 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
 
(2005
-
06)
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
 
(RAILWAY BOARD)
 
 
 
 
INDIAN RAILWAY CATERING & TOURISM CORPORATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT
 
 
 
 
       
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARI
AT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
August, 2005/Bhadrapada, 1927 (Saka)
 

 
2
 
 
 
SCR No. 93
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
 
(2005
-
06)
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
 
(RAILWAY BOARD)
 
 
 
 
INDIAN RAILWAY CATERING & TOURISM CORPORATION 
 
 
 
 
Presented to
 Lok Sabha on 30
th
 August, 2005
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30
th
 August, 2005
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 
August, 2005/Bhadrapada, 1927 (Saka)

 
3
 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE
 
 
COMPOSITI
ON OF THE COMMITTEE
…………………….……………….
 
 
 
 
 4
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 …………………………………………………………….
 
  5
 
 
PART 
–
 I
 
 
Report
 
 
Report
……………………. ………………………………………………………   6
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations
……………………………………………….  36 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAY (2005
-
06)
 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia
 
 
-
 
Chairman
 
 
MEMBERS
 
LOK SABHA
 
2.
 
      Shri A.Sai Prathap
 
3
 
Shri Dhirendra Agarwal
 
4
 
Shri Atique Ahamad
 
5         Shri Ajaya Kumar
 
6
 
Shri Subrata
 Bose 
 
7         Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
 
8.
 
Shri Kishan Lal Diler
 
9.
 
Shri Giridhar Gamang
 
10.
 
Shri Pradeep Gandhi
 
11.
 
Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
 
12.
 
Shri Anwar Hussain
 
13.
 
Shri Mahesh Kanodia
 
14.
 
Shri C. Kuppusami
 
15.
 
Smt. Kalpana R. Narhire 
 
16.
 
Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
 
17.
 
Shri Kis
han Singh Sangwan
 
18.
 
Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
 
19.
 
Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma
 
20.
 
Ch. Lal Singh
 
21.
 
Mohd. Tahir
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
22.
 
Smt. Kamla Manhar
 
23.
 
Shri Karnendu Bhatttacharjee
 
24.
 
Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi
 
 
25.
 
Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi
 
26.
 
Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
 
27.
 
Shri Tarini Kanta R
oy
 
28.
 
Shri R. Kamraj
 
29.
 
Shri Isam Singh
 
30.
 
Shri Harendra Singh Malik
 
31.
 
Shri Abani Roy
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
1.
 
Shri John Joseph
 
 
 
-
 
Secretary
 
2.
 
Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu
 
 
-
 
Additional Secretary
 
3.
 
Shri V.S. Negi
 
 
 
 
-
 
Deputy Secretary
 
 
4.
 
Smt Abha Singh Yaduvanshi
 
 
-
 
Un
der Secretary
 
5.
 
Shri P.K
. Sharma
 
 
 
-
 
Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
(iii)
 
 
 

 
5
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
I,  the Chairman of  the Standing Committee on Railways (2005
-
06), having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this 
Fou
rteenth Report of the Committee on ‘Indian Railway Catering & Tourism Corporation’ 
(IRCTC).
 
 
2.
 
The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Indian Railway 
Catering & Tourism Corporation on 26
th
 May, 2005 and Ministry of Railways on 27
th
 
June,
 2005.  
 
 
 
3.
 
The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on    29
th
 
August, 2005.  Minutes of the sittings held on 26
th
 May, 27
th
 June and 29
th
 August, 2005 
form Part
-
II of the Report. 
 
 
4.
 
The Committee wish to express their tha
nks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) and representatives of the Indian Railway Catering & Tourism 
Corporation for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the material and 
information which the Committee desired in connectio
n with the examination of the 
subject ‘Indian Railway Catering & Tourism Corporation’ and sharing with them the 
issues concerning the subject which came up for discussion during evidence.
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
                                     
BASUDEB ACHA
RIA
 
29     August, 2005 
 
 
 
 
                                            
 
Chairman,
 
07     Bhadrapada, 1927 Saka  
 
                     
 
     
Standing Committee on Railways
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)
 
 

 
6
 
 
CHAPTER 
-
 I
 
 
Report 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
The Indian Railways which is one of 
the largest Railway systems in the World carries 14 
million passenger daily through 14,444 trains covering 8055 stations.  With this magnitude and 
complexity involved in operations, it was deemed essential that a separate corporation be set up 
which would 
exclusively manage catering and tourism related functions of Indian railways.
 
 
 
1.2.
 
Initially all catering services were privatized.   Later in fifties and sixties departmental 
catering were put into place, which experiment continued for about 30 years or
 so. Ultimately, 
Railway decided that it is not a viable venture and so they thought of forming a corporation which 
will take over the departmental catering and also control the franchisee catering.
  
  The Union 
Cabinet on 27
th
 March, 1999 approved that th
e catering activity of Railways, whether 
Departmental or franchised, should be completely hived off to the new corporation along with the 
staff, and the railways, should divest itself of this function. In pursuance to this and as part of 
Indian Railway’s w
ider organizational reform and to strengthen its marketing and service 
capabilities in areas of Rail catering, tourism and passenger amenities a corporate entity Indian 
Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd. (IRCTC) was set up under the Companies Ac
t, 
1956 on 27
th
 September, 1999 as a public sector company under the administrative control of  
Ministry of Railways.
 
 
 
1.3.
 
IRCTC became fully functional from 1
st
 August, 2001 after setting up the functional 
Board.  The company in addition to its corporat
e office at New Delhi has its regional offices at 
New Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai and Secunderabad with one sub
-
regional office at 
Gorakhpur.  As an October, 2004 the corporation had 1643 employees.  The details of the regular 
as well as commission ven
dors  are as under:
 
(i) Staff working on regular basis in IRCTC (including deputationists +  
IRCTC appointed staff
 
 
74
 
(ii) Catering staff taken over by IRCTC from Railways
 
1128
 
(iii) Commission vendors working under IRCTC
 
441
 
Total
 
1643
 
 

 
7
 
 
1.4
 
The mai
n objectives of the Company is as under:
-
 
·
 
To professionalise, consolidate and upgrade railway
-
catering services through 
public
-
private partnership.
 
·
 
Promote rail based tourism and hospitality business.
 
·
 
To act as a Special Purpose Vehicle and enhance the val
ue of railway assets, 
including land and rolling stock.
 
·
 
To act as the access provider to Railway’s Passenger Reservation System and 
promote multiple channels of distribution using State of the Art technology 
including Internet.
 
·
 
To provide quality packaged 
drinking water “Rail Neer” to rail users.
 
·
 
To develop and upgrade the human resource skills by imparting training at all 
levels.
 
·
 
To treat each business activity as a separate profit center.
 
 
1.5.
 
The mission/vision of IRCTC is to act as an extended arm of t
he Indian Railways to 
upgrade, professionalise and manage catering and hospitality services at stations, on trains and 
other locations; to promote domestic and international tourism, through establishment and 
development of Budget Hotels, information and c
ommercial publicity and global reservation 
system, Rail Ticketing and provide quality packaged drinking water ‘Rail Neer’ to rail users.
 
 
Capital Structure
 
 
1.6.
 
The company has an authorised capital of Rs.50 crore and paid up capital of Rs.20 crore 
with 1
00% equity holding by the Central Government.
 
 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
 
 
1.7.
 
The financial performance of IRCTC during the last 4 years is as under:
-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Rs. in Crore)
 
Year
 
2001
-
02
 
 (Aug
-
March) 
8 Months
 
2002
-
03
 
Audited
 
2003
-
04
 
Audited
 
2004
-
05
 
Provision
al
 
Total Turnover
 
8.22
 
52.72
 
69.59
 
125.00
 
Profit after Tax
 
0.83
 
5.55
 
4.12
 
6.12
 
Dividend paid
 
0.20
 
1.20
 
1.00
 
1.00
 
 

 
8
 
1.8.
 
In response to the query of the 
Committee as to what was the reason and 
rationale in going for privatisation and corporatisation of c
atering in 1991
-
92, especially in view 
of the fact that one man Committee appointed in 1979
-
80 had not recommended for it, the 
Ministry of Railways in their written reply stated that  during 1991
-
92 the Govt. of India 
announced changes in economic policies
 and political thinking.  The Govt. of India pursued the 
policies of privatisation and liberalisation as part of second generation of economic reforms in 
various sectors.  Divestment and privatisation of non
-
core activity was announced as part of 
economic 
liberalisation.  Catering was, therefore, viewed as a non
-
core activity for the Railways 
an essential passenger amenity.  In view of this corporatisation of catering activity was decided.  
In 1991
-
92, the Ministry of Railways felt that departmental caterin
g was running into losses and 
accordingly the 1991
-
92 catering policy envisaged that no new catering activity should be 
undertaken departmentally.  
 
 
1.9.
 
Recruitment to departmental catering was also restricted  and it was a conscious decision 
that over a
 period of time the departmental catering will reduce by attrition and there will be no 
proliferation or expansion of departmental catering activity.
 
 
1.10.
 
It was also felt that substantial revenues will be generated through increased license fees 
from pr
ivatisation and these revenues could be then redeployed to supplement railways other 
essential programmes of expansion of passenger services, new trains etc.
 
 
 
 
1.11.
 
Altogether catering facilities numbering approximately 11000 units are provided at 
approx
imately 3150 stations over Indian Railway.  These are being run and managed 
departmentally and by licensee caterers.
 
 
112.
 
Catering Servi
ces 
as on date on Indian Railways is as under:
-
 
 
(a) Major Units:
 
 
Licensee 
 
Departmental
 
Pantry Car
 
213
 
39
 
Refreshme
nt Room
 
85
 
33
 
Food Plazas
 
32
 
-
 
(b) Minor Units:
 
 
Licensee 
 
Departmental
 
Stalls/Trolleys
 
8741
 
2100
 
Refreshment Room
 
179
 
61
 

 
9
 
 
CHAPTER 
–
 II
 
 
CATERING
 
 
2.1.
 
Catering on Indian Railways is of utmost importance and recognising this as one of the 
most import
ant of all passenger amenities Indian Railways have given much importance to it.  
 
Catering/vending services on Indian Railways consists of following facilities:
-
 
(i)
 
Refreshment rooms, restaurants, fast food centres/snack bars, tea stalls, 
fruit/fruit juices 
stalls, cold and hot beverage dispensers, miscellaneous 
curio goods stalls, ice
-
cream parlour etc. at railway stations.
 
(ii)
 
Tea stalls at roadside stations.
 
(iii)
 
Integrated on
-
board catering services on Rajdhani and Shatabdi Express 
trains.
 
(iv)
 
Services through pantry 
cars on selected long and medium distance 
superfast/mail and express trains.
 
(v)
 
Base kitchens to provide ready made meals for on
-
board catering.
 
(vi)
 
On board catering/vending services through static units (trains having no 
pantry cars.
 
 
2.2
 
The history of caterin
g on Indian Railways has on the whole been chequered marked  by 
irregular and frequent changes in principles and policy governing it. Right from the inception, 
catering services on Indian Railways have been managed by private parties.  In 1915, ex
-
Bengal
-
N
agpur Railway (South Eastern Railway) introduced western style catering by departmentally 
managed units.  On Southern Railway, departmental catering came up in 1920.
 
 
2.3.
 
In 1954, Government set up 
Alagesan  Committee 
to review all aspects of catering.  T
he 
Committee recommended that Railways with no departmental catering should start with an 
experiment with an economic departmental catering organisation so as to set the standard and 
service as model.  Consequent to this, other railways introduced departme
ntal catering.
 
 
2.4.
 
In 1967, Ministry of Railways appointed a Committee named “Railway Catering and 
Passenger Amenities Committee” under the 
Chairmanship of then Minster of State for 
Railways,
 the Committee made the following recommendation:
 

 
10
 
 
(i)
 
Railways sh
ould consolidate their existing catering  service and effect an 
improvement in their quality and services.  Further, extension of 
departmental catering may be contemplated after economy measures  have  
become effective.
 
(ii)
 
The present principle of running dep
artmental catering on a ‘no profit no 
loss’ basis should be modified so as to provide a small profit of three to 
four per cent which should be ploughed back into the service.
 
 
2.5.
 
In 1979
-
80 then
 Minister of Railways 
 in his Budget Speech made the followi
ng 
announcement :
 
“Formation of a Railway Catering Corporation as an autonomous body under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Railways, to take over the entire catering 
services on the Indian Railways, has been suggested by several Members of 
Pa
rliament and others.  This will be examined in depth”.
 
 
2.6.
 
Consequent to this announcement, a one
-
man Expert Committee on Railways Catering 
was set up which observed as under:
-
 
(i)
 
Ineffective and inadequate supervision.
 
(ii)
 
Heavier losses in refreshment rooms d
ue to heavy overheads and lesser 
customers.
 
(iii)
 
Losses in the running of mobile units due to heavy overhead charges.
 
(iv)
 
Even though the profits accrue in vending establishments and partly off
-
set 
the losses incurred in the sale of thali meals, the quantum of prof
its as 
shown in the books is much less than what should actually accrue, due to 
leakage in sales arising out of commission vendors selling their own stuff 
and not drawing adequate quantity of raw materials as warranted by the 
sales potential, and due to un
authorised vending by outsiders.
 
(v)
 
The margin of profit had been eroded by increase in staff costs and in the 
costs of raw materials without any corresponding increase in tariff.  The 
periodical review of the tariff, commensurate  with the increase in cost o
f 
the raw materials and staff costs, had not been undertaken except on an ad
-
hoc basis as a sporadic exercise, due to no institutionalised arrangements 
existing either at the level of the Board or the Zonal Railways.
 

 
11
 
 
2.7.
 
At that stage the Committee recom
mended that time is not right to have a separate 
Catering Corporation.  However, this should be looked at a later date.
 
 
2.8.
 
The Minister of Railways during his Budget Speech of 1991
-
92 had announced 
privatisation of catering services on the Railways.  Co
nsequent to this announcement, a meeting 
of  Chief Commercial Superintendents (CCMs) was held  in Railway Board’s Office on 
14.10.1991.  Following decision were taken 
–
 
(i)
 
In future no catering/vending units should  be taken up for departmental 
management and
 all new units both static and mobile should be managed 
by licensees only.
 
(ii)
 
Although existing departmental units could be privatised  keeping in view 
the various problems involved, mostly the staff problem, the privatisation 
has to be undertaken in phases.
 
 
2.9.
 
It was in the year 1999 that Railways finally decided to hive off catering of the Indian 
Railways to a Corporation and Note for Cabinet was put up before the Cabinet Committee to this 
effect.
 
 
 
2.10.
 
The
 Catering Policy 
issued by the Ministry of Rail
ways in the year 2000  reiterated that 
in future no catering/vending units should be taken up for departmental management and 
licensees should manage the services.  Facilities vacated due to absorption of commissioned  
vendors and commissioned bearers shou
ld be consolidated with a view to standardise the 
catering/vending facilities.
 
 
2.11.
 
The 
Catering Policy 2004  
issued on 5
th
 October, 2004 stipulated the following:
 
(i)
 
Two packet open tendering system on competitive bidding basis for all 
major catering units
 and small catering units at ‘A’,  ‘B’and ‘C’ category 
stations against two packet tendering system in case of major units only 
earlier.
 
(ii)
 
All new licences of major units and small units at ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category 
stations to be awarded by IRCTC.
 
(iii)
 
Licences 
at ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category stations to be awarded by Railways 
presently.
 
 

 
12
 
 
(iv)
 
A ceiling of 15% within a category of major units and overall ceiling of 
10% in overall major units in holding by a particular licencee imposed in 
New Policy.  No ceiling in old p
olicy.
 
(v)
 
Tenure of all major units and all catering units at ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category 
stations will be 5 years and there will be no renewal after expiry against 
renewal of 5 years in earlier policy.
 
(vi)
 
Reservation of 49.5% for SC, ST, OBC, physically/mentally 
handicapped, 
women etc. only at ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category stations.  Earlier policy 
provided 25% reservation in small units at all category stations.
 
 
 
Catering Policy 2005:
 
2.12.
 
The Railway Board reviewed the catering policy of 2004 in view of some amend
ments 
required in consideration of genuine demands and subsequent announcements made by the 
Minister of Railways in order to fulfill the social obligation of the Govt. of India.  This  new 
catering policy  supersedes all the existing policy guidelines issu
ed from time to time.  The new 
policy stipulates the following:
-
 
(i)
 
Two packet open tendering system on competitive  bidding basis for all 
major catering units and small catering units at ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category 
stations.
 
(ii)
 
All new licences of major units and
 small units at ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category 
stations to be awarded by IRCTC.
 
(iii)
 
Licences at ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category stations would be awarded by calling 
applications through press notification.
 
(iv)
 
A ceiling of 15% within the category of major units and overall c
eiling of 
10% in overall major units in holding by a particular licensee continued in 
New Policy.
 
(v)
 
Tenure of all major units will be 5 years and there will be no renewal after 
expiry.
 
(vi)
 
Tenure of all catering units at ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category stations will b
e 5 
years and there will be renewal after every 5 years on satisfactory 
performance.
 

 
13
 
 
(vii)
 
Tenure of all small units at ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category stations will be 3 
years and there would be no renewal after expiry of 3 years for general 
category.  In case of r
eserve categories,  renewal will be given after 3 years 
on satisfactory performance.
 
(viii)
 
Reservation of 49.5% at ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category stations and 25% at ‘A’, 
‘B’ and ‘C’ category stations for SC, ST, OBC, physically/mentally 
handicapped, women etc.  Rese
rvation for freedom fighters introduced at 
all categories of  stations in licences of small catering units.
 
(ix)
 
No reservation in major units licences.
 
(x)
 
Award of contracts to reserved category through calling applications, not 
through tender system.
 
(xi)
 
10% reserva
tion will be for women including war widows and widows of 
railway employees and 2% reservation for physically and mentally 
handicapped within 50.5% of general category and 49.5% of reserved 
categories.
 
 
2.13.
 
During the evidence when asked by the Committee
 as to what was the real objectives 
behind setting up catering facilities on Indian Railways, the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) stated :
-
 
“the objective has always been to provide cheap and wholesome food to the passengers.  
T
hat is the reason why we have started the practice of running catering services on no 
profit no loss basis.”
 
 
2.14.
 
  The minimum licence fee for different type of services in the New Catering Policy has 
been kept as under:
 
Rajdhani/Shatabdi Express trains
 
15%* of annual sales turnover based on actual 
occupancy figures certified by the Train 
Superintendent
 
Other Mail/express trains
 
12%* of estimated annual sales turnover.
 
All other static units
 
12%* of estimated annual sales turnover
 
    * Or any other p
ercentage commission on sales as notified from time to time.
 
 
2.15.
 
From the above it can be seen that minimum licence fee for various catering facilities 
ranges between 12 to 15% which in itself is reasonably high.
 
 

 
14
 
LICENCING  POLICY
 
2.16.
 
Under the new c
atering policy allotment of catering/vending licence will be done under 
separate rules for major and small catering/vending units.
 
 
For the purpose of award of catering licence major catering units are defined as under:
 
(i)
 
All mobile catering units including 
Rajdhani/Shatabdi Express and other 
mail and express trains,
 
(ii)
 
Restaurants/refreshment rooms, at all Category ‘A’ stations excluding 
attached facilities like stall/trolleys, if any existing at present.
 
(iii)
 
Multi outlet food plazas or food courts, or
 
(iv)
 
Single outle
t fast food centres.
 
 
Small catering units has been define as :
-
 
(i)
 
Restaurants/refreshment rooms at all ‘B; & ‘C’ Category stations and 
trolleys and stalls at all ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category stations.
 
(ii)
 
Catering units at all ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category stations.
 
 
TENDERING SYSTEM
 
Major Units
 
2.17.
 
Catering licences of major catering units are awarded through open tender under a Two 
Packet System.  Packet ‘A’ contains technical offer and Packet ‘B’ contain the financial bid.  
Each catering unit is  treated as separa
te unit and will have a separate licence, stalls/trolleys which 
would be allotted separately and will not be attached with Refreshment Rooms/stalls etc.  Award 
of licence in case of major units is done by IRCTC and co
-
ordinated at the level of CCM of the 
c
oncerned Zonal Railway.
 
 
Small Units
 
2.18.
 
Award of licence for small catering units has been divided into two classes. For catering 
units comprising of Refreshment Room/Restaurant at all ‘B’ and ‘C’ category stations and 
trolleys and stalls at ‘A’, ‘B’ an
d ‘C’ category stations license will be awarded through open 
tender under Two Packet System.  Conversely for small units at ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category stations 
licence will be awarded through calling of applications from reputed parties and not through open
 
competition bidding.
 
 

 
15
 
2.19.
 
The representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways while elaborating on policy of two 
packet system stated that the policy is to enhance the revenue of the Government which was 
earlier going to the contractor.  Further corroborati
ng it through an example he stated that as per 
the earlier system in the Howrah
-
Mumbai Sector the amount being paid  to the Railways by the 
private contractor was Rs.5 lakh.  Now, in the two packet system the same contractor is now 
paying to the Railways R
s.36 lakh.
 
 
 
2.20.
 
The Committee express their concern that with such a huge increase in payout by the 
contractor, the contractor will try to recover this by either reducing the salary or curtailing the 
other fringe benefits of workers etc.   The represent
atives of the Ministry of Railways on this 
assured 
 
‘they have to pay the minimum wage, we are taking care of that’.
 
2.21
 
Regarding the criteria adopted in selecting a particular private operator/licencee Ministry 
of Railways stated that IRCTC has formulat
ed policy guidelines clearly listing out technical and 
financial capability for empanelment of food and beverage organizations who are then considered 
eligible for bidding for all licenses on the following criteria:
-
 
 
The applicant should have a minimum an
nual turnover in catering/hospitality and 
F&B services related business and eligibility criterion for different types of units are as 
under:
-
 
 
Rs.5 crore per annum
 
Mobile catering on Rajdhani/ Shatabdi Express trains.
 
Rs.3 crore per annum
 
Mobile Catering 
on other mail/express trains 
 
Rs.1 crore per annum
 
Restaurants/refreshment rooms at Category “A” stations 
 
Rs.1 crore per annum
 
Single outlet fast food centres at Mumbai Central, Mumbai CST, 
Churchgate, Dadar, Delhi, New Delhi, Hazrat Nizamuddin, 
Chennai
 Central, Howrah, Sealdah and Bangalore City.
 
Rs.50 lakhs per annum
 
Single outlet fast food centers at other Category ‘A’ and 
Category ‘C’ stations..
 
Rs.25 lakhs per annum
 
Single outlet fast food centres at Category ‘B’ stations  
 
Rs.10 lakhs per annum
 
Single outlet fast food centres at other stations 
 
Rs.5 crore per annum
 
Multi outlet food plazas of food courts at Mumbai Central, 
Mumbai CST, Churchgate, Dadar, Delhi, New Delhi, Hazrat 
Nizamuddin, Chennai Central, Howrah, Sealdah and Bangalore 
City.
 
Rs
.3 crore per annum
 
Multi outlet food plazas or food courts at other Category ‘A’ and 
Category ‘C’ stations.
 
Rs.1 crore per annum
 
Multi outlet food plazas or food courts at Category ‘B’ stations.
 
Rs.50 lakhs per annum
 
Multi outlet food plazas or food cour
ts at other stations 
 
 
 

 
16
 
 
Further to encourage genuine parties to bid for licences, earnest money to be 
enclosed along with tender document would be as follows:
-
 
Rs.3 lakh
 
All mobile catering licenses and multi outlet 
food plazas/courts.
 
Rs.1 lakh
 
Refresh
ment rooms/restaurants/single outlet 
fast food centres.
 
 
2.22.
 
However, IRCTC’s policy clearly enables the existing licencee managing services on the 
railways to also bid for that particular services being operated by the licencee even if he does not 
fulf
ill the eligibility criteria set up by IRCTC.  This has been done as a measure of social justice.
 
 
2.23.
 
A business group/firm/company or individual can hold a maximum of 15% units of each 
type of major catering units with overall ceiling of 10% of total m
ajor units.
 
 
2.24.
 
The term and conditions imposed on the private operators at the time of awarding 
contracts can be classified into following heads which are duly entered in the agreement.”
 
2.25.
 
GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE LICENCE 
–
 advising the 
items 
and tariff of each items that should be permitted to be sold in the unit.
 
FINANCIAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS
-
 
 
·
 
Payment of annual Licence fee 
–
 a fixed percentage over assessed annual sales 
turnover 
–
 12% for all static and mobile units other than Rajdhan
i Shatabdi 
Express trains and 15% for Rajdhani/Shatabdi Express trains or any other 
percentage commission on sales as notified from time to time.
 
·
 
Payment of Concession Fee:
 
·
 
Refund of Concession Fee: Conditions for refund of proportionate concession fee 
in 
the event of train cancelled within a period of five years.  No concession fees 
will be refunded if the train is cancelled after the expiry of first term.
 
 
Apart from the above terms and conditions the detailed conditional agreements are entered 
into with 
the licencees.  This agreement covers the operational details, inspections, termination, 
arbitration, renewal etc.
 
 
RESERVATION
 
2.26.
 
By way of positive discrimination and affirmative action, provision for reservation in 
favour of certain sections of socie
ty has been made in the catering policy
-
2005.
 
 
 

 
17
 
2.27.
 
In the refreshment room/restaurants 
rooms at ‘B’ and ‘C’ category stations and 
trolleys and stalls at all ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category stations, 25% reservation has been provided.  
The break
-
up among he di
fferent categories of beneficiaries  is as follows:
-
 
 
 
Scheduled Caste
 
6%
 
Scheduled Tribes
 
4%
 
People below Poverty Line 
 
3%
 
Freedom Fighters/women including war widows and widows 
of railway employees
 
4%
 
Other Backward Classes
 
3%
 
Minorities *
 
3%
 
Physi
cally/Mentally Challenged Persons
 
2%
 
 
 
* the term minorities will include the communities namely Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists 
and Zoroastrians (Parsis)
 
 
2.28.
 
For allotments of  small catering units at ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category of stations, 49.5%
 
reservation is provided  based on application.  The following pattern of reservation has been made 
applicable for distribution among sub
-
categories.
 
Schedule Castes
 
12%
 
Schedule Tribes
 
8%
 
Other Backward Classes
 
20%
 
Minorities*
 
9.5%
 
 
Total
 
 
49.5%
 
In each category 10% reservation 
will be for freedom fighters and 
women including war 
widows and 
widows of Railway employees and 
2% reservation will be for physically 
and mentally challenged persons.
 
 
* the term minorities will include the communities name
ly Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists 
and Zoroastrians (Parsis)
 
 
2.29
.
 
Award of license in case of all major catering/vending units will be made only on the basis 
of professional criteria through open competitive bidding as laid down for this purpose an
d their 
will be no reservation for any category.
 
 
2.30.
 
It can be clearly seen that a distinction has been made between major and small catering 
units, while no reservation has been provided in respect of major units, even in the smaller 
catering units, th
e quantum of reservation for small catering units at ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category of 
stations and  catering units at ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category  stations is different.
 
 

 
18
 
2.31.
 
Responding to a query of the 
Committee as to why no reservation has been 
provided in 
major units, the representative of the Ministry of Railways replied that 
 
“In major units that is food plazas, pantry cars, refreshment rooms there is no reservation.”
 
 
 
2.32.
 
 When asked for the reason and rationale behind this differentiation between the
 ‘A’, ‘B’ 
and ‘C’ category stations and ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ categories of stations in the matter of reservation 
which was contrary to the general policy of the Government,  the representatives explained that 
 
“Earlier reservation was not there for ‘A’, ‘B’ an
d ‘C’ category stations.  Now, 25 per 
cent reservation has been provided for ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category stations, and 49.5 per 
cent reservation has been provided for ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category stations. ‘A’, ‘B’ and
 
‘C’ 
category stations are bigger stations 
and where more financial inputs are required, whereas 
‘D’ ‘E’ and ‘F’ category stations are small stations which do not require heavy investment 
of capital.”
 
 
2.33.
 
He further added
-
 
 
“In major units, that is food plazas, pantry cars there is no reservatio
n.  In 
refreshment rooms there is no reservation in the case of major units.  There are 
about 10,000 catering establishments in the country.  Out of these, about 500 only 
are the major units which do not qualify for the reservation.  The balance 9,730  
and
 odd units qualify for the reservation.”
 
 
 
TENURE
 
2.34.
 
In the New Catering Policy of 2005, the tenure of licence for major units are different and  
there is also differentiation between licence granted to general category and reserved 
category:
-
 
(i)
 
The tenur
e of license for major units is 5 years.
 
(ii)
 
The monitoring of performance  of the licensee to be strengthened during the 
period.
 
(iii)
 
There is no renewal or extension after expiry of the contract and fresh tenders 
should be called and finalised well before the exp
iry of the existing contract.  The 
current contract of existing licences which have already been given extension from 
time to time is not be extended further.  It was further decided that all such 
contracts whose term are expiring/expired would be transfer
red to IRCTC on 
completion of the present term.
 

 
19
 
 
 
(iv)
 
At the time of fresh bid for the unit, license fee should be enhanced based  on 
actual sales turnover of the unit subject to a minimum of 10% increase in the 
prevailing license fee of the unit.
 
 
2.35.
 
The t
enure of the licence for reserved categories are for three years and licence of these 
categories will be renewed every 3 years on satisfactory performance.  At the time of renewal of 
the licence of reserved categories at ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category stations 
or fresh bid for the unit, 
licence fee will be enhanced based on actual sales turnover of the unit subject to a minimum of 
10% increase over the prevailing license fee of the unit.  Renewal will be done for the existing 
licencees only on withdrawal of the 
court cases by the licensees, if any, against the railway and 
payment of all railway dues and arrears.
 
 
2.36.
 
The tenure of licences of all small catering units at ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category stations are 
for five years.  Railways may renew the licences afte
r every 5 years subject to satisfactory 
performance.  Renewal will be done for the existing licencees only on withdrawal of the court 
cases by the licensees against the railways and payment of all dues  and arrears.  Monitoring  of 
performance will be done
  which will include  prompt  payment of all railway dues, complaints of 
serious nature against licensees regarding quality of food and services, reasonable increase in 
sales turnover during the period of licence and inspection reports of senior railway of
ficers during 
the term of licence.
 
 
2.37.
 
Explaining about the need for non
-
renewal of contracts in case of major units and the 
revision of the tenure of the licenses for small units only for three years the Ministry of Railways 
stated that all the Railway
 catering contracts have been in perpetuity from the past and have been 
continuing at very low licence fee.  Basic idea of tendering them is to dertermine the market value 
of these contract so as to realize higher revenues and re
-
deploy the money for impro
vement in 
catering.  The period of 3 years has been decided as investment involved is on the lower side. 
Further, contractors providing good services are encouraged to perform better.  Bad performers 
are liable to be discouraged in new contracts and action
 is taken against them for poor 
performance. 
 

 
20
 
 
2.38.
 
 When asked about the fate of licencees whose licences have not been reviewed, the 
Ministry stated that licences are awarded for a fixed terms, beyond which Railway has no liability 
as a matter of polic
y.  Further, creation of additional facilities creates more jobs.  IRCTC so far 
has created over 5000 jobs in the private catering sector.  Replacement of a licencee by another 
licencee does not result in job loss.
 
 
DEPARTMENTAL UNITS
 
2.39.
 
Departmental un
its are those catering/vending establishment, which are set up and run by 
the Indian Railways.  In 1915, ex
-
Bengal
-
Nagpur Railway (South Eastern Railway) introduced 
western style catering by departmentally managed units.  In 1954, at the instance of Alages
an 
Committee departmental catering was started on the entire Railway so as to set the standard and 
service as model.  However, after evolution of catering in Indian Railway over the years the 
Catering   Policy 2005, clearly states that: 
 
(i)
 
In future no cater
ing/vending units should be taken up for departmental 
management and only catering licences will be awarded in future.  Facilities 
 
vacated due to absorption of commissioned vendors and commissioned bearers 
should be consolidated with a view to standardize
 the catering/vending  facilities.
 
(ii)
 
IRCTC/Railway should review from time to time, the performance of departmental 
units.  All loss making  units should be taken for licensing with the approval  of the 
General Manager.  Staff should be relocated  to other u
nits within the railway, 
Railway Board may be kept informed  in this regard.
 
(iii)
 
Railways will not make any fresh recruitment in Catering department except in the 
categories specified by Board.
 
 
2.40.
 
In a comparative study between the departmental catering an
d private catering, sample 
data of profit/loss of these units when managed by department and earnings of these units when 
managed by private operators are tabulated in juxtaposition below:
-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Departmental
 
 
 
IRCTC
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Rs. in lakhs)
 
 S.No.
 
Train
 
Profit/Loss to 
Deptt. (p.a.)
 
Licence fee from 
Licencee (p.a.)
 
Concession fee from 
Licencee (One time)
 
1.
 
2627/2628 (Karnataka Express)
 
16.93
 
34.50
 
439.00
 
2.
 
2925/2926 (Paschim Express)
 
9.41
 
32.50
 
282.00
 
3.
 
2903/2904 (Golden Temple Express)
 
10.72
 
18.00
 
1
37.00
 
4.
 
2553/2554 (Vaishali Express)
 
3.76
 
19.00
 
90.90
 
5.
 
8237/8238 (Chhattisgarh Express)
 
(
-
)4.52
 
20.50
 
121.00
 
6.
 
8477/8478 (Kalinga Utkal Express)
 
15.52
 
18.50
 
114.70
 
7.
 
8011/8012 (Ispat Express)
 
(
-
) 2.25
 
8.00
 
10.00
 
 

 
21
 
2.41.
 
It is seen from the compara
tive study 
that Railways were not able to tap the full 
potential of the market for catering services over Indian Railways.  Departmental Catering 
services have not been the core activity of Indian Railways.  According to the Railways, catering 
services hav
e improved over the years with the services of professionally reputed private caterers.
 
 
2.42.
 
In regard to decision to privatise departmental units  the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways submitted that :
 
“we have been running departmental units 
all through on the principle  of no profit no 
loss, therefore the costs have been kept low with the increase in input costs, increase in 
staff costs, day to day catering services has not been profitable venture right from the 
beginning.”
 
 
 
2.43.
 
The repres
entatives of the Ministry of Railways informed that as of now the IRCTC has 
taken over departmental catering of 15 divisions namely Delhi, Mumbai CST, Solapur, Mumbai 
Centtal, Hawrah, Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Pune, Guntakal, Guntur, Lucknow, Secunderabad, 
Ch
ennai, Nanded and Sealdah including their staff. They further informed that the plan is to take 
over completely the entire departmental catering and franchising catering by March, 2006.  They 
also informed that they are  planning to bring in experts, relat
ed to health and hygiene so as to 
improve these facilities.  IRCTC is giving a chance for professional expertise by clearly stating 
the major units that the licencees must have personnel holding professional qualifications. 
 
 
2.44.
 
Responding to a query ab
out auction of departmental catering units,  the representatives of 
the IRCTC categorically denied and stated:
-
 
 
 “departmental catering remain as it is untouched, not a single unit has been auctioned.”
 
 
2.45.
 
In a related question when the Committee asked
 about the improvement in the 
performance within the last one year, the representatives of  IRCTC emphatically claimed:
-
 
“average sales at the stations that we have catered (7 metropolis), revenues have gone up 
by 30 per cent.”
 
 
2.46.
 
Further he also infor
med:
 
“we have made a very massive plan of modernisation of these units that we have 
taken over, we are making modular stalls, renovating kitchens and improving the 
standards.”
 

 
22
 
 
2.47.
 
As per Ministry of Railway mandate of IRCTC is to expand and upgrade the 
catering 
services on the Indian Railway which in turn will generate additional employment potential.  The 
establishment of additional food plazas by IRCTC has created additional direct job opportunities 
based on an average criteria of around 50 persons for
 a food plaza.  In addition, new pantry 
services added by IRCTC has resulted in substantial creation of additional jobs.
 
 
2.48.
 
The Committee in its concern for the welfare of employees wanted to know about the  
repercussion  and likely effect of the new p
olicy on the existing 2500 odd employees of the 
departmental units.  They specifically wanted categorical assurance from the Ministry of 
Railways that their service conditions should not be adversely affected, and in no circumstance 
they should be retrench
ed.  
 
 
2.49.
 
Upon this allaying the apprehension of the Committee, the Chairman, IRCTC stated:
 
“when the catering unit is taken over by IRCTC, the entire staff comes to the 
IRCTC, they get an option to opt for railways or to continue in IRCTC.  This 
option
 is open upto three years,  within that period if they want to continue in 
IRCTC they are welcome to continue and they become the employees of IRCTC;  
If they opt to go back to railways, they will be taken by the railways and suitably 
re
-
deployed in the Ra
ilways.  So, the staff have been taken care of.  There is no 
question of retrenchment of railway staff.”
 
 
 2.50.
 
About the working conditions of such employees the representatives of IRCTC made it 
clear to the Committee:
-
 
 
“when Railways handed over cateri
ng staff to us, before that there was decision 
between the Boards and the Union that their service conditions will remain the 
same.  Railways will continue to provide them housing, medical facilities, passes, 
pension and gratuity benefits.  No privileges o
r perks of theirs will be curtailed.  
IRCTC has been asked to pay for all these facilities till they remain with them and 
conditions applicable to serving Govt. employees remain applicable to them.  
There is absolutely no change…….  Their service condition
s will be protected.”
 

 
23
 
 
UNAUTHORISED VENDING
 
2.51.
 
Unauthorised hawking is punishable under Section 144 of the Railways Act, 1989. 
Unauthorised vending is liable to be misused, thereby endangering the health and very life of the 
Railway users.  Enumerating
 the steps taken to prevent unauthorized vending IRCTC in their 
written reply stated that routine and frequent checks by Zonal Railways and Divisional Officials 
are conducted  for  checking this malaise.  Unauthorised vendors on trains and at stations are 
prosecuted under the provisions of the Railways Act and Railways (Second Amendment) Act, 
2003.    The number of unauthorized vendors prosecuted during 2001, 2002 and 2003 was 61609, 
71406 and 75354 respectively.
 
 
2.52.
 
Further, when the Committee suggested
 that some sort of mechanism should be evolved 
whereby these small vendors could be given license and permits to sell the food articles, a list of 
food articles could also be given, with proper batch and uniform as this would not only serve the  
need of th
e passengers but also add to the revenue of the Railways by way of license fee,  the 
representatives of the Ministry of Railways expressed their inability and stated :
 
“giving them license will be a problem, because, we do not know at the moment 
who are wo
rking unauthorisedly.  Today we may say it is 100 but when we start 
giving them license, 1000 persons may land up, we will not be able to distinguish 
who is right and who is wrong……..”
 
 
2.53.
 
He further stated:
 
“there will be no machinery for us to check t
he quality of the things that they are 
providing and also the rate they are charging.  All these problems will come up and 
it will create more problems than solving it.”
 
 
2.54.
 
The Ministry of Railways stated that in train side vending, commission vending 
along 
with direct sale by departmental staff is prevalent.  Such system is being transferred to IRCTC  on 
as is where is basis.  Train side vending through licencee is done on contractual basis.
 

 
24
 
 
JOB SECURITY OF WORKERS
 
2.55.
 
Near about 87 to 90% of Railw
ay catering is in the hand of private licensee caterers, this 
coupled with the limited period of tenure of contract may  leads to throwing thousands of workers 
engaged in mobile catering out of job with every change of contractor.  Even in case of those 
wo
rkers who are working for more than 10 to 15 years  no provident fund is deducted.
 
 
2.56.
 
To the suggestion of the Committee that to secure the livelihood  of workers a separate  
clause  could be incorporated  in the agreement itself providing for continua
nce  of the service of 
workers in the event of change of contractor,
 
the representatives of Ministry of Railways replied:
 
“legally, it is not tenable to provide this sort of clause in the agreement.  The legal 
adviser did not agree with that, they said tha
t it would  not stand in the court of 
law.”
 
 
2.57.
 
He further stated:
 
“our experience is that by and large all of the workers barring a few are taken over 
by the new contractors because of their experience.”
 
 
2.58.
 
Concerning monitoring the deployment of  
 new hands at low salaries far below minimum 
wages by the new contractor, the representatives of Ministry of Railways stated:
-
 
“ in bigger units this is not a problem,  they adjust them some where or other, may 
be in small stalls this problem will come.  W
e have also started pro
-
active action, 
for example when the Vijayawada case came all commission vendors got 
regularised but their helpers had a problem, we set up automatic vending machines 
and the oldest 34 commission vendors have been given jobs by us th
ere.  They 
further assured that we ourselves from the corporations are finding ways and 
means to bring as many as possible back to employment.”
 
 
 
PANTRY SERVICES
 
 
2.59.
 
Pantry cars occupy an important place in the catering system of the Railways by serving
 
the on board passengers of long distance trains.  
 
 
 

 
25
 
2.60.
 
As of now, only 252 trains have 
attached pantry cars, of these 151 pantry cars 
are managed by IRCTC and the rest 101 are managed by Zonal Railways which will be 
transferred to IRCTC by the end of 
December, 2005.
 
 
2.61.
 
In the new catering policy following provisions regarding pantry cars have been laid 
down.   Provision of pantry cars on different trains continue to be determined centrally by the 
Railway Board.  Railways observe the following guide
lines with regard to pantry cars.
 
(i)
 
Pantry cars for Rajdhani Express Trains are to be designed to ensure that pre
-
cooked and hygienically packed food is supplied from base kitchens with 
minimum handling in transferring  the same to the passengers.  Mini pant
ries with 
modern gadgets/equipment as specified for Rajdhani Express Trains coaches are to 
be provided.  IRCTC to use covered mobile vans, containers and trolleys of 
standard design for transferring meals from base kitchens to the trains.  However, 
in firs
t AC class railways to provide personalised service and the food is to be 
cooked in the pantry cars.  Services be provided through trolleys in all coaches. 
 
(ii)
 
All Shatabdi Express trains to have mini pantries equipped with modern gadgets 
such as hot cases, w
ater boiler, bottle cooler etc. in all coaches.  There has to be no 
cooking and washing on board.  Food should be served in pre
-
set trays, and service 
in all the coaches should be through trolleys.  IRCTC to use covered mobile vans, 
 
container and trolleys
 of standard design for transferring meals from base kitchens 
to the trains.
 
(iii)
 
Railways to provide pantry cars on long distance trains which have to be identified 
centrally at Railway Board level from time to time.  
 
(iv)
 
Train side vending 
–
 As it is not feasibl
e to provide pantry cars on all trains, 
IRCTC to arrange on board catering/vending services (train side vending).
 
(v)
 
Pantry car of a particular train has to be considered as one unit, irrespective of the 
frequency viz. whether weekly/bi
-
weekly, etc./or a dail
y train service.  Pantry car 
license of a particular train to be awarded to one licensee only and not be split 
among different licensees for different days.
 
 
2.62.
 
In regard to compulsory provision of pantry cars in every long distance train which runs 
for
 more than 15 hours,  the representatives of the Ministry of  Railways explained that as far as 
the policy of pantry car is concerned, the journey time should be more than 24 hours each way; 
there should be at least 10 sleeper coaches in the formation of t
rain; and at least 200 meals 

 
26
 
comprising of lunch and dinner for super fast 
trains and 150 for express trains are expected to 
be served.  Then, the number of stoppages should be less so that passengers are not able to avail 
the platform vending.  The airbra
ke rakes and vestibule rakes are given preference because it is 
easier to service in vestibule rakes.  Then, there should be non
-
availability of satisfactory services 
en
-
route.  These are the various criteria on which norms of pantry car are there.
 
 
2.63.
 
On being specifically pointed out that there are some long distance trains without attached 
pantry car concurring with this, the representatives of the Ministry of  Railways stated:
-
 
“This year we have increased the production programme of pantry cars.  Th
is year 
we have planned 45 pantry cars earlier it used to range  around  20 pantry cars 
only. As and when they start coming,  we will put them on these 58 trains.  We 
will try to cover as many trains as possible out of these 58 trains.”
 
 
MENU
 
2.64.
 
The Com
mittee in its concern for the quality and quantity of food on the Indian Railways 
wanted to know about the standard of Menu.  The Ministry of Railways stated in their replies that 
Menu of Rajdhani/Shatabdi trains are reviewed at periodical intervals which 
is equally applicable 
on all zonal railways, duly considering the passengers’ suggestions/opinion to bring in 
improvement in the catering services.  Zonal railways have instructions to ensure 6 days 
–
 
alternate menu to the passengers of Rajdhani/Shatabdi u
nder their administrative control on the 
basis of the menu suggested by the Railway Board.  The menu of Rajdhani/Shatabdi trains were 
last reviewed in 1999.  A Committee has been constituted to review the existing catering charges 
and menu and the matter i
s under examination.
 
 
QUALITY CONTROL AND INSPECTION
 
2.65.
 
Quality control is of utmost important, not just because of greater quality consciousness or 
value for money  proposition  but more so with a view to ensure health and hygiene of the users. 
To ensu
re this there is a system of regular inspection and surprise checks by Inspectors and 
Officers of Indian Railways, at different levels to monitor quality of food of  refreshment 
rooms/restaurants/kitchens managed departmentally and by private licensees.  T
he IRCTC in its 
written reply stated that, in addition to the inspections being carried by Railway officials, IRCTC 
is conducting inspections through its own officials  and has engaged  the services of two 
professionally reputed food audit agencies namely 
M/s VIMTA LAB and M/s FRESH.  
(Foundation of Fresh Research & Enterprise for Safety & Hygine) who carry out specific 

 
27
 
inspections relating to hygiene, food safety  and 
training alongwith micro biological analysis of 
food and water samples.  
 
 
 
2.66.
 
Quality
 control and hygiene manuals have been published and distributed to all railways 
and catering units to ensure quality control.  Zonal Railways frequently take measures to 
implement the given standards of quality and hygiene.
 
 
2.67.
 
Regarding complaints, th
e representatives of Ministry of Railways also divulged that,  in 
the year 2004
-
05 approximately 340 complaints regarding food and 6 complaints in regard to 
package drinking water were received and action was taken in 246 and 1 case respectively.  They 
als
o informed that regular inspection/surprise checks are carried out at all levels to ensure quality 
in catering services.  Special drives are organised from time to time, complaints received are 
investigated and strict action taken against the defaulters.
 
 
2.68.
 
The details of surprise checks done during the last 3 years are :
-
 
Year
 
No. of Checks
 
No. of cases in which action taken
 
2002
-
03
 
5536
 
2239
 
2003
-
04
 
4896
 
2481
 
2004
-
05
 
2064
 
995
 
 
2.69.
 
To bring improvement and efficiency in the catering services on I
ndian Railways has 
engaged internationally reputed  food audit agencies who will also carry out inspection specially 
related to hygiene, food safety and carry out microbiological analysis of food  stuff being served.  
Lifting samples of food stuff, both un
der PFA Act and Quality control, and sending these for 
analytical  report, to State Food Laboratories and Railway Food Laboratories, respectively and 
suitable punitive action taken wherever necessary.  Independent food audit agencies have also 
been deploye
d by Indian Railways Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) for 
standardization and quality checks.
 
 
 
 

 
28
 
 
CHAPTER 
–
 III
 
TOURISM
 
3.1.
 
India with its rich and diverse cultural and historical traditions, has emerged as an 
important tourist destination.  The 
Indian Railways with its large and extensive network, spread 
throughout the country can play a pivotal role in promoting tourism.  Realising this IRCTC has 
been mandated to promote rail based tourism for both domestic and International Tourism by 
utilizing
 various services provided by the Indian Railways.  IRCTC  has initiated several 
measures to promote tourism on Indian Railways.
 
 
3.2
 
The Ministry of Railways have issued policy directives for promotion of tourism by 
IRCTC for the following schemes:
-
 
(i)
 
C
hartering of Special Trains
 :
 
 A total of 99 (including 33 steam trains on World 
heritage Darjeeling Himalayan Railways), 55 and 46 full trains were charted 
during 2002
-
03, 2003
-
04 and 2004
-
05 respectively.
 
(iii)
 
Chartering of Special coaches
: 247 coaches in 200
2
-
03, 400 in the year 2003
-
04, 
326 in the year 2004
-
05 coaches were chartered.
 
(iv)
 
Earmarking of reserved accomodation in trains for value added tour programmes:
 
for promotion of comprehensive tourism including Rail Journey, Road Linkage,  
hotel accommodation,
 food and sight seeing Indian Railways provide for 
earmarking of reserved accommodation in regular trains for value  added tours to 
be undertaken for promotion of organised tour.  A total of 8771 berths were 
earmarked during 2004
-
05.
 
(v)
 
Chartering of Special 
Trains on hill Railways
:  Indian Railways through IRCTC 
provides special train charters on hill Railways for the benefit of domestic and 
foreign tourists. 
 
 
 
BHARAT  DARSHAN SPECIAL TOURIST  TRAIN (VILLAGE ON WHEELS)
 
3.3.
 
To promote domestic tourism and to
 enable general people particularly from poorer 
sections, to visit different parts of their beloved country, Indian Railways have launched a scheme 
of ‘village on wheels’ (Bharat Darshan).  A total of 11 circuits have been covered since inception 
of the pr
ogramme in November, 2004.  These circuits have originated from Patna, 
Vishakhapatnam, Mumbai and Madurai for various destinations covering Eastern, Northern, 
Western, Central and Southern parts of the country.  The schedule of operation of the train is 

 
29
 
be
ing fixed as per tourist demand so as to 
enable maximum number of tourists to travel at 
affordable cost.
 
 
3.4.
 
IRCTC does not operate the tourist trains by itself but markets it and issues letter of intent 
to reputed tour operators for this purpose.  To po
pularise it further, the marketing of these trains is 
being undertaken through newspapers, print media, releasing of brochure and through 
newspapers.  With regard to success of village on wheels the IRCTC officials claimed that:
 
“ village on wheels i.e. Bh
arat Darshan for poor people has been very successfully 
launched, 11 circuits have  been covered.  We are now expanding it further so that 
every person from the poorest of the society can use these facilities and see Bharat 
which he could not do before due
 to exorbitant stay arrangement and sight seeing 
costs that were involved.”
 
 
3.5.
 
On being asked by the Committee regarding fare structure of the village on wheels (Bharat 
Darshan) the IRCTC officials explained, that on an average it costs Rs.350 to Rs.450
 per day 
including meals and tea, accommodation, transportation  and sight seeing.  On an average for 
seven day package it costs around Rs.2500.
 
They also informed that IRCTC has been asked by 
the Railways to bring down the cost.
 
 
3.6
 
When asked by the Com
mittee why does not IRCTC itself operats these tourists trains,  
the representative of the IRCTC  explained that considering the vastness of the country it is not 
financially and physically viable to create infrastructure at all places of tourist interest.
  
Infrastructure is essential for the following areas:
 
·
 
Marketing infrastructure through network of offices .
 
·
 
Manpower deployment 
 
·
 
Provision of transportation facilities including buses at all places of sight seeing
 
·
 
Provision of lodging facility including h
otel lodge etc.
 
·
 
Provision of catering and allied  facilities at all locations
 
·
 
Provision of guides
 
·
 
Security personnel
 
 
The above infrastructure provision is extremely expensive and cannot be sustained on a 
long term basis and hence in order to keep cost of 
services reasonable these operations and 
functions will have to be planned through reputed tour operators.
 

 
30
 
 
3.7.
 
Plans to introduce special tourist trains, covering important tourist circuits is a policy issue 
governed by the Ministry of Railways.  On the 
directives issued by the Ministry of Railways from 
time to time, IRCTC initiates proposals for various tourism initiatives.  Presently, there is  no 
formal proposals regarding introduction of tourist trains by IRCTC.   On behalf of Indian 
Railways, IRCTC u
ndertakes marketing of special charter trains and steam charter trains on Hill 
Railway sections to promote tourism.  IRCTC has been successfully able to market large number 
of steam charter trains specially on Darjeeling Himalayan Railway.  Kalka Shimla Hi
ll Railway 
and Nilgiri Mountain Railway for use by tourists.
 
 
3.8
 
Regarding achievements and progress made by the IRCTC in the field of promotion of 
tourism, IRCTC officials claimed;
 
“we have taken major strides in tourism, highlighting them they said that
 hardly 
anybody used Darjeeling Hill Railway, we started chartering trains.  In the last two 
months we have run 50 charters for companies and for foreigners.  We have made 
Darjeeling Hill Railway as one of the most popular destination for domestic travel 
a
nd foreigners.  We have requested travel companies to come to us.  Now, we are 
taking children for camps.  This summer we have run more than 50 coaches for 
taking children to the summer camp and back.  We have provided over 200 
coaches for these people.  N
ow, we are expanding our services to Shimla railway 
and Ootacamund Hill Railway so as to bring foreigners to enjoy the facilities that 
we are providing. In addition our project village on wheels i.e. Bharat Darshan for 
poor people has been very successfull
y launched.”
 
 
3.9.
 
Regarding future plans to exploit the potentialities, the vast untapped potential in tourism 
sector the IRCTC officials submitted that 
 
“so far IRCTC has not made any future plans but the suggestion is well taken and 
we will  work on it.
”
 

 
31
 
 
CHAPTER 
–
 IV
 
 
PACKAGED DRINKING WATER (RAIL NEER)
 
4.1
 
In its endeavour to meet the growing and varied demands of railway passengers IRCTC 
has expanded the ambit and gamut of services offered to the passengers, one of these, is 
manufacturing and supply 
of packaged drinking water under the brand name of ‘Rail Neer’.
 
 
4.2
 
In a written reply  the IRCTC justified its venture in manufacturing of  packaged drinking 
water by stating that the need for setting up of the packaged drinking water has arisen out of t
he 
large consumption of water on railways and the frequent cases of failure in sample checks of 
various BIS certified brands of packaged drinking water. To ensure that the railway users get safe 
and quality packaged drinking water, Rail Neer was made the e
xclusive brand  to be sold at 
railway premises and in trains.  Accordingly,  IRCTC was instructed to set up state of the art 
plants comparable with the best in the industry.  In the initial phase IRCTC was instructed to set 
up initially only two plants one
 at Nangloi, Delhi and the other at Danapur, Bihar.  The capacity 
utilization of these plants is 100 per cent.
 
 
4.3.
 
As per the Ministry of Railways Rail Neer is using processes that guarantee safe  drinking 
water i.e. crystal clear, low in dissolved  soli
ds and free from all pathogenic bacteria and viruses 
as well as other harmful contaminants like fluoride, arsenic, nitrate and iron and conforming to 
the BIS specifications.  The plants confirms to European Union Norms and employs eight stage 
purification 
process, the highest employed by any plant in India
 
The following eight processes 
are employed:
-
 
1.
 
Activated Carbon 
–
 Multistage activated carbon
 
2.
 
Softner
 
 
-
 Process employed for making Rail Neer
 
3.
 
Ultra filtration
 
4.
 
Reverse Osmosis
 
5.
 
Calcite filter
 
6.
 
Micron filters
 
7.
 
Ultra Violet filters
 
8.
 
Ozonation
 
 

 
32
 
 
4.4.
 
The representatives of Ministry of Railways informed that Rail Neer is wholly 
manufactured by IRCTC.  The plant is run by IRCTC, only maintenance contract has been given 
to outside agency.
 
 
4.5.
 
To meet the increasing
 demand of Rail Neer IRCTC is taking the following measures :
 
(i)
 
The packaging capacity of the plants at Nangloi is being increased to 5000 bottles 
per hour, for which technical evaluation is under process.  After the enhancement 
of production capacity, the P
lant will be capable to produce 10000  cartons per day 
for 27 days in a month i.e. 2,70,000 cartons per month on three shift basis.
 
(ii)
 
For Western Region, Central Railways has been approached for allotment of 
suitable land in Mumbai area.
 
(iii)
 
For Southern Region,
 some sites have been suggested by Southern Railway in 
Tamil Nadu.  As there are certain restrictions on ground water exploitation in the 
state, IRCTC has approached M/s Water and Power Consultancy Services India 
Ltd., a PSU under Union Ministry of Water R
esources to conduct a detailed survey 
and suggest a suitable site.
 
(iv)
 
The capacity of Rail Neer Plant at Danapur is at present considered sufficient to 
meet the demand in Eastern and NF regions.
 
 
4.6.
 
The details of different components and raw materials used
 for making Rail Neer and 
margin on sale of each bottle  of Rail Neer in Delhi area are as per details below:
-
 
A.
 
Cost of Raw materials
 
P
rice per bottle (Rs.)
 
Preforms
 
2.04
 
Caps
 
0.35
 
Shrink Labels
 
0.12
 
Cartons
 
0.36
 
Tapes
 
0.02
 
TOTAL
 
2.89
 
 
B.
 
Operation & 
other overheads
 
Operation & Maintenance Charges
 
0.51
 
Electricity Charges
 
0.43
 
Freight & CFA charges
 
0.46
 
Excise Duty
 
0.80
 
Sales Tax
 
0.72
 
TOTAL
 
2.92
 
 

 
33
 
C.
 
Total cost of raw materials & 
overheads (A+B)
 
 
 
5.81
 
D.
 
Sale Price per bottle
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.50
 
E.
 
Contri
bution per bottle (D
-
C)
 
 
 
 
 
0.69
 
 
F.
 
Fixed Cost 
 (including Depreciation, Lease Rent and other
 
 
0.52
 
 
 
          Administrative overheads)
 
G.
 
Net Margin per bottle (E
-
F)
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.17
 
 
E
-
TICKETING
 
4.7.
 
Millions of travelling tickets are booked/reserved on the 
Indian Railways daily.  To ease 
problems in booking of tickets and to make ticketing convenient and hassle free, IRCTC forayed 
into ticketing sector in consonance with one of the objectives of IRCTC  to act as the access 
provider to Railway’s passenger Res
ervation system and promote multiple channels of 
distribution using state of the art technology  including Internet.  Accordingly, IRCTC launched 
Internet Rail Reservation on  3
rd
 August, 2002.
 
 
4.8.
 
E
-
Ticketing has three main aspects 
first
, booking of tic
kets. 
Second
, payment for tickets 
booked  and 
third
, delivery of tickets.
 
 
4.9.
 
(i)
 
Booking of tickets: 
Tickets are booked mainly through internet, by logging on to 
the website of IRCTC and other service providers, from 9
th
 September, 2004 booking of 
ticke
ts through mobile phones has also been started.  For this purpose IRCTC has  tied up 
with leading cellular phone operators.
 
(ii)
 
Payment Mechanism:
 
The tickets are booked by IRCTC for each user after the 
payment has been confirmed using Master/Visa/Diner C
lub/American Express credit cards 
or through Direct debit from banks, having Internet Banking facility, who have tied up 
with IRCTC for this purpose.
 
(iii)
 
Delivery System:
  Tickets  are delivered mainly through  courier, tickets can be 
collected from pers
onal collection counter also.  At present the delivery service covers 150 
cities, and in future more cities will be covered.
 
 
 
4.10.
 
During the evidence IRCTC officials apprised the Committee of the success of the           
E
-
Ticketing  initiative of IRCTC
, by saying that :
 
“one of our very successful projects has been the internet based ticketing  We have 
now spread into 150 cities.  We are selling more than 6000 tickets a day.  Earlier 

 
34
 
we were on the internet.  Then 
we came on to the cell phones.  This ye
ar we 
will be extending this facility to the land line also, so that a person can ring up on 
his ordinary telephone, book a ticket through us and we will deliver it as his or her 
house.  Over 10 million tickets have been sent to various houses and not a si
ngle 
ticket has been lost or delivered on wrong address.”
 
 
4.11.
 
When asked to explain what steps the IRCTC plans to undertake to make the ticketing 
through internet and other  electronic means, further popular, IRCTC in its written replies stated 
that, IR
CTC is planning the following measures to make ticketing popular.
 
·
 
Extending  delivery to other cities
 
·
 
Adding more payment option  for customer convenience
 
·
 
Adding mobile based application to more Mobile service providers
 
·
 
The booking services are available b
etween 0800 hrs. to 2200 hrs. from Monday to 
Saturday and 0800 hrs. to 1400 hrs. on Sundays at the IRCTC website 
www.irctc.co.in.
 
 
YATRI NIWAS AND BUDGET HOTELS
 
 
4.12
 
IRCTC is also engaged with Management of Railway Hotels and Rail Yatri Niwas to help 
rail
way passenger  in finding suitable accommodation.  Although this is not its core concern but 
nevertheless it is not incidental and ancillary. It follows from the very nature and mission of 
IRCTC, to manage the entire hospitality business of Indian Railways
.
 
 
4.13.
 
Indian Railways had established two Yatri Niwas  one each at New Delhi and Howrah, in 
addition it had also established BNR hotels at Puri and Ranchi.
 
 
4.14.
 
Existing  Yatri Niwas at New Delhi has been handed over to IRCTC with effect from         
      
1
st
 April, 2005.  Rail Yatri Niwas at Howrah and BNR hotels at Puri and Ranchi are being handed 
over to IRCTC for management.
 
 
4.15.
 
IRCTC  informed that  the Ministry of Railways have decided to set Rail Yatri 
Niwas/Budget Hotels on unused railway l
and in the vicinity of major stations and have directed 
IRCTC to establish the facilities.  Identification of potential locations for establishing Rail Yatri 
Niwas/Budget Hotel is under process with various Zonal Railways. 
 

 
35
 
The facilities will be establis
hed 
through private participation.  In the first phase 
6 sites are proposed at Madurai, Bangalore, Bhopal (Habibganj), Chandigarh, Sealdah and 
Secunderabad.  Land ownership will continue to remain with the railway and lease license rental 
will be payable t
o the railways. The process of selection of reputed organisations to establish the 
facilities will be undertaken through open competitive bidding process, to enable maximisation of 
revenues. After the first phase is completed, IRCTC would be undertaking es
tablishment of Rail 
Yatri Niwas/Budget Hotels at several other locations after identification of land is undertaken.
 
 
4.16.
 
During the evidence the IRCTC officials further stated :
-
 
Yatri Niwases at Howrah and Delhi  have been handed over to us with a mand
ate 
to modernise them.  IRCTC has already engaged the architects where certain 
provisions are being made to upgrade all the Yatri Niwases and Hotels that we 
have.  In addition, our mandate is to set up Budget Hotels at six railway stations.  
There was cert
ain clearances awaiting from the Ministry of Railways which had 
recently been given.  Very soon, we will be floating tenders for setting up budget 
hotels in the country.”
 

 
36
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
 
 
1.
 
The Committee find that IRCTC is an extended arm o
f the Indian Railways to 
upgrade, professionalise and manage catering and hospitality services at stations, on trains 
and other locations, to promote domestic and international tourism, through establishment 
and development of Budget Hotels, information an
d commercial publicity and global 
reservation system, Rail Ticketing and provide quality packaged drinking water. The 
Committee appreciate that IRCTC is making efforts to improve and  modernise catering.  
However, as an extension of Indian Railways, IRCTC 
has also to fulfill the social obligations 
towards the Railway users and those dependent on Railways.
 
 
 
The Committee after going through the New Catering Policy 2005, note that the 
system of catering envisaged in the Policy is totally different from what 
it was earlier. It has 
undergone a paradigm shift, the very notion and concept behind railway catering has been 
changed, it is no longer being treated as part of passenger amenities.  The Committee 
further note that earlier catering on railways was based o
n the principle of no profit no loss, 
but in the New Catering Policy, the dominant theme is to commercialise it, privatise it. 
Profit motive is apparent on the face of it, license fee has been hiked, tendering and bidding 
system has been introduced, licens
e would be given to the highest bidder, tenure of license 
has been reduced and departmental catering is being dispensed with. 
 
 
 
  Considering all these aspects of New Catering Policy, it is inevitable that when the 
catering policy is put into practice, it
 will directly or by implication impact and  impinge on  
the interest of the passengers and railway users.   The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the whole system of catering including the Catering Policy
-
2005 should be reviewed so 
as to align the cate
ring policy as a part of  passenger amenities and not as a commercial and 
profit making venture alone.  The Policy should incorporate provisions which fulfill social 
obligations towards passengers, railway users and those dependent on Railways.    Further 
the Committee note that stay order is in vogue in awarding licence to static and mobile units 
till October, 2005.  The Committee desire that the review of New Catering Policy be done 
before the expiry of the stay order.
 

 
37
 
 
2.
 
The Committee are of the view t
hat catering on Indian Railways apart from being a 
business venture forms a source of livelihood for most of the small caterers/vendors in trains 
and on stations.  The entire family is dependent on it for generations.  In view of this, the 
Committee is con
strained to note that some of the provisions of the Catering Policy
-
2005 
directly strike at the livelihood concerns of small caterers/vendors.
 
 
 
The Committee are particularly concerned about provisions in Para Nos. 15.6.1, 
15.6.3, 15.6.4, 16.3, 16.4 of th
e Catering Policy
-
2005:
-
 
 
(i)
 
Para 15.6.1,
  provides that the tenure of the license for small units for 
restaurants, refreshment rooms at all ‘B’ & ‘C’ category stations and trolleys and 
stalls at category ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category stations will be 3 years
, this the 
Committee feel is unjustified and impractical, 3 years is too short a period to provide 
stability to any venture much less a business venture.  This provision coupled with 
Para 15.6.3
 which stipulates that there would be no renewal or extension 
after expiry 
of the contract will lead to uncertainty and insecurity in the minds of the small 
caterers. The Committee feel that this provision is anti entrepreneurship as no 
business can develop & flourish in such an environment of uncertainty.  The licen
see 
cannot plan ahead for future and will not invest and take interest in the venture.  He 
will always be on tenterhooks.  Considering all these factors the Committee suggest 
that the tenure of the small units should also be for a period of 5 years and the
reafter 
only review of license should be done.  After the review, the license should be 
generally renewed with necessary changes and modifications in the terms and 
conditions governing the license depending upon the performance.
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)
 
Similarly, paragra
phs  
15.6.4
 and  
16.4
 of the new policy stipulates that on every 
renewal of license of reserved categories at “A”, “B” and “C” category stations or fresh 
allotments, license fee should be increased based on actual sales turnover or the unit 
subject to a mi
nimum of 10 per cent hike over the prevailing license fee of the unit.  The 
Committee feel that this is unwarranted and recommend that it should be reduced to a 
more reasonable level.  The Committee also take note of para 16.3 which stipulates that 
‘may re
new’ the tenure license of small units at “D”, “E” and “F” category stations after 
every five years subject to satisfactory performance.  The Committee feel that this leaves 
much discretion in the hands of officials and is likely to be misused.  They, ther
efore, 
recommend that  the performance criteria should be analytical and rational with specific 

 
38
 
parameters so that there is no scope for 
subjectivity.   This will give confidence to the 
small caterers.
 
 
3.
 
The Committee are happy to note that in the new ca
tering policy provision for reservation 
has been made in favour of underprivileged and marginalized sections of society, but on close 
perusal of the policy, they discerned that the reservation policy followed by the Railways in 
awarding catering license la
cks uniformity and is devoid of justifiable criteria.  They particularly 
note three major lacunae in the policy.   
First
, no provision for reservation has been laid in case of 
major units and the award of license made on the basis of professional criteria 
through open 
competitive bidding .   
Secondly
, with reference to the small units dual standard has been made, 
for instance in restaurants/refreshment rooms at “B” and “C” category stations the quantum of 
reservation has been fixed at 25 per cent, while at 
“D”, “E” and “F” category stations, it has been 
pegged at 49.5 per cent.     The Committee  find the reservation anomalous and contradictory. 
Thirdly
, the Committee specifically note that no criteria and standard has been adopted in 
allocating the percenta
ge reservation among different categories of beneficiaries such as war 
widows, widows of railway employees, handicaps etc.  In view of the above, the Committee desire 
that uniform policy of reservation should be followed in all catering units at all statio
ns/trains.  
They, therefore, recommend that the existing reservation policy of Government of India should be 
followed strictly with necessary modifications and exceptions, if any, to be made in favour of any 
special category.   Further, a specific criteria
 should be adopted in allocating reservation among 
different categories of beneficiaries. 
 
 
4.
 
The Committee find that only 252 mail/express trains have attached pantry cars (213 
licensee and 39 departmental). Many long distance trains do not have the pant
ry car facility at all.  
The Committee are also concerned at the lack of modernization in pantry services.  They also do 
not appreciate the criteria which have been laid down for providing attached pantry cars on the 
trains.  They take exception particular
ly to the minimum journey time stipulation of more than 24 
hours each way.  Taking all these factors into consideration, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that every long distance train which runs for more than 15 hours each 
w
ay should be provided with attached pantry car as early as possible. They also desire that the 
pantry services should be modernized by effecting changes in the design and décor of the pantry 
car and ensure minimum human handling by inducting modern gadgets
/equipments and 
processes.
 
 
5.
 
The Committee note with concern the phenomenon of unauthorized vending in the trains 
and at the stations.  They are of the view that unauthorized vending not only causes loss of 
revenue to the Railways, but also poses a threa
t to health of passengers.  However, they are also 
aware that this is a source of livelihood for many families.   Considering these factors, the 
Committee earnestly desire that this problem should be tackled in a harmonious and prudent 
manner after taking 
into consideration different aspects of the problem.  The Committee also 

 
39
 
suggest that some sort of mechanism in the 
nature of an informal union or society should be 
created to organize the unauthorized vendors and a limited number of license should be give
n to 
the Union/Society depending upon the category of stations.   The Committee recommend that 
unauthorized vendors should be identified, their credentials be verified and license be granted to 
them.   Further they should be given identification numbers in
 the form of badge and uniform as is 
presently given to porters. This would ensure proper monitoring on such vendors and curb the 
possibility of misuse.
 
 
6.
 
The Committee note with apprehension that with gradual privatization of catering services 
in the In
dian Railways, the position of workers/vendors/hawkers engaged by licensee caterers has 
become vulnerable.  Their job security is at risk and are more likely to be exploited now.  Since 
there is no safety provision for them in the event of change of contra
ctor, they could be jettisoned 
by the new contractor, their wages could be reduced even below the minimum level, their service 
condition could be varied to their disadvantage.  In view of all these, the Committee desire that 
some sort of social security/sa
fety net should be created in their favour.  The IRCTC should 
formally or informally evolve some mechanism and ensure that in the event of change of 
contractor, workers should not be discontinued.   They also desire that the departmental catering 
which are
 still in existence be continued.
 
 
7.
 
The Committee find that now license would be awarded through tender system to the 
highest bidder instead of awarding through invitation of applications earlier.    As far as the change 
over to tendering and bidding  sy
stem is concerned, the Committee have no objections as such.  
However, their apprehension stems mainly from the fact that it would encourage speculative and 
excess bidding  with a view to grab the tender.  It could lead to deliberate tampering with the 
qua
lity and quantity of the food and increase in  prices of food articles on one hand and 
exploitation of the workers to recover the huge sum of money spent on getting the license on the 
other.  So in the process both workers and Railway passengers stand to l
ose immensely.  
 
 
 
To avoid the pernicious effect of the new tendering system, the Committee recommend that 
the objective behind tendering and bidding  should be changed and it should be supplanted with a 
new system.  License should be awarded to the bidde
r who quotes the lowest price and is ready to 
supply the prescribed and defined item/menu.  Regular monitoring of the supply of quantity and 
quality should be essentially carried out.  This will not only benefit the passenger, but also make 
Railway caterin
g affordable and accessible to common passengers who otherwise seldom use 
Railway catering. This will also make catering profitable as volume will go up, more passengers 
will patronize the Railway catering.
 
 
8.
 
The Committee note that an elaborate inspecti
on and complaint redressal mechanism is 
sine qua non
 for improving the standard of catering services in Indian Railways.  Quality control is 
of paramount importance in any concern dealing with food and beverages as it is directly linked to 

 
40
 
health and safet
y of consumers.  The Committee 
feel that strict and regular inspection/surprise 
checks have become crucial in the new catering regime.  Almost 90 per cent of the catering system 
is presently being handled by private licensee caterers and in such a situatio
n it becomes the 
responsibility of the license issuing authority to ensure that all terms and conditions of the license 
agreement are followed.  
 
 
 
The Committee further note that at present enforcement power has been bestowed among 
Railway Board, Zonal Ra
ilways and IRCTC. This creates confusion and results in lax monitoring.  
They after taking into account these factors recommend that an elaborate and unified monitoring 
and quality control system should be evolved with minimum overlapping between different
 
agencies. The Committee also suggest that redressal of grievances and disposal of complaints 
should be accorded top priority. They, desire that the system should be made fully electronic and 
computerized so as to ensure prompt action and hassle free regis
tration of complaints.
 
 
9.
 
The Committee express their reservation regarding the provision of minimum license fee 
that has been kept for different type of catering services in the new policy.  They note that for 
Rajdhani/Shatabdi Express trains, minimum li
cense fee has been kept at 15 per cent of annual 
sales turnover based on actual occupancy or any other percentage commission on sales.  For 
other mail/express trains and static units, this has been kept at 12 per cent.  They observe that this 
system based 
on estimated annual sales turnover entails detailed case by case assessment and 
requires constant supervision and continuous monitoring. The system apart from being 
cumbersome and time consuming is also prone to be misused since it gives much discretion an
d 
leeway to the assessing officers. Therefore, the Committee with a view to impart greater degree of 
objectivity to the system suggest that license fee should be replaced with a system based on 
rent/lease, arrived at after considering the location, dimensi
ons, scale, maintenance and 
conservancy charges of the catering establishment in question.
 
 
10.
 
The Committee note with appreciation the work done by the IRCTC in area of E
-
ticketing.  
They find that the entire process of e
-
ticketing goes through three int
er related stages viz. booking 
of tickets, payment for ticket and delivery of tickets.  IRCTC started the internet based Rail 
reservation on 3
rd
 August, 2002.  In September 2004, they expanded this facility to mobile phones 
by tying up with leading cellula
r operators to make it more accessible.  Further, IRCTC is planning 
to extend this facility to landlines also.  Similarly with regard to the payment for booked tickets, 
IRCTC has entered into agreement with leading private and public sector banks.  Payment
s are at 
present being made through direct debit from banks and through credit cards.  The delivery of 
booked ticket is mainly done through courier.  The Committee were informed that in a short span 
of time, IRCTC has extended this facility to more than 15
0 towns, more than 6000 tickets are being 
booked every day, more than 10 million tickets have been delivered till now and the turnover has 
been more than 175 crore.    They were apprised that not a single ticket was delivered at wrong 
address.   However, t
he Committee feel that IRCTC has a long way to go as only a miniscule 

 
41
 
percentage of people are patronizing this 
facility. They note that the problem lies with the 
payment mechanism.  Credit and debit cards penetration is not wide spread.  Even those who ha
ve 
these cards, are generally reluctant to use these for security reasons.  Considering all these 
factors and with a view to make it popular, the Committee recommend that more payment options 
should be explored and made available so that general public can
 get benefit of this facility.  They 
particularly suggest that IRCTC should make available cash cards of various denominations which 
could be distributed through the network of PCO booths, general stores, travel agents etc. so that 
anyone wishing to make p
ayment quote the cash card number and the payment would instantly be 
made.  This way e
-
ticketing would become more popular and come within the reach of general 
public.
 
 
11.
 
The Committee note with satisfaction that IRCTC has forayed into manufacturing of 
p
ackaged drinking water with the brand name ‘Rail Neer’ to meet the long felt need of railway 
passengers.  Rail Neer is presently being processed/manufactured at two plants namely Nangloi in 
Delhi and Danapur in Bihar.  These plants confirm to BIS and EU no
rms.   The Committee were 
informed that these plants employ eight stage purification process.  
 
 
 
However, inspite of all these, ‘Rail Neer’ is not being used by majority of passengers 
because of its cost and taste.  Common people still use local tap water
 or carry home water with 
them.  The Committee note that the total production cost of ‘Rail Neer’ amounts to about Rs.6.50/
-
 
bottle (raw material Rs.2.89, operations and other overheads charges Rs.2.92).  Further the 
Committee also note that of all the raw
 materials preforms, caps and shrink level together cost 
around Rs.2.50.  They are of the view that if IRCTC starts supplying the purified water in other 
alternative low cost package, its cost would come down and would become more affordable.  In 
view of t
his, the Committee recommend that IRCTC should consider supplying water in alternative 
low cost packages/pouches to reduce the overall cost of ‘Rail Neer’.  They desire that 
packages/pouches of different  volume should also be introduced in the market.  Th
e Committee 
also desire that IRCTC, in consultation with experts, should take steps to improve the taste of Rail 
Neer.  This would lead to more sale as the passengers and other costumers would have cheap 
water with wider options.
 
 
 12.
 
The Committee find t
hat the Ministry of Railways have decided to set up Rail Yatri 
Niwas/Budget Hotels on unused railway land in the vicinity of major stations and have directed 
IRCTC to establish the facilities through private participation.  They were also informed that 
pro
visions are being made to upgrade all the Yatri Niwases and Hotels in existence at present.  The 
Committee are of the view that such facilities would help in tackling the hardships faced by 
Railway passengers in finding suitable accommodation.  They emphas
ize that the Ministry of 
Railways should expedite the process of setting up new  Budget Hotels and modernizing and 
repairing the existing ones.  They urge the Ministry of Railways to give clearance for such projects 
at the earliest.  
 

 
42
 
 
13.
 
The Committee no
tice that bed rolls are provided to sleeper classes in Rajdhani and other 
express trains on demand, whereas the same is not provided in sleeper classes in ordinary long 
distance trains. They desire that on demand the bed rolls should be provided in sleeper
 classes of 
long distance trains also on payment.
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (BASUDEB ACHARIA)
 
29 August, 2005
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Chairman,
 
07 Bhadrapada, 1927 (Saka)
 
 
 
 
 
       Standing Committee on Railways
 
 
 
 
 