         
 30 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 16th Report of the Standing Committee 
on Railways (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha)  
on ‘Expansion of Railway Network – New Lines, Gauge Conversion, 
Doubling and Electrification’] 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 

 2 
           
SCR No.: 117 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 16th Report of the Standing Committee 
on Railways (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha)  
on ‘Expansion of Railway Network – New Lines, Gauge Conversion, 
Doubling and Electrification’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.09.2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.09.2007 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 

 3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
            PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….  (iv)   
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….     (v) 
 
PART - I 
 
CHAPTER I  Report…………………………………………………       1  
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been   6 
   accepted by the Government ………………………….        
 
CHAPTER  III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  15 
   do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
   reply .…………………………………………………..         
   
CHAPTER  IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   18 
   Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
   Committee and which require reiteration ……………….       
 
CHAPTER  V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final   19 
   Replies of Government are still awaited ………………..       
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX    I.     Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways 
      held on 06.09.2007    
        
APPENDIX    II.   Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
      Recommendations/Observations contained in the 24th Report 
      of the Standing Committee on Railways (14th Lok Sabha) 
       on ‘Expansion of Railway Network – New Lines, Gauge  
Conversion, Doubling and Electrification’.       
    
        
  
(iii)

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  (2007 -08) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
      
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.         Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4. Shri Atiq Ahamad 
5.         Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
6. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
7.       Shri H.D. Devegowda 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10.   Shri Anwar Hussain 
11.       Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
12.       Ch. Lal Singh 
13.       Shri Ananta Nayak 
14.       Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
15.       Shri A. Sai Prathap 
16.       Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
17.       Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
18.       Shri Manik Singh 
19.       Shri K. Subbarayan  
20. Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.       Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
23. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri A. Elavarasan 
29. Shri Isam Singh 
30. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31. Shri Abani Roy 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director  
4. Shri Hoti Lal    - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Vinay P. Barwa   - Executive Officer 
 
 (iv) 
 
 
 

 5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing  Committee on Railways (2007 -08), having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Thirtieth 
Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth  Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways on ‘Expansion of Railway Network – New Lines, Gauge 
Conversion, Doubling and Electrification’.  
 
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 09.12.2005 and it contained 
8 recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways have furnished their Action 
Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 06.06.2006. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 06.09.2007.  
 
4. An analysis of the a ction taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                      BASUDEB ACHARIA  
6 September, 2007                Chairman,  
15 Bhadrapada, 1929 Saka              Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

 6 
 
CHAPTER - 1 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the  16th Report of the Standing Committee on 
Railways  (2005 -06) on ‘Expansion of Railway Network – New Lines, Gauge Conversion, 
Doubling and Electrification’ which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
09.12.2005. 
 
2. The aforesaid Report con tained 8 recommendations/observations.  Action Taken Notes 
have been received from the Government in respect of all these 
recommendations/observations. These have been broadly categorized as follows. 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
   
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7 and 8. 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply. 
 
 Para Nos. 3 and 5. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee. 
 
 Nil 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies 
are still awaited 
 
Nil 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their Recommendations/Observations. 
 

 7 
 
Expansion of Rail Network 
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 
 
4. The Committee had inter alia  noted that the funding of ongoing New Lines, Gauge 
Conversion, Doubling, Electrification and Metropolitan Transport projects with a 
throwforward of Rs. 47,354 crore  had become a challenging task for the Railways. The major 
challenge before the Railways was to arrange funds for about 60 projects sanctioned on socio -
economic considerations.  The Committee noted that to implement these projects a new 
scheme-Remote Area Rail Sampark Yojana envisaging an investment of about Rs. 20,000 
crore in a period of 5 years had been announced in the interim Rail Budget 2004-05.  However, 
no funding arrangement had been tied up. Considering the huge requirement of funds which 
were not available with the Railways, the Committee strongly recommended that budgetary 
support to the Railways be adequately enhanced so that the projects taken up especially in 
hilly, tribal and backward areas could be completed as early as possibl e. They also 
recommended that an Expert Committee consisting of eminent economists and representatives 
of the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance be constituted to explore new sources 
of funding and suggest remedies so that all the sanctioned p rojects are completed in a 
maximum period of five years.   
  
5. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
 “Efforts are being made to arrange funds for the financially unviable 
New Line and Gauge conversion projects taken up primarily on socio-economic 
considerations for development of backward and underdeveloped areas to be 
covered under Remote Area Rail Sampark Yojana.  Under this scheme, funds 
are proposed to be provided through budgetary support and non budgetary 
initiatives including seeking participation of respective State Governments so as 
to complete all the ongoing projects in a time frame of about 5 years.  In such a 
case, setting up of an Expert Committee as recommended is not considered 
necessary for the present”. 
 
 
6. The Committee are glad to note that efforts are being made to mobilize funds 
through budgetary support and non budgetary initiatives including seeking participation 
of respective State Governments for completion of the financially unviable on -going 
projects taken up on socio -economic considerations. These projects are expected to be 
completed within five years.  The Committee would like to know the progress made in 
this regard so far and the details of the projects under execution.  The Committee w ould 

 8 
also like to know whether the aforesaid time frame of five years covers all the 60 projects 
sanctioned on socio economic considerations.  
 
 
Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL)  
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
  
7.  The Committee had noted that to mobilize the  funds for bankable projects from non -
budgetary sources , Railways had formed  Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL) in January, 2003 
and had also transferred 53 projects for execution.  Out of these, 32 projects were pertaining to 
strengthening of Golden Quadri lateral and diagonals and 21 projects were pertaining to 
strengthening of port connectivity and corridor to hinter land. Another 13 projects were yet to 
be sanctioned by the Ministry of Railways.  According to RVNL, funding for 30 projects had 
been tied -up and the projects were under various stages of physical execution.  10 Projects 
were being executed through the construction department of the Zonal Railways being the last 
mile projects and were funded through budgetary support mostly.  The Golden Quadril ateral 
projects involving  capital expenditure of about Rs. 8000 crore were to be provided through a 
Budgetary Support of Rs. 1500 crore, Rs.1500 crore from Asian Development Bank and 
Rs.5000 crore from market borrowings. The Port connectivity projects of about Rs. 4000 crore 
were to be funded by borrowing from market and Public Private Partnership.  For this purpose, 
8 projects were being planned to be implemented by creation of Special Purpose Vehicles 
through equity participation by strategic investors.  
  
 The Committee desired that the RVNL should expedite the process of tying up of funds 
and ensure the completion of all the projects transferred to them for execution within the 
stipulated time. 
 
8. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Railways have inter alia stated that:- 
 
“Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL) has been formed to expedite completion of 
projects related to strengthening of Golden Quadrilaterals & its Diagonals and port 
connectivity by raising funds through non -budgetary resources.  Sinc e some of the 
these RVNL projects were last mile projects and were at advance stage of completion, 
Railways were in a better position to complete the same as compared to RVNL which 
was formed recently and thus it was decided to let Railways complete the sa me on 
behalf of RVNL. 
  
 RVNL has taken necessary actions to mobilize funds for projects and it is 
expected that all the projects except one transferred recently would be over by 2006 -
07” 

 9 
9. The Committee are happy to note that RVNL has taken necessary ac tion to 
mobilize funds for the projects related to strengthening of Golden Quadrilaterals and its 
diagonals and port connectivity.  These projects were expected to be completed by 2006 -
07. The Committee would like to be informed whether these projects have  indeed been 
completed in the year 2006 -07 as expected.  If not, the Committee be informed of the 
reasons for the delay.   
 
Missing Links 
(Recommendation Para No.7) 
 .  
10.   The Committee were of the considered view that the completion of missing links an d 
throughput enhancement works on the viable routes will substantially improve the efficiency 
and productivity of the Railways.  They further found that certain Sections in between the main 
BG line for example Bardhaman -Katwa and Azimganj -Katwa in Eastern Railway had not so 
far been converted into BG causing lot of inconvenience to railway commuters and traders.  
They, therefore, recommended that the Railways should identify such areas without any further 
delay and link all the missing links of gauge conver sion, doubling, electrification and 
signalling & telecommunication works and also adequate allocation be made for these works 
so that the same could be completed in time and line capacity is increased. 
 The Committee also noted that some uneconomic branch lines connected with the main 
line had not been converted into broad gauge so far and desired that such uneconomic branch 
lines (Metre Gauge as well as Narrow Gauge) be identified and converted into Broad Gauge 
lines so that it may lead to socio-economic development of the areas. 
 
11. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“The recommendation of the Committee have been noted.  However, it is 
brought out that Railways have a huge throwforward of Projects with limited 
availability of resources.  The ongoing gauge conversion works have a throwforward of 
about Rs.10,000 crore and annual allocation has been of the order of about Rs.1,000 
crore in the recent years and Rs.1,450 Crore has been provided during 2006 -07.  
Though, some efforts are being made to generate additional resources but the ongoing 
projects are likely to take at least 5-6 years for completion. 
The sections which have so far not been taken up for gauge conversion are 
mostly branch lines and isolated lines with  not much traffic prospectus.  In such a 
scenario, it may not be feasible to take up gauge conversion of such lines till the 
resource position improves or existing shelf is reduced to a reasonable level.”   
 

 10 
 
12.   The Committee  are of the view that miss ing links not only create bottlenecks but 
also cause sub-optimum utilization of existing assets which ultimately affect the efficiency 
and productivity of the system.    Since earnings of Railways have improved in recent 
years, the Committee feel that  com pletion of missing links could be taken up  gradually 
and completed within a reasonable period of time.   The Government’s reply is silent as to 
whether any exercise was undertaken as recommended by the Committee  to identify  all 
the missing links of gauge conversion, doubling, electrification etc.  The Committee would 
await details in this regard, zone-wise, and the plan for completing these projects.  
 
 
National Projects 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
 
13. The Committee  had inter alia noted that the pace o f progress of four national projects 
had not been picking up at the desired rate.  The Committee while expressing their concern 
over the slow progress of these projects recommended expeditious execution of these projects 
by the Railways. 
 
14. Pointing that there are four National Projects, the Ministry of Railways in  their action 
taken reply, have inter alia  indicated the targets as follows  :-  
 
(1) Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramula, New Line  Target:  2008-09 
 Udhampur-Katra      December 2006 
 Katra-Quazigund      2008-09 
 Quazigund-Badgam      December 2006
 Badgam-Baramulla      2007-08 
 
      (2)  Kumarghat-Agartala, New Line    March, 2007 
    (3)  Jiribam-Imphal Road (Tupul), New Line   March, 2010 
      (4)  Lumding-Silchar-Jiribam, New Line    March, 2009 
 
  
15. The Committee desire to informed whether Udhampur-Katra and Quazigund-
Badgam  sections of Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramula project and   Kumarghat-Agartala  
project were completed as per the target mentioned above and also of the extent of 
progres made in regard to the remaining projects.  
     
----------

 11 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Integrated Transport Policy 
(Recommendation Para No.1) 
 The Committee find that the Indian Railways have made a tremendo us contribution 
towards the economic development of the country especially during the initial years of 
Independence.  The Railway provided the necessary fillip to industrial growth by inter -
connecting the primary production areas, industrial centers and th e markets.  However, the 
Committee note that with the upcoming of Road  Sector as a potential mode of transport, 
gradually Railways lost a substantial  share of traffic to the road sector.  The constitution of 
National Highway Authority of India in 1998 an d launching of National Highway 
Development Programme in 1998 on the Golden Quadrilateral and East –West & North – 
South corridors has put up a stiff challenge to the Railways. 
 In the backdrop of National Transport Policy (1980), the Railways prepared the ir First 
Corporation Plan in 1985 for 15 years.  However, due to inherent weaknesses such as 
inadequate funds for investment for the expansion of railway network and ad -hoc policies is 
taking up new projects without ensuring commensurate funds, the Railway s could not come up 
to the expectation in general  and to the people of this country in particular.  The Railways 
have now started preparing their Second Corporte Plan to address the aforesaid  challenges.  
The Committee while taking a serious note of thes e challenges  are of the considered view that 
Railways being the integral part of national infrastructure  for growth and development of the 
country’s economy cannot be left in isolation to decide their  Plans.  They are of firm view that 
time has come now for a an Integrated  Transport Policy to be defined on urgent  basis clearly  
stating the role of Railways as well as Road Sector.  This  will enable the Railways to manage 
their business productivity and efficiently  through better management of their as sets and 
resources  in close coordination with other modes of transport like Roadways, Waterways, etc. 

 12 
Reply of the Government 
 Integrated Transport Policy document prepared by Planning Commission in 2001 
outlines an approach to the transport policy and i ndicated the broad direction in which the 
policy of each mode must evolve.  The document suggested that a Task Force or a 
Coordinating Body should also be set up which by visualizing the transport system as an 
integrated structure of different modes and se rvices would give policy thrust of inter -modal 
nature, oversee implementation and introduce corrections, if required, in the mechanism in 
order to achieve  an optimal inter -modal mix.  Some of the recommendations made by the 
policy document for the railway sector are: 
 Qualitative capacity augmentation. 
 
 Technology upgradation and modernization. 
 
Augment capacity on the  saturated high density routes and replace overaged assets. 
 
Reduce speed differential between freight and passenger services. 
 
Focus on c reation of rail hubs with sufficient warehousing capacity to accelerate the 
programme of containerization. 
 
Enlarging the scope of private sector participation in acquiring rolling stock through 
innovating leasing schemes. 
  
 Ministry of Railways, to augme nt the capacity on the saturated high density routes, is 
going for Dedicated Freight Corridors between JNPT -Dadri via Ahmedabad and Palanpur and 
Sonnagar-Ludhiana via Allahabad and Kanpur.  This will enable Railways not only to augment 
its capacity but will also enable Railways to reduce the unit cost of transportation by increasing 
the axle load of freight wagons from existing  maximum of 22.5 to 30 tonnes and movement of 
double stack container trains.  The segreagation will increase the speeds of freight trains 
reducing  the speed different as aimed in the policy document. 
 Ministry of Railways under Special Railway Safety Fund (SRSF) is in the process of 
liquidating arrears of replacements of overaged assets.  Certain safety enhancement works are 
also undertaken under SRSF. 
 Indian Railways have also formulated their Integrated Modernization Plan for period 
2005-2010.  Under the Plan activities have been identified with a definite time frame for 
implementation. 
  
 

 13 
To accelerate the process of containerization  in India, Ministry of 
Railways has already issued a policy on movement of container trains on Indian Railways by 
organization other than Container Corporation of India (CONCOR) in January, 2006. 
 For encouraging private investments in wagons, a Policy  on Wagon Investment has 
already been announced in 2005.  The industry has shown favourable response to the Scheme. 
 
Expansion of Rail Network 
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 The Indian Railways had a Rail network of 53596 route kms. including 25258 
kms. broa d gauge, 24185 kms. metre gauge and 4153 kms. narrow gauge  as on 
01.04.1951.  Since then during  the last 54 years  i.e upto 31.03.2004, Railways have been 
able to expand its network to 63221 route kms. comprising 46807 kms broad gauge, 
13290 kms. metre gauge and 3124 kms. narrow gauge with a growth rate of about  0.33% 
per annum.  The Committee notice that the pace of expansion of rail network in the 
country has been very tardy in comparison to other World Railways particularly that of 
China. 
 The Committee further notice that through the Railways have made continuous 
efforts to expand their network but due to shifting priorities and ad -hoc policies, they 
could not make much  head -way in their pursuit.  They  further  note that the Railways’ 
emphasis  has mainly been on the development and strengthening of Golden 
Quadrilateral and diagonal routes whereas  the projects taken up on socio -economic 
consideration have been gives a low priority.  They are of the view that a sound 
infrastructure  heralds the econo mic development of an area and the Railways being an 
important contributor of infrastructure  can make a remarkable difference by developing  
the backward regions.  The committee further observe that the Railways could not draw 
a perspective Plan for the development and expansion of Rail network in a holistic way. 
 The Committee also note that the railway shelf presently contains 240 projects of 
New Lines, Gauge Conversion, Doubling and Electrification and Metropolitan  Transport 
Projects.  The total  throw-forward of these projects as on 01.04.2005 has been assessed to 
Rs.47354 crore. Out of these, 53 bankable projects have now been handed over to Rail 
Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL) for execution.  In view of in -adequate fund allocation, this 
huge throw-forward a bound to uprurge further and further at the end  of every year.  
Thus funding of  ongoing projects has become a challenging  task for the Railways.  To 
address this, the Committee find that the Railways have embarked upon a number of 
initiatives like Pu blic Private Partnership, Special Purpose Vehicle,  Rail Vikas Nigam 

 14 
Limited etc.  in order to mobilize the required funds.  Further the major 
challenge before the Railways is to arrange funds for about 60 projects sanctioned on  
socio-economic considerations.  The Committee find that to implement these projects a  
new scheme – Remote Area Rail Sampark Yojana envisaging  an investment of about 
Rs.20,000 crore in a period of 5 years has been announced in the interim Rail Budget  
2004-05.  However, till date no funding arrangement has been tied up.  Considering the 
large shelf of projects and large requirement of funds which is not available with the 
Railways, the committee cannot but strongly recommend that budgetary support to the 
Railways be adequately enha nced  so that the projects taken up especially in hilly, tribal  
and backward area could be completed as early as possible.  They also recommend that 
an Expert Committee consisting of eminent economists  and representatives of the 
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance be constituted  to explore new sources 
of funding and suggest remedies so that all the sanctioned projects are completed in a 
maximum period of five years.  The Committee  desire that the findings and 
recommendations of the aforesaid Expert Committee be intimated to them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Efforts are being made to arrange funds for the financially unviable New Line and 
Gauge Conversion projects taken up primarily on sociao -economic considerations for 
development of backward a nd underdeveloped areas to be covered under Remote Area Rail 
Sampark Yojana.  Under this scheme, funds are proposed to be provided through budgetary 
support and non budgetary initiatives including seeking participation  of respective State 
Government  so a s to complete all the ongoing projects in a time frame of about 5 years.  In 
such a case, setting up of an Expert Committee as recommended is not  considered necessary 
for the present. 
     

 15 
 
New Lines  
Recommendation (Para No.4) 
 Railways from the very be ginning has accorded top priority to construction of new 
lines. However, after 1968 -69 priority has been shifted to other Plan Heads like Doubling, 
Electrification and Gauge Conversion.  The committee find that since 01.04.1951 the 
Railways the funding has  been the major problem for the Plan Head new lines.  The ideal 
allocation for new lines projects should be one sixth of the  throw -forward.  The Plan Head 
New Line experienced the maximum resource -crunch as most of the projects were 
sanctioned on socio -economic considerations.  The Committee have  noted that this Plan 
Head has the highest throw forward of Rs.25801 crore as on 01.04.2005.  During 2005 -06 
the allocation made under this Head has been only Rs.658 crore as against  Rs.1644 crore 
allocated  in t he preceding year.  During their study tour, the Comitte also found that in 
Southern Railway only Rs.5 crore has been allocated to 5 new line (one crore each) project 
as against their throw-forward of Rs.1000 crore approximately. 
 The sources of funding fo r New Line projects has largely been Budgetary Support 
from the  Central Exchequer.  After deducting share of National Projects and other 
important projects like megs bridges, the remaining part of the Budgetary Support is 
earmarked to different Plan -Heads on the basis of allocation formula.  As per the ideal 
criteria of allocation referred  to above, the allocation should be more than Rs.4000 crore 
annually to complete all the ongoing projects within a time span of 5 -6 years.  The 
Committee have also noted  that new alternative sources of funding like Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPVs) and viability gap funding have been identified by the Railways to 
supplement  the existing source of funding.  The Committee emphasise that the Railways 
with all possible sources at their disposal should complete all the ongoing projects of new 
Lines with in a period of 5-6 years.  The Committee also recommend that separate funds be 
provided for natinal projects besides the annual budgetary support given to the Railways. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As on 01.04.2005 there were 77 ongoing New Line projects having a throw -forward  of  
Rs.25801 crore.  These projects on completion would add 7,840 Kms to the railway network. 
 A number of initiatives have been taken in the past few years fo r generation of additional 
resources through specific funding for National  Projects, funding from Ministry of Defence, 
Public/Private partnership  and non -budgetary initiatives for National Rail Vikas Yojana.  
Remote Area Rail Sampark Yojana has also been  announced in the interim budget 2004 -05 

 16 
which envisages  investment of Rs.20,000 crore in 5 years on projects which have been 
taken up on socio -economic consideration for development of backward, remote and under -
developed areas.  However, the resources f or this Yojana are yet to be tied up.  Once funds for 
this Yojana are tied up, all the on going projects including New Lines would be completed  in 
about 5years period. 
 As regards National Projects, it is mentioned that full funds for Udhampur -Srinagar-
Baramulla are being provided as an additionally to normal Railways plan.  However, for the 
National Projects in N.E. region (3 new lines and 1 gauge conversion) part funds are being 
provided as an additionally considering the some funds would continue to be provided by 
Ministry of Railways from their Budgetary support through 10% of funds to be earmarked for 
N.E. region. 
 
Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL)  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
  
7.  The Committee had noted that to mobilize the funds for bankable project s from non -
budgetary sources , Railways had formed  Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL) in January, 2003 
and had also transferred 53 projects for execution.  Out of these, 32 projects were pertaining to 
strengthening of Golden Quadrilateral and diagonals and 2 1 projects were pertaining to 
strengthening of port connectivity and corridor to hinter land. Another 13 projects were yet to 
be sanctioned by the Ministry of Railways.  According to RVNL, funding for 30 projects had 
been tied -up and the projects were unde r various stages of physical execution.  10 Projects 
were being executed through the construction department of the Zonal Railways being the last 
mile projects and were funded through budgetary support mostly.  The Golden Quadrilateral 
projects involving  capital expenditure of about Rs. 8000 crore were to be provided through a 
Budgetary Support of Rs. 1500 crore, Rs.1500 crore from Asian Development Bank and 
Rs.5000 crore from market borrowings. The Port connectivity projects of about Rs. 4000 crore 
were to be funded by borrowing from market and Public Private Partnership.  For this purpose, 
8 projects were being planned to be implemented by creation of Special Purpose Vehicles 
through equity participation by strategic investors.  
  
 The Committee desired that the RVNL should expedite the process of tying up of funds 
and ensure the completion of all the projects transferred to them for execution within the 
stipulated time. 
 
8. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Railways have inter alia stated that:- 

 17 
 
“Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL) has been formed to expedite completion of 
projects related to strengthening of Golden Quadrilaterals & its Diagonals and port 
connectivity by raising funds through non -budgetary resources.  Since some of the 
these RVNL projects were last mile projects and were at advance stage of completion, 
Railways were in a better position to complete the same as compared to RVNL which 
was formed recently and thus it was decided to let Railways complete the same on 
behalf of RVNL. 
  
 RVNL has taken necessary actions to mobilize funds for projects and it is 
expected that all the projects except one transferred recently would be over by 2006 -
07” 
 
Missing Links 
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
 Efficiency and productivity are the hallmarks of mod ern management.  The 
Railways can improve their efficiency and productivity by de-congesting the routes which 
are over saturated and by removing the bottlenecks by linking the missing links in 
doubling, gauge conversion, electrification and signaling & tel ecommunication system 
and better  management of terminals on the viable routes.  The Committee find that in 
the year2005 -06 Railways have given thrust to throughtput enhancement works and 
linking of missing links.  To this effect the Railways have made an allocation of Rs.487.59 
crore under the Head Traffic Facilities in the year 2005 -06.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that the completion of missing links and throughput enhancement works 
on the viable  routes will substantially improve the effici ency and productivity of the 
Railways.  They further find that certain Sections in between the main BG line for 
example Bardhaman -Katwa and Azimganj -Katwa in Eastern Railway have not so far 
been converted into BG causing  lot of inconvenience to railway co mmuters and traders.  
Therefore, they strongly recommend that the Railways should identify such areas without 
any further delay and link all the missing  links of gauge conversion, doubling, 
electrification and signaling & telecommunication works and adequ ate allocation be 
made for these works so that the same could be completed in time and line capacity is 
increased. 
 The Committee also find that some uneconomic branch  lines connected with the 
main line, which caters to the needs of the people in and arou nd the area have not been 
converted into broad gauge so far.  The Committee desire that such uneconomic branch 
line (MG as well NG) be identified and converted  into BG line so that it may lead to 
socio-economic development of these areas. 
 

 18 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee have been noted.  However, it is brought out 
that Railways have a huge throwforward   of  Projects with limited availability of resources.  
The ongoing gauge conversion works have a throwforward of about Rs.10, 000 crore and 
annual allocation has been of the order of about Rs.1,000  crore in the recent years and 
Rs,1,450 crore has been provided during 2006 -07.  Though, some effect are being  made to 
generate additional resources but the ongoing projects are likel y to take at least 5 -6 years for 
completion. 
 The  sections which have so far not been taken up for gauge conversion are mostly 
branch lines and isolated lines with not much traffic prospects.  In such a scenario, it may not 
be feasible to take up gauge co nversion of such lines till the resource position improves or 
existing shelf is reduced to a reasonable level. 
 
 
National Projects 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
 The Committee note that there are four projects which have been declared by the 
Government as Nat ional Projects.  Out of these three projects are of New Lines and the 
one  relates to Gauge Conversion.  Till March, 2005 Rs.1639.78 crore on Kumarghat -
Agartala (New Line) and Rs.334.74 crore on Lumding -Silchar (Gauge Conversion) 
Projects.  However, they a re surprised  to find that only meager amount of Rs.3.00 crore 
has been spent on the Jiribam -Imphal (Tupul), New Line  project uptil March, 2005 
against  an estimated cost of Rs.727.56 crore.  The  total throw -forward of these four 
National Projects as an 01.04.2005  has been assessed at Rs.6399.14 crore and Rs.2401.42 
crore has been incurred by March 2005 on these projects.  The Udhampur -Srinagar-
Baramula and Kumarghat -Agartala New Lines Projects are to be completed by August, 
2007 and by March, 2007 respectively. 
 The Committee further note that the pace of progress of these projects has been 
picking-up at the desired rate.  Their progress is directly linked with many other factors 
like timely release of funds by the Central Exchequer, acquisition of land by the State  
Government concerned  and handling over the name to the Railways for execution etc.  
The Committee express their concern over the show progress of these projects and 
strongly  recommend for timely release of funds by the Centre and expedition  execution 
of these projects by the Railways.  They also recommend that the State Governments 

 19 
concerned should in all cases must  extend every logistic support necessary for the 
speedy and smooth implementation of these projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 There are four National Projects out of which one is in Jammu & Kashmir and three in 
North East Region.  Full funds for Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramulla and part funds for NE region 
projects are being provided as additionality to normal Railway Plan.  The addit ional funds to 
these projects are being projected in the General Budget and released during the course of the 
year by Ministry of Finance as per the progress. 
 Railways are taking all action to progress the projects expeditiously  so as to complete 
these in a time bound manner. However, the adverse law and order condition prevailing in both 
these areas have an adverse impact on the progress. State Government have been  extending 
their support in execution of the projects and have provided  security cover to  the railway 
officials along the site but the same is not adequate to cover all the locations.  The acquisition 
of land particularly for Udhampur-Baramulla project is also getting delayed.  Besides, there are 
numerous technical attached with these projects  as alignment in J&K is through young 
Himalayas with poor geology.  In one of the tunnels between Udhampur -Katra, the work got a 
severe setback of more than one year due to heavy underground flow of water into the tunnel.  
This project involves very long t unnel of 10.950 Km in length and bridge across river Chenab 
with 550 m steel arch. 
 The following targets have been fixed for these projects: 
 (1) Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramulla , New Line  Target:  02008-09 
Udhampur-Katra      December, 2006 
Katra-Quazigund      2008-09 
Quazigund-Badgam      December, 2006 
Badgam-Baramulla      2007-08 
 (2) Kumarghat-Agartala, New Line    March, 2007 
 (3) Jiribam-Imphal Road (Tupul), New Line   March, 2010 
 (4) Lumding-Silchar-Jiribam, New Line    March, 2009  
    
 
 
 
CHPATER-III 
 

 20 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY  
 
Priority of Projects 
(Recommendation Para No.3) 
4. The Committee find that the Railways do not have any pre -fixed criteria for fixation of 
priority of projects.  Railways are deciding the priority of projects on year to year basis keeping 
into account the availability of funds.  Moreover, they do not fix the completion date of the 
projects unless they are assured of required funds on annual basis.  In November, 1998 the 
Railways had evolved some criteria for prioritization of projects with the approval of CCEA,  
however, it was not implemented.  Further, a fund allocation on the basis of population, are and 
the backwardness of the State has contributed towards thinly spreading of inadequate resources 
leading to inordinate delay of projects and huge cost and time overruns. 
 The Committee deplore such kind of irrational distribution/allocation of funds in their 
earlier Report also.  However, due weightage to the Committee recommendation was not given 
by the Railways.  The Committee again strongly  recommend that they should decide the 
priority of all projects afresh in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning 
Commission so that some tangible results may be witnessed on the ground of completing some 
projects.  While deciding the priority of the projects, the Committee desire that other ongoing 
projects categorized in category IV should also be accorded due priority. 
 
5. The Ministry of Railways, in their Action Taken reply  have stated as under:- 
. “Normally, yearly targets for completion/partial completion of projects are fixed 
based on the availability of funds and progress of individual project.  From 
2002-03 onwards, funds to various p rojects are being allocated statewise based 
on a clear and transparent  formula announced by the Minister of Railway in 
Budget speech 2002 -03.  As per this formula, the available funds for projects 
have been distributed based on area, the population and th e throwforward of 
projects in the State.  The weightage given to these criteria is in the ratio 15%.  
15% and 70% respectively.  This was done to remove perceived sense of 
injustice felt by some States in regard to allocation of funds for railway projects 
in their States.  From 2006 -07, Doubling and Railway Electrification projects 
have been excluded from the ambit of this formula as these works are necessary 
from capacity enhancement considerations and required to be completed early. 

 21 
Based on the direction s from the Government, Ministry of Railways, 
once again, did prioritization of projects and the same had been approved by the 
Government in April, 2005.  The funds to projects are being allocated keeping 
this prioritization in view.” 
 
6. The Committee appr eciate the concern shown by the Railways to remove 
perceived sense of injustice felt by some States in regard to allocation of funds for 
Railway projects in their States.  The Committee are also aware of the constraints faced 
by the Railways in mobilizing funds.  However, at the same time the  Committee do not 
approve of the method evolved by the Railways for allocation of funds and prioritization 
of projects.  Development and expansion of rail network must be guided by National 
priority  and with a view to  remove regional imbalance and on other socio -economic 
considerations.  Keeping these in view  the Committee reiterate and strongly stress  that 
Railways in consultation with all stake holders  and simultaneously involving Ministry of 
Finance and Planning Commission, draw a road map, clearly indicating priority of 
different projects, for the next 10-15 years. 
 
  
Rate of Return 
(Recommendation  Para No.5) 
7. The Railways have fixed Rate of Return (ROR) at 14% to decide the viability of a 
project.  The Commit tee have in the past after having discussed the issue with the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Railways have recommended in their Reports  to bring  it down to 
a more reasonable level.  While replying to the concern expressed by the Committee in this 
regard, the Financial Commissioner categorically expressed their inability to bring this down.  
However, the representatives of RVNL who also decide the bankability of the projects have 
informed the Committee that the prevailing market rate of interest is t aken into consideration 
while determining the bankability of project.  To bring more and more projects within the 
ambit of RVNL, it is essential to bring the extant Rate of Return i.e. 14% to a more practical 
level.  The Committee, therefore, recommend tha t the present Rate of Return be reviewed on 
an urgent basis and suitably be brought down to the extent possible.  Further, this criteria of 
ROR should nto be made applicable to the projects taken up in hilly and tribal areas. 
 
8. The Ministry of Railways, in their Action Taken reply  have stated as under:- 

 22 
“The prescribed cut off Rate of Return of 14% being followed on Indian 
Railways for determining the financial viability of projects constitutes not only 
the cost of Capital but also provision for Capital formation.  Besides paying 
dividend to General Revenue, the Indian Railways are required to make 
provision for DRF, PF and DF.  Only about 50% of the total Plan outlay of 
Indian Railways, of around Rs.15000 crore gets budgetary support from the 
Central Govt.  The balance 50% has to be necessarily funded through internally 
generated surpluses and market borrowings.  The need of generation of internal 
resources has been further enhanced on account of various initiatives taken by 
Indian Railways for modernizat ion and increasing the throughput to meet the 
requirement of transportation for growing Indian economy.  Any reduction in 
generation of internal resources would lead to the need for higher budgetary 
support. 
.  Fluctuations in earnings from traffic, arisin g out of change in traffic 
patterns, can make a dent in the viability  of a project in future.  Therefore, 
while adjudging the viability of a project, this risk factor requires to be 
adequately accounted for.  Besides railway projects have a long gestation  
period.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV  
 

 23 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-N I L-

 24 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              - N I L - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                              (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
6 September, 2007                                                       Chairman, 
15 Bhadrapada, 1929 Saka                Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 

 25 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 16th REPORT        
(14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘EXPANSION OF RAILWAY NETWORK – NEW LINES, GAUGE 
CONVERSION, DOUBLING AND ELECTRIFICATION’  
 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations     08 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by  06 
the Government (Vide recommendations/observations) 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7 and 8 
 
Percentage of total         75% 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not  02 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies 
Para Nos. 3 and 5 
 
Percentage of total         25% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of   NIL 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
NIL  
 
Percentage of total            NIL 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final   NIL 
replies of Government are still awaited  
NIL 
 
Percentage of total            NIL 
 
 
 
 

 26 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FOURTH  SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RAILWAYS (2007-08) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 6 th September, 2007 from 1000 hours to                        
1030  hours in Committee Room  ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
4. Shri Anwar Hussain 
5. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
6. Ch. Lal Singh 
7. Shri Manik Singh 
8. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
9. Shri K. Subbarayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
11. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
12. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
13. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director 
3. Shri Hoti Lal    - Deputy Secretary-II 

 27 
 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the fol lowing draft Action Taken Reports 
without any amendment:- 
 
(i) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
(ii) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
 
(iii) Draft report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in 16 th report on ‘Expansion of Railway 
Network – New Lines, Gauge Conversion, Doubling and Electrification’ 
 
(iv) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
   
 
 
 
 