          
 29 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the 17th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(Fourteenth Lok  Sabha)  
on ‘Production Units, Railway Workshops and Maintenance of Rolling 
Stock’] 
 
 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 

 2 
           
SCR No.: 116 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the 17th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(Fourteenth Lok  Sabha)  
on ‘Production Units, Railway Workshops and Maintenance of Rolling 
Stock’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.09.2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.09.2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 

 3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
            PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….    (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….     (v) 
 
PART - I 
 
CHAPTER I  Report…………………………………………………       1  
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been   11 
   accepted by the Government ………………………….        
 
CHAPTER  III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  27 
   do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
   reply .…………………………………………………..         
   
CHAPTER  IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   29 
   Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
   Committee and which require reiteration ……………….       
 
CHAPTER  V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final   32 
   Replies of Government are still awaited ………………..       
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX    I.     Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways 
      held on 06.09.2007    
        
APPENDIX    II.   Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
      Recommendations/Observations contained in the 17th Report 
      of the Standing Committee on Railways (14th Lok Sabha) 
      on ‘Production Units, Railway Workshops and Maintenance 
 of Rolling Stock’.         
        
  
 
 
(iii)

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  (2007-08) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.          Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3.         Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4.         Shri Atiq Ahamad 
5.          Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
6. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
7.       Shri H.D. Devegowda 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10.   Shri Anwar Hussain 
11.        Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
12.        Ch. Lal Singh 
13.        Shri Ananta Nayak 
14.        Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
15.        Shri A. Sai Prathap 
16.        Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
17.        Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
18.        Shri Manik Singh 
19.        Shri K. Subbarayan  
20. Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.        Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
23. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri A. Elavarasan 
29. Shri Isam Singh 
30. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31. Shri Abani Roy 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director  
4. Shri Hoti Lal    - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Vinay P. Barwa   - Executive Officer 
 
 (iv) 
 
 

 5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2007 -08), having bee n 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Ninth 
Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Standing Committee 
on Railways on ‘Production Units, Railway Workshops and Maintenance of Rolling Stock’.  
 
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 03.02.2006 and 
presented to Lok Sabha on 20.02.2006. It contained 20 recommendations/observations. The 
Ministry of Railways have furnished their Action Taken Replies on all the 
recommendations/observations on 15.05.2006 and 08.06.2007.  
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 06.09.2007.  
 
4. An analysis of t he action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;               BASUDEB ACHARIA  
6 September, 2007             Chairman,  
15 Bhadrapada, 1929 Saka         Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

 6 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations and observations contained in the 17 th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2005 -06) on ‘Production Units, Railway Workshops and 
Maintenance of Rolling Stock’.  The Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 
03.02.2006 and presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.02.2006.  
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 20 recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These have been 
broadly categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government –  
 
Para Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18. 
    
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
 
Para Nos. 19 and 20.        
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration –  
 
Para Nos. 10 and 12.       
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are still 
awaited  Para No.- 
 
Nil.     
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by Government on some of 
their recommendations/observations. 

 7 
4. The Committee are distressed to note that the Ministry of Railways 
have not given careful consideration and specific responses to a number of 
points made in their 17 th Report as may be seen from some of the 
observations contained in the subsequent paragraphs.  The Committee hope 
that the Ministry of Railways will not be found wanting in this respect in 
future. 
A. PERSPECTIVE PLAN REGARDING ROLLING STOCK    
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 
5. The Committee had noted that the Railways had projected to acquire 9160 
coaches and 1745 EMUs during the 10 th Plan period.  In the first three years of 10 th 
Plan, the Railways could acquire only 5957 coaches and 397 EMUs.  Though Railways 
were going to achieve the coach targets but in case of EMUs, Railways would have a 
shortfall of 800 at the end of the Plan.  The Committee were also informed that this 
shortfall would be made up by 2008 -09.  The Committee further  noticed that the 
Railways were then using 562 over aged EMUs after putting extra inputs to cope up 
with the shortfall.  They were of the view that the Railways were not  planning their 
requirement of rolling stock in right perspective by taking into accou nt the future 
growth trajectory in traffic and requirement on account of condemnation of old stock 
etc.   They had, therefore, recommended that the Railways should prepare a 
perspective Plan with regard to their requirement of rolling stock for the next 10  years 
holistically so that increasing demands of the rolling stocks could be met. They had also 
desired that keeping into account the substantial growth in suburban passenger traffic 
the number of coaches in all EMU trains be increased to 12 coaches from the existing 9 
coaches. 
 
 Further the Committee recommended that in order to meet the future 
requirement of coaches, Railways should consider setting up a production unit in the 
Eastern Region. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated  as under:- 
 
“Production Plans are normally issued on an annual basis. Other than the plan 
for 2006-07 which has already been finalised, the Ministry is also in the process 
of finalizing production programme for a further two years i.e., for 2007-08 and               

 8 
 
2008-09. These shall be incorporated within the planning for the 11 th Five Year 
Plan which shall be initiated shortly to include Rolling Stock requirements 
projected for the plan period from 2007 -08 to 2011 -12.  This will thus enable a  
holistic requirement of Rolling Stock keeping in view the trends, increasing 
demand and traffic projections. 
 
The increase in number of coaches in EMU trains from 9 coaches to 12 coaches 
is being implemented in a phase -wise manner depending upon suburban traffic 
requirements and availability of the coaches. 
 
The capacities of Rail Coach Factory/Kapurthala and Integral Coach Factory/ 
Chennai have been proposed and sanctioned for enhancement from 1000 
coaches each to 1400 coaches for RCF/Kapurthala and 1250 coaches for 
ICF/Chennai.  These works shall significantly increase the coach manufacturing 
capacity including EMUs to take care of the overaged stock. 
 
Keeping in view the ongoing expansion of ICF and RCF and the proposal of 
further increasing ICF’s capaci ty of 1500 coaches per year, as proposed for 
sanction in 2006-07, the coach manufacture capacity in the country is considered 
adequate and there is  no proposal to set up another production unit for coach 
manufacture.” 
 
7. The Ministry has not given any re ason as to why a perspective plan for 
next ten years regarding rolling stock should not be prepared as 
recommended by the Committee.  The Ministry’s reply though confined to the 
11th Five Year Plan ending in 2011 -12, has not disclosed what would be the 
projected requirement for rolling stock at the end of the 11 th Plan period and 
whether the proposed expansion programme of ICF and RCF would be 
adequate to meet the projected requirement.  The Committee would await 
details in this regard.  The Committee as al ready recommended would also 
like the Railways to project their rolling stock requirement by the year 2016 -
17 and to consider establishing a production unit in the Eastern Region.      
 
8. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the Railways  
are increasing the number of coaches in EMU trains phase -wise manner  
depending upon suburban  traffic requirement and availability of coaches.  
The Committee would like to be informed of the number of EMU trains in 
which coaches have been increased to 12  coaches until now and their plan in 
this regard for the year 2007-08. 

 9 
  
 
B. JERKING PROBLEM IN LHB COACHES  
 (Recommendation Para No. 5) 
 
9. The Committee had desired that certain deficiencies noticed in LHB coaches be 
removed, efforts be made to reduce the magnitude of jerks. 
 
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“……..Indian Railways have switched  over for passenger carrying trains with 
centre buffer couplers from the conventional screw coupling arrangement.  The 
central coupling arrangement has significant advantages in terms of safety 
during unfortunate accidents.  With the centre buffer coupler arrangement, the 
coaches do not climb on each other, thereby significantly reducing the loss of life 
and injury to pass engers during serious accidents.  It is, however, correct that  
considering the larger number of coaches in our trains as compared to several 
other countries, these are giving higher longitudinal jerks.  Most developed 
countries have shorter trains (lesser  number of coaches per train) and in that 
situation the magnitude of these jerks is not high.  Since we are running trains 
with much larger number of coaches in each train, we have to supplement the 
existing centre buffer couplers to take care of this problem.  Developmental work 
in this field is already in hand with RDSO and is expected to be finalised within a 
few months after which this will be taken up for implementation on coaches.” 
 
 
11. Developmental work to supplement the center buffer couplers to t ake 
care of the jerk problem is stated to be already in hand with Research 
Designs and Standards Organisation (RDSO) and is expected to be finalized 
soon.  The Committee hope the developmental work finalized in this regard 
will be expeditiously implemented  on coaches.  The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the effectiveness of the development work in removing the 
jerk problem.   
 
C. UTILISATION OF OVER-AGED LOCOMOTIVES  
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
 
12. The Committee had noted that against the plan to acquire 655 diesel locomotives 
during the 10 th Five Year Plan, the Ministry of Railways had been able to procure 326 
diesel locos in the first three years of the Plan and expect to procure only 293 locos in 

 10 
the remaining two years of the 10 th Plan. Thus there would be a shortfall of 36 locos 
and the Ministry of Railways propose to make up this shortfall by deferring 
condemnation of 60 diesel locos for two years by giving them three years rescheduling 
and taking care of safety requirement.  The Committee also fo und that the orders for 
locos placed by Railways with DLW during the initial three years of 10 th Plan are far 
below the installed capacity of DLW resulting in gross under utilization of the manpower 
and technology available with DLW. The Committee had disa pproved the practice 
adopted by Railways for postponement of condemnation of overaged rolling stock in 
view of non availability of new stock which obviously further puts the safety aspect on 
back burner. They, therefore, were of the view that such adhoc ap proach should be 
avoided by the Railways and adequate orders be placed with DLW in future so that it’s 
capacity is utilized fully. 
 
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“The production programme for diesel locom otive works, Varanasi for 2006-07 is 
for 150 diesel locomotives which is the installed capacity of DLW.  It is estimated 
that the number of diesel locomotives required in the coming years shall be 
significantly more than these numbers, and hence the capaci ty of DLW is 
expected to be utilized fully.” 
 
 
14. The Committee take a serious view that the Action Taken Reply of the 
Ministry of Railways have not addressed the Committee’s concerns regarding 
the operational safety, which could be jeopardized as a resul t of the 
continued use of over -aged rolling stocks.  They would await the Ministry’s 
response in this regard specifying the steps taken or proposed to be taken to 
discontinue the practice of using over-aged locos. 
 
D. TRACTION MOTOR PRODUCTION IN CHITTARANJAN LOCOMOTIVE 
      WORKS (CLW)  
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
 
15. The Committee had noted that the requirement of traction motors was being met 
by Railways from CLW and Transfer of Technology (ToT) partners such as BHEL and 
Crompton Greaves.  They had fur ther noticed that CLW had the production capacity of 
750 traction motors. During their study visit to CLW in October, 2005, they were 

 11 
informed that CLW was manufacturing 90 traction motors per month and likely to 
manufacture 800-900 traction motors that ye ar. The Committee had therefore desired 
that the traction motor production capacity of CLW be increased to 1000 per annum  so 
that CLW itself could meet the entire requirement of the Railways.    
 
 
16.     In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“The manufacture of traction motors at CLW is being stabilized.  However, due 
to increased requirement, the dependence on ToT partners to supply traction 
motors may continue to supplement CLW’s production.” 
 
 
17. The Ministry’s reply is silent as to the quantum of increase in 
requirement of traction motors, the extent of dependence on Transfer of 
Technology partners and the stabilized capacity of the Chittaranjan 
Locomotive Works for manufacture of traction motors.  The Committee  
would await details in this regard.  
 
D. EXPORT ORDERS FOR PRODUCTION UNITS   
 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 
18. The Committee had noted that the capacity of production units was not being 
utilized fully because of the lesser orders placed by the Railways with them.  The export 
orders received so far by Railways were also not adequate.  Therefore, they desired 
that the Railways should explore extensively the markets abroad in order to secure 
more orders which would not only help in generating extra revenue bu t also help in 
better utilization of the capacities  of these production units.  The Committee also found 
that the production units were exporting their rolling stocks namely, coaches and 
locomotives, after meeting the demands of Railways mostly to Afro -Asian Countries 
through RITES.  To grant more autonomy to production units, the Railway Board was 
contemplating to evolve a methodology under which more autonomy could be imparted 
to these units.  The Committee had desired that the Railway Board should final ise the 
same expeditiously so that the production units could earn more money and utilize the 
same for their expansion, modernization and replacement of equipments.  
 

 12 
19.     In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“To grant more autonomy, revised financial and administrative powers have 
been given to General Managers of Production Units which are as under: 
 
(i) With respect to pricing for Non -Railway Customers (NRCs) and Experts, 
GMs are delegated powers to reduce profits up to NIL & overheads upto 
5%, subject to certain conditions. 
(ii) Machinery & Plant replacement upto Rs. 30 lacs per item subject to 
availability of Budget. 
(iii) Purchase of components for supplies against confirmed orders of exports 
of upto Rs. 22 crores per case.  
(iv) Expenditure towards hospitality to NRCs upto specified ceilings. 
(v) Expenditure in engaging/obtaining Consultancy Services for Production 
Units, connected with export orders, from outside bodies in excess of Rs. 
50 lakhs in each case or in excess of Rs. 1.5 crores in a year, to be funded 
from the Market Development Fund.  
(vi) Development of new items, product diversification, marketing efforts and 
engagement of consultants for sale to NRCs and for exports of upto Rs. 5 
crores per annum (Rs. 1 crore in each case)  out of the profits accruing 
from sales to NRCs and exports, during the course of the year, subject to 
certain laid down conditions. 
(vii) Powers to import stores from the existing level of Rs. 4 crore in each case 
to Rs. 15 crore in each case, as applicable to indigenous purchases.” 
 
20. Nothing has been mentioned in the Reply given by the Ministry of 
Railways as to whether any measures have been initiated as recommended 
by the Committee to extensively explore the markets abroad for securing 
more orders of rolling stocks for production units and if so, with what result.  
The Committee expect the Ministry to furnish details in this regard without 
delay. 
 
F. REVIEW REGARDING RECOGNITION OF UNIONS IN PRODUCTION 
UNITS  
(Recommendation Para No. 12) 
 
21. The Committee had  observed that the production units of Indian Railways did 
not have recognized unions.  However, in pursuance of the directives of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, a mechanism is prevailing since 1954 where the redressal of grievances 
of the staff is done thr ough Staff Council which meets once or twice a year at Railway 
Board level. According to the Ministry of Railways, the Staff Councils were the 
representatives of the workers and there was no difficulty for the Staff Council to get 

 13 
the grievances redressed.  Therefore, they did not feel the need for a recognized 
union. The Committee did not agree with the views of the Ministry and desired that the 
Railways should review the decision regarding recognition of unions in production units. 
 
22. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:-  
 
“The system of redressal of staff grievances through Staff Councils has been in 
vogue in the production units and has been working satisfactorily till date. The 
policy regarding recruitments, pro motions, reservations etc. and financial 
emoluments are dealt with by the Ministry of Railways on a global basis after due 
consultation with the recognized federations as applicable. These provisions are 
applicable to the production units also. Policy or m ajor issues specific to a 
production unit or production units in general are discussed and sorted out in 
annual meetings held with Staff Councils on regular basis.  With respect to 
Production Units – specific issues representation of staff through the Staf f 
Council is considered adequate for the machinery of grievance redressal.” 
  
 
23. The Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry of Railways 
have simply advanced the same views which had already been considered by 
the Committee before they made their recommendation.  The Ministry’s reply 
does not throw any light as to whether any review was undertaken as 
recommended by the Committee, on the question of according recognition to 
the unions in production units.  The Committee stress that a review should  
be undertaken in this regard and the outcome reported to the Committee.  
 
G. MODERNISATION OF WORKSHOPS  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 13) 
 
24. The Committee were informed that modernization of workshops was done from 
the money available from Depreciation Reserv e Fund (DRF).  Since workshops are 
backbone of the Railways and proper maintenance of rolling stocks is essential for 
smooth and safe operation of trains, the Committee recommended that Railways must 
make study of all the workshops with reference to their modernization requirement and 
based on the study, a fresh modernization plan for workshops be prepared in a time 
bound manner.   
 

 14 
25.     In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“Modernization of workshops is a continu ous process.  For replacement and 
modernization of workshop, assets funds are allocated each year. There are 
however, arrears in replacement of Machinery and Plant and other infrastructure.  
In order to eliminate/reduce these arrears, a comprehensive works hop 
modernization plan is being prepared for nominated workshops, this plan shall be 
ready in six months time.”   
 
26.   The Committee are glad to note that a comprehensive workshop 
modernization plan for nominated workshops is being prepared as 
recommended by the Committee.  The Committee would like to be informed 
of the details of the Modernization Plan, anticipated dates for completion of 
specific projects and the steps taken to ensure timely completion of those 
projects.   
 
H. ROLE OF CENTRAL ORGANISATION FOR MODERNISATION OF 
WORKSHOPS (COFMOW)  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 14) 
 
27. The Committee were surprised to note that the Central Organisation for 
Modernisation of Workshops (COFMOW) established in 1979 with an objective to 
modernize the workshops and to d eal with the modernization programme was involved 
in only procuring of Machine and Plants and in making studies for maintenance of sub 
systems in workshops with a view to improve them instead of concentrating on its main 
objective of planning for moderniza tion.  The Committee further noted that 
modernization of workshops is done by the Railway Board based on the feedback from 
workshops and funds are released accordingly.  They were of considered view that the 
COFMOW should discharge its core responsibility of planning for modernization of 
workshops and Railways must entrust this work to COFMOW. Funds allocated for 
modernisation of workshops should also be fully utilized. 
 
28. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“Expertise of COFMOW is being utilized in discharge of industrial engineering 
functions of production units and workshops.  COFMOW have been directed to 
take up a larger number of technical studies aimed at modernization of 

 15 
workshops and to organize technical seminars on a regular manner. Studies on 
technologies related to repair of unloadable wagons in workshops,  
standardization of compressed air infrastructure in workshops and modernization 
of stores/depots in major workshops are an example of studies which C OFMOW 
would complete by 31.9.2006.” 
 
29. The reply of the Ministry has not explained as to why the Central 
Organisation for Modernisation of Workshops  (COFMOW) should not be 
allowed to discharge its core responsibility of planning for modernization of 
workshop as suggested by the Committee.  The original objective of the 
organization was not merely conducting technical studies which are detailed 
in the reply.  The Committee would like the Ministry of Railways to give 
serious thought to the recommendation of  the Committee and come up with 
appropriate response.   
 
 
--------

 16 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
 
The Railways had met their requirement of rolling stocks through its 6 production 
units located at different places in the country.   The adequacy of rolling stock 
comprising of locomotives, coaches and wagons along with its upkeep and optimum 
serviceability were utmost important for efficient operation of the system.  Rolling stock 
needs to be augmented and upgraded constantly with modern and fuel efficient   ones 
so as to meet effectively the needs of growing traffic and to keep pace with growing 
economy of the country.    
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Rolling Stock augmentation has been a continuous process with the 
Indian Railways.  Recently, Locomotives and coaches have been upgraded 
through Transfer of Technology from M/s ABB for Electric Locomotives, M/s. 
General Motors for Diesel L ocomotives and M/s. Alstom (LHB) for passenger 
coaches.  Further, upgradation of systems and sub -systems are being done 
continuously by Research Design and Standard Organization and by the 
Production Units.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 
 The Committee had found tremendous scope for growth of passenger as well 
freight traffic taking into account the higher trajectory of national economy.  During the 
evidence the Committee were informed that in the year 2004-05, the passenger growth 
was 6 per cent as against the annualized passenger growth of 3 per cent in the 
previous decade and in the current year also Railways expect to sustain the same.  In 
freight traffic Railways expect to achieve 67 5 million tonne of loading in 2005 -06.  The 
Committee further noticed that the Railways were now on a high growth path and 

 17 
national economy was also picking up.  Demands will be much more once the 
quadrilateral sections are modernized and electrified.   In such a scenario Railways need 
more rolling stock commensurate with traffic growth.  They also noted that the 
Railways had projected to acquire 9160 coaches and 1745 EMUs during the X Plan 
Period.  During the first three years of X Plan, the Railways could  acquire only 5957 
coaches and 397 EMUs.  Though Railways were going to achieve the coach targets but 
in case of EMUs, Railways would have a  shortfall of 800 at the end of the Plan.   The 
Committee were also informed that this shortfall will be made up by  2008-09.  The 
Committee further noticed that the Railways were presently using 562 over aged EMUs 
after putting extra inputs to cope up with the shortfall.  They were of the view that the 
Railways were not planning their requirement of rolling stock in ri ght perspective by 
taking into account the future growth trajectory in traffic and requirement on account of 
condemnation of old stock etc.  They, therefore, recommended that the Railways 
should prepare a perspective Plan with regard to their requirement o f rolling stock for 
the next 10 years holistically so that increasing demands of the rolling stocks can be 
met out. They also desired that keeping into account the substantial growth in 
suburban passenger traffic the number of coaches in all EMU trains be increased to 12 
coaches from the existing 9 coaches.  
 
Further the Committee had found that at present Rail Coach Factory Kapurthala 
and Integral Coach Factory, Perambur were the two coach manufacturing units of the 
Indian Railways.  In order to meet the f uture requirement of coaches, the Committee 
emphasized that Railways should consider setting up a production unit in the Eastern 
Region also. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Production Plans are normally issued on an annual basis.  Other than the 
plan for 2006 -07 which has already been finalised, the Ministry is also in the 
process of finalising the production programme for a further two years i.e. 2007 -
08 & 2008-09.  These shall be incorporated within the planning for  the 11th Five 
Year Plan which shall be initiated shortly to include Rolling Stock requirements 
projected for the plan period form 2007 -08 to 2011 -12.  This will thus enable a 

 18 
holistic requirement of Rolling Stock keeping in view the trends, increasing 
demand and traffic projections.  
 
The increase in number of coaches in MU trains from 09 coaches to 12 
coaches is being implemented in a phase-wise manner depending upon suburban 
traffic requirements and availability of the coaches. 
 
The capacities of Rail Co ach Factory/Kapurthala and Integral Coach 
Factory/Chennai have been proposed and sanctioned for enhancement from 
1000 coaches each to 1400 coaches for RCF/Kapurthala and 1250 coaches for 
ICF/Chennai.  these works shall significantly increase the coach manu facturing 
capacity including EMUs to take care of the overaged stock. 
 
Keeping in view the ongoing expansion of ICF and RCF and the proposal 
of further increasing ICF’s capacity of 1500 coaches per year, as proposed for 
sanction in 2006-07, the coach manufacture capacity in the country is considered 
adequate and there is no proposal to set up another production unit for coach 
manufacture.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
Capacity Enhancement of RCF and ICF 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
 
 The Committee had noted that the installed capacity of Rail Coach Factory (RCF), 
Kapurthala and Integral Coach Factory (ICF), Perambur was 1000 coaches per annum 
each at present.   As the traffic projections were high the output of the se units had to 
be improved.   Therefore, Railways had sanctioned the capacity augmentation of RCF 
and ICF from 1000 to 1400 and 1250 coaches respectively.  The cost involved in the 
augmentation works-out to Rs.9 crore in the case of ICF and Rs.35 crore in  the case of 
RCF were at various phases of progress at present and likely to be completed by 2008.  
During their study visit to ICF in October, 2005, the Committee were informed that to 
increase further the capacity of ICF to 1500, a conceptual plan had be en submitted to 

 19 
Railway Board.  The Railway Board informed the Committee that the proposal 
submitted by ICF was under examination at present.  The Committee desired that the 
Railways should expedite the examination of the proposal and finalize the same at the 
earliest. 
  
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“The proposal of further increasing the capacity of ICF to 1500  coaches 
per year has been considered by the Board, and the work has been proposed for 
sanction in Budget 2006-07 at a total cost of Rs. 54.31 crore.”      
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
LHB Coaches 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
  
 The Committee had found that the Railways have signed an agreement with M/s 
LHB/Alstom for transfer of technology to manufacture stainless steel bodied coaches in 
RCF (Kapurthala). Though presently LHB coaches were being manufactured in RCF, the 
complete assimilation and indigenisation of the technology acquired from M/s 
LHB/Alstom had not yet b een fully materialized.  They also noted that the 
manufacturing of LHB coaches had been assigned only to RCF and not to ICF.    During 
the study visit to ICF, the Committee were informed that if the ICF was provided with 
Machines & Plants (M&P) inputs, the y can also manufacture LHB coaches.  In this 
connection the Ministry of Railways had submitted before the Committee during 
examination that once the technology was fully assimilated and becomes broad based 
after that the proposal for extending the technolo gy by way of giving necessary inputs 
such as M&P etc. to ICF can be considered.    As the entire fleet of Rajdhani and 
Shatabdi trains were to be replaced by LHB coaches in the near future, the demand for 
LHB coaches would naturally increase.   The Committ ee, therefore, emphasized that 
necessary infrastructural inputs such as M&P be provided to ICF also so that the latter 
can also supplement the requirement of LHB coaches in future. 
  
 
 

 20 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“The indigenous manufacture of LBH Alstom coaches at Rail Coach 
Factory/Kapurthala was initiated in 2001 -02, and within a period of four years 
the assimilation of technology has proposed significantly.  It has been proposed 
that Integral Coach Factory/Chenna i be given very stiff targets for manufacture 
of EMUs over 2007 -08 onwards, so that overaged EMUs running over the Indian 
Railways can be replaced within a very short time.  In view of this, infrastructure 
enhancements at ICF are underway in terms of input s such as required 
Machinery & Plant etc. for meeting the growing requirements for EMUs.  The 
production of LHB coaches at RCF, though on a progressively increasing trend, is 
not constrained by production capacity at RCF, the issue of manufacture of LHB 
coaches by ICF can be considered at a later stage.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
 (Recommendation Para No. 5) 
 
 The Committee had also noticed certain deficiencies in LHB coaches such as 
uncomfortable toilets, heavy  doors and jerks during journey.   During examination the 
Ministry of Railways had stated that certain quality problems had been noticed in these 
coaches and were being discussed with users and manufacturers so as to get these 
rectified.   The Committee had desired that existing toilets in these coaches be replaced 
with more convenient and user -friendly ones and efforts be made to reduce the 
magnitude of jerks. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“The toilets provided in the LHB coaches are ‘Controlled Discharge Toilets’.  
Discharge from these toilets is controlled through a programmable logic 
controller with the objective that the waste is not discharged at major stations or 
in densely populated areas.  As the next stage of  technology upgradation, Indian 
Railways are putting efforts to procure/develop sealed toilets, which will have no 
waste discharge enroute.  Considering the environment requirements and the 

 21 
Government policy of total sanitation for the year 2012, it would not 
be appropriate to go back to conventional coach toilets.  As is common with 
several new technologies/products there have been a few teething problems with 
these toilets, particularly in respect of the slide/flapper arrangement of discharge 
from the toilet bowl to the retention tank and from the retention tank to outside.  
Based on the experience of these problems, certain solutions have been found 
and the modified arrangements are being tried in the new builds; for example a 
change over from slide arran gement to flapper arrangement e.g. a change over 
from double cylinder to slide arrangement and from slide arrangement to flapper 
arrangement.  Performance of these toilets is being monitored very closely and it 
has been found that lately the cases of choki ng of toilets, etc. have come down.  
The expectation is that with some more experience we will be able to overcome 
all the problems.  By designing these toilets and to provide better cleaning of the 
bowl and considering these several advantages it is propo sed to continue with 
controlled discharge toilets but make necessary changes as already stated 
earlier. 
 
Indian Railways have switched over for passenger carrying trains with 
centre buffer couplers from the conventional screw coupling arrangement.  The 
central coupling arrangement has significant advantages in terms of safety 
during unfortunate accidents.  With the centre buffer coupler arrangement, the 
coaches do not climb on each other, thereby significantly reducing the loss of life 
and injury to passeng ers during serious accidents.  It is , however, correct that 
considering the larger number of coaches in our trains as compared to several 
other countries, these are giving higher longitudinal jerks.  Most developed 
countries have shorter trains (lesser nu mber of coaches per train) and in that 
situation the magnitude of these jerks is not high.  Since we are running trains 
with much larger number of coaches in each train, we have to supplement the 
existing centre buffer couplers to take care of this problem.  Developmental work 
in this field is already in hand with RDSO and is expected to be finalized within a 
few months after which this will be taken up for implementation on coaches.”   
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 

 22 
 
DIESEL LOCOMOTIVES WORKS (DLW) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
 
From the material submitted to the Committee, they noted that against their plan to 
acquire 655 diesel locomotives during the Tenth Five Year Plan, the Ministry of Railways 
has been able to pro cure 326 diesel locos in the first three years of the Plan and it is 
proposed to procure 329 locos during 2005 -06 and 2006 -07. During the examination, 
the Committee were informed by Ministry of Railways that they expect to procure only 
293 locos in the remaining two years of the 10th Plan and there would be a shortfall of 
36 locos. The Ministry of Railways further informed the Committee that they propose to 
make up this shortfall by deferring condemnation of 60 diesel locos for two years by 
giving them thre e years rescheduling and taking care of safety requirement. The 
Committee find that the orders for locos placed by Railways with DLW during the initial 
three years of 10th Plan are far below the installed capacity of DLW resulting in gross 
underutilization of the manpower and technology available with DLW. They are of the 
view that had the adequate orders been given to DLW during these three years of 10th 
Plan, the question of capacity underutilization and shortfall would not have arisen. The 
Committee also  disapprove the practice being adopted by Railways at present for 
postponement of condemnation of the overaged rolling stock in view of non -availability 
of new stock which obviously further puts the safety aspect on back burner. They, 
therefore, are of the view that such ad hoc approach should be avoided by the Railways 
and adequate orders be placed with DLW in future so that its capacity is utilized fully. 
  
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“The production programme for diesel locomotive works, Varanasi for 2006 -07 is 
for 150 diesel locomotives which is the installed capacity of DLW.  It is estimated 
that the number of diesel locomotives required in the coming years shall be 
significantly more than these numb ers, and hence the capacity of DLW is 
expected to be utilized fully.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 23 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
 
 The Committee had further noticed that although General Motors had transferred 
technology  for various equipments and sub -assemblies, yet  100 per c ent  transfer of 
technology from General Motors to DLW had not taken place so far in the case of these 
equipments and sub -assemblies.  As a result DLW was still importing around 13 per 
cent of the equipments such as engine blocks, turbochargers etc. requir ed for diesel 
locomotives.  They were surprised to note as to why the DLW had not so far been able 
to acquire the requisite technology from General Motors despite the fact that the MoU 
for transfer of technology was signed way back in 1990s.  They desired that the 
Railways must vigorously pursue with the General Motors for complete transfer of 
technology so that the equipments now being imported can be manufactured in DLW 
itself. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Certain import content would remain either because of the 
assembly/component being proprietary in nature or because of the fact that 
economies of scale would not be achievable in view of the fact that certain 
specialized components (such as those of the turbos) r equire huge investments 
for setup for complete manufacture and the offtake of DLW would not be 
commensurate with the costs of setup. 
 
However, the import content of General Motors has been reducing 
substantially, and full efforts are underway to further re duce dependence on 
import for critical items such as engine block etc.  This is being vigorously 
pursued by DLW, so that indigenization can be stepped up further, and further 
cost reduction can be affected.” 
 [Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
 
 
 

 24 
 
 
CHITTARANJAN LOCOMOTIVE WORKS (CLW) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
 
 
 The Committee had also found that as in the case of DLW, orders placed during 
the last six years including the current year on CLW for electric locomotives we re much 
below the installed capacity.  They further found that in the year 2002 -03 the orders 
placed with CLW were only 69 Locos which was around 53% of the installed capacity.   
The Committee were informed that yearly production of locomotives was based o n 
traffic requirement and availability of funds.  For the year 2005 -06, the target for the 
CLW had been increased to 128 locos and the present capacity was sufficient to meet 
the projected requirement of locos in future.  To increase the capacity to 150 lo cos, 
works were in progress at CLW.  The Committee had noted that during 2004 -05 there 
was a tremendous growth in the passenger as well as freight traffic which was likely to 
continue in the current year as well as in future.  Accordingly, the Railways wou ld be 
required more locomotives to carry the increased traffic.  The Committee therefore, 
desired that henceforth adequate orders be placed with CLW not only to cope up with 
the increasing traffic but also to utilize their capacity. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“The Production Programme for Chittaranjan Locomotives Works, 
Chittaranjan for 2006 -07 is for 150 Electric Locomotives which is the installed 
capacity of CLW.  It is estimated that the number of Electric Locom otives 
required in the coming years shall be significantly more than these numbers, and 
hence capacity of CLW is expected to be utilized fully.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
 
 
 
 

 25 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
 
 The Committee had noted that at present the requirement of traction motors 
were being met by Railways from CLW and Transfer of Technology (ToT) partners such 
as BHEL and Crompton Greaves.  They further noticed that CLW had the production 
capacity of 750 trac tion motors at present. During their study visit to CLW in October, 
2005, the Committee were informed that CLW is manufacturing 90 traction motors per 
month and were likely to manufacture 800 -900 traction motors this year.  The 
Committee therefore, desired that the traction motor production capacity of the CLW be 
increased to 1000 per annum so that CLW itself could meet the entire requirement of 
the Railways.    
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“The manufacture of traction motors at CLW is being stabilized. However, 
due to increased requirements, the dependence on TOT partners to supply 
traction motors may continue to supplement CLW’s production.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
Staff Strength 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
 
 The Committee had noted that a large number of vacancies especially in Group 
‘C’ & ‘D’ categories exist almost in all the production units  of the Railways.  Similarly, 
there was shortage of staff in Workshops. T he Ministry of Railways had informed the 
Committee that as part of the manpower planning exercise, the DOPT Guidelines permit 
only one out of three posts falling vacant to be filled up.   They further informed that 
though percentage of vacancies were on hi gher side being more than 10 per cent, the 
vacancies did not necessarily affect the production because the posts were sanctioned 
broadly on the basis of work load and actual operational requirement which vary from 
time to time depending upon the annual pro duction targets.   Vacant posts were not 
surrendered as the production units and workshops had to manufacture upto their 

 26 
capacity.  Therefore, Railways had approached the DOPT  for relaxation in the 
norms so that Railways could fill up the posts more than 1/3rd.   The Committee taking 
note of the growing demand of rolling stock as a result of traffic growth were of the 
considered view, that the Railways should pursue the matter with DOPT and vacancies 
in Group ‘C’ & ‘D’ category be filled up accordingly so that the targets of rolling stock 
could be met without delay. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Integral Coach Factory/Chennai and Diesel Locomotive Works, Varanasi 
have already been permitted for filling up of the post s as required by them.  For 
meeting the increased targets of Rolling Stock production.  The specific 
requirements of the other Production Units & Workshops with respect to 
increased production targets will also be considered as per the requirements  
projected by them.”   
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
MODERNISATION OF WORKSHOPS 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 13) 
 
The Committee find that way back in 1980s, with the World Bank assistance, 
Railway Workshops primarily dealin g with coaching stock were modernized in two 
phases with the objective to reduce Periodic Overhauling (POH) cycle time, increase 
POH capacity of rolling stock and replace overaged Machines & Plants. In phase -I four 
workshops namely Matunga, Kanchrapara, Kh aragpur and Lower Parel Workshops and 
in Phase-II, six workshops viz. Parel, Lilluah, Jagadhari, Golden Rock, Kharagpur and 
Ajmer workshops were modernized. The also found that thereafter Railways have not 
made any effort to modernize the workshops keeping  pace with the technological 
development in the field. During the evidence, the Committee were informed that 
modernization needed for Machines & Plants and some sheds structures were done in 
Phase-I and II and as the sufficient money is now available from Depreciation Reserve 
Fund (DRF), modernization requirement is done from this money. The Committee 

 27 
consider workshops as backbone of the Railways as besides manufacturing 
components, Periodic Overhauling of Locomotives, coaches, wagons are done in these 
workshops which is essential for smooth and safe operation of trains. They  therefore, 
recommend that Railways must make study of all the workshops with reference to their 
modernization requirement and based on the study a fresh modernization plan for 
workshops be prepared in a time bound manner. The Committee also desire that action 
taken in this regard be intimated to them. 
 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“Modernization of workshops is a continuous process.  Fo r replacement and 
modernization of workshop, assets funds are allocated each year. There are 
however, arrears in replacement of Machinery and Plant and other infrastructure.  
In order to eliminate/reduce these arrears, a comprehensive workshop 
modernization plan is being prepared for nominated workshops, this plan shall 
be ready in six months time.”   
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
CENTRAL ORGANISTION FOR MODERNISATION OF WORKSHOPS (COFMOW)  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 14) 
 
Central Organisation for Modernisation of Workshops (COFMOW) was established 
in 1979 with an objective to modernize the workshops and to deal with the 
modernization programme. The Committee are surprised to note that COFMOW is at 
present involved in only procuring of Machines & Plants and making studies for 
maintenance of sub -system in workshops with a view to improve them instead of 
concentrating on its main objective of planning for modernization. The Committee 
further note that modernization of wor kshops is done by the Railway Board based on 
the feed back from workshops and funds are released accordingly. The Committee are 
therefore, of considered view that the COFMOW should discharge its core responsibility 
of planning for modernization of workshop s and Railways must entrust this work to 
COFMOW. Funds allocated for modernization of workshops should also be fully utilized. 
 
 

 28 
 
 
 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Expertise of COFMOW is being utilized in discharge of  industrial engineering 
functions of production units and workshops.  COFMOW have been directed to 
take up a larger number of technical studies aimed at modernization of 
workshops and to organize technical seminars on a regular manner. Studies on 
technologies related to repair of unloadable wagons in workshops, 
standardization of compressed air infrastructure in workshops and modernization 
of stores/depots in major workshops are an example of studies which COFMOW 
would complete by 31.9.2006.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
MAINTENANCE OF LHB COAHCES 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 15) 
 
 The Committee were of the considered view that with the introduction of LHB 
coaches in the premier trains like Shatabadi and Rajdhani train s, the requisition for 
maintenance of these coaches will increase manifold.  This would require separate 
facilities such as Machines and Plants to be installed at workshops meant for coach 
maintenance at ideal locations depending upon the operational needs  of the Railways.   
The Committee found Liluah Workshop as one of the ideal workshops which requires to 
be equipped with the maintenance facilities of LHB coaches.  They, therefore, 
recommended that the Railways should first install the requisite facilitie s at Liluah 
Workshop for maintenance of LHB Coaches by expanding it and accordingly funds be 
allocated.  The Committee also recommended that the same may also be replicated in 
other workshops which were ideally and strategically located on the operational routes 
of trains being run with LHB coaches.   
 
 
 
 
 

 29 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Railways have already planned for replacing all Rajdhani and Shatabdi 
coaches of ICF design by LHB design.  Accordingly facilities for  maintenance of 
LHB are being created in the workshops, which would be dealing with these 
coaches, i.e. Jagadhri, Lower Parel and Liluah workshops.  The work is in 
progress in Jagadhri, and Lower Parel workshops. 
 
For Liluah workshops, a new work for creat ing of facilities for LBH coach 
maintenance has been proposed through Budget 2006-07.” 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
REVIEW OF MANUALS/RULE BOOKS/GUIDELINES REGARDING  PERIODIC 
OVERHAULING (POH) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee had found that POH and maintenance of rolling stock were 
undertaken in the workshops/maintenance sheds as per the manuals/rules 
book/guidelines/ instructions issued by the Railways.   They note that these aforesaid 
manuals etc. were quite old and voluminous which require to be updated.   They 
therefore, desired that these manuals/rules book etc. be reviewed on urgent bases 
keeping in view their commensurate compatibility with latest technological 
developments in the rolling stock and the level of their use. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Instructions have been used to IRIMEE regarding Review of 
Manuals/Code/Rule books with the purpose of removal of discrepancies or 
contradictions. 
 
The Coach  Manual and Wagon Manual has been reviewed by the 
nominated committee vide Director/IRIMEE, Jamalpur’s letter no. 
IMEE/RST/Manual Review dated 30.03.2005 and diesel Manual have also been 

 30 
reviewed by the nominated committee vide their letter dated 
27.06.2005.  Reports of the Review Committee have been submitted to Railway 
Board.  Instructions have been issued to DLW/Varanasi for the 
corrections/modifications in Diesel Locomotive manual as advised by the 
Committee.  Instructions have also been issued to RDSO/ Lucknow for the 
corrections/modifications in Coaching and Wagon maintenance manuals as 
advised by the Committee Maintenance instructions for diesel electric 
locomotives have been distributed to all the zonal Railways and other concerned 
parties.”  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
CONDEMNATION OF ROLLING STOCK 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 17) 
 
 The Committee found that Rolling Stock are condemned on age -cum-condition 
basis and in line with life codal provisions.  As on dat e the Railways were having 392 
Diesel locomotives, 562 EMUs and 1587 coaching vehicles which were overaged but 
were being used after putting extra inputs and caring for the safety aspects.   The 
Ministry of Railways had stated that by 2010 all the overaged  stock running on the 
system would be eliminated.  The Committee appreciated that all the overaged rolling 
stock would be eliminated by 2010 but at the same time would like to add that the 
overaged 562 EMU coaches which were still being run be replaced on urgent basis so 
that safety of passengers travelling in EMU trains was ensured. Besides, the Committee 
also desired that the replacement of the condemned rolling stock should be a parallel 
exercise so that the business does not get affected.  
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Rolling Stock is replaced on an age -cum-condition basis.  The age of the 
Rolling Stock is taken as a yardsitck for Planning replacements which are done 
based on the individual condition of the vehic le from structural aspects and 
safety point of view.  This is a continuous process.”  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 

 31 
 
IMPROVEMENTS IN COACHING MAINTENANCE DEPOTS 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 18) 
 
 The Railway Safety Review Committee (RSRC), 1989 in their Report submitted in 
August, 1999 had inter -alia highlighted the deficiencies in coaching maintenance 
infrastructure.  RSRC was of the view that inadequate infrastructure at coaching depots 
caused great safety hazards and  that the gap between the required and the existing 
facilities had widened which is not at all conducive for safety.  The Committee had 
noted that based on the recommendation of RSRC the Railway Board had constituted a 
Task Force for identifying shortcomings in coaching depots and to work out investments 
required to eliminate these shortcomings.  This Task Force had submitted its Report in 
2003 and thereafter the Railway Board had constituted a Committee to prioritize these 
works.  They also found that the Zonal Railways had been asked to formulate proposals 
for improving 10 priority coaching maintenance depots so as to make good the existing 
deficiencies for bringing out the infrastructure upto the norms/standards.  The 
Committee had also been informed that  the identified high priority depots include Jheel 
Siding and Sorting Yard, Tikiyapara of Howrah Division of Eastern Railway for which an 
investment of about Rs. 35 crore is needed.  The Committee desired that while 
formulating the proposals for modernizat ion of the coaching depots, the proposal of 
sanctioning Rs. 35 crore for the Tikiyapara coaching depot be taken into consideration.   
 
  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“The Ministry of Railways  are seized with the nee d for making good 
infrastructural deficiencies in coach maintenance depots in the country.  In the 
light of the RSRC recommendations that the deficiencies should be made good in 
a time bound manner, prioritization of the needs in this area has been done.  In 
line with this, an amount of Rs. 99.68 crores has been proposed for sanction in 
the Railway Budget 2006 -07 for making good deficiencies in Coaching 
Maintenance Depots.  This also includes a proposal for additional facilities at 
Tikiapara Depot at a cost of Rs. 20.00 crores.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 

 32 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
SETTING UP OF WAGON WORKSHOP IN EAST COAST RAILWAY 
(Recommendation Para No. 19) 
 
  The Committee had found that at present there are 66 workshops with the 
Indian Railways and these were not equitably located in all Zones.  During the course of 
the examination of the subject and also during th e study visit of the Committee in 
October, 2005, the Committee had found that the region under East Coast Railway was 
experiencing rapid industrialization and the traffic to be handled by it was likely to grow 
up enormously in the coming years which may re sult in the requirement of wagons to 
the extent of 25000.  As compared to 170 wagons at the moment, it was expected that 
the POH arising out of this increase in traffic will be about 620 wagons per month.  The 
Committee found that the East Coast Railway do es not have any wagon workshop to 
attend to this increased POH and as a result wagons were being sent to South Central 
Railway, South East Central Railway and Southern Railway, etc.  As such this movement 
was unproductive from traffic point of view.  The C ommittee, therefore, recommended 
that a wagon workshop should be set up in East Coast Railway at some appropriate 
location.  
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“Planning for periodic overhaul of freight stock on Indian Ra ilways is on 
all-India basis.  Present workshop capacities available on the Indian 
Railways are sufficient to meet arisings.  According to the present 
planning for periodic overhaul, wagons on East Cost  
Railways are based on Raipur and Kharagpur workshops , where capacity 
exists.  Railways therefore at present are not considering setting up of any 
new wagon POH workshop on East Coast Railway.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
 

 33 
 
MAINTENANCE OF METER GAUGE COACHES 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 20) 
 
 After the introduction of Uni-gauge System in the Indian Railways, the Northeast 
Region falling under Northeast Frontier Railway still has the substantial route on Meter 
Gauge (MG).  The Committee had found that there are no adequ ate maintenance 
facilities for MG coaches in the region with the result these coaches were sent for POH 
and maintenance to other Workshops/Depots outside the region, which lead to delay in 
maintenance as well as affecting the business also.  Therefore, the  Committee desired 
that adequate maintenance facilities be provided in the region itself by providing 
necessary allocation. 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“On Northeast Frontier Railway there are three workshops at Ne w 
Bongaigaon, Lumding and Dibrugarh which are undertaking periodic overhaul of 
coaches and wagons.  The arising of POH workload for Northeast Frontier 
Railway is being met by these three workshops and on MG stock FROM 
Northeast Frontier Railway is being se nt to other Railway workshops for periodic 
overhaul.”  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 

 34 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
 
 
Autonomy 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 
 
 The Committee had found that at present the capacity of Production Units were 
not being utilized fully because of the lesser orders placed by the Railways with them.  
The Committee felt that this under utilization of the capacit y of production units would 
need to be viewed seriously.   The export orders received so far by Railways were also 
not adequate. Therefore, they desired that the Railways should  be explored extensively 
the abroad markets in order to secure more orders whi ch would not only help in 
generating extra revenue but also help in better utilization of the capacities of these 
production units.  The Committee also found that production units are exporting their 
rolling stocks namely coaches and locomotives, after mee ting the demands of Railways, 
mostly to Afro -Asian countries through RITES at present. During evidence the 
Committee were informed that to restructure the production units, the powers of 
General Managers of Production Units had been increased so that they can function 
better and had greater autonomy.  To grant more autonomy to those Production Units 
the Railway Board was presently contemplating to evolve a methodology under which 
more autonomy could be imparted to these units.   The Committee desired that t he 
Railway Board should finalize the same expeditiously so that the production units could 
earn more money and utilize the same for their expansion, modernization and 
replacement of equipments.   They would like to be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 35 
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“To grant more autonomy, revised financial and administrative powers 
have been given to General Managers of Production Units which are as under: 
 
(viii) With respect to pricing for  Non-Railway Customers (NRCs) and Experts, 
GMs are delegated powers to reduce profits up to NIL & overheads upto 
5%, subject to certain conditions. 
(ix) Machinery & Plant replacement upto Rs. 30 lacs per item subject to 
availability of Budget. 
(x) Purchase of compo nents for supplies against confirmed orders of exports 
of upto Rs. 22 crores per case.  
(xi) Expenditure towards hospitality to NRCs upto specified ceilings. 
(xii) Expenditure in engaging/obtaining Consultancy Services for Production 
Units, connected with export orde rs, from outside bodies in excess of Rs. 
50 lakhs in each case or in excess of Rs. 1.5 crores in a year, to be funded 
from the Market Development Fund.  
(xiii) Development of new items, product diversification, marketing efforts and 
engagement of consultants for sale to NRCs and for exports of upto Rs. 5 
crores per annum (Rs. 1 crore in each case) out of the profits accruing 
from sales to NRCs and exports, during the course of the year, subject to 
certain laid down conditions. 
(xiv) Powers to import stores from the exis ting level of Rs. 4 crore in each case 
to Rs. 15 crore in each case, as applicable to indigenous purchases.” 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS 
 
(Recommendation Para NO. 12) 
 
 The Committee had observed that the production units of Indian Railways do not 
had recognized unions.  However, there was a mechanism of redressal of grievances of 
the staff through Staff Councils which meets once or twice in a year at Railway Board 
level.  This system was prev ailing since 1954 in pursuance of the directives of the 

 36 
Ministry of Home Affairs.    During evidence the representatives of the 
Ministry of Railways explained to the Committee that the Staff Councils are the 
representatives of the workers and there was no difficulty for the Staff Council to get 
the grievances redressed.  Therefore, Railways did not feel the need for a recognized 
Union.  The Committee did not agree with the views of the Ministry as the production 
units were industrial establishment that empl oys a large number of workers in different 
categories and it was their genuine right to had a recognized union.      The Committee 
therefore, desired that the Railways should review the decision regarding recognition of 
unions in production units.  
 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“The system of redressal of staff grievances through Staff Councils has 
been in vogue in the Production Units and has been working satisfactorily till 
date.  The policy regarding requirements, promotions, reservations etc. and 
financial emoluments are dealt with by the Ministry of Railways on a global basis 
after due consultation with the recognized federations as applicable.  These 
provisions are applicable to the Production Units also.  Policy  or major issues 
specific to a production unit or production units in general are discussed and 
sorted out in annual meetings held with Staff Councils on regular basis.  With 
respect to Production Unit – specific issues, representation of staff through the  
Staff Councils is considered adequate for the machinery of grievance redressal.”  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005/BC-II/XIV/300/12 dated 15.05.2006] 
 
 
 

 37 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                               (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
6 September, 2007                                                        Chairman, 
15 Bhadrapada, 1929 Saka                 Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 

 38 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 17th REPORT       
(14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘RAILWAY PRODUCTION UNITS, WORKSHOPS AND 
ROLLING STOCK’  
 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations      20 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by   16 
the Government (Vide recommendations/observations) 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 
 
Percentage of total          80% 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not   02 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies 
Para Nos. 19 and 20 
 
Percentage of total          10% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of    02 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
Para Nos. 10 and 12  
 
Percentage of total             10% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final    NIL 
replies of Government are still awaited  
Para No. NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 39 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FOURTH  SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RAILWAYS (2007-08) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 6 th September, 2007 from 1000 hours to                        
1030  hours in Committee Room  ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
4. Shri Anwar Hussain 
5. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
6. Ch. Lal Singh 
7. Shri Manik Singh 
8. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
9. Shri K. Subbarayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
11. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
12. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
13. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director 
3. Shri Hoti Lal    - Deputy Secretary-II 

 40 
 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the following draft Action Taken Reports 
without any amendment:- 
 
(i) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
(ii) Draft report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in 17 th report on ‘Production Units, 
Railway Workshops and Maintenance of Rolling Stock’ 
 
(iii) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
(iv) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
   
 
 
 