18
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RAILWAYS
(2005-06)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 8th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants—2005-06’
of the Ministry of Railways]
EIGHTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2006/Magha, 1927 (Saka)


EIGHTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2005-06)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 8th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants—2005-06’
of the Ministry of Railways]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.2.2006
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 22.2.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2006/Magha, 1927 (Saka)


S.C.R. No. 99
Price : Rs. 55.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ........................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the  Government ..................... 11
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s reply ...................................... 33
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ...................................................... 40
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ......................................................................... 43
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee
on Railways held on 18.01.2006 ............................ 46
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations/observations contained
in the 8th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on
‘Demands for Grants (2005-06)’ ............................. 48 (i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RAILWAYS (2005-06)
Shri Basudeb Acharia —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A. Sai Prathap
3. Shri Dhirendra Agarwal
4. Shri Atique Ahamad
5. Shri Ajaya Kumar
6. Shri Subrata Bose
7. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang
10. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
11. Shri Anwar Hussain
12. Shri Mahesh Kanodia
13. Shri C. Kuppusami
14. Smt. Kalpana R. Narhire
15. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana
16. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
17. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi
18. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma
19. Ch. Lal Singh
20. Mohd. Tahir
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Smt. Kamla Manhar
23. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee
24. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi
(iii)

25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi
26. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy
28. Shri R. Kamraj
29. Shri Isam Singh
30. Shri Harendra Singh Malik
31. Shri Abani Roy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
4. Shri V .S. Negi — Director
5. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Assistant Director
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2005-06),
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on
their behalf, present this Eighteenth Report of the Committee on Action
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways
(2004-05) on ‘Demands for Grants—2005-06’ of the Ministry of Railways.
2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 19.04.2005
and it contained 30 recommendations/observations. The Ministry of
Railways have furnished their Action Taken Replies on all the
recommendations/observations on 05.10.2005.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken
Report at their sitting held on 18.01.2006.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Eighth Report of the
Standing Committee on Railways (2004-05) Fourteenth Lok Sabha is
given in Appendix-II.
  N
EW D ELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA,
17 February, 2006 Chairman,
28 Magha, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the
Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2004-05) on
‘Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Railways’ which was
presented in Lok Sabha 19.04.2005.
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 30 recommendations/observations contained in
the Report. These have been broadly categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government—Para Nos. 180, 180 (i), 180 (ii),
180 (iii), 180 (iv), 180 (v), 180 (vi), 180 (x), 180 (xi), 180 (xii),
180 (xiii), 180 (xiv), 182, 183, 184, 185, 187, 191, 193 and
194.
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies—
Para Nos. 180 (vii), 180 (ix), 181, 186, 189 and 195.
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee—Para Nos. 188 and 190.
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies are still awaited—Para Nos. 180 (viii), 192 and 196.
1.3 The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations in Chapter-V of the Report for which only interim
replies has been given by the Government should be furnished to
them expeditiously.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by
Government on some of their Recommendations/Observations.
A. Growth of Basic Infrastructure Facilities
Recommendation [Para No. 180 (i)]
1.5 The Committee had observed in the above paragraph that the
growth of basic infrastructure facilities were not commensurate with

2
the growth in economy and traffic. The new lines, gauge conversion,
doublings, restoration of dismantled lines, constructing the missing
links and easing the congested routes, track renewals bridge work,
level crossing, traffic facilities (yard), electrification works, road safety
works are a must not only to enhance the carrying capacity of the
system but also smooth, efficient, prompt and safe running of trains.
The Committee further observed that the projects were started without
much justification and background work and after making huge
investments were left without completion as new projects were taken
up which caused spreading of the scarce resources very thinly without
any remuneration from huge investments, creating missing links, last
mile projects waiting  completion and gross financial loss to Railways.
The ongoing and pending project shelf of Railways was worth Rs.
46,000 crore. The Committee had, therefore, suggested that the
investments should be made on priority for last mile projects, missing
links or strengthening high density network or for port connectivity
so that quick remuneration start flowing.
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have
stated that Railways have a throw forward of projects requiring over
Rs. 47000 crore for completion. The throw forward of new line and
gauge conversion projects itself is over Rs. 37000 crore. Many of these
projects were included in the budget on socio-economic considerations
for development of backward, remote, hilly and other under developed
areas. However, need has been felt for strengthening of high density
route falling on Golden Quadrilateral and Diagonals and other port
connectivity works so as to deal with the anticipated growth in traffic.
Rail Vikas Nigam Limited has been entrusted with the execution of
bankable projects falling on these routes and the same will be
completed in about next 3 years period.
1.7 The Ministry has further stated that the ongoing Doubling,
Railway Electrification projects are expected to be completed in a period
of next 2-3 years. The projects under New Lines and Gauge Conversion
have been recently prioritised into the following categories:
(i) Last mile project—where expenditure already incurred is
more than 60% of estimated cost and throwforward liabilities
are less than Rs. 100 crore.
(ii) Viable projects/those required on operational considerations.
(iii) National Projects, Defence funded projects, cost sharing,
public private partnership projects and those in North
Eastern Region.

3
(iv) Other ongoing projects that are not covered in the above
categories.
The above prioritisation will help in proper allocation of resources
so that the projects in category (i) and (ii) are completed in next
2-3 years period.
1.8 The Committee are satisfied to note that the Railways have
since prioritised the projects under new lines and Gauge Conversion.
They hope that the Railways will be able to complete the projects
in category (i) and (ii) above within the scheduled time frame.
However the Committee desire that the projects under category (iii)
and (iv) should not be lost sight of and all out efforts should be
made for completion of these projects also within the reasonable
timeframe.
B. Mobilization of Additional Resources
Recommendation [Para No. 180 (vi)]
1.9 The Committee in this paragraph had desired that mobilisation
of additional resources should be made through internal generation,
commercial utilization of their surplus land and other focused
marketing strategies. Budgetary allocation should be enhanced.
1.10 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have
stated that the Railways are striving to improve their financial health
through higher earnings and reduced expenses as well as adopting
measures for greater operational efficiency . As a result of vigorous
efforts made by the Railways in recent years, the position of internal
generation has improved considerably and internal generation has gone
up from Rs. 3,455 cr. in 2001-02 to Rs. 6,124 cr. in 2005-06 (BE). A
number of initiatives such as reduction in wagon turn round time,
simplification and rationalization of goods traffic, new premium
registration scheme, liberalization of engine-on-load scheme,
development of private sidings through cost sharing, etc. mainly in
freight business, public-private partnership, parcel business and
passenger business have been taken for significantly enhancing the
revenues and improving the services to customers. In regard to
passenger traffic also a number of steps have been taken like
introduction of new trains to carry additional volume of traffic,
provision of additional coaches on well patronized trains to
accommodate waitlisted passengers by redeployment of under utilized
coaches on other trains expansion of PRS, UTS facilities, computerized
Train Enquiry system across the country. This will help Railways in

4
meeting the growth demand and increasing its passenger earnings.
Railways have reshaped their priorities and business strategies, as
outlined in the Budget of 2005-06 to cope up with the emerging
demands of the economy as a whole. In the investment planned
through the annual exercise of Works Programme for the year 2005-06,
the focus has been to augment the capacity of the system to meet the
operational requirements and bridge the critical gaps in high traffic
density routes. Instead of spreading the sources thinly over all the
Zonal Railways, a corridor-wise approach was adopted this year to
meet the requirements of incremental traffic. A prioritised exercise of
the projects has also been done and approval of the Government
obtained. This will facilitate proper allocation of resources to derive
the fruits of investment in a shorter time span.
1.11 The Ministry has further stated that to ensure the continued
economic development of the country, Ministry of Railways have drawn
up an ambitious plan for meeting the increasing and emerging demands
of the economy through the provision of world-class infrastructure
and by streamlining passenger services and initiating a gamut of
commercial, operational and investment-oriented initiatives in the freight
sector. These initiatives will help Railways in mobilization of additional
resources to meet its present and future requirements.
1.12 The Committee are happy to note that Indian Railways has
taken a number of initiatives in freight business, public private
partnership, parcel business and passenger traffic. As a result of
these initiatives the internal generation has improved considerably
from Rs. 3455 crore in 2001-02 to Rs. 6124 crore in 2005-06 (BE). The
Committee hope that the Railways shall continue to maintain this
tempo. they desire that the Railways should chalk out a
comprehensive plan to become self-sufficient and take measures to
fully exploit the benefits of Government’s policy of economic
liberalization.
C. Rebate/Concession on Investment by Industrial Units for
Investing on Installing Mechanical Devices
Recommendation (Para No. 183)
1.13 The Committee in the aforesaid para had inter-alia noted that
difficulties were being faced at unloading points such as non-availability
of complete godown, a complete cover shed at the unloading points,
inability to unload directly to matching trucks within the given time
frame etc. To address these difficulties certain measures have been
proposed in the current budget viz. incentives to customers if they go

5
for mechanization of direct truck loading, free time of two hours to
customers provided there is nothing on the ground, Engine-on-load
wagon availability, wagon utilization, wagon turn round to five days
only, integrated rail side warehouse complexes with private participation
as well. The Committee are of the opinion that the measures as
proposed by the Railways would certainly provide them the additional
freight traffic. However, they emphasise for prompt and effective
implementation of these innovative schemes/measures. Railways should
also think over to give some rebate/concession on investment by
industrial units for investing on installing mechanical devices for
loading/unloading arrangements in the industrial sidings in view
of drastic reduction of time of loading and unloading by the
Railways.
1.14 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have
stated that regarding rebate/concession on investment by industrial
units for investing on installing mechanical devices for load/unloading
arrangements in the industrial sidings in view of drastic reduction of
time of loading and unloading by the Railways, a study has been
entrusted to a professional agency regarding the extent of rebate/
concession which can be given. Report of the study undertaken by C
TRAM is awaited.
1.15 The Committee note that a professional agency C TRAM
has been entrusted with to study the extent of rebate/concession
which can be given to industrial units on investment for installing
mechanical devices for load/unloading arrangements in the industrial
sidings. The Committee desire that the study made by C TRAM
may be placed before them as and when the Report is submitted.
D. Introduction of New Trains
Recommendation (Para No. 187)
1.16 The Committee had in this paragraph inter-alia noted that it
has become as usual practice of Railways to introduce the trains
announced in the budget at the fag end of the financial year, if at all
they were started. They stressed that a quarterly schedule for
introduction of new trains should be prepared for the year and followed
accordingly instead of starting all the announced trains at the fag end
of the financial year.
1.17 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have
stated that the Committee’s recommendation has been noted and
appropriate action as deemed fit and feasible, will be taken.

6
1.18 The Committee note that the financial year 2005-06 is now
in its last quarter. While reiterating their earlier recommendation,
they desire that the quarterly schedule prepared and new trains
introduced during first three quarters be intimated to them.
E. Participation of People’s Representatives and Passenger Forms in
IRTTC Meetings
Recommendation (Para No. 188)
1.19 The Committee in this paragraph had found that at times
when the time tables of running trains were rescheduled, it caused
more inconvenience to the passengers rather than benefiting them.
They had desired that the representative of people and the Passenger
forums be invited well in time to the IRTTC meeting for their
suggestions before any change is carried out in the timings of the
already existing/running trains to avoid inconvenience to the travelling
public. They had also desired that the Ministry should also reschedule
the time tables in such a manner that their earnings are raised to a
higher level.
1.20 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have
stated that as regards rescheduling of trains, before changing the
timings of trains, Zonal Railways consult the passengers associations,
members of ZRUCC and people’s representatives and do take their
views into account before effecting the changes. Care is also taken to
ensure that rescheduling does not lead to inconvenience in form of
missing of connections at junctions, etc. Rescheduling of trains at time
are necessitated due to operational reasons. However, the exercise of
rescheduling of trains is done mainly to realize the twin aims of
catering passengers in a better way and earn more revenue also to
ensure smooth operation of trains. Inviting passengers forms at the
IRTTC meeting is neither feasible nor desirable, as the discussions at
the meeting and the decisions arrived thereat from the basis for
preparation of Railway Budget, a secret documents until it is laid in
the Parliament.
1.21 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Government. While appreciating the fact that rescheduling of trains
at times are necessitated due to operational reasons, they are unable
to understand the problems in inviting the passenger’s Forum and
representatives of people to IRTTC meeting. The Committee are not
convinced with the plea of the Government since the decision taken
at IRTTC meeting form the basis for preparation of the Railway
Budget, therefore, the passengers’ forum cannot be invited to these

7
meetings. The Committee note that the rescheduling of the trains/
preparation of time table are taken up only after the presentation of
the budget of each year. The contention of the Ministry is therefore
untenable. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that
the representatives of people and the passenger forums should be
invited to the IRTTC meeting.
F. Annual Plan 2004-05
Recommendation (Para No. 190)
1.22 In this paragraph, the Committee had noted that despite a
substantial Capital Support from the General Exchequer, the Railways
have not been able to manage their developmental Plan 2004-05.
Though the Capital Support has contributed about 56% of the total
Annual Plan, the physical targets under important Plan Heads such as
New Lines, Gauge Conversion and Electrification have contrarily been
reduced. Moreover, the expenditure incurred upto December, 2004 has
been assessed about 65% of the revised estimates, which shows a very
slow pace of expenditure during the initial three quarters of the year
2004-05. The Committee further noticed that the Railway’s Plan seems
to be propelled by the Capital Support being received from the General
Exchequer instead of the resources managed by the Railways either
through internal generation or by public/private investment initiatives/
market borrowings. The Committee have over the last few years
observed that the Railways do not reflect the requisite delivery instinct.
Despite the pumping of huge resources into the development needs,
the Railways could not produce any mile stones or slow any
significant/remarkable change. They were of the considered view that
the Railways should manage their plan in a more professionalized
way rather than the traditional one being practised currently. They
had further stressed that financial and physical targets of Railway
should move in direct proportion.
1.23 In their reply the Government have stated as under:
“During 2004-05 target for completion of 273 kms of New Lines,
999 kms Gauge Conversion and 381 kms of doublings was fixed
at the Budget stage. However, only 150 kms of New Line,
779 kms of Gauge Conversion and 282 kms of Doublings  i.e. total
1211 kms of BG Railways Lines against target of 1653 kms could
be completed during the year. The progress has been less because
of following reasons:
(a) Non-deposition of share by the State Governments for cost
sharing projects.

8
(b) Delay in land acquisition and forestry clearance.
(c) Unprecedented hike in steel prices, as a result of which
several contracts had to be terminated.
(d) Slow progress against contracts on various reasons by the
contractors.
(e) Delay in supply of PSC sleepers, Elastic Rail Clip due to
hike in steel prices.
As far as Railway electrification is concerned, during 2004-05, total
320 RKM were electrified against the target of 375 RKM. The shortfall
is marginal. However, the target of 1800 RKM for X Plan will be
achieved as only 521 RKM are required to be electrification in the
balance 2 years of the Plan.
Penal/Route Relay/Electronic Interlocking have been commissioned
at 351 stations against the target of 300 stations which is an all time
high. Track circuiting has been commissioned at 1545 locations against
a target of 1264 locations which includes all time high of 853 locations
commissioned under SRSF. Rehabilitation works have been done at an
all time high of 262 stations against the target of 234 stations.
Interlocking of Level Crossing (LC) gates have been provided at
325 LC gates against a target of 300 LC gates while telephone has
been provided at 380 LC gates against a target of 300 LC gates, thus
exceeding the targets”
1.24 The Government have further stated that the increase in
allocation/expenditure under various plan heads has been mainly for
taking up activities on large number of projects and expediting progress
on some of the projects which could be targeted for completion in the
coming years.
1.25 The Committee are dissatisfied to note that against the target
for completion of 273 kms of New Lines, 999 kms of Gauge
Conversion 381 kms of Doublings during 2004-05 only 150 kms of
New Line, 779 kms of Gauge Conversion and 282 kms of doublings
could be completed. This confirms the Committee’s observation that
despite the pumping of huge resources into the development needs,
the Railways could not produce any milestones or show any
significant/remarkable change.
1.26 The Committee also observe that the reply of the
Government is silent on the recommendations of the Committee that
the Railways should manage their plan in a more professionalised

9
way rather than the traditional one being practised currently. They
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the Government to
inform the Committee about the specific steps taken in this regard
within three months.
G. Staff Quarters and Amenities for Staff
Recommendation (Para No. 194)
1.27 The Committee had noted that the policy of Railways is to
provide quarters for essential staff on programmed basis. The housing
satisfaction over Indian Railway is about 48%. For the year 2004-05
the funds allocated for Staff Quarters and Amenities for staff were
Rs. 75 crore and Rs. 65 crore respectively, which were later revised to
Rs. 65 crore and Rs. 73 crore respectively . For 2005-06 the same has
been projected to Rs. 80 crore and Rs. 93 crore respectively. The
Committee were concerned about the pathetic, shabby and unhygienic
conditions of quarters especially for running staff, safaiwallas and C&D
category staff. They were informed that Ministry of Railways have
gone for 10 years Corporate Welfare Plan in this regard. Also a ‘Quality
Audit Team’ had been set up to monitor the quality of work being
done for construction of staff quarters. The Committee had stressed
that the Corporate Welfare Plan of the Ministry should be implemented
promptly to improve the housing conditions viz. sanitation, drainage,
clean water supply, other additions/alterations and upgradation of
substandard quarters of the staff. They had also emphasized that the
Quality Audit Team should effectively monitor the quality of
construction work of these quarters regularly . In addition to this, a
senior officer from the Zonal Railway should visit the staff colonies
periodically to see the works being undertake in these colonies and
submit his report to the Railway Board.
1.28 In their Action Taken Reply the Government have stated that
the progressively increasing allotments under Demand no. 11 (MH-
500-Residential Building-Repairs and Maintenance and Welfare) were
made during the last four years raising from Rs. 483 crore in 2000-01
to Rs. 576 crore in 2003-04. Increasing funds are being provided under
the Plan Heads-“Staff Quarters” and “Amenities for Staff” for
construction of staff quarters both on new/replacement accounts and
of improvements to staff quarters. Higher allotments have been given
to above Plan Heads during the last five years raising from
Rs. 60 crore in 2000-01 to Rs. 80 crore in 2005-06.
Out of about 1.40 lakh sub-standard quarters as reported by the
Zonal Railways about 75000 substandard quarters have already been

10
improved. Based on the Zonal Railways report, there are still about
65000 substandard quarters requiring standardization. In compliance
with the announcement of the Hon’ble Minister for Railways through
Railway Budget Speech 2005-06, a Corporate Welfare Plan is under
formulation for paying special attention towards maintenance and
improvement of substandard quarters as also Railway colonies including
roads, sewerage, drainage, lighting etc. Relevant data is under collection.
On receipt of complete data from the Zonal Railways, Corporate Welfare
Plan spreading over a period of ten years will be formulated in
consultation with the Union Federations. This is likely to take about
three more months.
As regard suggestion of the Committee to ensure that the Quality
Audit Team should effectively monitor the quality of construction works
of the staff quarters, necessary instructions in this regard have been
issued to all the Zonal Railways for compliance.
As regard periodical inspection of staff colonies/quarters by a
Senior Officer of the Zonal Railways to see the works being undertaken
in the colonies and submit of its report to the Railway Board, it is
stated that it may not practically feasible to monitor all such inspections
at the apex level of the Railways. However, instructions have been
reiterated to Railways to perform adequate higher level checks on
colony maintenance.
1.29 The Committee are satisfied to note that higher allotments
have been given to the Plan Heads-“Staff Quarters” and “Amenities
for Staff” during 2005-06. They also appreciate that necessary
instructions have been issued to all the Zonal Railways for effectively
monitoring the quality of construction works of staff quarters.
However, the Committee are not convinced with the reply of the
Government that it may not be practically feasible to monitor the
inspections at the apex level of Railways. As an apex body it is the
responsibility of the Railway Board that its instructions are followed
scrupulously by the Zonal Railways. The Committee are unable to
understand as to how in the absence of feed-back from the Zonal
Railways, the Railway Board will ascertain whether its instructions
are being followed or not. The Committee therefore, desire that the
Railways should evolve some suitable mechanism for the same.

11
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1.80)
From a small beginning of 34 Kms. from Boribunder to Thane in
1853, the Indian Railways have expended its network significantly.
Today, Indian Railways are operating through the length and breadth
of the country with 63,221 route Kms. comprising 46,807 Km. broad
gauge, 13,290 km. of metre gauge and 312 Km. of narrow gauge. It
has a fleet of 2,28,170 wagons (units), 40781 coaches, 7817 locomotives,
running daily 13,684 trains including 8,622 passenger trains carrying
1.6 million tones of freight traffic and about 14 million passengers
covering 7031 stations. This system is being managed with 67 operating
Divisions and 16 Zones. The Committee felt that Railways need to
pay attention in various important fields such as safety maintenance
of Railway assets, laying of new lines and track renewal. There are
number of pending and ongoing projects which require huge financial
resources. Keeping in view the growing competition with Road sector
the Railways have to strive for cutting cost in passenger and freight
operations and plugging their revenue leakages. The Committee also
feel that there is an urgent need for the Railways to review their tariff
policy as well as attract freight and passenger traffic and reduce the
impact of cross subsidization. Railway being the prime infrastructure
sector in the country need to expand, develop and modernize to keep
pace with the growth of Indian economy. For this they have to
promptly address the major difficulties being faced in their operations.
Some of the areas require to be attended to are:
Recommendation [Para No. 180 (i)]
Growth of basic infrastructure facilities are not commensurate with
the growth in economy and traffic. The new lines, gauge conversion,
doublings, restoration of dismantled lines, constructing the missing
links and easing the congested routes, track renewals bridge work,
level crossings. Traffic facilities (yard), electrification works, road safety
works are a must not only to enhance the carrying capacity of the
system but also smooth, efficient, prompt and safe running of trains.
The projects are started without much justification and background
work and after making huge investments are left without completion

12
as new projects are taken up. This has caused spreading the scarce
resources very thin without any remuneration from huge investments,
creating missing links, last mile projects waiting  completion and gross
financial loss to Railways. As on date the ongoing and pending project
shelf of Railways is worth Rs. 46,000 crore. The Committee, therefore,
suggested that the investments should be made on priority for last
mile projects, missing links or strengthening high density network or
for port connectivity so that quick remuneration start flowing.
Reply of the Government
Railways have a throw-forward of projects requiring over
Rs. 47000 crore for completion. The throw-forward of new line and
gauge conversion projects itself is over Rs. 37000 crore. Many of these
projects were included in the budget on socio-economic considerations
for development of backward, remote, hilly and other under developed
areas. However, need has been felt for strengthening of high density
route falling on Golden Quadrilateral and Diagonals and other port
connectivity works so as to deal with the anticipated growth in traffic.
Rail Vikas Nigam Limited has been entrusted with the execution of
bankable projects falling on these routes and the same will be
completed in about next 3 years period.
The ongoing Doubling, Railway Electrification projects are expected
to be completed in a period of next 2-3 years. The projects under New
Lines and Gauge Conversion have been recently prioritised into the
following categories:
(i) Last mile project—where expenditure already incurred is
more than 60% of estimated cost and throwforward liabilities
are less than Rs. 100 crore.
(ii) Viable projects/those required on operational considerations.
(iii) National Projects, Defence funded projects, cost sharing,
public private partnership projects and those in North
Eastern Region.
(iv) Other ongoing projects that are not covered in the above
categories.
The above prioritisation will help in proper allocation of resources
so that the projects in category (i) and (ii) are completed in next
2-3 years period.
(For Comments of the Committee see Para 1.8 of Chapter-I of the
Report)

13
Recommendation {Para No. 180 (ii)}
The Railways assets in the form of Rolling Stocks viz. coaches,
wagons, containers are out dated. Efforts should be made to modernize
the coaches into more comfortable, accident proof, fire proof and the
wagons with capacity for more axle on load and container with larger
capacities. These technological up-gradation of assets should be
promptly taken up for improving efficiency, throughput and increasing
average speed of trains.
Reply of the Government
1. Indian Railways have recently acquired the latest technology
coaches, which are now being produced in Railways own
Production Units through transfer of technology.
2. A study is also in hand to enhance crashworthiness of
coaches, specifically those types of coaches the mostly remain
at the end of trains. For validating this type of design
developed through computer simulation on actual crash test
also been conducted and results of the same are being
analysed. Once this project succeeds it is expected that in
the events of unfortunate accidents coaches will be able to
absorb greater crash energy thereby given higher protection
to passengers.
3. Various materials used in coach furnishings have been
updated for fire retardancy and reduce toxicity so that the
time available to passengers for evacuation, in case of fire,
increase. Further developments in this direction are going
on.
4. Wagons are designed as per axle load permitted on track
and bridge considerations. For increasing through put,
wagons with high speed (100 kmph) potential have been
introduce. In addition, light weight Stainless Steel and
Aluminum wagons are being procured.
Recommendation {Para No. 180 (iii)}
There have been a information technology revolution world over
during the last few years due to introduction of computer, cable lines
etc. The Railways have introduced Railway booking and enquiries to
passengers through internet, SMS and E-mail etc. Also, FOIS has been
introduced to keep complete information about the wagon requirement,
wagon utilization, wagon whereabouts and empty haulage. The

14
Committee stressed that these facilities should be introduced in the
entire system promptly so that there is sufficient data base for proper
planning about allotment of rakes and Passenger Profile Management
System.
Reply of the Government
All the facilities mentioned above are being introduced in the entire
system. Internet Booking of tickets is now available at more than
150 cities/towns throughout the country. Enquiries to passengers for
all reservation and trains running related enquiries is available through
internet sites http://indianrailway.gov.in and trainequiry.com. In addition
queries are also available through major mobile phone service providers
across the country. FOIS is now available at over 237 locations for
Rake Management System (RMS) and 212 locations for Terminal
Management System (TMS). FOIS is targeted for completion by June,
2006 in over 525 TMS locations. Recently, Passenger Profile Management
System has been set up in Railway Board for analysing data of
passenger services.
Recommendation [Para No. 180 (iv)]
With the growth in the economy, a number of new units of iron,
steel, cement and thermal power have come up at various places. Due
to non-availability of wagons, these units are facing difficulties. The
Committee desired that the Railways should prepare a Perspective
Plan to cater to the needs of the industry and sufficient wagons should
be made available so that industrial units may not suffer.
Reply of the Government
For the Tenth Plan figures for wagon procurement as contained in
the document was 65000 Four Wheeler Units. In the mid term review
it has been revised to 94,214 Four Wheeler Units. These figures do not
include departmental wagons.
Recommendation [Para No. 180 (v)]
There was a backlog of safety works to the extent of about
Rs. 17000 crore in 2001. A Special Railway Safety Fund was introduced
to clear the backlog by replacement of over-aged assets within a period
of 5 years. The Committee urged that sufficient provision should be
made in Depreciation Fund henceforth to meet the current arising on
year to year basis. Besides safety infrastructure should be upgraded
through induction of technical aids to support human element and
increment asset reliability.

15
Reply of the Government
Railway Safety Review Committee-1998 recommended that the
Central Government should provide a one time grant of
Rs. 15000 crore to the Railways so that arrears in renewals of vital
safety equipment are wiped out within a fixed time frame. The cost
of replacement of such overaged assets when reassessed at current
prices (2001) came to Rs. 17000 crore. Therefore, in order to implement
this recommendation, a non-lapsable “Special Railway Safety Fund”
(SRSF) of Rs. 17000 crore has been set up with effect from 01.10.2001,
to wipe out the arrears in renewal/replacement of over aged assets of
track, bridges, rolling stock, signalling gears etc. and for certain Safety
enhancement works, within a fixed time frame of 6 years.
With the non-lapsable Special Railway Safety Fund that has been
set up, the Railways are making conscious efforts to ensure that
accumulation of arrears of replacement/renewals of assets does not
take place again. However, it has to be appreciated that contribution
to Depreciation Reserve Fund (DRF) depends on the extent of internal
generation through operations. Factors like steadily rising cost of
operation and maintenance, which include increasing staff and fuel
cost, a debt servicing liability and limited options for augmenting traffic
revenue and the fact that as transporter for the masses, Railways have
to exercise restraint when it comes revision of fares and freight have
also to be taken into account. Provisioning of the DRF depends upon
the operational surplus available with the Railways and all efforts are
being made to maximize it. Accordingly, appropriation to DRF has
been increased from Rs. 2367 crore in 2004-05 (BE) to Rs. 2762 crore
in 2004-05 (RF) and further to Rs. 3704 crore in 2005-06 (BE). The
balances in DRF, which came down to Rs. 51 crore as on 31.03.2000,
have also been built up in recent years and are expected to be at
Rs. 4778 crore by end of March 2006 as per 2005-06 (BE).
Safety is the prime concern of Indian Railways and adoption of
new measures, which include induction of technical aids to support
human element, as also to increase asset reliability, is a continuous
process. The measures being taken by India Railways to improve safety
include adoption of suitable and modern technology for interlocking
and signalling system, upgradation of standards of track and rolling
stock, modernisation of maintenance practices, replacement of over-
aged assets, upgradation of training aids like simulators, checks on
observance of safety precautions and Anti Collision Device.
Indian Railways have also formulated a Corporate Safety Plan for
the period 2003-2013, which has already been presented to the

16
Parliament. This Plan states the objectives, strategies and targets for
which the Indian Railways would be striving in the next decade. The
document encompasses the priorities of the safety related works and
indicates a broad time frame to complete them along with assessed
approximate requirement of financial investments. The Corporate Safety
Plan of the IR (2003-2013) also envisages a safety action plan directed
towards continuous reduction in risk level to its customers,
implementation of suggested system reforms, imbibing better safety
culture enhancement of asset reliability etc. This covers continuous
rehabilitation and modernization of assets, qualitative changes in men
and machines, induction of appropriate technologies in support of
human efforts etc.
Recommendation [Para No. 180 (vi)]
The Committee desired that mobilisation of additional resources
should be made through internal generation, commercial utilization of
their surplus land and other focused marketing strategies. Budgetary
allocation should be enhanced.
Reply of the Government
The Railways are striving to improve their financial health through
higher earnings and reduced expenses as well as adopting measures
for greater operational efficiency. As a result of vigorous efforts made
by the Railways in recent years, the position of internal generation
has improved considerably and internal generation has gone up from
Rs. 3,455 crore in 2001-02 to Rs. 6,124 crore in 2005-06 (BE).
A number of initiatives mainly in freight business, public-private
partnership, parcel business and passenger business have been taken
for significantly enhancing the revenues and improving the services to
customers. These include plan to improve throughput through increased
productivity and efficiency, reduction in wagon turn round time,
simplification and rationalization of goods traffic, new premium
registration scheme, liberalization and simplification of preferential
traffic schedule for supply of wagons, electrification of diesel sidings
located on electrified sections, liberalization of engine-on-load scheme,
formulation of Terminal Incentive Scheme, up-gradation of facilities at
freight train examination centres, implementation of electronic payment
gateway facility for BTPS and its extension to major customers,
development of private sidings through cost-sharing, integrated
warehouses complexes to provide single window service, etc.

17
In regard to passenger traffic also a number of steps have been
taken like introduction of new trains to carry additional volume of
traffic, provision of additional coaches on well patronized trains to
accommodate wait listed passengers by redeployment of under utilized
coaches on other trains, expansion of PRS, UTS facilities, Computerized
Train Enquiry system across the country. This will help Railways in
meeting the growing demand and increasing its passenger earnings.
Railways have reshaped their priorities and business strategies, as
outlined in the Budget of 2005-06, to cope up with the emerging
demands of the economy as a whole. In the investment planned
through the annual exercise of Works Programme for the year 2005-06,
the focus has been to augment the capacity of the system to meet the
operational requirements and bridge the critical gaps in high traffic
density routes. Instead of spreading the resources thinly over all the
Zonal Railways, a corridor-wise approach was adopted this year to
meet the requirements of incremental traffic. A prioritisation exercise
of the projects has also been done and approval of the Government
obtained. This will facilitate proper allocation of resources to derive
the fruits of investment in a shorter time upon.
Commercial utilization of surplus land including property
development has been identified as one of the priority items and
Railways are making all out efforts to maximum its earnings. Earnings
due to land utilization during 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 were
Rs. 93.96 crore, 116.53 crore and 200.85 crore (Provisional) respectively.
It has also been decided to set up an Authority viz. Rail Land
Development Authority (RLDA) to undertake all tasks connected with
property development. Railways (Amendment) Bill, 2004, for setting
up of the Authority and to include commercial utilisation of the
Railway land/air-space as a part of work of Railways’ activity, has
been introduced in Rajya Sabha on 20.12.2004 which has been referred
to the Standing Committee.
The Standing Committee has since presented its Report in both
the Houses of Parliament on 11.05.2005. The Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee are under examination.
Thus, to ensure the continued economic development of the country,
Ministry of Railways have drawn up an ambitious plan for meeting
the increasing and emerging demands of the economy through the
provision of world-class infrastructure and by streamlining passenger
services and initiating a gamut of commercial, operational and
investment-oriented initiatives in the freight sector. These initiatives

18
will help Railways in mobilization of additional resources to meet its
present and future requirements.
(For comments of the Committee please see Para 1.12 of the
Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation [Para No. 180 (x)]
There is a need for empowerment of staff at cutting edge level for
greater customer orientation. The Committee felt that more delegation
of power would result in quicker response to various situations and
improvement in equality of service. Delegation of powers should be
effected by undertaking a study of various feedback received from
customers/passenger based on their requirement.
Reply of the Government
It is agreed that there should be more customer orientation of staff
at the cutting edge level. For this to achieve, the prime need is to
impart proper customer care training to such staff apart from delegation
of more powers. Railways have already been taking the required action
in this direction.
Recommendation [Para No. 180 (xi)]
Passenger amenities/services/cleanliness and general ambience are
yard stick of the performance and life line of business of Indian
Railways. Rail users are ready to pay more if they are provided the
services of quality and satisfaction. Therefore, all out efforts should be
made to improve and maintain the quality of passenger amenities in
running trains as well as at stations. They also stressed that
accountability should be enforced by fixing responsibility.
Reply of the Government
All endeavours are made by the railway administration to improve
and maintain the quality of passenger amenities at stations and in
trains. The following steps have been taken in this regard in the recent
past which are as under:
(i) In order to provide upgraded passenger amenities over
Indian Railways, 327 stations have so far been selected as
model stations out of which 101 stations have already been
developed as model stations.

19
(ii) W ith a view to improve the standard of cleanliness, a
number of initiatives have been taken which include
introduction of mechanised cleaning, provision of washable
aprons, ‘Pay & Use’ toilets etc. As per the Integrated Railway
Modernisation Plan (2005-2010), it has been planned to
extend mechanised cleaning at 250 A&B category stations
by 2007-2008. Regular drives are also being undertaken from
time to time.
To control the rodent and cockroach menace in coaches,
Railways are taking preventive action on priority to cover
yard, drains, station buildings and other service buildings
so that the breeding of rodents and cockroaches is prevented
in addition to disinfestations of coaches and pantry cars.
For improving cleanliness in trains, during Primary and
Secondary Maintenance, the trains are cleaned thoroughly
both internally and externally.
For periodic cleaning of coach toilets and removal of garbage
etc. from running trains, a process has been developed with
suitable mechanization. This has been given the name ‘Clean
Train Station’. This system is presently working at Rattlam
station of Western Railway and Bhusawal of Central Railway
and it is planned to provide this facility at 16 stations by
March 2006 and at 50 stations by March 2010.
(iii) To improve telephone enquiry, Railways are setting up
Integrated Train Enquiry System (ITES) which will consist
of both Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS) and
manual enquiry provisions for dissemination of information
on train running status, PNR status & availability of
accommodation. There will be a universal number 139 which
will get connected as a local call.
(iv) W ith a view to facilitate issue of unreserved tickets,
Computerized Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS) has been
started and is being extended to all Zonal Railways.
(v) Reservation on internet has been started with assistance of
Indian Railway Catering & Tourism Corporation (IRCTC).
The Ticket delivery facility is currently available in more
than 170 cities.
(vi) Recently the scheme of e-ticketing has also been introduced
on pilot basis in two pairs of Shatabadi Express trains in
which no physical ticket is required to undertake a reserved

20
journey. Based on experience more trains will be covered
under this scheme.
(vii) Tatkal Reservation has been extended to all Mail/Express
trains and in all required classes.
(viii) For physically disabled persons, production of modified
luggage-cum brake vans ahs started.
Recommendation [Para No. 180 (xii)]
Railways have failed to plug the revenue leakages and corruption
prevalent due to existing administrative inefficiencies. They should take
concrete measures to plug revenue leakages, specially, in areas such as
scrap disposal and ticketless travel.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Railways have taken a number of steps to tackle
the problem of losses due to revenue leakage in various areas such as
ticketless travel, parcel, goods, scrap disposal and unauthorised
payment to staff. Some of the result oriented measures are as under:
Passenger, Parcel and Goods Booking
In passenger booking, intensive preventive checks at important
stations, including booking/reservation, platforms and trains are being
organised by Railway Vigilance in addition to the regular ticket
checking done by the Commercial Department. In parcel and baggage
booking, checks are being organised to detect cases of wrong
classification and overloading. In goods rakes, ransom checks are carried
out to detect incidences of overloading. In addition to existing
mechanical weighbridges, electronic-in-motion weighbridges have been
installed at various strategic locations to facilitate checking of rakes,
while in motion, without causing detentions.
Scrap Disposal
In the area of scrap disposal following steps have been taken to
prevent leakage of revenue:
(a) Intensive checks are carried out to reduce incidences of
leakages and to curb the malpractices.
(b) In addition to existing mechanical weighbridges, electronic
weighbridges are being provided at depots and sheds from
where scrap material is delivered to purchaser.

21
(c) Accountal of rail and Permanent-way material is being
computerised.
Payment to Staff
Checks in various areas such as salaries, allowances, bonus, loans/
advances, involving payments to staff and leave accounts have been
intensified by Zonal Railways and regular monitoring in these areas is
done by Railway Board to detect cases of fraudulent/over payments.
Recommendation [Para No. 180 (xiii)]
Railways should emphasise reducing the energy bill by purchasing
directly from Central Generating Agencies or Joint ventures for setting
up power plants with generating agencies.
Reply of the Government
Railways are pursuing the efforts for availing direct power supply
from Central Generating Agencies like National Thermal Power
Corporation (NTPC), Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited
(NPCIL) etc.
Railways have already started availing direct power supply from
NTPC on Ghaziabad-Kanpur section of North Central Railway.
Another similar scheme for taking power NTPC in state of
Chhattisgarh sanctioned in 2002-03 is under implementation.
Action has been initiated for signing of Memorandum of
Understanding (Mou) with NPCIL for taking power Tarapur plant.
It is also proposed to set up 1000 MW coal based power plan in
Joint venture with NTPC at Nabinagar, Bihar by establishing a company
“Bhartiya Rail Bijlee Company Limited”.
Recommendation (Para No. 180 (xiv)
The Committee found that in the MEMU/DEMU trains which
covers long distances over three hours, no toilet facilities are being
provided which causes difficulties to passengers travelling in these
trains. The Committee desired that such long distances MEMU/DEMU
trains should be converted into conventional trains and requisite
amenities be provided.

22
Reply of the Government
On the basis of recommendations of Standing Committee on
Railways for conversion of long distance MEMU/DEMU/DMU trains
with a journey time of more than three hours into conventional trains
with requisite amenities, all Zonal Railways have been advised that all
the MEMU/DEMU and other toilet-less trains running more than 160
kms or with journey time of more than 4 hours should be provided
a halt of 30 minutes at an intermediate and convenient station for the
benefit of commuters. Zonal Railways have also been advised that if
such a halt is not operationally feasible, the commuter train may be
converted into conventional train. Instructions have also been issued
to make necessary changes in links of MEMU/DMU Trains if they are
running for more than 160 kms or more than 4 hours.
Recommendation (Para No. 182)
The Committee noted that to enhance their earnings in freight
segments, Railways have proposed certain initiatives measures for the
year 2005-06 such as wagon turn round to five days, preferential traffic
schedule, Electronic Payment Gateway facility, Premium Registration
Scheme, Wagon Investment Scheme, Terminal Incentive Scheme,
reclassification of commodity groups, public private partnership and
introduction of Double Stake Containers etc. They also noted that the
Railways have implemented certain effective measures such as Freight
Operation Information System, Rake Management System, Engine-on-
Load, electrification of diesel sidings, reducing the examination time
of rake, improvement in facilities at the train examination centers,
customers encourage to develop private sidings through cost sharing
etc. They found that GDP growth for the whole year (2005-06) is
expected to be 6.9% which is good enough to give 7.7% traffic growth
to Railways. The Committee were of the concerted view that the
positive fall out of above mentioned effective measures should also be
taken into consideration while projecting the budget targets for the
year.
Reply of the Government
Budget Estimates of freight earnings are based on originating freight
loading targeted for the year which is assessed keeping in view the
traffic offerings projected by user industries and historical growth.
Besides, estimated of freight earnings also include the impact of
contemplated modification in freight structure. Other marketing
initiatives outlined in the Budget are aimed to bring a further
improvement in freight business during the course of the year.

23
The freight earnings of Rs. 33,480 crore envisaged in Budget
Estimates, 2005-06 are based on 635 mt. of freight loading targeted in
the budget and additional Rs. 650 crore anticipated from rationalization
of freight structure and other initiatives proposed for 2005-06. There
has been a set practice on the Railways to review the performance vis-
a-vis the budgeted target in each segment on a monthly basis.
accordingly, freight performance during the course of the fiscal year
will be reviewed in the light of gradual implementation of various
marketing initiatives proposed in the Budget and will be appropriately
reflected in the Revised Estimates.
Recommendation (Para No. 183)
The Committee were informed that the Railways have regained its
market share of freight loading which had gone to the road sector to
a certain extent during previous years. They found that the Railways
have not only maintained their share in the two major bulk
commodities viz. coal and iron ore which constitute 60% of the
Railways total freight traffic but have also marginally increased their
share. The share of food grains and fertilizers is being maintained at
a higher level. However, the Railways share of freight loading in
cement, steel & POL products has been affected due to continuous
hike in freight rates. During the evidence the Chairman, Railway Board
explained that when the growth centres increase as in the case of
Cement industry, the leads go shorter and the road mobility transport
becomes more viable for a customer thereby leading to loss of traffic
to roads. The Committee were also informed that difficulties were
being faced at unloading points such as non-availability of complete
godown, a complete cover shed at the unloading points, inability to
unload directly to matching trucks within the given time frame etc. To
address these difficulties certain measures have been proposed in the
current budget viz. incentives to customers if they go for mechanization
of direct truck loading, free time of two hours to customers provided
there is nothing on the ground, Engine-on-Load wagon availability,
wagon utilization, wagon turn round to five days only, integrated rail
side warehouse complexes with private participation as well. The
Committee were of the opinion that the measures as proposed by the
Railways would certainly provide them the additional freight traffic.
However, they emphasised for prompt and effective implementation
of these innovative schemes/measures. They also stressed that retrieval
of the Railways share of freight traffic from road should not be one
time achievement and should be sustained and enhanced over a period
of time through a focused approach. Simultaneously, Railways should
extend their capacity to carry this enhanced load. Railways should

24
also think over to give some rebate/concession on investment by
industrial units for investing on installing mechanical devices for
loading/unloading arrangements in the industrial sidings in view of
drastic reduction of time of loading and unloading by the Railways.
The Committee noted that without requisite infrastructure at siding
freight loading and unloading to 24 hours time has been imposed and
demurrages are charged for delay. They recommended that the Railways
should review its decision and this scheme should be introduced only
after providing requisite infrastructure such as tracks, lighting, security
arrangement, availability of labour during night.
Reply of the Government
Innovative measures proposed in the current Budget such as
incentives to customers if they go for mechanization of direct truck
loading, free time of two hours to customers provided there is nothing
on the ground. Engine-on-load wagon availability, wagon utilization,
wagon turn round to five days only, integrated rail side warehouse
complexes with private participation etc. have all been notified and
necessary instructions issued for implementation.
Regarding rebate/concession on investment by industrial units for
investing on installing mechanical devices for loading/unloading
arrangements in the industrial sidings in view of drastic reduction of
time of loading and unloading by the Railways, a study has been
entrusted to a professional agency regarding the extent of rebate/
concession which can be given. Report of the study undertaken by
C TRAM is awaited.
Regarding imposition of 24 hours time to freight loading/unloading
and charging demurrages for delay. Zonal Railways have been asked
to improve the existing infrastructure such as tracks, lighting, security
arrangements etc. Loading/Unloading time have been relaxed to some
extent.
(For Comments of the Committee please see Para 1.15 of Chapter-
I of the Report)
Operating Ratio
Recommendation (Para No. 184)
The operating ratio (ratio of total Working Expenses excluding
‘Suspense’ to the total Traffic Earnings) of the Zonal Railway viz.,
Eastern Railway, East Central Railway, North Eastern Railway, Northeast

25
Frontier Railway, North Western Railway, Southern Railway, South East
Central Railway, South Western Railway and Western Railways is
hovering beyond 100% during the last few years. The Committee were
aware that Zonal Railways by virtue of their jurisdiction and
geographical location, are not placed evenly with regard to traffic
earnings. Also each Zonal Railway would be incurring operating
expenses which includes an element of fixed costs necessary to keep
the system operative irrespective of their traffic output. However, they
insisted that Railway Board should emphasise on each Zonal Railway
to curb the undesirable expenditure and work towards enhancing
efficiency and productivity to raise their earnings.
Reply of the Government
Railways, in order to bring about an overall improvement in the
Operating Ratio, are working for maximizing traffic earnings through
increased traffic output and preventing leakage of revenue;
simultaneously observing strict austerity and economy to minimize
the operating expenses. With a view to improve the operational
efficiency of each zone, zonal railways are given targets of physical
traffic output and traffic earnings and on expenditure side, spending
limits lower than the budgetary allocation are fixed so as to encourage
economy.
As desired by the Committee, zonal railways with an operating
ratio above 100%, have been addressed to curb undesirable expenditure
and to enhance the efficiency and productivity.
Recommendation (Para No. 185)
Further, the Committee observed that the Railways are anticipating
to improve their operating ratio to 91.2% as against 92.6% anticipated
in 2004-05 and have projected the same at 90.8% (BE) in 2005-06.
According to the Railways 90% is an ideal operating ratio as was
during the last decade and is comparable with some of the countries
like China, France etc. However, the Committee desired that the
Railway finances should be monitored and managed continuously and
regularly by keeping check on undesirable expenditure so that the
operating ratio may further improve towards ideal ratio.
Reply of the Government
Traffic earnings for the fiscal year 2004-05, as per the approximate
account are Rs. 46,762 crore. These indicate a significant increase on
account of excellent physical performance. While the ordinary working

26
expenses at Rs. 33,386 crore do indicate an excess expenditure over
the revised estimates, this is mainly on account of the multiple hike
in diesel prices effected during the year. Despite increase in working
expenses, the operating ratio for 2004-05 shows an improvement against
the revised target of 91.2%.
As desired by the Committee, the financial performance of the
Railways is being monitored on regular basis. As stated in reply to
Point No. 184, zonal railways have been instructed to curb undesirable
expenditure. Railways are also working for improving the operating
ratio to an ideal level in the coming year.
Recommendation (Para No. 187)
The Committee found that out of the 32 pairs of new trains
announced in budget 2004-05, only 13 pairs of trains have been
introduced by the Railways till February, 2005. The Ministry of Railways
have assured that all the trains announced in Rail Budget 2004-05
would be introduced during the current financial year itself as proposed
except that of Mansi-Saharsa passenger train where the gauge
conversion work is still going on. The Committee noted that it has
become a usual practice now of Railways to introduce the trains
announced in the budget at the fag end of the financial year, if at all
they are started. They stressed that a quarterly schedule for introduction
of new trains should be prepared for the year and followed accordingly
instead of starting all the announced trains at the fag end of the
financial year.
Reply of the Government
The Committee’s recommendation has been noted and appropriate
action, as deemed fit and feasible, will be taken.
(For Comments of the Committee please see Para 1.15 of Chapter-
I of the Report)
Annual Pan 2005-06
Recommendation (Para No. 191)
The Plan outlays for the year 2005-06 have been estimated at
Rs. 15349 crore, which is short of Rs. 326 crore from the revised
estimates of Rs. 15675 crore of the Annual Plan 2004-05. The Committee,
however, appreciated the fact that the Railways have increased their
share from internal generation by about 25% during the year 2005-06

27
compared to that of the year 2004-05. The share of the internal
generation of the Annual Plan 2005-06 has been projected at
Rs. 4718.19 crore vis-a-vis Rs. 3775.80 crore revised estimates of
2004-05. However, the share of Capital from General Revenues fall
short of about Rs. 1627 crore during the year 2005-06 as compared to
the year 2004-05. The Railways have allocated Rs. 7230 crore during
the year 2005-06 vis-à-vis Rs. 8857 crore provided in the year 2004-05
under the source. The shortage is mainly in the Capital Head. It is a
noteworthy fact that share of resources other than the Internal
Generation and Extra Budgetary Sources (market borrowings/private-
public investments) has substantially increased over the last few years.
The share of resources from General Exchequer has reached almost
53% in the Annual Plan 2005-06. The Committee were informed during
the evidence that about Rs. 2500 crore additional support are also to
be provided by the General Exchequer and about Rs. 2500 crore are
expected to be mobilised through Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) under
the aegis of Rail Vikas Nigam Limited. The Committee were
apprehensive of the phenomena of decreasing share of internal
resources and increasing share of resources outside the Railways’ kitty.
They had reasons to believe that the size of the Annual Plan 2005-06.
vis-a-vis Annual Plan 2004-05 has remained low only because of the
lesser resources mobilised from internal generation. More importantly
it has been noticed that no provision of investment under Build Operate
and Transfer (BOT) either in Rolling Stock or in infrastructure projects
has been made during the year 2005-06. Therefore, the Committee
were concerned about the developmental needs of the Railways in the
light of the growing economy on the one hand and the inadequate
availability of requisite funds due to internal generation with the
Railways on the other hand. They were of the view that it is imperative
for the Railways to recast their priorities and business strategies to
cope up with the emerging demands of the economy as a whole.
They also urged that all out efforts should be made by Ministry of
Railways to enhance their internal generation share of the total
resources.
Reply of the Government
The budgeted net plan outlay for 2005-06 at Rs. 15,349 crore is, no
doubt, Rs. 326 crore less than the revised plan outlay of Rs. 15,675
crore for the previous year. However, the reduction is on account of
decline in the budgetary support extended to the Railways in 2005-06
over 2004-05 (RE). The internal generation component, which was
Rs. 3,106 crore in 2004-05 (RE) has increased to Rs. 3,895 crore in
2005-06 (BE). It is however, to be kept in view that in addition to the

28
Plan outlay of Rs. 15,349 crore for 2005-06, additional funds to the
tune of Rs. 1,365 crore have been sought for the national project of
Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramulla new line and the newly declared
national projects of the North Eastern Region 2004-05 (RE) include
Rs. 700 crore on this account. Release of funds to these is to be made
in the course of the year based on the pace of work. Similarly, the
additional funds of Rs. 358 crore (in addition to Rs. 493 crore included
in Plan outlay) sought for the works being executed by RVNL would
also be released as necessary during the course of the year.
As a result of vigorous efforts made by the Railways in recent
years, the position of internal generation has improved considerably
and internal generation has gone up from Rs. 3,455 crore in 2001-02
to Rs. 6,124 crore in 2005-06 (BE). Out of this internal resources
deployed in the Plan have also increased accordingly. Excluding the
Railways’ contribution to SRSF from its internal resources, the share of
internal resources in Railway’s plan has increased from 20% in
2001-02 to 25% in 2005-06 (BE). It may be noted that excluding the
contribution received from General Exchequer towards Special Railway
Safety Fund and Railway Safety Fund-which are for specific purpose,
the share of Capital from General Exchequer in Railways’ plan has
infact reduced from 43% in 2001-02 to 25% in 2005-06.
The resources made available through BOLT/BOT/OYWS during
the last five years have been less than even Rs. 100 crore. Due to this
no provision of investment under these categories has been made
during the year 2005-06, to be on conservative side. However, a
modified scheme called Wagon Investment Scheme has been introduced
in order to encourage public-private partnership in procurement of
wagons to meet the anticipated incremental freight traffic in the coming
years.
Railways have indeed reshaped their priorities and business
strategies, as outlined in the Budget of 2005-06, to cope up with the
emerging demands of the economy as a whole. In the investment
planned through the annual exercise of Works Programme for the year
2005-06, the focus has been to augment the capacity of the system to
meet the operational requirements and bridge the critical gaps in high
traffic density routes. Instead of spreading the resources thinly over
all the zonal railways, a corridor-wise approach was adopted this year
to meet the requirements of incremental traffic. A prioritisation exercise
of the projects has also been done and approval of the Government
obtained. This will facilitate proper allocation of resources to derive
the fruits of investment in a shorter time span.

29
A number of initiatives mainly in freight business, public-private
partnerships, parcel business and passenger business have been taken
for significantly enhancing the revenues and improving the services to
customers. These include plans to improve throughput through
increased productivity and efficiency, reduction in wagon turn round
time, simplification and rationalization of goods tariff, new premium
registration scheme, rationalization and simplification of preferential
traffic schedule for supply of wagons, electrification of diesel sidings
located on electrified sections, liberalization of engine-on-load scheme,
formulation of Terminal Incentive Scheme, upgradation of facilities at
freight train examination centers, implementation of electronic payment
gateway facility for BTPS and its extension to major customers,
development of private sidings through cost-sharing, integrated
warehouses complexes to provide single window service, etc.
Thus, as brought out above, realizing fully that the Indian Railways
have a critical role in ensuring the continued economic development
of the country, Ministry of Railways have drawn up an ambitious
plan for meeting the increasing and emerging demands of the economy
through the provision of world-class infrastructure and by streamlining
passenger services and initiating a gamut of commercial, operational
and investment-oriented initiatives in the freight sector.
Throughput Enhancement
Recommendation (Para No. 193)
The Railways have at last acknowledged the fact that the efficiency
and productivity of their system can be improved without huge
investment required for their capacity augmentation. This can be done
by decongesting the routes which are over saturated with traffic. By
removing the bottlenecks on these viable routes with small investment
on throughput enhancement work such as deployment of modern
signalling and telecommunication devices, better management of
terminals, doubling of lines, electrification of diesel sidings etc. the
speed of both passenger and goods trains can be increased to 150 km
and 100 km per hour respectively. This will directly result in better
productivity and efficiency of rolling stock and further bring down
their turn around. The Committee were happy to note that the Ministry
of Railways have made a budgetary provision of Rs. 487.59 crore for
the year 2005-06 under the head Traffic Facilities for their throughput
enhancement works. Simultaneously, they also think that with the
improvement in throughput stepping up its investments towards
improving track capacity and 7% growth of GDP in the future, there

30
will be a larger requirement of rolling stock. Therefore, the Railways
should explore the wayout to enhance the axle load as per international
standard alongwith procurement of larger number of rolling stock.
They urge the Ministry of Railways to consider extending present
external dimensions  of wagons so as to enhance the total surface area
and volume of goods that could be transported in wagons. They also
suggested the Ministry to study the feasibility of using aluminium
wagons that can carry an additional 4.2 tonnes of revenue generating
weight than the steel wagons. They stressed that the Railways should
go for all such works which ensure speedy delivery of goods. They
also emphasized that application of Information Technology be
exploited to a great extent to improve the efficiency and productivity
of the Railways.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Railways has initiated series of steps for Capacity
Enhancement, and efficiency and productivity of the system. The works
under “Traffic Facilities” Plan-Head have been given allocation of
Rs. 487.59 crore for 2005-06 which is 32% higher then that of 2004-05.
The Traffic Facilities works are normally small works bringing in
Capacity Enhancement and will be completed on priority. At present
axle load on Indian Railways’ system is limited to 20.32 tonnes. This
in turn limits the carrying capacity of wagons. Only on some selected
sections, wagons with axle load of 22.9 tonnes are operating. High
axle load wagons are able to carry more payload in one train consist
which improves throughput substantially. With minor modifications in
bogie of conventional wagons along with strengthening of body, the
wagons can be permitted to operate at 22.9 tonnes axle load. Open
wagons mainly operation in the coal circuits corrode on account of
combined effect of corrosive acids and high abrasions due to
mechanized loading/unloading corrosion resistant stainless steel
body for open wagons have been inducted to minimise this adverse
effect.
The improved quality of these wagons would enable extension of
the first Periodic Overhaul (POH) to 7.5 years against 6 years and
6 years for subsequent POH against the present 4.5 years. Introduction
of stainless steel body wagons will improve availability of wagons as
corrosion and consequent repairs will be eliminated, enhancing the
life of the asset.
After successful trials Indian Railways will introduce 10000 open
wagons of stainless steel body from 2005-06 at the incremental cost of

31
Rs. 2.25 lakh per wagon over cost of conventional wagons at a total
cost of approximately Rs. 225 crore.
As far as the application of Information Technology on the Indian
Railways is concerned, Computerized Unreserved Ticketing System
(UTS), Passenger Reservation System (PRS), Freight Operating
Information System (FOIS) and Management Information System (MIS)
will be expanded and their remote locations will be linked to Railway
owned Satellite HUB by Remote V-SAT Terminals. Integrated and
Extended National Train Enquiry System will be introduced for the
on-line train running position. This system is targeted to be
commissioned by 2008-09.
Staff Quarters and Amenities for Staff
Recommendation (Para No. 194)
The Committee noted that the policy of Railways is to provide
quarters for essential staff on programmed basis. As on date the
housing satisfaction over Indian Railways is about 48%. For the year
2004-05 the funds allocated for Staff Quarters and Amenities for staff
were Rs. 75 crore and Rs. 65 crore respectively, which were later revised
to Rs. 65 crore and Rs. 73 crore respectively. For 2005-06 the same has
been projected to Rs. 80 crore and Rs. 93 crore respectively. However
the Committee were concerned about the pathetic, shabby and
unhygienic conditions of quarters, especially for running staff,
safaiwallas and C&D category staff. They were informed that Ministry
of Railways have gone for 10 years Corporate Welfare Plan in this
regard. Also a ‘Quality Audit Team’ has been set up to monitor the
quality of work being done for construction of staff quarters. The
Committee stressed that the Corporate Welfare Plan of the Ministry
should be implemented promptly to improve the housing conditions
viz. sanitation, drainage, clean water supply, other additions/alterations
and upgradation of substandard quarters of the staff. They had also
emphasized that the Quality Audit Team should effectively monitor
the quality of construction work of these quarters regularly. In addition
to this, a senior officer from the Zonal Railway should visit the staff
colonies periodically to see the works being undertake in these colonies
and submit his report to the Railway Board.
Reply of the Government
Progressively increasing allotments under Demand no. 11 (MH-
500-Residential Building-Repairs and Maintenance and Welfare) were
made during the last four years raising from Rs. 483 crore in 2000-01

32
to Rs. 576 crore in 2003-04. Increasing funds are being provided under
the Plan Heads—“Staff Quarters” and “Amenities for Staff” for
construction of staff quarters both on new/replacement accounts and
for improvements to staff quarters. Higher allotments have been given
to above Plan Heads during the last five years raising from
Rs. 60 crore in 2000-01 to Rs. 80 crore in 2005-06.
Out of about 1.40 lakh sub-standard quarters as reported by the
Zonal Railways in 1996, about 75000 substandard quarters have already
been improved. Based on the Zonal Railways report, there are still
about 65000 substandard quarters requiring standardization. In
compliance with the announcement of the Hon’ble Minister for
Railways through Railway Budget Speech 2005-06, a Corporate Welfare
Plan is under formulation for paying special attention towards
maintenance and improvement of substandard quarters as also Railway
colonies including roads, sewerage, drainage, lighting etc. Relevant data
is under collection. On receipt f complete data from the Zonal Railways,
Corporate Welfare Plan spreading over a period of ten years will be
formulated in consultation with the Union Federation. This is likely to
take about three more months.
As regard suggestion of the Committee to ensure that the Quality
Audit Team should effectively monitor the quality of construction works
of the staff quarters, necessary instructions in this regard have been
issued to all the Zonal Railways for compliance.
As regard periodical inspection of staff colonies/quarters by a
Senior Officer of the Zonal Railways to see the works being undertaken
in the colonies and submit of its report to the Railway Board, it is
stated that it may not practically feasible to monitor all such inspections
at the apex level of the Railways. However, instructions have been
reiterated to Railways to perform adequate higher level checks on
colony maintenance.
(For Comments of the Committee please see Para 1.29 of
Chapter-I of the Report)

33
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation [Para No. 180 (vii)]
The Committee stressed that apart from optimum utilisation of
assets proper, adequate and timely maintenance norms should be laid
down for zero failure of fixed installations and rolling stock. This, in
turn, may yield not only safe transit and travel but also improve
reliability, productivity and capacity.
Reply of the Government
With regard to Electric Locomotives, it is submitted that
Maintenance schedule of rolling stock as well as fixed installation are
being followed, based on the recommendations/guidelines issued by
RDSO. In addition, relevant sections contained in manual of AC traction
are also being followed.
Besides this, yearly reliability action plan is drawn by the Railways
to bring down asset failure and further improve the reliability index
achieved.
Corporate Safety Plan 2003-2013 also envisages reduction in failure
incidents, which will lead to increase in safety of operation and improve
asset reliability. Based on the Action Plan contained in the Corporate
Safety Plan to reduce asset failures, committees have been set up and
strategies formulated for achieving minimum level of failures.
As regards Signalling, Maintenance norms for conventional
preventive maintenance already exist. Zero failure of fixed installation
is a very comprehensive subject requiring online continuous monitoring
of parameters of assets. Any degradation in specified parameters of
the assets is pre-warned and preventive action is taken before the
failure takes place. This concept is being gradually inducted using
data loggers.
Recommendation {Para No. 180 (ix)}
The Committee emphasised to adopt a policy of modernising the
system with state of the art technology and provide proper training to

34
the large unskilled manpower so that they could be utilised for the
betterment of the Railways. Intensive training programme for
behavioural changes in the operational as well as the commercial staff
should be undertaken.
Reply of the Government
Continuous training of staff at various stages is being given due
attention to cater to the rising customer expectations, to assimilate
rapid technological changes taking place within the system and also
to provide the necessary motivation to the staff. Training plan for the
railway staff is divided into initial, promotional, refresher and
specialized type of courses. Training courses have been designed both
for Group ‘C’ & ‘D’ staff to continuously upgrade their knowledge
and skills.
A comprehensive training need analysis of all categories of staff is
done through a serious of meeting with Principals of training centres
on a regular basis. Based on the feedback received, training modules
are modified/revised to suit the training requirement of staff.
Training in ‘Customer Care’ for initiating behavioural changes in
staff coming in contact with public are being organised. This is arranged
with special emphasis on behavioural aspects of customer-service
provider interface.
Funds have been provided to training centres to upgrade their
training aids, models, equipment, etc. in line to undertake the changing
technology within the Railways.
Efforts are also made to use IT enabled equipment to develop
better training contents and effective dissemination of the same amongst
the staff.
Freight
Recommendation (Para No. 181)
The target for originating revenue earning freight traffic for the
year 2003-04 kept at 540 MT was revised to 550 MT at the revised
estimates stage. The actual achievement make during the year was
557.39 MT which was 7.39 MT more than the revised estimates and
38.65 MT more than the performance in 2002-03. Similarly, the freight
loading target for the year 2004-05 has been increased to 600 MT at
revised estimates stage as against the Budget Estimates of 580 MT.

35
During the year 2005-06, a target of 635 MT has been projected for
freight loading as the buoyancy in traffic is expected to be maintained
during this year also as in 2004-05 on account of uniform growth path
in economy of the country. As compared to 684.8 in 2004-05, a slightly
lower lead of 680.4 has been projected for 2005-06. The Committee
found that the Railways were not estimating the freight traffic
realistically at the Budget Estimates stage and enhancing the targets
subsequently at Revised Estimates stage. They were of the opinion
that incremental loading should also be taken into account while
projecting the target for the next fiscal year.
Reply of the Government
The target for revenue earning originating freight loading is
prepared based on the broad indications obtained from the various
user sectors. In addition, the performance in previous years are also
taken into consideration, which is utilised for firming up of the target.
The projection for lead is also made on the basis of indications of
pattern of traffic which emerges during interaction with the various
user sectors. The target for average lead has been fixed as 680 Kms
for 2005-06 as compared to the average lead of 683 kms (prov.) for
2004-05. A slightly lower lead has been fixed based on the indication
given by the Food Sector that 2005-06 may not witness export of
foodgrain. Foodgrain movement from northern region for export helps
railways in improving its average lead, the absence of which will
have its negative impact over the average lead. Therefore, slightly
lower target for lead has been fixed.
New Trains
Recommendation (Para No. 186)
The Committee found that 54 new trains have been announced in
the Budget 2005-06 besides extension of 28 trains and increasing the
frequencies of 10 trains. Time and again the Committee have raised
their apprehensions over the announcement of new trains on a system
which is already over stressed. The Railways network has expanded
at a very slow pace. The total route length has expanded only 9544
kms. from 1950-051 to 2002-03. However, new trains are announced
every year invariably without enhancing requisite infrastructure to bear
additional burden, which results in further congestion on the already
over loaded tracks and further cut in the time available for
maintenance. The Committee further noted that new trains are
announced without taking into account the feasibility of their operation.

36
The Ministry of Railways have stated that the new trains announced
in the Rail Budget are introduced during the course of that financial
year subject to availability of resources & operational feasibility. All
54 new trains announced during 2005-06 would be introduced by
31st March, 2006. In cases where major infrastructural changes are
required like gauge-conversion, new line, additional platform & pit
lines at originating/terminating stations, introduction will be done after
completion of work. The Committee did not appreciate the eagerness
with which the announcement of new trains are generally made in the
Budget. They desired that before announcing the new trains all pre-
requisites such as the infrastructure capability to bear stress, capacity
enhancement through acquisition of rolling stock commensurate with
the growth of passenger traffic, the provision of adequate time for
maintenance of assets/rolling stock apart from public demand on the
route be worked out to justify announcement of new trains in the
Railway Budget. In case the new trains are not operationally and
financially feasible, the announcement of the same should be kept in
abeyance until appropriate time.
Reply of the Government
Introduction of passenger carrying trains over Indian Railways is
a continuous process. All the pre-requisites like availability of demand,
path, maintenance infrastructure & Rolling Stocks, commercial
justification, Manpower requirement etc. are considered in the Inter
Railway Time Table Committee Meeting (IRCTC) before the
announcement in Rail Budget every year. The decision taken during
the IRTC meeting for introduction of new trains, increase in frequency
of trains, extension of trains and services on completion of gauge
conversion and new line project form the basis for annual working
timetable that gives minutes to minutes details of train running.
Further, for improvement in line capacity works mechanised track
maintenance is resorted to instead of conventional manual maintenance.
Line capacity works are taken up from time to time to provide
additional line capacity on a particular route to meet the demand of
increase in traffic. These works include doubling/multiple line projects,
traffic facility works, signal improvement works etc. Apart from this,
new line and gauge conversion projects also create additional capacity
for movement/diversion of trains. A thrust has been given to
expeditiously complete the ongoing doubling and traffic facility works
and other capacity improvement works to create additional capacity
for movement of trains.

37
Commissioning of new lines; gauge conversion, doubling works
etc. increases the aspiration of people so much that it becomes
imperative to connect the new sections, gauge converted section with
other parts of the country, Normally the demand far exceeds the
resources available, therefore, utmost care is taken while announcing
the new trains. At the same time, to meet the public demand, the
existing trains are also augmented as far as possible. The new train
services announced in Rail Budget are introduced during the course
of that particular financial year only after all the related works are
completed. However very few train services could not be introduced
due to unforeseen circumstances like floods, earthquakes, law & order
problems, elections etc. but they are introduced later on completion of
all the formalities.
Recommendation (Para No. 189)
The Committee further found that a number of concessions have
been announced by the Minister of Railways in his budget speech
2005-06 adding to the already existing concessions to various categories
of persons. They opined that since the passenger services are
intrinsically loss making to the extent of 14.4 paise per passenger Km.
there is an urgent need to not only contain but also substantially
reduce the negative impact of passenger services on the financial health
of the Railways. They desired that concessions should be announced
for only those categories where it is utterly necessary.
Reply of the Government
In the Budget Speech 2005-06, concessions were announced for the
following four categories of persons:
Category Concession
Kisans & Milk  Producers-visit to National 50% concession in Second class
level institutes for learning/training (not sleeper)
Entrance exam-Girls of Govt. schools in 75% concession in Second class
rural areas-for National level entrance (not sleeper)
exam for medical engineering, etc.
Students of Govt. schools in rural areas-for 75% concessions in Second Class
study tour once a year (not sleeper)
Unemployed youth to attend interviews for Full concession in Second class (not
State Govt. jobs sleeper)

38
It will be observed that concession has been extended to only
deserving categories of persons and that too in lowest class of travel.
Recommendation (Para No. 195)
The Committee noted that the perishable items such as vegetables,
fruits, beetle leaves etc. have to rebook at different stations for onward
transmission. This has caused a lot of difficulties to the railway
customers. The Committee desired that the earlier system should be
restored in booking of these perishable items.
Reply of the Government
Railway’s first and foremost responsibility towards the passengers
is to provide them with adequate passenger amenities including
convenience and safety of their movement on the platform while
boarding and alighting from the trains whose number is increasing
tremendously. Heaps of parcels lying on the platforms at various
railway stations is a serious impediment to the free and safe movement
of travelling public and Railways are coming in for severe criticism on
this account.
In the larger public interest and for the convenience and safety of
travelling public and their free movement on passengers’ platform,
maintenance of punctuality of trains, reduction in over-carriage of
parcels, reduction in transit time of parcels and overall decongestion
of platforms at railway stations, booking and carriage of parcels by
passenger carrying trains has been rationalised in February, 2004. As
per the rationalisation, transhipment of packages from one train to
another, during transit, is not permitted except for one change-of-gauge.
Booking of parcels from and to intermediate stations of a train is also
not permitted if that train stops for less than five minutes at those
stations so as to avoid detention to trains on account of loading/
unloading of parcels, causing avoidable inconvenience to passengers.
This also reduces the chances of over carriage of parcels.
Transhipment of parcels from one train to another involves blocking
of platform after unloading; removal of the packages from one platform
to another platform for the connecting trains again blocking the
platform space till the packages are re-loading. It has, therefore, been
decided that parcels should be booked to their destination by a direct
train and promptly removed from the platform after they are unloaded
to avoid inconvenience to passengers.

39
The rationalisation will reduce the overall transit time of parcels,
which is to the interest of the trade and industry. While there may be
certain pairs of points, which are not served by direct trains or a
particular road-side station may have inadequate halt of trains. In
such circumstances, the trade can organise movement of parcels by
creating hubs at nearby important centers. Movement of parcels can
be easily organized by direct trains from one hub to another.
Aggregation and disaggregation of traffic can be done to and from
road-side stations to the hubs created at nearby major stations. In fact,
the hub and spoke system of transportation is progressively being
adopted by many rail users to cut down wasteful utilization of
transport capacity as also to reduce the overall transit time with
minimum damage and loss during transit.

40
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 188)
The Committee found that at times when the time tables of running
trains are rescheduled, it causes more inconvenience to the passengers
rather than benefiting them. They desired that the representative of
people and the Passenger forums be invited well in time to the IRTTC
meeting for their suggestions before any change is carried out in the
timings of the already existing/running trains to avoid inconvenience
to the travelling public. The Ministry should also reschedule the time
tables in such a manner that their earnings are raised to a higher
level.
Reply of the Government
As regards rescheduling of trains, it is stated that before changing
the timings of trains, Zonal Railways consult the passenger
associations, members of ZRUCC and people’s representatives and do
take their views into account before effecting the changes. Care is also
taken to ensure that a rescheduling does not lead to inconvenience in
form of missing of connections at junctions, etc. Rescheduling of trains
at times are necessitated due to operational reasons. However, the
exercise of rescheduling of trains is done mainly to realize the twin
aims of catering passengers in a better way and earn more revenue
also to ensure smooth operation of trains. Inviting passengers forums
at the IRTTC meeting is neither feasible nor desirable, as the discussions
at the meeting and the decisions arrived thereat from the basis for
preparation of Railway Budget, a secret document until it is laid in
the Parliament.
(For Comments of the Committee please see Para 1.21 of Chapter-
I of the Report)
Annual Plan 2004-05
Recommendation (Para No. 190)
The plan outlay for the year 2004-05 has been revised to Rs. 15675
crore from Rs. 14498 crore basically on account of an increase of about

41
Rs. 1137 crore under Budgetary Support Resource. Contrary to this
increase there has been a reduction of Rs. 407.66 crore in the Extra
Budgetary Resources. However, the plan outlay under the Internal
Resource did not witness any substantial change at the revised stage.
The expenditure incurred upto December, 2004 was found to the order
of Rs. 10197.41 crore which is approximately 65% of the total revised
estimate of Rs. 15675 crore. Though plan outlays for major heads like
New Lines, Gauge Conversion, Signalling & Telecom Works and
Electrification Projects have been increased, the physical targets under
the heads new lines, gauge conversion and doubling have been revised
downward. Moreover, the physical targets achieved upto December,
2004 under these heads have been realised to the order of about 50%
of the revised targets under New Line, 20% under Gauge Conversion,
30% under Electrification and about 37% under Doubling.
The Committee have noted that despite a substantial Capital
Support from the General Exchequer, the Railways have not been able
to manage their developmental Plan 2004-05. Though the Capital
Support has contributed about 56% of the total Annual Plan, the
physical targets under important Plan Heads such as New Lines, Gauge
Conversion and Electrification have contrarily been reduced. Moreover,
the expenditure incurred upto December, 2004 has been assessed about
65% of the revised estimates, which shows a very slow pace of
expenditure during the initial three quarters of the year 2004-05. The
Committee further noticed that the Railway’s Plan seems to be
propelled by the Capital Support being received from the General
Exchequer instead of the resources managed by the Railways either
through internal generation or by public/private investment initiatives/
market borrowings. The Committee had over the last five years
observed that the Railways do not reflect the requisite delivery instinct.
Despite the pumping of huge resources into the development needs,
the Railways could not produce any mile stones or show any
significant/remarkable change. They were of the considered view that
the Railways should manage their plan in a more professionalised
way rather than the traditional one being practised currently. They
further stressed that financial and physical targets of Railway should
move in direct proportion.
Reply of the Government
During 2004-05 target for completion of 273 kms of New Line,
999 kms Gauge Conversion and 38.1 kms of doublings was fixed at
the Budget stage. However, only 150 kms of New Line, 779 kms of

42
Gauge Conversion and 282 kms of Doublings i.e. total 1211 kms of BG
Railway Lines against target of 1655 kms could be completed during
the year. The progress has been less because of following reasons:
(a) Non-deposition of share by the State Governments for cost
sharing projects.
(b) Delay in land acquisition and forestry clearance.
(c) Unprecedented hike in steel prices, as a result of which
several contracts had to be terminated.
(d) Slow progress against contracts on various reasons by the
contractors.
(e) Delay in supply of PSC sleepers, Elastic Rail Clips due to
hike in steel prices.
As far as Railway electrification is concerned, during 2004-05, total
320 RKM were electrified against the target of 375 RKM. The shortfall
is marginal. However, the target of 1800 RKM for X Plan will be
achieved as only 521 RKM are required to be electrified in the balance
2 years of the Plan.
Penal/Route Relay/Electronic Inter locking have been
commissioned at 351 stations against the target of 300 stations which
is an all time high. Track circuiting has been commissioned at
1545 locations against a target of 1264 locations which includes all
time high of 853 locations commissioned under SRSF. Rehabilitation
works have been done at an all time high of 262 stations against the
target of 234 stations. Interlocking of Level Crossing (LC) gates have
been provided at 325 LC gates against a target of 300 LC gates thus
exceeding the targets.
The increase in allocation/expenditure under various plan heads
has been mainly for taking up activities on large number of projects
and expediting progress on some of the projects which could be
targeted for completion in the coming years.
(For Comments of the Committee please see Paras 1.25 & 1.26 of
Chapter-I of the Report)

43
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation [Para No. 180 (viii)]
The Committee stressed that Ministry should accelerate programme
of containerisation to enhance their multi-model transport and catering
to high volume traffic.
Reply of the Government
In order to meet the growing demand for container trains,
organisations other than Container Corporation of India will also be
considered for movement of container traffic. The Ministry is having
this subject studied by a professional agency after which the Ministry
of Railways will issue the policy.
Road Safety Works
Recommendation (Para No. 192)
Basically road safety works consist of (i) Road Over Bridge/Road
Under Bridge and (ii) Level Crossings. Resources for these two Plan
Head Works are mobilised through diesel cess share the Railways are
getting from the total diesel cess being collected and distributed by
the Central Government. As far as the works relating to Road Over
Bridge/Road Under Bridge is concerned, there is a mutual agreement
between the Indian Railways and concerned State to share the cost of
these works on 50:50 basis. The proper bridge on the railway lines are
not prepared by the Railways while the approach road on both sides
of this proper bridge is supposed to be completed by the concerned
State. However, the Railways release their share only after ensuring a
marching release by the State concerned. Due to severe financial crunch
being faced by most of the States, the works related to ROBs/RUBs
gets suffered. To address this constraint, the Railways have opined
that in case the Central Government is ready to pass on the requisite
share of diesel cess of concerned State directly to the Railways then
there will be no problem of matching release of funds and the works
will get completed on time. By doing so, the safety in the system will
go a long way improving the Railway’s credibility. During the year

44
2004-05 at the revised stage, Rs. 251 crore were estimated to be incurred
on these works, however till December, 2004, only Rs. 48.75 crore
could be spent, which shows snail’s pace of progress. The Committee
had many a time squarely fathomed this problem and impressed upon
the Ministry in their earlier Reports to expedite there works by
exploring alternative way outs to the aforesaid funding problem.
However, no viable way out has been explore till date. Considering
the Safety in the Railways system as sacrosanct area, the Committee
urged the Ministry to approach the Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA) as early as possible so that one time solution for such
stalemate of funding of these works may be found out. The Committee
noted that under the present criteria of sharing the cost of construction
of ROB/RUB with the State Governments at 50:50 is not working
properly due to financial crisis being faced by the State Government.
They, therefore, desired that the Railways should workout the feasibility
of bearing the expenditure on ROB/RUB at 75:25 ratio with the State
Government.
Reply of the Government
Action is this direction has already been initiated following
Standing Committee on Railways earlier recommendations given in
their 7th Report during consideration of Demands for Grants 2004-05.
The Committee has desired that Railway should bear the entire cost of
construction of ROBs/RUBs instead of depending upon State Govts.
to bear their 50% share of cost as the State Govts. generally remain
facing financial crunch. To enable Railways, Committee had suggested
that Railway’s share from CRF be increased and they should be
exempted from paying the central cess on their consumption of Diesel
and Petrol. Funds so accumulated/saved be utilised on construction
of ROB/RUBs. For implementation of these recommendations
Committee had opined that Railways should raise the issue with
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for their consideration.
Accordingly, Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance have
already been approached by the Ministry of Railways vide CRB’s DO
Letter No. 2004/CE-I/Misc./5 (CRF)/pt. dt. 04.05.2005 but their
response is still awaited. On receipt of views from Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance matter shall be placed before
Cabinet for decision.
Present recommendation of Standing Committee regarding
feasibility of bearing of expenditure on ROB/RUB at 7 ROB/RUB at
75:25 ratio with State Govt. shall be examined after receipt of earlier
reference made to Planning Commission and Finance Ministry as
indicated above.

45
Recommendation (Para No. 196)
The Committee desired that the Egmore station be connected with
Central Chennai Railway Station as early as possible by completing
the already sanctioned broad gauge line between these two stations so
that the commuters from Southern Chennai travelling towards
North India may board trains from Egmore Station itself.
Reply of the Government
The Government of Tamil Nadu is not prepared to share the cost
of this line in the ratio of 50-50 and also due to other technical and
economic reasons, this project is under reconsideration of the Ministry
of Railways.
  N
EW D ELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA,
17 February, 2006 Chairman,
28 Magha, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

46
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18th January, 2006 from
1500 hours to 1600 hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia —  Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Dhirendra Agarwal
3. Shri Subrata Bose
4. Smt. Paramjeet Kaur Gulshan
5. Shri Anwar Hussain
6. Shri Mahesh Kanodia
7. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan
8. Mohd. Tahir
Rajya Sabha
9. Smt. Kamla Manhar
10. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee
11. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi
12. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy
13. Shri Abani Roy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri V .S. Negi — Director
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Assistant Director
2.*** *** ***
3. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the draft
Action Taken Report on the action taken by the Government on the

47
observations/recommendations contained in the 8th Report on
‘Demands for Grants (2005-06)’ and adopted the same without any
amendment.
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports
after making consequential changes, if any, arising out of factual
verification by the Ministry of Railways or otherwise and present the
same to the House.
The Committee then adjourned.

48
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
8TH REPORT (14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS (2005-06)’
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 31
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been 20
accepted by Government:
Para Nos. 180, 180(i), 180(ii), 180(iv), 180(v),
180(vi), 180(x), 180(xi), 180(xii), 180(xiii), 180(xiv),
182-185, 187, 191, 193 and 194.
Percentage of total 64.5%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the 6
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of Government replies:
Para Nos. 180(vii), 180(ix), 181, 186, 189
and 195.
Percentage of total 19%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 2
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee which require
reiteration:
Para Nos. 188 and 190.
Percentage of total 6.5%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 3
which final replies of Government are still
awaited:
Para Nos. 180(viii), 192 and 196.
Percentage of total 10%