         
24 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2006-07) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
‘LAND MANAGEMENT’ 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

 2
 
 
 
 
SCR No. 107 
  
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2006-07) 
 
  
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
‘LAND MANAGEMENT’ 
   
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  28.11.2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    29.11.2006 
 
             
  
             
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

 3
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  
  
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2.       Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3 Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4 Shri Atiq Ahamad 
5          Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
6 Shri Ramdas B. Athawale  
7 Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8 Shri H.D. Devegowda 
9. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
10. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
12. Shri Anwar Hussain 
13. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
14. Ch. Lal Singh 
15. Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato  
16. Shri Ananta Nayak 
17. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
18. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
19. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
20. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
21. Shri K. Subbarayan  
22. Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.       Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
23. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri R. Kamraj 
28. Shri Isam Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
4. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Assistant Director 
5. Shri U.C. Bharadwaj  - Committee Officer   
 
(iii) 

 4
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….   (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….    (v) 
 
PART – I 
 
Report 
 
Chapter-I - Introductory. .………………………………………………………...   1  
  
Chapter-II - Miscellaneous Usage of Railways……………………………….    7 
 
Chapter-III - Development of Surplus Lands and Encroachment of  
          Railway Land ……………………………………………………….  12 
 
Recommendations/Observations………………………………………………   22 
 
PART-II 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways         
held on  16.06.2006        ……………..  30 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways  
held on  13.07.2006       ……………...  32 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways 
held on  28.09.2006       ……………… 34 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 5
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I,  the Chairman of  the Standing Committee on Railways (2006-07), having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty 
Fourth Report of the Committee on ‘Land Management’. 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the repres entatives of the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board) on 16.06.2006 and  13.07.2006. 
  
3. The Committee considered and adopted t he Report at their sitting held on 
28.09.2006. Minutes of the sittings held  on 16.06.2006, 13. 07.2006 and 28.09.2006 
form Part-II of the Report.   
 
4. The Committee wish to express their th anks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board), for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the 
material and information which the Co mmittee desired in connection with the 
examination of the subject ‘Land Manageme nt’ and sharing with them the issues 
concerning the subject which came up for discussion during evidence. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                          BASUDEB ACHARIA 
          November, 2006                                                                     Chairman, 
          Agrahayana, 1928 Saka                              Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 6
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
Introductory – Railway Land 
 
  Railway land has been defined under the Railways (A mendment) Act, 2005  as 
‘ a n y  l a n d  i n  w h i c h  a  G o v e r n m e n t  R a i l w a y  h a s  a n y  r i g h t ,  t i t l e  o r  i n t e r e s t ’ .   O v e r  t h e  
years, Railways have been acquiring land for operation of trains. Railways have 4.31 
lakh hectares of land as on  1.4.2006.  Some of these land  has been provided by the 
State Governments free of cost  or on nomi nal charges and rest of the land has been 
acquired by the Railways from the State Governments for the public purpose after 
paying compensation.  The Railways are th e owner as well as the lessee of the land 
available with them.  The break-up of the usage of railway land as on 1.4.2004 was  as 
under:- 
 
S.No. Land  Use  Area (in 
lakh 
hectare) 
Percentage of 
Total land 
holding 
(i) Track and structures including 
stations, colonies etc. 
3.26 75.7 
(ii) Afforestation 0.45 10.5 
(iii) ‘Grow More Food’ Scheme 0.06 1.4 
(iv) Commercial licensing  0.03 0.7 
(v) Other uses like pisciculture 0.03 0.8 
(vi) Encroachment 0.02 0.5 
(vii) Vacant Land  0.44 10.4 
 Total 4.31  
 
 
1.2 The above table shows that percentage-w ise only 75.7 per cent of land is under 
use for operation and allied purposes like track, stations, training establishments, 
production units, stores, godowns, staff quarters and colonies.  Remaining land is either 
vacant or under miscellaneous use such as afforestation, grow more food etc. 

 7
   
1.3 On being asked to furnish the details of the land holdings by each Zone as on 
31.3.2006, the Ministry of Railways in a written reply furnished the details as under:-  
 
(in hectares) 
Railway Total land  
Central Railway 27580.32 
Eastern Railway 20764.81 
East Central Railway 33611.71 
East Coast Railway  12620.27 
Northern Railway  38865 
North Central Railway 15051 
North Eastern Railway 25648.21 
Northeast Frontier Railway 43224 
North Western Railway 23922 
Southern Railway  25540 
South Central Railway 27516 
South Eastern Railway 42113.61 
South East Central Railway 24145 
South Western Railway 13424 
Western Railway 34575 
West Central Railway 23255 
Total  431854 
  
 
1.4 On being further asked to furnish the de tails of land use of the railway land in 
consonance to the latest figure s of land holdings, the representative of the Ministry 
stated during the evidence:-  
“Some land will get added. Because of the new projects which we have 
taken up, some more acquisition woul d have taken place. It would take 
some time to give an updated figure.” 
 
1.5 In acquisition of land, Railways are following the pro cedure laid down in  the 
Provisions of Land Acquisition Act, 1984.  Acti on like publication of Preliminary Notice 
under Section 4(1) of Land Acquisition Ac t, declaration under Section 6(1), award 
enquiry, passing of final award, disbursement  of payment etc. are done by competent 
authority  of the State Government (District Collector/Special Land Acquisition Officer as 

 8
the case may be). The assessed approximate land acquisition cost including 
solatium and interest etc. as per statutory provision is deposited in advance with the 
State Government by Railways.   
 
Management of railway land 
 
1.6 Railway lands are  the important and basic business inputs of the Railways and 
therefore, requires proper management of  the same for its optimum utilization. 
Railways are managing their lands through their  Engineering Department which is 
regarded as the custodian of such lands.  To give more impetus to the management of 
railway land, the Railway Board vide letter No.96/LML/14/74 dated 10.09.2001 had 
advised all the Zonal Railways to form Land Management Cell to deal with entire issues 
of land management which include commerci al licensing, afforestation, plantation, 
prevention of encroachments, maintenance of land records etc. and related court cases.  
Accordingly, each Zonal Railway has set up  a Land Management Cell carving out their 
Engineering Department. These cells  are ma naged by a Senior Administrative Grade 
Officer and supported by a Junior Administrative Grade Officer along with Law Assistant 
and other supporting staff.   
 
1.7 Responding to the query of the Committee about efficacy of the Land 
Management Cells, the Ministry in a written re ply stated  that  by and large these Cells 
are functioning satisfactorily and are fully en gaged in implementing the policy relating 
to licensing/leasing of railway land, commerc ial development of railway land/air-space, 
afforestation, removal of encroachment, verification of land records, recovery of licence 
fee and liquidation of arrears, dealing with litigation, fencing/providing boundary pillars 
along railway land etc.     
 
1.8 On being asked whether there would be any change in the functions, authority 
and area of functions of Management Cell after the constitution of Rail Land 
Development Authority (RLDA), the representati ve of the Ministry stated that after Rail 
Land Development Authority  starts functioning, only  the work of commercial 

 9
development of vacant, surplus and land which do not have any immediate use, 
such railway land/ airspace will be entrusted to RLDA. Remaining works will continue to 
be handled by Land Management Cells on  Railways and in Railw ay Board. The basic 
management of land, keeping the land free from all kinds of encroachment, drawing up 
schemes from time to time particularly not in urban areas, the way side stations would 
remain within the charge of Land Management Cell. 
 
1.9 The Ministry of Railways further  informed the Committee that since officers 
dealing with  Land Management cells are also  entrusted with some other 
responsibilities and therefore, additional staff and officers are required to be engaged in 
land management work. The Zonal Railways ha ve been directed to augment the staff 
strength from the available resources.    
 
1.10 When asked to state as to why the removal of encroa chment and completion of 
land records has been kept outside th e purview of the proposed Development 
Authority, the Ministry stated in a writte n reply that the Railways would be able to 
handle this job more effectiv ely rather than entrusting th is work to the Authority who 
will have to create vast netw ork of staff and wherewithal to  deal with the management 
of encroachments.  In fact  the Authority is proposed to be set up with minimum 
number of officers and staff and would not be equipped to deal with removal of 
encroachments.  Moreover, withou t the transfer of title of la nd to the Authority, it may 
not be vested with competen t Authority to remove encroachments from railway land. 
Similarly, land records can only be completed after certification of the same by Revenue 
authorities which requires joint verification of the site by Railways and Revenue officials 
in different talukas, districts, towns falling in different Zonal Railways.   This work will 
require vast network of staff to deal with  the quantum of work which the proposed 
Authority will not have. 
 
Recording, Certification and Computerization of Railway Land 
1.11 The up to date Land R ecords Register and Land Boun dary Verification Register 
are  maintained by the Zonal Railways in the Chief Engineer’s office and Divisions as per 

 10
prescribed proforma in whic h details such as acquisition etc. are shown. Complete 
land records are maintained by the Divisional Engineers. The method adopted by the 
Railways in monitoring these land record is that  during  consolidation and settlement of 
operations by Revenue authorities, the Sect ion Engineers ensure that railway land is 
kept intact in Revenue record s.  He also by regular inspection ensures that boundary 
demarcation is properly done and maintain ed.  Whenever any discrepancy is found, 
same is reported to the high er officers who initiate steps to rectify the situation. The 
zone-wise details as on April, 2006  with regard to the total land plan, compilation made 
so far,   certification by State Revenue authorities and computerization is as under:- 
 
Railway Total 
Plans 
Availability Certification Computeri-
zation 
Central Railway 5378 5277 5156 5156 
Eastern Railway 6022 5988 4742 0 
East Central Railway 5256 5256 3882 3660 
East Coast Railway 1891 1838 1773 1326 
Northern Railway 5232 5232 4003 3238 
North Central Railway 3333 3171 2622 3171 
North Eastern Railway 1697 1696 1696 1247 
Northeast Frontier Railway 3085 3085 3021 2992 
North Western Railway 2029 1960 1723 1527 
Southern Railway 4009 4009 3653 3873 
South Central  Railway 3120 3037 2422 3037 
South East Railway 3284 3260 2881 3260 
South East Central Railway 831 818 759 809 
South  Western Railway 1736 1723 1723 564 
Western Railway 2915 2860 2353 2773 
West Central Railway 2742 2135 569 2078 
Total 52560 51345 42978 38711 
 
The original computerized land plan records are kept in the headquarter of Zonal 
Railways and copies in the Divisions.   
 
 

 11
 
1.12 Asked as to why the works related to computerization and certification of land 
plans is comparatively very slow in some Railways and no computerization at all in 
Eastern Railway and also by when the proce ss of computerization would be completed, 
the Ministry stated that due to greater th rust in the past three years, almost 90% 
certified plans have been computerized.  Cons equent to creation of seven new zones in 
2003-04, land plans had to be transferred fr om one Railway to another.  This has 
affected the progress of comp uterization.  Now it has again been taken up in right 
earnest by the Railways.  In Eastern Railway progress of computerization will improve in 
coming months, as the work shall be outs ourced soon. As soon as the tender is 
finalized, work will start. Railways have taken it as a mission area to complete 
computerization within a year or so. As certification of land plans is a continuous 
exercise and progress in this regard depends to a large exte nt on the cooperation from 
State Government authorities, fixing a target  date for the same may not be feasible.  
However, the position is being monitored on a monthly basis. 
 
1.13 When asked about making information regarding railway land plan available 
online, the Ministry stated that currently th ere is no proposal to make the information 
available online.  However, data on land plans showing the position of availability, 
certification, computerization, etc. will be hoisted on Indian Ra ilways website in the 
near future.  
 

 12
 
CHAPTER-II 
MISCELLANEOUS USAGE OF RAIL LANDS 
 
 Out of 431854 hectares of land with Railways as on 31. 3.2006 about 13.4 per 
cent  land holdings are  under miscellaneous usage viz. afforestation, grow more food, 
commercial licensing, commercial plantation an d pisciculture etc.  The policy of the 
Railway in this regard has been  as under:- 
 
(i) Afforestation of Railway Land   
 
2.2 For over last 5 decades, tree plantation  has been undertaken on vacant railway 
land along the railway tracks as well as near some workshops and colonies etc. through 
departmental/contractual efforts bringing  over 45187 hectares i. e. 10.5 per cent of 
railway land under the green cover. As a ma tter of policy, railway land in mid-section 
was, till now, being entrus ted to the State Forest De partments for undertaking 
afforestation.  Plantation was done by the Forest Department at locations jointly 
approved between the Railways and the Forest  D e p a r t m e n t s .  T h o u g h  t h i s  h e l p e d  i n  
providing green cover, Railways have had prob lems with the State Forest Departments, 
like non-execution of agreemen ts, denial of legitimate a ccess for undertaking routine 
safety works  connected with railway operations , difficulties in getting back the land for 
Railway purposes. 
 
During the year 2005-06 about 108 lakh tr ees were planted on railway land.  A 
target of tree plantation of 120 lakh trees is fixed for the year 2006-07. 
 
(ii) Plantation of Jatropha Curcas for producing Bio-diesel  
 
2.3  Zonal Railways have been asked to take  up plantation of ‘Jatropha Curcas’ 
through departmental effort on a massive sc ale by the side of the railway track and 
other areas also.  A target of 72 lakh sapl ings has been kept for the year 2006-07.  

 13
Railways has also entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with IOC 
for plantation of Jatropha Curcas for producing an environm ent friendly fuel, bio-diesel 
for use by Indian Railway.  Under this MOU,  500 hectares of land shall be leased to 
IOC. So far, 180 hectares has been handed over and plantation has been completed in 
about 48 hectares. 
 
2.4 When asked who would ca rry out the plantations and how the revenue would be 
shared, the Member (Engineering), Railway Board informed the Committee during 
evidence as under: 
 
“This was the first project taken up.  Su bsequently we found that there are so 
many other parties other than IOC who were  also interested in this Mission.  We 
wanted that plantation, care and mainte nance should be done by the party.  
They should also set up extr action plant.  Out of sale proceeds, they should give 
us some percentage.  To find out this aspect, consultant has been engaged.  The 
draft consultancy report has already come .  Areas have been identified.  We 
would call open tender to select the party for plantation.”  
 
(iii) Commercial Plantation    
2.5 Railways have also decided to undertake plantation on railway land by involving 
private parties in a joint venture to share the total earnings or revenue generated from 
use of land by way of plantation. While the private parties  shall provide all the funding, 
material, expertise and  labour for the growth and management of the plantation at its 
own cost, in lieu, Railways  contribution will be in form of its land  for a specified period 
of fifteen years with a provision for extension of another 15 years.  Fourteen sites under 
the scheme have so far been finalised on Northern, North Eastern and Southern  
Railways. 
 
(iv) Grow More Food Scheme (GFM)  
2.6 Prior to October, 1984, with a view to help in augmenting the food production, 
Railways had been permitting licensing of sp are railway land for cultivation both to 

 14
railwaymen and outsiders.  However, due to many difficulties like non-payment of 
dues, very large quantum of wo rk in licensing, preparation of agreements, retrieval of 
land when required for Railway’s use etc. it  was decided in 1984 to take back the land 
given for cultivation under grow more food after expiry  of current license and utilize 
the same for afforestation. As an exception to  this, continuation of licenses in case of 
Group ‘D’ Railway employees, outsiders belo nging to SC/STs,  landless labourers and 
other weaker sections of the society were permitted on merits of each case with the 
specific approval of Chief Engineer/General Manager. 
 
2.7 Later, it was seen that land li censed to Railway employees for growing 
vegetables etc. in station yards in the Mu mbai suburban section has remained largely 
free from encroachment, the matter was re-c onsidered and it has been decided in 
February, 2000 to revive the licensing of railway land to Railway employees in identified 
urban areas for cultivation as an anti-enc roachment measure as also to earn some 
revenue.  Under the scheme the land is li censed to Railway employees belonging to 
Group C & D only for growing ve getables, crops etc. for a pe riod of 2 years extendable 
to 5 years. Land is not licensed to non railwaymen or State Governments for cultivation.  
The license fee is fixed by Railway based on  the revenue generating potential of the 
land. 
  
(v) Commercial Licensing   
2.8 Plots of railway land at stations, go ods sheds, sidings (k nown as commercial 
plots) are licensed for stacking/storing of goods moved by ra il. Such licensing helps the 
railways in attracting/retaining traffic.  These licenses are given by Railway on an 
annual basis subject to the fulfillment of traffic commitments by the licencees of the 
plots.  No pucca structure are allowed to be pu t up on such lands.  Railway land is also 
licensed for bulk oil installations, steel yard, coal dumps and private sidings which offer  

 15
 
substantial traffic to the Railways.  The rate of licence fee for various types of plots is as 
under:- 
Item No. Types of Plots Annual Licence Fee as a 
Percentage of Land 
Value 
(a) Railway related activities such as City 
Booking offices, Out Agencies etc. 
6% 
(b) Ordinary Commercial Plots – without 
structures 
6% 
(c) Ordinary Commercial Plots – with 
temporary  structures for 
stacking/storing 
(i) Covered area 
(ii) Open area 
 
 
 
(i) 7½ % 
(ii) 6% 
(d) Steel Yards/Coal Dumps. Bulk Oil 
Installations etc.  
    7½ % 
(e) Land used to lay private sidings 6% 
(f) Shops/Retail Depots etc. 10% 
 
 
(vi) Licensing of tanks and borrow pits for Pisciculture    
2.9 Licensing of borrow pits/tanks for piscic ulture is also done by Railways. While the 
first preference is invariably to be given to Co-operative societies formed by railway 
employees, these tanks/pits can also be licen sed to registered fi shermen co-operative 
societies  subject to safeguarding Rail ways’ over all financial interests and 
commensurate with the prevaili ng market rate.  Railways ma y resort to public auction 
or open tender in case no such societies come forward. The period of fishing rights may 
be permitted for one to five years. Suit able licence agreement are required to be 
executed by Railway with the parties before handing over possession of borrow 
pits/tanks. 
 
Generation of Revenue from Afforestation, GMF, Commercial Licensing and 
Pisciculture 
 
2.10 According to the Railways the details of earnings from afforestation, grow more 
food, commercial licensing and pisciculture  are not maintained separately but are 
maintained allocation-wise.  The allocation  pertaining to land  are Z-230  (Rent &  tolls  

 16
 
from buildings let out to outsiders etc.) Z-240 (leasing/licensing of land) and Z-250 
(sale proceeds of grass, fruits, dead & matu re trees).  The cumulative earnings from 
land utilization during the last five years are given below:- 
 
Year  2001-2002 2002-2003 2003-2004 2004-2005 2005-2006 
 
Rs. 
(crores) 
223.53* 92.0 116.53 200.8 201.4 
     
* Includes Rs. 131.2 crore arre ars of license fee received by Northern Railway from 
oil companies.  
 
Land Licensed to Social & Welfare Organizations and PSUs 
2.11 The Railways have given about 109.56 hectare of land upto March 2003 for 
social and welfare activities.  This land ha s been licensed/leased to social and welfare 
organizations i.e. schools, welfare centres, cooperative societies, etc.  after having 
thoroughly verified their antecedents.  Mostly such welf are organization are for the 
welfare of railway staff only like Railway  Womens’ Welfare Organization, Railways 
Scouts & Guide etc. The revenue generated from the land licensed to social and welfare 
works and PSUs during 1998 to 2003 was about  Rs. 174.93 lakh and 134.65 lakh 
respectively.     
 

 17
 
CHAPTER-III 
DEVELOPMENT OF SURPLUS LANDS AND ENCROACHMENT OF RAILWAY 
LAND   
Surplus/Vacant Lands 
 Surplus lands are such land s, which are not required for any of purpose defined 
in Railway’s Act.  According to Ministry of Railways, normally land vacated due to 
abandonment or dismantling of old alignm ents, workshops in rural areas at times 
becomes surplus.     
 
3.2 Railways have about 44894 hectares of vacant land.  A major portion of the 
vacant lands are in the form of longitudinal strips on both sides of the track, which is 
required for future developmental works lik e doublings, gauge co nversions etc.  The 
remaining vacant land is mostly near stations and yards and shall be required for 
expansion of yards and circulating areas etc.   V a c a n t  l a n d  i s  a l s o  p u t  t o  u s e  f o r  
commercial plantation, for afforestation and cultivation under Grow More Food Scheme, 
retail oil outlets to registered oil compan ies, long lease of land to Government 
Departments   property development etc.   The zone-wise position of  vacant land as on 
31.3.2006 is as under:- 
       (in hectares) 
Railway Vacant land 
Central Railway 2478 
Eastern Railway 1547 
East Central Railway 5773 
East Coast Railway  1355 
Northern Railway  2919 
North Central Railway 738 
North Eastern Railway 5923 
Northeast Frontier Railway 2435 
North Western Railway 964 
Southern Railway  2297 
South Central Railway 4248 
South Eastern Railway 84 
South East Central Railway 3391 
South Western Railway 2871 
Western Railway 7383 
West Central Railway 488 
Total  44894 

 18
 
3.3 Replying to a query whether the Railway s would consider to return to States 
those lands which were obtained free of cost  from the latter for operation of train, 
production of rolling stock, equipment, etc., in case, thes e lands are not required for 
the purpose of the Railw ays, the Ministry state d  t h a t  r e t u r n i n g  o f  s u c h  l a n d  t o  t h e  
States will depend on the cond itions of original grant.  In most cases, Railways under 
Land Acquisition Act have acquired land, 1984 by paying required compensation and 
railways is the permanent owner of such land.  Commercial use of such railway land has 
now been permitted by the Railways (Amend ment) Act, 2005.  Howe ver, if the railway 
land is not required for any of the potent ial use permitted as per Railways Act and is 
surplus, then it could be considered for returning the same to State Government at 
current market value.   
 
3.4 However, elaborating on the mandate of  Railways to use this  surplus land for 
commercial purpose, the Member Engineering, Railway Board submitted before the 
Committee as under:- 
 
“Normally we have not taken the land on  lease from the State Government.  We 
have got free title to those lands.  Wh ether we can commercially exploit a piece 
of land which was given for a certain pr ofessed operational need in the past, 
clearance has now been given and this ty pe of land can also be utilized by 
Railways for commercial exploitation provi ded it has got something to do with 
the Railways, so, under this proviso we are utilizing this.”   
 
3.5. Responding to a point of the Commi ttee whether the surplus lands which may 
not be required in future for  operation of trains and  commercial development, could  
be provided to State Governments/Municipa l Corporation for social activities, the 
Member Engineering (Railway Board) stated as under:- 
“There will be some very remote ar eas where there would not be a very 
great potential or possibility of its development for commercial purposes.  
Some municipal body or Government body might ask for their use.  We 

 19
are open to it.  Maybe there are pr ocedural delays because so many 
formalities have to be completed because they have to give an 
undertaking.  I think, those are the areas which take time.  Otherwise, the 
policy is very well laid down.  If everyt hing is followed an d if the land is 
spare, giving it particularly to municipality etc. is not very difficult. 
 
Development of Surplus Lands for Commercial Use  
 
3.6 The Ninth Plan Document envisaged commercial utilization of vacant railway land 
and space above such land to supplement the internal revenues of the Railways.  
Railways while keeping in view  future needs of rail netw ork started the process of 
identification, planning an d commercial development of such lands in 2001-02.  
However, due to some inherent constraints such as absence of clear cut mandate in the 
Railway Act, 1989 authorizing the Railways to develop surplus lands for commercial 
purpose other than the core activity of the Railway i.e. operation of trains and 
inadequate expertise with the Railways in the field of real estate developmental 
activities,  Railways could not make much desired progress in this regard.  Zonal 
Railways have identified 61 locations for commercial development so far, which is 
roughly about 200 hectares out of the total 44894 hectares of vacant land.  So far only 
9 areas out of these identified locations have been finally let out by Railways and others 
are either dropped or under re-examination.  
 
3.7 In order to give greater thrust to this important aspect, Railw ays have decided to 
set up a separate authority namely ‘The Rail Land Develo pment Authority’ (RLDA), to 
undertake all tasks related to property deve lopment on railway land under the control 
of Ministry of Railways.  The authority will raise financial resources and generate 
revenues for the Indian Railways through development of land, air space and properties 
owned by the Railways.  The ownership of such  railway land will, however be vested in 
Railways only.  Railways (Amendment) Act, 2005 as approved by Parliament has been 
notified in the Gazette of India on 16.09.2005 after the President’s assent.  Gazette 
notification entrusting Railway Board with requisite powers re garding RLDA has been               

 20
issued.  However, Ministry of law has not approved the notification for Railways Act 
to come into force and consti tuting an Authority and has de sired to notify rules for the 
authority first which is under finalisation.    
 
3.8 Asked as to by what time  the Rules would be finalize d, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated that Rules for setting up RLDA  has been framed and are approved by the 
Minister of Railways.  The same are being sent to Ministry of Law & Justice  (Legislative 
Wing) for vetting to enable notification of the same.  The authorit y shall be constituted 
after notification of the Rules which is expected in next two months time.  
 
3.9 Elaborating on the terms of reference o f  R L D A  t h e  M i n i s t r y  s t a t e d  t h a t  t h e  
Authority shall discharge such functions an d exercise such powers of the Central 
Government in relation to the development of railway land as are specifically assigned 
to it by the Central Government.  In partic ular, and without prejudice to the generality 
of the foregoing powers, the Central Government may assign to the Authority all or any 
of the following functions namely: 
(i) To prepare scheme or schemes for us e of Railway and in conformity with 
the provisions of Act; 
(ii) To develop railway land for commer cial use as may be entrusted by the 
Central Government for the purpose of  generating revenue by non tariff 
measures; 
(iii) To develop and provide consultancy,  construction or management services 
and undertake operation in the country in relation to the development of 
land and property; 
(iv) To carry out any other work or func tion as may be entrusted to it by the 
Central Government, by order in writing.   

 21
 
3.10. Prevention and removal of encroachme nt has been kept ou t of the purview of 
Authority due to the following reasons: 
 
(i) Any action to remove encroachment s on railway land is taken under the 
provisions of PPE Act, 1971.  It is felt that Railways being a Central 
Government Department, will more effect ively be able to handle this job 
especially under Section 147 of Railway Act, 1989. 
(ii) RPF Act – as per section 42.4 of RPF Act, 1957, Railway Protection Force 
are required to render effective assi stance in removal of encroachments.  
The authority will not be able to take active & direct assistance of RPF. 
(iii) Railways have organisation upto the field level who are responsible for 
custody of land as well as for preven tion / removal of encroachments.  
Land Development Authority will have to create a vast network of staff 
and wherewithal to deal with manage ment of encroachme nts; which will 
not be possible.  In fact, the Author ity is proposed to be created with 
minimum of officers’ and staff. 
 
However, the Ministry stated that RLDA shall prevent the encroachment of prime 
railway land by putting the same to commercial use.   
   
Encroachment 
 
3.11 About 2033 hectares of railway la nd are under encroachment.  These 
encroachments are mostly in and around  th e urban area and the metro cities. At some 
places they have caused a problem of safety as the en croachment is coming under 
safety zone. Out of this, Northern Ra ilway has  1145 hectares of land under 
encroachment  which is the highest among the Railway zones. A break up of Zone-wise 
encroachment  of land as on 31.3.2006 is as under:- 
  

 22
        ( i n  h e c t a r e s )  
Railway Land under encroachment 
Central Railway 81 
Eastern Railway 31 
East Central Railway 22 
East Coast Railway  31 
Northern Railway  1145 
North Central Railway 59 
North Eastern Railway 35 
Northeast Frontier Railway 175 
North Western Railway 19 
Southern Railway  66 
South Central Railway 31 
South Eastern Railway 207 
South East Central Railway 52 
South Western Railway 25 
Western Railway 47 
West Central Railway 7 
Total  2033 
 
3.12 Railways have classified the encroachment into four categories.  Elaborating the 
types of encroachment,  the Member Engineering, Railway Board  stated as under:- 
 
“Encroachments are of four categories – A, B, C and D. ‘A’ is hard type 
encroachment where somebody comes and erects a permanent structure.  These 
cases are taken up under PPE Act.  Railways take action to get it vacated.  Estate 
Officer deals with these cases. In ‘B’ type there is no erection of structure or 
anything. B, C and D structures are soft encroach ments which readily come and 
go.  It is not very difficult to remove them..” 
 
3.13 The reasons  leading to such encroachme nts was enumerated by the  Ministry of 
Railways as under:- 
(i) There is a large scale migration to  urban areas from rural areas.  The 
failure of the State Governments to provide housing facilities to such 
migrants compel these people to settle on public land,  railway land which 
are spread across the co untry in longitudinal strips and are very 
vulnerable to encroachments. 

 23
 
(ii) It is not possible to provide 24 ho urs protection to the vast railway land. 
(iii) Preventive steps like constructi on of boundary walls prove to be 
inadequate for protection. 
(iv) Removal of encroachments often le ads to interferences by local leaders 
and politicians.  
(v) Removal of encroachments often creates law and order problems for 
which the required assistance (Po lice and Magistrates) from State 
Governments are not easily available. 
 
3.14 With regard to the ca ses of encroachment on railway land, the Member 
Engineering, Railway Board submitted before the Committee as under:- 
 
“As on date, the total encroachment cases is 1,59,323.  Out of which 39733 
cases are pending in Courts under Public Premises Eviction Act.  Decision in 
those cases are yet to be made. In 44473 cases the Estate Officer has passed 
orders to vacate the land.  But it did not take place many a time because the 
assistance of the State Government is ne cessary in such cases.  Those lands 
could not be got vacated…  Magistrate and police are to be sent by the State 
Government to get them vacated.  But many a time  it does not materialize.  Out 
of the 44473 cases, there are 3539 cases which  have gone to High Court 
against the decision.” 
 
3.15 The total number of cases pending wi th the Estate Officers alongwith their 
duration as on 31.03.2006 is as under:- 
 
Time period for which pending Number of cases pending 
For more than 5 years 16964 
For 3 to 5 years  9644 
For 1 to 3 years  7451 
For upto 1 year  5674 
Total  39733 
 

 24
3.16 Railways have organisati on up to the field level that are responsible for 
custody of the land as well as  for prevention/removal of encr oachments.  Any action to 
remove encroachments on railw ay land is taken under the provision of PPE Act, 1971, 
Section 147 of Railways Act,  1989 and Sectio n 42.4 of RPF Act.  As per the Joint 
Procedure Order (JPO) adopted by all Zo nal Railways in September, 2001,  the 
prevention/detection/removal of encroachme nts is the joint responsibility of many 
departments including the RPF.  In areas wh ere the assistance of RPF is felt necessary, 
the Divisional Officers reques t their counterparts in RPF for the same, and the RPF, 
within their limitations, provide the assistan ce.  However, RPF has no direct role in 
removing encroachments on railway land, and it is also not covered under the 
provisions of recently amended RPF Act, 1957 and Railways Ac t, 1989.  A proposal to 
amend the Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 so as to include ‘Railway Lands’ and 
‘Immovable Property’ in the definition of ‘r ailway property’ has been referred to the 
Ministry of Law and Justice in February, 2002 for their advice. Ministry of Law and 
Justice did not concur with the proposal.    
 
3.17 Elaborating on the coordination  wi th State Governments in dealing with 
encroachment, the Ministry of Railways  stated  that there are multifarious coordination 
with the State Government in dealing wi th the encroachment.  Since removal of 
encroachment often leads to law and order problem, the Governments  are requested 
to provide police and Magistrate fo r the same.  After a series of 
correspondences/meetings between the two side s, date(s) are fixed for the removal.  
The State Governments very often demand  that the encroach ers should not be 
removed,  instead, the encroached railway la nd s hou l d be  s pare d by Ra ilw ay fre e  of 
cost for settlement of the encroachers.  The demand of the State Governments are 
refused by Railways and State Governments are pursued for providing police/Magistrate 
help.  Following are the constraints against removal of encroachments:- 
i. Lack of cooperation from State Governments 
ii. Lack of adequate powers with Estate Officers 
iii. Legal interference (eviction cases being dragged to Courts) 
iv. Interference from so cial-political leaders. 

 25
 
3.18 Responding to the need for further empowering the Es tate Officer by amending 
the Public Premises Eviction Ac t, 1971, the Ministry of Railways  stated that it is felt 
that, under PPE Act, 1971 Estate Officer (EO), who is a quasi-judicial authority, has not 
been invested with adequate powers to effectively deal with encroachments.  Moreover, 
the prescribed procedure takes a lot of time.  Further, evicti on order of the EO is not a 
decree of Court and thereby the Railway administration is not able to enforce the order 
at times in the absence of local police su pport.  Section 147 of the Railways Act, 1989 
basically deals with occasional trespassers , and is not effective in dealing with 
encroachments. A proposal was sent to the Ministry of Urban Development in 
December, 1998 suggesting that the PPE Act, 1971 may be suitably amended.  Ministry 
of Urban Development forwarded the remarks of the Ministry of Law & Justice on the 
proposal in February, 2003.  The remarks were  examined and it has been suggested by 
this Ministry to the Ministry of Urban Development in September, 2003 that the PPE Act  
may be amended for the following:- 
 
(i) EOs be empowered to (a) issue in terim orders or injunction during 
pendency of a case, (b) issue directiv es for attachments of encroachers’s 
property, 
(ii) EO’s orders be deemed to be the  directives issued by a Civil Court and 
non compliance may he held punishable for contempt of Court and  
(iii) The Act may provide for Recovery Officers for recovery of expenses,  
damage/arrears etc. 
 
The final reply from  the Ministry of Ur ban Development in this regard is still 
awaited despite being pursued for the same.   
 
3.19 Further responding to the query of the Committee ab out need for perspective 
planning not only to remove  the existing encroachments but to stop future illegal 
occupation of railway lands, the Member Engineering, Railway Bo ard, stated during 
evidence as under:- 

 26
 
“Survey has been conducted for the entire area. Each  and every encroachment 
has been identified.  This problem is not only in the Railway the same is the case 
with other departments of the Union Gove rnment. That is why a discussion is 
going on with regard to formation of a task force at the Ministry of Urban 
Development level to find out the ways in this regard. There have been efforts to 
form a unified policy to deal with the subject.  We are moving ahead in this 
direction.”   
 
3.20. The Committee while exam ining the subject noted that the Railways had adopted 
a policy to allot land to the cooperatives formed by shopkeepers who were running their 
business on such encroached railway land for more than 50 year s .   H o w e v e r ,  t h e y  
further noticed that the Railways allot such land  on one single station in the Division to 
such cooperatives.  When the Committee aske d the Railway why they restricted to one 
station per Division while allotting land to  such cooperative, th e Member Engineering 
(Railway Board) replied as under:- 
“The present policy is of one station per Division.  We will have to 
consider whether it can be extend e d  t o  m o r e  t h a n  o n e  s t a t i o n  p e r  
Division.” 
 
  
                 

 27
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
Railway Land 
 The Committee find that as on  31.3.2006, Railways own 4.31 lakh 
hectares of land.   They were informed that as on 1 st April, 2004, 3.26 lakh 
hectares of land was in use for locating service and operational infrastructure 
such as track, workshops, production uni ts, stations, staff colonies etc.  and 
0.03 lakh hectares for commercial lice nsing and many other miscellaneous 
uses like afforesation, grow more food and  pisciculture. When the 
Committee wanted to know the actual posi tion of land used as on 31.3.2006, 
they were informed that  as some more acquisition of land has  been made 
for the new projects taken up, it would take some time to give an updated 
figure.  The Committee express their seri ous concern over the failure of the 
Railway Board in maintaining proper and accurate data of land use.   They 
desire that the requisite information be furnished to them within a period of 
three months.   
 
Afforestation of Railway Land 
2. The Committee note that out of 4. 31 lakh hectares of land holdings as 
on 1.4.2004, 10.5 per cent of land was under afforestation done through 
State Forest Department on vacant la nd along the tracks, near workshops 
and colonies etc.  They have been in formed that though afforestation policy  
has helped in providing green cover but  Railways had  the problems with 
State Forest Departments such as non execution of the agreements, denial of 
legitimate access for undertaking rout ine safety works connected with 
railway safety, works connected with railway operations, getting back the 
land for railway purposes etc.  The Committee feel that Railways should not 
get detracted from their policy of afforestation by these problems rather they 
should make efforts to solve such problems amicably by taking up the matter 
with State Government Authorities.  Si nce, afforestation is the need of the 

 28
hour, the Committee desire that Railways should continue with their 
afforesation policy with more vigorous efforts. 
  
Plantation of Jatropha Curcas 
3. The Committee have been further informed that Railways have asked 
the Zonal Railways to take up planta tion of ‘Jatropha Curcas’ through 
Departmental effort on a massive scal e along the tracks and other areas and 
a target of 72 lakh saplings have been fixed for the year 2006-07.  The 
Committee also notice that the Railways have entered into a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) with Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) for plantation of 
Jatropha Curcas  on 500 hectares of land  to be leased by Railways to IOC for 
producing environment friendly fuel, bio-d iesel for use by Railways.  So far, 
plantation on 48 hectares of land has been completed by IOC.  However, 
during the evidence, the Committee were  informed that subsequent to this 
first project taken up for plantation of   Jatropha Curcas, Railways found that 
many other parties are also interested in this field.  Therefore, to finalise the 
modalities of the contract with concer ned parties, Railways have engaged 
consultant and based on their report,  some areas have been identified by 
Railways and open tender is being invited in order to select party.  The 
Committee desire that the process of se lection of parties be expedited and 
decision taken in this regard be intimated to them at the earliest.   
 
Land Management Cell 
4. Land being an important non traditional resource, a proper and 
scientific management of the same becomes essential and in order to put this 
highly important area of activities on proper footing, Railways have set up 
Land Management Cells in each Zone .  The Committee were informed that 
the officers of Land Management Cells,  apart from dealing with issues 
related to land management such as licensing/leasing of Railway Land,  
commercial development of Railway Land/airspace, afforestation, removal of 
encroachment, verification of land records, recovery of license fee, 

 29
liquidation of arrears and  dealing with litigations etc.,  are also 
entrusted with some other responsibilitie s.  However, after the constitution 
of Railway Land Development Authority (RLDA), the work relating to 
commercial development of Railway Land which are vacant/surplus and 
which do not have any immediate use will be entrusted to it and the 
remaining works will continue to be handled by the Land Management Cell.  
To strengthen these Cells, Railways have directed the Zonal Railways to 
augment the staff strength of these Cells from the available resources and 
provide them regular training in land  management.  The Committee, keeping 
into account the importance and the seriousness of job assigned to these 
Land Management Cells are of the cons idered view that the Railways should 
accord utmost priority for strengthening of these cells by providing all 
necessary inputs like trained manpower and requisite technology etc. so that 
these cells may function more effectively and scientifically.   
 
Encroachment 
5. The Committee note with concern that as on 31.3.2006 about               
2033 hectares of Railway Land are under encroachment mostly in Metro 
cities and in and around urban areas.  The Northern Railway ranks first in all 
Zones with 1145 hectares of land under encroachment.  The Committee were 
informed during evidence that there are in all 1,59,323 cases of 
encroachments out of which 39, 733 cases are pending in courts under Public 
Premises Eviction Act, 1971.  Although  in 44.473 cases the Estate Officer has 
passed orders under PPE Act to vacate th e land, however, the eviction could 
not take place because of lack of cooperation from State Governments in 
execution of the orders of  Estate O fficer. In 3539 cases, the encroachers 
have gone to High Court against the decision of the Estate Officer.   
 
 The Committee observe that the action for removal of encroachment 
on Railway Land is taken by the Ra ilways under the provisions of Public 
Premises Eviction Act, 1971,  Sectio n 147 of Railway Act, 1989 and also 

 30
under Section 42.4 of Railway Pr otection Force Act, 1957.  As per 
the Joint Procedure Order (JPO) of 2001, the prevention/detention/removal 
of encroachment is the joint responsibility of many Departments including 
Railway Protection Force. The latter  provides assistance within their 
limitations as this is not covered under the Provisions of Railway Protection 
Force Act, 1957 and Railway Act, 1989 .  However, the Committee have been 
informed by the representative of the Ministry of Railways during evidence 
that a proposal to amend the Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 so as to 
include ‘railway lands’ and ‘immovable pr operty’ in the definition of ‘railway 
property’ was taken up with the Ministry of Law and Justice but the latter did 
not concur with the proposal.  The Ministry further informed the Committee 
that the problem of encroachment is not only with the railway lands but 
same is the case with other Mi nistries/Departments of the Union 
Government.  Therefore, to find ou t the ways to deal encroachment 
problems, a discussion is going on  to  form a Task Force in the Ministry of 
Urban Development to formulate a uni fied policy to deal with such 
encroachments.  The Committee find that there is no substantial decline in 
Railway Land under encroachment.  Howe ver, they appreciate the idea of 
formation of Task Force to deal with such problems and desire to be apprised 
of the final outcome of the same.   Th ey also desire that while removing 
encroachments on the railway land, a humanitarian view should be taken 
towards the settlement colonies and vendors who have existed on railway 
land for more than 50 years. 
 
Fixation of responsibility and accountability for encroachment 
6. The Committee find that as per the Joint Procedure Order (JPO) of 
2001, many Departments are  responsible for the removal of encroachment 
on railway land.  They are of the firm view that unless and until there is a 
nodal agency/officer responsible for prevention/detection/removal of 
encroachments, it becomes difficult to fix the responsibility for any 
encroachment on any single Depart ment.  They, therefore, strongly 

 31
recommend that the Officer-in- ch arge of Land Management Cell at 
Zonal Railway and Divisional Railway Manager at the Division level be 
assigned with this responsibility and in case of any further detection of such 
encroachment, these officials should be held directly responsible for the 
same and penal action may also be fixed to ensure their  accountability.   
 
Empowering of Estate Officer 
7. The Committee further note with concern that as on 31.3.2006 as 
many as 39733 cases were pending with the Estate Officer. Out of these, 
16,964 cases were pending for more than five years.  Further, they find that 
under the PPE Act, 1971, the Estate Office r, a quasi judicial authority, is not 
invested with adequate powers to deal  with encroachment cases effectively. 
The orders of eviction passed by him und er the Act is not a decree of court 
and at times in the absence of assistance from the State Government, 
Railways are unable to execute the same.  They were informed by the 
Railways that a suggestion to amend th e PPE Act so as to empower Estate 
Officer was made to Ministry of Ur ban Development in the year 2003 but 
their final reply is still awaited.  The Committee are of the strong view that to 
a great extent the problem of encr oachment can be counteracted by 
empowering the Estate Officer at par wi th the Civil Courts. They, therefore, 
desire that the Railways should take up the matter with the Ministry of Urban 
Development at the highest level and necessary amendments in the PPE Act 
be brought out at the earliest. 
 
Certification and Computerization of Land Plans 
8. The Committee find that land record register and land boundary 
verification registers are maintained,  as per the prescribed proforma,  in 
Chief Engineers Office at Zonal level an d in Divisions.  Section Engineers are 
duty bound  to ensure that the land records and boundaries are kept intact in 
revenue records.  They further noti ce that out of the 52560 land plans 
available with the Railways as on 1.4. 2006, 42978 plans so far  have been 

 32
certified by the Revenue Authorities and 38711 plans are computerized by 
the Railways. From the statistics furnished to them by the Railways in this 
regard, they find that almost in all the Zonal Railways the works relating to 
computerization and certification of land  plans are too slow and in case of 
Eastern Railway computerization of land  development plans have not at all 
taken place so far.  Th e Ministry of Railways in formed the Committee that 
consequent upon creation of new Zone s in 2003-04, land development plans 
had to be transferred from one Railway to another which has affected the 
progress of computerization. Now this has been taken up as a mission area 
and would  be completed within a year or so. In case of Eastern Railway, 
computerization of land plans is bein g outsourced.  Railways are monitoring 
the position of computerization on mo nthly basis and it will definitely 
improve in the coming months. The Commi ttee desire that the work relating 
to computerization and certification of  land records should be completed 
without any further delay and the information in this regard be made 
available also on the Railway website simultaneously. 
 
Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA) 
 
9. The Committee note that IX Plan document had envisaged 
development of surplus/vacant land for commercial utilization to supplement 
the internal resource generation of th e Railways.  However, due to absence 
of clear mandate in the Railway Act, 1989 and inadequate expertise in the 
field of real estate development ac tivities, Railways could not make much 
headway in this direction.  They further find that to garner clear cut mandate 
to utilize surplus/vacant land for comm ercial development like setting up of 
shops in the subways, shopping comp lex etc.  Railways in the year 2005  
have brought out an amendment in the Railway Act, 1989 so as to set up a 
separate Land Development Authority to deal with developmental activities.  
However, this Authority could not be co nstituted and notified as the Ministry 
of Law and Justice has desired that befo re notifying the setting up of RLDA, 

 33
rules for the proposed authority be framed.  The Ministry have informed 
the Committee that the rules now framed  in this regard and approved by the 
Minister of Railways are being sent to the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Wing) for vetting and Author ity is expected to be set up in the 
next couple of months.  The Committee ta ke a serious view of the fact that 
although almost a year has elapsed af ter the notification of the Railways 
(Amendment) Act, 2005, the RLDA is yet to be cons tituted by the Railways. 
Such  an apathetic attitude reflects la ck of seriousness of the Ministry in 
constitution of  the proposed Authority.   They strongly disapprove this delay 
and recommend that the constitution of the RLDA be notified at the earliest 
so that the land development works may  not get hampered.  They would like 
to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.    
 
 Apart from this, they also  recommend that the surplus railway land for 
commercial development be leased on short term basis  only i.e. for not more 
than 25-30 years with the specific prov iso that in case of requirement for 
business operation any time in future the lessor i.e. the Railways can retrieve 
such land. 
 
Leasing of encroached  lands/shops to cooperatives 
 
10. The Committee note that there are certain hard encroachments by 
shopkeepers on Railway land which are continuing for more than 50 years or 
so and the Railways have not been able to vacate them.  They further find 
that to solve such chronic  encroachments, Railways have formulated a policy 
in 2002 to regularize such encroachment  on cooperative basis by providing 
shops/lands on lease at one station per Division.  The Committee are of the 
view that by restricting it to one station per  Division, Railways may not be 
able to resolve the problem as such.  Th ey, therefore, desire that the extant 
policy be extended to more than one station per Division. 

 34
 
Use of Railway Land for Social Activities 
  
11. The Committee observe that there is a well laid down policy of the 
Railways to hand over the land to State Governments/Local bodies for 
various social activities vi z. construction of Schools, Bus Terminals, Stadium 
etc., if such land is not required by the Railway for their operations.  
However, the Committee note th at it takes years for State 
Governments/Local bodies to acquire such land due to lengthy procedure 
followed by the Railways.  They also find that there are certain 
demands/requisitions by the State Gove rnments/Local bodies which are still 
pending   with   the   Railways  for  the  last  many years.  In views of this, 
the Committee desire that the Railways should process these 
demands/requisitions expeditiously  and the extant procedure for clearance 
of such land be simplified and made amenable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                          BASUDEB ACHARIA 
          November, 2006                                                                     Chairman, 
          Agrahayana, 1928 Saka                               Standing Committee on Railways  

 35
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2005-06) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 16 th June, 2006 from 1500 hours to               
1700  hours in Committee Room ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN   
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
3. Shri Ajaya Kumar 
4. Shri Subrata Bose 
5. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
6. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7. Shri Mahesh Kanodia 
8. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
9. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
10. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma  
11. Mohd. Tahir 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
13. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
14. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
15. Shri Abani Roy  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
 

 36
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
 
.  
1. Shri R.R. Jaruhar  Member  Engineering, Railway Board & 
     Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
2. Shri Ramesh Chandra Member  Electrical, Railway Board & 
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
3. Shri R.R. Bhandari  Memb er Mechanical, Railway Board & 
     Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
4. Shri R.S. Varshneya  Me mber Staff, Railway Board & 
     Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India.  
 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representati ves of the Ministry of 
Railways on the subject – ‘Land Management .’ The representatives of the Ministry 
clarified the various points raised by the the Members of the Commi ttee.  The evidence 
remained inconclusive.   
 
3. A verbatim  record of th e proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 37
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY EIGHTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2005-06) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 13 th July, 2006 from 1500 hours to              
1700  hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN   
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
12. Shri Ajaya Kumar 
13. Shri Subrata Bose 
14. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
15. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
16. Shri Anwar Hussain 
17. Shri Mahesh Kanodia 
18. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
19. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
20. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
21. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
22. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
14. Maulana Obaidu llah Khan Azmi 
15. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
16. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
17. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
18. Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushi k  - Assistant Director 

 38
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
 
1. Shri J.P. Batra  Chairman , Railway Board & Ex-officio 
 Principal Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
2. Shri R.R. Jaruhar  Member  Engineering, Railway Board & 
     Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
3. Shri Ramesh Chandra Member  Electrical, Railway Board & 
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
4. Shri R.S. Varshneya  Me mber Staff, Railway Board & 
     Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India.  
 
5. Shri R.P. Gupta  Ad viser (Land & Amenities) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Commi ttee condemned the reckle ss and dastardly act of 
terrorism which occurred on 11 th July, 2006 in  the form of  series of bomb blasts in the 
suburban trains of Mumbai killing about 200 people and le aving more than 700 injured. 
They deeply mourned this tragedy and co nveyed their condolen ce to the bereaved 
families.  The Committee and the officers ob served silence for a minute as a mark of 
respect to the departed souls.  
 
3. The Committee welcomed Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi was had been nominated to 
the Committee.  The Committee th en took oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on the subject – ‘Lan d Management’.  The evidence 
was concluded.   
 
4. A verbatim  record of th e proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 39
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2006-07) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 28 th September, 2006 from  1500 hours to 
1600 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
  SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.    Shri Prasanna Acharya  
3.    Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4.    Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
5.    Shri Ramdas B. Athawale 
6.    Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
7.    Shri Giridhar Gamang 
8.    Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
9.    Shri Ananta Nayak 
10.    Shri Laxman Rao Patil 
11.    Shri K. Subbarayan 
12.    Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
13.    Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
14.    Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
15.    Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi  
16.    Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
17.    Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
18.    Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
19.    Shri Abani Roy 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh       - Joint Secretary        
2.      Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
3.      Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Assistant Director 
 

 40
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on 
‘Land Management’ and adopted the same with  the following addition at the end of 
Para 9 of the Recommendation (Rail Land Development Authority):-  
“They also recommend that the surplus railway land for commercial development 
be leased on short term basis with the sp ecific condition that the lessor i.e. the 
Railways can subsequently retrieve such  land, if required for their business 
operations”  
  
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report after the 
consequential changes, if any, arising out of  factual verification by the Ministry of 
Railways or otherwise and present the same to the House.  
 
4. xxx    xxx    xxx 
  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 