           
22 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2006-07) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 14th Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘Indian Railway Catering & Tourism Corporation’  
of the Ministry of Railways] 
 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
       
  
      
       LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

2 
  
 
 
           S CR No.105  
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2006-07) 
 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
  
  [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 14th Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Indian Railway Catering & Tourism Corporation’  
 of the Ministry of Railways]
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ……….. 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ………… 
 
             
  
             
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2006/ Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

3 
  
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
                P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….        (iii) 
  
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………… ………………….…          (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report…………………………………………… …………              
     
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been           
accepted by the Government  …………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observation s which the Committee          
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Obser vations in respect of which   
   Replies of the Government   have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….…. 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final      
replies of the Government  are still awaited  …………. 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX-I  Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on   
Railways held on 18.09.2006 
 
 
APPENDIX-II Analysis    of    Action    Taken    by   Government  on  
the Recommendation/observations contained in the  
14th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘Indian Railway Catering 
& Tourism Corporation.’ 
(i) 
 

4 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
     MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
  
2.       Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3 Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4 Shri Atique Ahamad 
5         Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
6 Shri Ramdas B. Athawale  
7 Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8 Shri H.D. Devegowda 
9. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
10. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
11. Shri Anwar Hussain 
12. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
13. Ch. Lal Singh 
14. Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato  
15. Shri Ananta Nayak 
16. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
17. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
18. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
19. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
20. Shri K. Subbarayan  
21. Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.      Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
23. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri R. Kamraj 
28. Shri Isam Singh 
30.       Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31. Shri Abani Roy 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director  
4. Shri Arun K. Kaushik    - Assistant Director  
5. Shri P.K. Sharma   - Sr. Exe. Asstt. 
 
(iii) 

5 
  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2006-07), having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report  on their behalf, present 
this Twenty Second Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fourteenth 
Report of the Standing Committee on  Railways 2005-06 on ‘Indian Railway 
Catering & Tourism Corporation’. 
 
2. The Fourteenth Report was presen ted to Lok Sabha on 30.08.2005 and it 
contained 13 recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways have 
furnished their Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 
23.12.2005.  
  
3. The Committee considered and adopte d the Draft Action Taken Report at 
their sitting held on 18th September 2006.  
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/ observations containe d in the Fourteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                        BASUDEB ACHARIA 
        November, 2006                                               Chairman, 
       Agrahayana, 1928 Saka        Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

6 
  
 
1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations and observations containe d  in the                      
14th Report of the Standing Committee on Ra ilways  on ‘Indian Ra ilway Catering 
& Tourism Corporation’ (IRCTC).  The Report was presented in Lok Sabha on                         
30th August, 2005 and laid in Rajya Sabha on  the same day. 
 
1.2. Action Taken Notes have been rece ived from the Government in respect 
of all the 13 recommendations/observati ons contained in the Report.  These 
have been broadly categorised as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 8, 10 and 12  
(ii) Recommendations/Observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Para Nos.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9  and 11 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Para Nos. 1 and 2 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which final replies 
are still awaited: 
Para Nos. 13 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that final reply in respect of the 
recommendation for which only interi m reply has been given by the 
Government should be furnished to them expeditiously.   
 

7 
  
 
    
1.4 The Committee will now deal with t he action taken by Government on 
some of their recommendations. 

8 
  
 
Catering Policy – 2005 
(Para No.1) 
1.5 In this paragraph the Committee a fter going through the New Catering 
Policy - 2005, had noted that the system of  catering envisaged in the new Policy 
is totally different from what  it was earlier. It had undergone a paradigm shift, the 
very notion and concept behind railway catering had been changed, it was no 
longer being treated as part of passenger amenities.  They had also noted that 
earlier catering on railways was based on the pr inciple of no profit no loss, but in 
the New Catering Policy, the dominant them e is to commercialise it, privatise it. 
Profit motive is apparent on the face of it, license fee has been hiked, tendering 
and bidding system has been introduced, li cense would be given to the highest 
bidder, tenure of license has been reduced and departmental ca tering is being 
dispensed with.  
 
1.6  Considering all these aspects of New Catering Policy, the Committee 
observed that when the catering policy is put into practice, it would directly or by 
implication impact and  impinge on  the interest of the passengers and railway 
users.   The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the whole system of 
catering including the Catering Policy-2005 should be reviewed so as to align the 
catering policy as a part of  passenger amenities and not as a commercial and 
profit making venture alone.  The Policy should incorporate provisions which fulfill 
social obligations towards passengers,  railway users and those dependent on 
Railways.    Further, the Committee had noted that the stay order was in vogue in 
awarding licence to static and mobile  units till October, 2005 and they desired 
that the review of New Ca tering Policy be done before the expiry of the stay 
order. 
 
1.7 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
“There is no paradigm shift in the Cate ring Policy.  Catering continues to 
be an important component of passenger  amenity.  Railways lose about 

9 
  
Rs.400 crores on catering services in ca se fully distributed costs including 
cost of haulage of panty car are taken in to account.  Effort is being made 
to cut down the losses in the catering activities. 
There is no shift to profit motive.  Only charging of the licence fee 
has been  rationalised so that Railways get their fair share in the revenue, 
which is generated by various licens ees.  Earlier the whole profit was 
accruing to the licensee alone, now a pa r t  o f  i t  i s  a l s o  c o m i n g  t o  t h e  
Railways as licence fee/concession fee.  The money so generated is 
being ploughed back for im proving the catering infrastructure and 
modernization of catering processes like training of staff etc. so as to 
upgrade and professionalise catering services .  In no way wi ll it affect the 
passenger amenities  as prices at whic h the F&B products will be sold will 
continue to be governed by the Railways. 
The tendering process initiated has  brought in transparency unlike 
the earlier  system where allotment was through a process of applications, 
which may have led to discretion at times. 
The new Catering Policy has addre ssed the social obligations of 
the Government Reservation quota for underprivileged  in small units at A, 
B & C categories of stat ions has been introduced and it  is 49.5% in the D, 
E & F categories of stations. 
As suggested by the Standing Co mmittee, the review of the 
Catering Policy has been initiated in Ra ilway Board well before October. 
2005.” 
 
1.8 The Committee had desired that r eview of the Catering Policy-2005 
should be done well before October, 2005 when the stay order in vogue in 
awarding of licenses to stat ic and mobile units will expire.  They find from 
the action taken reply that the Ministry though have initiated the process of 
reviewing the Catering Policy – 2005 well before October, 2005 yet have not 
been completed the same so far.    Th e Committee desire that  the Catering 
Policy-2005 should be reviewed on priority  basis within a fixed time frame  

10 
  
and the action taken in this regard be placed before them within a period of 
three months.  
 
1.9 The Committee note from the action taken reply that the money 
generated from various license fee/ concession fee is ploughed back in 
improvement of the catering infrastru cture and modernization of catering 
processes such as training of staff etc. so as to upgrade and 
professionalise the catering service.  They desire that the details of the 
money generated from the license fe e/concession fee so far and the 
amount spent on development of catering infrastructure and modernization 
process be furnished to them.    
 
Amendment in certain provisions of the Catering Policy-2005 
(Para No.2) 
1.10 The Committee in this paragraph ha d opined that catering on Indian 
Railways apart from being a business vent ure formed a source of livelihood for 
most of the small caterers/vendors in  trains and on stations. They were 
constrained to note that some of the provisions of the Catering Policy-2005 
directly striked at the livelihood c oncerns of small caterers/vendors. The 
Committee were particularly concerned about  provisions in Para Nos. 15.6.1, 
15.6.3, 15.6.4, 16.3, 16.4 of the Catering Policy-2005:- 
 
(i) Para 15.6.1 ,  provides that the tenure of  the license for small units 
for restaurants, refreshment rooms at all ‘B’ & ‘C’ category stations and 
trolleys and stalls at cat egory ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ cat egory stations will be 3 
years. The Committee felt that this was  unjustified and impracticable as  3 
years is too short a period to provide stability to any venture much less a 
business venture.  This provision coupled with Para 15.6.3 which 
stipulates that there woul d be no renewal or extens ion after expiry of the 
contract will lead to uncertainty and inse curity in the minds of the small 
caterers. The Committee felt that this provision is anti entrepreneurship as 
no business can develop & flourish in su ch an environment of uncertainty.  

11 
  
The licensee cannot plan ahead for fu ture and will not invest and take 
interest in the venture.  He will al ways be on tenterhooks.  Considering all 
these factors the Committee suggested that the tenure of the small units 
should also be made for a period of 5 years and thereafter only review of 
license should be done.  After the review, the license should be generally 
renewed with necessary changes and modifications in the terms and 
conditions governing the license depending upon the performance. 
   
 (ii) Similarly, paragraphs  15.6.4 and   16.4 of the new policy stipulates 
that on every renewal of license of reserved categories at “A”, “B” and “C” 
category stations or fresh allotment s, license fee should be increased 
based on actual sales turnover or the unit subject to a minimum of 10 per 
cent hike over the prevailing license fee of the unit. Considering this as 
unwarranted, the Committee  had recommended  that it should be 
reduced to a more reasonable level.  They had also taken note of para 
16.3 which stipulates that  ‘may renew’ the tenure of  license of small units 
at “D”, “E” and “F” category stations after every five years subject to 
satisfactory performance.  The Commi ttee had observed that this leaves 
much discretion in the hands of officials and is likely to be misused.  They, 
therefore, had recommended that  the performance criteria should be 
analytical and rational with specific parameters so that there is no scope 
for subjectivity.   This will give confidence to the small caterers. 
 
1.11 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
“Infrastructure input required for setting up a small static unit at a 
station does not involve any subs tantial cost, except a bare 
structure.  Three years period is considered more than adequate for 
a party allotted such a stall to reco ver his cost of infrastructure.  
Only unreserved category stall at A, B & C categories of stations 
come within the purview of the above Policy. 

12 
  
 Out of 8,055 stations in the country, only 935 stations 
approximately come under A, B & C category.  At 7,120 stations, 
existing stallholders  wil l continue to operate as they are subject to 
satisfactory performance.  Thus, existing contractors at all above 
stations are not being disturbed and their liv elihood is not being 
affected in any way. 
 Even at A, B & C categories of stations, reserved category 
stalls in small unit category wil l remain as they are and their 
livelihood will not be affected in any way.  It is only unreserved 
category stall at A, B &C categories of stations, which are being put 
on tender. 
 The Committee’s observation  that tenure should be 
extended from 3 years to 5 years is under examinatio n of Ministry 
of Railways. 
 The provision in the Policy for increase of the licence fee by 
10% on renewal or on fresh allotment  over prevailing licence fee of 
the unit is justified because fresh a llotment will be done after 3 to 5 
years.  In this period the increase in the Wholesale Price Index for a 
period of 5 years is generally much more than 10%.  Further due to 
increase in the number of passengers also, the sale will also go up 
to the period of 5 years. 
 The renewal system is based on periodical  assessment of 
the performance.  Performance based report about satisfactory 
performance is submitted on a requisi te  proforma which is very 
analytical  to the committee, wh ich recommends the extension.  
This is also a time-tested system and is very objective and 
equitable.” 
 
1.12 The Committee find from th e Action Taken Reply that their 
apprehension that some of the provisions of the Catering Policy-2005 when 
put into practice may directly strike at the livelihood of small 
caterers/vendors has not been addressed to by the Government at all.  The 

13 
  
Committee desire that examination of extending the tenure of licence  for 
small units for restaurants, refreshment rooms at ‘B’ & ‘C’ category 
stations and trolleys and stalls at ‘A’, ‘B’ & ‘C’ category stations  from 3 to 5 
years be completed at the earliest.  Th ey also  desire that  the decision 
taken in this regard be apprised to them within a period of three months. 
Further, the Committee  stress that at the end of the tenure, the licence  
should invariably be renewed unless there are specific charges of violation 
of provisions of Catering Policy and te rms of contract, against a particular 
licensee. 
 
Complaint redressal system for improving the standard of Catering 
services 
(Para No.8) 
1.13 The Committee in this paragraph had noted that an elaborate inspection 
and complaint redressal mechanism is sine qua non  for improving the standard 
of catering services in Indian Railwa ys.  Quality contro l is of paramount 
importance in any concern dealing with food and beverages as it is directly linked 
to health and safety of consumers.  The Committee had felt that strict and regular 
inspection/surprise checks have become cr ucial in the new catering regime.  
Almost 90 per cent of the catering system  is presently being handled by private 
licensee caterers and in such a situation it becomes the responsibility of the 
license issuing authority to ensure that all terms and conditions of the license 
agreement are followed.   
 
1.14 The Committee had further noted that at present enforce ment power has 
been bestowed among Railway Board, Zona l Railways and IRCTC. This creates 
confusion and results in lax monitoring.  They after taking into account these 
factors recommended that an elaborate and unified monitoring and quality control 
system should be evolved with minimum overlapping between different agencies. 
The Committee had also suggested that redre ssal of grievances and disposal of 
complaints should be accorded top priori ty. They desired that the system should 

14 
  
be made fully electronic and computerized so as to ensure prompt action and 
hassle free registration of complaints. 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Reply, the Mi nistry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
 “There is a well-developed machinery to ensure that quality and quantity 
as prescribed by Railways are maintained by contractors.  For this purpose, 
regular inspections are carried out by the Railway officials as we ll as officials of 
IRCTC. 
 There is at present dual system so  that checks and balances can be 
maintained properly as only one agency in specting may not get the perspective, 
which the other agency can have. Railways and IRCTC are in the process of 
computerising passenger complaints so as  to get quick redre ssal.  Hygiene and 
Quality Manual has already been prepared for the guidan ce of staff so that 
inspections can be carried out based on certain pre-determined norms.” 
 
1.16 The Committee appreciate the c oncern of the Indian Railways for 
ensuring strict adherence to the prescribed norms of quality and quantity 
with regard to catering services on the I ndian Railways.  However, they feel 
that there is always a scope for improvement in many areas.  They feel that 
the proper maintenance of quality of f ood, the mechanism for inspection of 
food hygiene needs to be improved.  With regard to monitoring and 
inspection regime, they desire that  a uniform and unified system for 
monitoring and inspection should be put up in place instead of the present 
dual system. As regards the redressal of grievances and registration of 
complaints, the Committee desire that complaint book should be easily 
available without any hassle to the p assengers.  They have noted that at 
present official complaint books are not provided by the Railways to the 
catering managers. They desire that  complaint book should be made 
available to the Catering Manager and it should be monitored and checked 
on daily/trip basis.  They also desire that the steps taken by Railways in 

15 
  
computerization and making hassle free grievance redressal mechanism be 
intimated to them within a period of three months.  

16 
  
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Para No.8. 
 The Committee noted that an elaborate inspection and complaint 
redressal mechanism was sine qua non  for improving the standard of 
catering services in Indian Railways.  Quality control was of paramount 
importance in any concern dealing with food and beverages as it was 
directly linked to health and safety of  consumers.  The Committee felt that 
strict and regular inspection/surprise checks had become crucial in the 
new catering regime.  Almost 90 pe r cent of the catering system was 
presently being handled by private licensee caterers and in such a 
situation it becomes the responsibility  of the license issu ing authority to 
ensure that all terms and conditi ons of the license agreement were 
followed.   
 The Committee further noted that at present enforcement power had 
been bestowed among Railway Board,  Zonal Railways and IRCTC. That 
creates confusion and results in lax m onitoring.  They after taking into 
account those factors recommended th at an elaborate and unified 
monitoring and quality control syst em should be evolved with minimum 
overlapping between different agenci es. The Committee also suggested 
that redressal of grievances and di sposal of complaints should be 
accorded top priority. They, desired th at the system should be made fully 
electronic and computerized so as to ensure prompt action and hassle free 
registration of complaints. 

17 
  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 There is a well-developed machinery to ensure that quality and quantity as 
prescribed by Railways are ma intained by contractors.  For this purpose, regular 
inspections are carried out by the Railway officials as well as officials of IRCTC. 
 There is at present dual system so  that checks and balances can be 
maintained properly as only one agency in specting may not get the perspective, 
which the other agency can have Railways and IRCTC are in the process of 
computerising passenger complaints so as  to get quick redre ssal.  Hygiene and 
Quality Manual has already been prepared for the guidan ce of staff so that 
inspections can be carried out based on certain pre-determined norms. 
 
 
Para No.10 
 The Committee noted with appreci ation the work done by the IRCTC 
in area of E-ticketing.  They found that  the entire process of e-ticketing 
goes through three inter related stages viz. booking of tickets, payment for 
ticket and delivery of ti ckets.  IRCTC started the internet based Rail 
reservation on 3
rd August, 2002.  In September 2004, they expanded this 
facility to mobile phones by tying up  with leading cellular operators to 
make it more accessible.  Further, IRCT C is planning to extend this facility 
to landlines also.  Similarly with regard to the payment for booked tickets, 
IRCTC had entered into agreement with  leading private and public sector 
banks.  Payments were at present being made through direct debit from 
banks and through credit cards.  The de livery of booked ticket was mainly 
done through courier.  The Committee were  informed that in a short span 
of time, IRCTC had extended this facility to more than 150 towns, more than 
6000 tickets were being booked every da y, more than 10 million tickets had 
been delivered till now and the turnover had been more than 175 crore.    
They were apprised that not a single ticket was delivered at wrong address.   
However, the Committee felt that I RCTC had a long way to go as only a 

18 
  
miniscule percentage of people are patronizing that facility. They noted that 
the problem lies with the payment m echanism.  Credit and debit cards 
penetration is not wide spread.  E ven those who had these cards, were 
generally reluctant to use these for security reasons.  Considering all those 
factors and with a view to make it popular, the Committee recommended 
that more payment options should be explored and made available so that 
general public could get benefit of this facility.  They particularly suggested 
that IRCTC should make available cash cards of various denominations 
which could be distributed through th e network of PCO booths, general 
stores, travel agents etc. so that  anyone wishing to make payment quote 
the cash card number and the payment would instantly be made.  This way 
e-ticketing would become more popular  and come within the reach of 
general public. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The suggestion for increasing the di stribution network for e-ticketing and 
also for consideration of cash card is  a welcome suggestion.  Cash Cards have 
already been introduced for purchase of Internet Tickets. 
 Number of alternate opt ions of payment for Internet Tickets are being 
explored and are getting implemented in stages.  In additi on to credit cards as a 
mode of payment inter account transfe rs from banks have been introduced and 
services of cash cards have also been introduced.  IRCTC has offered their 
services to all cash card service holders so as to proliferate this activity. 
 
Para No. 12 
 The Committee found that the Minist ry of Railways had decided to 
set up Rail Yatri Niwas/Budget Hotels on unused railway land in the vicinity 
of major stations and had directed I RCTC to establish the facilities through 
private participation.  They were also informed that provisions are being 
made to upgrade all the Yatri Niwases and Hotels in existence at present.  
The Committee were of the view that such facilities would help in tackling 
the hardships faced by Railway passengers in finding suitable 

19 
  
accommodation.  They emphasized that the Ministry of Railways should 
expedite the process of setting up new  Budget Hotels and modernizing 
and repairing the existing ones.  They urged the Ministry of Railways to 
give clearance for such projects at the earliest.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 Rail Yatri Niwas and Budget Hotels is a welcome area for extension and 
effort is being made by IR and IRCTC to expedite making of Budget Hotels. 

20 
  
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT 
REPLIES 
 
 
Para No.3 
 
The Committee were happy to note that in the new catering policy 
provision for reservation had been made  in favour of underprivileged and 
marginalized sections of society, but on close perusal of the policy, they 
discerned that the reservation policy foll owed by the Railways in awarding 
catering license lacks uniformity and was devoid of justifiable criteria.  
They particularly noted three major lacunae in the policy.   First, no 
provision for reservation had been laid in case of major units and the 
award of license made on the basis of  professional criteria through open 
competitive bidding.   Secondly, with reference to the small units dual 
standard had been made, for instance in restaurants/refreshment rooms at 
“B” and “C” category stations the quantum of reservation had been fixed at 
25 per cent, while at “D”, “E” and “F” category stations, it had been pegged 
at 49.5 per cent.     The Committ ee  had found the reservation anomalous 
and contradictory. 
Thirdly, the Committee specifically noted that no criteria 
and standard had been adopted in allocating the percentage reservation 
among different categories of beneficiaries such as war widows, widows of 
railway employees, handicaps etc.  In  view of the above, the Committee 
desired that uniform policy of reservation should be followed in all catering 
units at all stations/train s.  They, therefore, recommended that the existing 
reservation policy of Government of Indi a should be followed strictly with 
necessary modifications and exceptions, if any, to be made in favour of any 
special category.   Further, a speci fic criteria should be adopted in 
allocating reservation among different categories of beneficiaries.  
 

21 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 There are no directives from Centra l Government about reservation and 
its percentage  and criterion in contracts and licences.  Licences are  awarded 
and governed by Contract Act and Companies Act. 
 The management of major units r equires lot of managerial acumen, 
functional capability and cate ring experience and capabili ty to muster resources 
including financial  resources and put up the system and processes which should 
cater to large scale operation in order to meet the aspirations and requirements 
of the traveling public.  Major units requi re the best available professionals in the 
trade.  Reservation in this category will not meet  the above requirements. 
 Indian Railways have taken pro-active steps to provide  reservation 
although there is no provision for it under Contract Act or Companies Act.  
Increase in reservation upto 49.5% at D, E and F categories of stations has been 
primarily done to look after the interests of weaker sections of the society. 
 Percentages decided by the Railways has  kept in view the needs of these 
categories. 
 
Para No.4 
 The Committee found that only 252 mail/express trains had attached 
pantry cars (213 licensee and 39 departme ntal). Many long distance trains 
did not have the pantry car facility  at all.  The Committee were also 
concerned at the lack of modernizati on in pantry servi ces.  They also did 
not appreciated the criteria which had been laid down for providing 
attached pantry cars on the trains.  The y took exception part icularly to the 
minimum journey time stipulation of more than 24 hours each way.  Taking 
all those factors into consideration,  the Committee reiterated their earlier 
recommendation and desired that every long distance train which runs for 
more than 15 hours each way should be pr ovided with attached pantry car 
as early as possible. They had also d esired that the pantry services should 
be modernized by effecting changes in  the design and d écor of the pantry 

22 
  
car and ensure minimum human handling by inducting modern 
gadgets/equipments and processes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The suggestion given by the Standing Committee to modernize the design 
and décor of pantry cars and ensure mi nimum handling by introducing modern 
gadgets, equipments and procedure is noted. 
 At present, due to limited availability of  pantry cars, the current stipulation 
is for attaching pantry cars to trains , which run for more than 24 hours.  
Whenever a pantry car is providing to a train, one coach has to be reduced as 
the locomotives  have limited hauling capaci ty and are at present run to the full 
capacity. 
 The provision of pantry cars to trains  with 15 hours run will invariably lead 
to reduction in passenger amenity. 
 To look after the requirement of cate ring services for such trains, which do 
not have pantry cars.  Railways have  a policy of Train Side Vending (TSV) , 
which caters to the requirement of such trains.                                          
 
Para No.5 
The Committee had noted with concern the phenomenon of 
unauthorized vending in the trains and at the stations.  They were of the 
view that unauthorized vending was not  only causes loss of revenue to the 
Railways, but also poses a threat to h ealth of passengers.  However, they 
were also aware that this was a sour ce of livelihood for many families.  
Considering those factors, the Committ ee had earnestly desired that this 
problem should be tackled in a ha rmonious and prudent manner after 
taking into consideration different  aspects of the problem.  The Committee 
had also suggested  that some sort of mechanism in the nature of an 
informal union or society should be cr eated to organize the unauthorized 
vendors and a limited number of license should be given to the 
Union/Society depending upon the cate gory of stations.  The Committee 
had recommended that unauthorized  vendors should be identified, their 

23 
  
credentials be verified  and license be granted  to them.  Further they 
should be given identification numbers in the form of badge and uniform as 
is presently given to porters.  This w ould ensure proper  monitoring  on 
such  vendors and curb the possibility of misuse. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Unauthorized hawking under Section 144 of I ndian Railway Act  and 
further amendment as Railway (2 nd Amendment) Act 2003  is an offence, the 
provisions of which are given below: 
  “144 : Prohibition on hawk ing, etc. and begging:- 
(i) If any person canvasses for any custom or hawks or exposes for sale any 
article whatsoever in any railway carriage or upon any part of a railway, except 
under and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a licence granted by 
the railway administration in this behalf, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend  to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees, or with both: 
Provided that, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, such punishment shall not 
be less than a fine of one thousand rupees. 
(ii) If any person begs in any railway carriage or upon a railway station, he 
shall be liable for punishment as provided under sub-section(I). 
Any person referred to in sub-section(I) or sub-section(2) may be removed 
from the railway carriage or any part of the railway or railway station, as the case 
may be by any railway servant authorised in  this behalf or by any  other person 
whom such railway servant may call to his aid. 
Grant of permission for unauthorised vend ing will require a change in the 
Railway Act.  The Railway Act’s above provision has been made with lot of 
deliberations and has stood  the test of time. 
(i) Safety & security of passengers.  There are cases where unauthorised 
vendors have served obnoxious food resulting in grievous and serious injury to 
passengers. 

24 
  
(ii) There may be increase in crimes committed at station by way of luggage 
lifting, snatching of chains etc. if unauthorised vendors are permitted. 
 
(iii) Quality of food cannot be ensured. 
(iv) It may also lead to sub-standard f ood by eating of which may make the 
passengers sick of ill and may not meet the PFA requirements. 
(v) It will give a bad image to Railways since raison d’etre is to control the 
llicensees and put up a very strong quality control management system as 
suggested by Standing Committee. 
(vi) The number of vendor s cannot be controlled. 
(vii) Further, there have been cases in  Railways where members of the 
cooperatives have sought employment in Railways by using Labour Contract Act.  
This has already happened in  cooperative societies for loading/unloading of 
parcels.  The labour contract and regulations act is quoted and some judgment 
adversely  affecting the Railways have been given. 
 The need does not exist for giving licence to unauthorized vendors as 
long-distance trains have been provided with pantry cars and such trains, which 
do not have pantry cars, are served through train side vending contracts.  
Adequate stalls and st atic units have been provided at stations to look after the 
needs of passengers.  Unauthorised vendi ng is a public menace as services 
provided by them are sub-standard.  Ca ses of lifting of luggage from these 
sources have come up and they give Railways a bad name. 
 
Para No.6 
The Committee noted with appr ehension that with gradual 
privatization of catering services in th e Indian Railways, the position of 
workers/vendors/hawkers engaged by licensee caterers had become 
vulnerable.  Their job security was at  risk and were more likely to be 
exploited now.  Since there was no safety provision for them in the event of 
change of contractor, they could be jettisoned by the new contractor, their 
wages could be reduced even below the minimum level, their service 
condition could be varied to their disadvantage.  In view of all those, the 

25 
  
Committee desired that some sort of social security/safety net should be 
created in their favour.  The IRCTC should formally or informally evolve 
some mechanism and ensure that in the event of change of contractor, 
workers should not be discontinued.    They also desired that the 
departmental catering which were still in existence be continued. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 More than 90% catering on Indian Rail ways is already in private hands as 
has been brought before the Standing Committee by IRCTC. 
 Development of catering activity on the Indian Railways has brought about 
substantial increase in employment.  IRCTC, during presentation before the 
Committee, has indicated that new cateri ng activities have created more than 
5000 jobs. 
  
No railway man employed in catering activity has been retrenched.  In 
order to consolidate catering services so  as to increase the productivity and 
output, staff has been redeployed within  the same system. 
A formal mechanism cannot be evolv ed whereby a new contractor can be 
forced to take on the labour of the old contractor.  However, informal systems do 
exist where the staff of previous contractor  is taken over by the new contractor in 
large numbers. 
 
Para No. 7 
 The Committee found that now license would be awarded through 
tender system to the highest bidder instead of awarding through invitation 
of applications earlier.    As far as the change over to tendering and bidding  
system was concerned, the Commi ttee had no objections as such.  
However, their apprehension stems main ly from the fact that it would 
encourage speculative and excess bidding  wi th a view to grab the tender.  
It could lead to deliberate tamperi ng with the quality and quantity of the 
food and increase in  prices of food articles on one hand and exploitation 
of the workers to recover the huge  sum of money spent on getting the 

26 
  
license on the other.  So in the process both workers and Railway 
passengers stand to lose immensely.   
 To avoid the pernicious effect of the new tendering system, the 
Committee recommended that the objective behind tendering and bidding  
should be changed and it should be  supplanted with a new system.  
License should be awarded to the bidd er who quotes the lowest price and 
was ready to supply the prescribed and defined item/menu.  Regular 
monitoring of the supply of quantit y and quality shoul d be essentially 
carried out.  That would not only bene fit the passenger, but also make 
Railway catering affordable and acce ssible to common passengers who 
otherwise seldom use Railway cateri ng. That would also make catering 
profitable as volume would go up, more passengers would patronize the 
Railway catering. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 There is a well established system on the Railways wherein menus for the 
meals supplied on the trains along with quantity of each it em to be provided are 
fixed by the Railways.  Each contractor has  to abide by the abo ve conditions  as 
well as the rates at which he will char ge for the services.  These conditions are 
laid down in the contract document. 
 In order to ensure than the menus and the quantities prescribed by the 
Railways are adhered to by the contractor, frequent checks are carried out by the 
Commercial organization or t he Railways.  Thus, the interest of the travelling 
public are fully protected.  A contractor bidding for a contract keeps into account 
these factors and bidding evolves after ke eping in view the margins that he will 
derive from such a contract. 
 Award of contract to the lowest bidder will in no way change the present 
perspective as pre-determined menu, qua ntity and pricing ar e pre-determined.  
The present system ensures that part of his margins accrue to  the Railways so 
as to utilise this money for re-deployment in improvement of services. 

27 
  
 The system of award of contract to the highest  bidder with strong quality 
check mechanism both for menu rates and quantity and quality is considered to 
be the best system and has been working satisfactorily. 
 
 Para No.9 
 The Committee expressed their reservation regarding the provision 
of minimum license fee th at had been kept for different type of catering 
services in the new policy.  They noted that for Rajdhani/Shatabdi Express 
trains, minimum license fee had been kept at 15 per cent of annual sales 
turnover based on actual occupancy or any other percentage commission 
on sales.  For other mail/exp ress trains and static units, that had been kept 
at 12 per cent.  They observed that th is system based on estimated annual 
sales turnover entailed detailed case by case assessment and required 
constant supervision and continuous monitoring. The system apart from 
being cumbersome and time consuming was also prone to be misused 
since it gave much discretion a nd leeway to the assessing officers. 
Therefore, the Committee with a view to impart greater degree of objectivity 
to the system suggested that license fee should be replaced with a system 
based on rent/lease, arrived at after considering the location, dimensions, 
scale, maintenance and conservancy charges of the catering establishment 
in question. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The present system of keeping licence fee as a percentage of sales 
turnover is continuing sinc e long and has stood the test of  time as licence fee is 
linked to the sales.  Rental will be fixed on the basis of market rate of land at a 
particular location.  There may be situatio n wherein market rental may be very 
high with stall not getting the sale leading to a situation where the contract will be 
unviable.  There will similarly be reve rse situation when sales will be very high 
with the low market r ent leading to abnormal returns to the contractor.  Hence,  
licence fee is fixed to the sale rather than land rental, which vary from city to city.  
It is for this purpose that Railways pr opose to introduce tender system, which will 

28 
  
be purely market driven and will decide t he value of a contract based on the 
market forces and this system will be transparent and open. 
 12% licence fee is charged at all units on the Indian Railways, mobile and 
static except for Rajdhani/Shatabdi trains  where  licence fee is 15% keeping in 
view the higher returns to the contractor. 
 
Para No. 11 
 The Committee noted with satisfact ion that IRCTC had forayed into 
manufacturing of packaged drinking water with the brand name ‘Rail Neer’ 
to meet the long felt need of railwa y passengers.  Rail Neer is presently 
being processed/manufactured at two pl ants namely Nangloi in Delhi and 
Danapur in Bihar.  These plants conform to BIS and EU norms.   The 
Committee were informed that these plants employ eight stage purification 
process.   
 However, in spite of all these, ‘R ail Neer’ was not being used by 
majority of passengers because of its cost and taste.  Common people still 
use local tap water or carry home wa ter with them.  The Committee noted 
that the total production cost of ‘R ail Neer’ amounts to about Rs.6.50/- 
bottle (raw material Rs.2.89, opera tions and other overheads charges 
Rs.2.92).  Further the Committee also noted that of all the raw materials 
preforms, caps and shrink level togeth er cost around Rs.2.50.  They were 
of the view that if IRCTC starts supplying the purified water in other 
alternative low cost package, its cost would come down and would become 
more affordable.  In view of this , the Committee recommended that IRCTC 
should consider supplying water in alternative low cost packages/pouches 
to reduce the overall cost of ‘Rail Neer’.  They desired that 
packages/pouches of different  volume  should also be introduced in the 
market.  The Committee also desired that IRCTC, in consultation with 
experts, should take steps to improve the taste of Rail Neer.  This would 
lead to more sale as the passengers  and other customers would have 
cheap water with wider options. 
 

29 
  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Rail Neer retail price is Rs.10/- only.  Some of the other brands who 
process water through the same facilities are selling at higher price.  The present 
facilities of production of Rail Neer have been designed for 1-litre bottles only.  
Technology in such plants cannot be in troduced to provide pouches for which 
separate systems are required. 

30 
  
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
 
Para No.1 
 The Committee had found that IRCT C was an extended arm of the 
Indian Railways to upgrade, prof essionalise  and manage catering and 
hospitality services at stati ons, on trains and other locations, to promote  
domestic and international  tourism, through establishment and 
development of Budget Hotels, information and commercial publicity  and 
global reservation system, Rail Ticket ing and provide quality packaged 
drinking  water.  The Committee had appreciated that IRCTC was making 
efforts to improve and modernise cater ing.  However, as an extension of 
Indian Railways, IRCTC had also to fu lfill the social  obligations towards 
the Railways users and those dependent on Railways. 
 The Committee after going through the New Catering Policy 2005, 
had noted that the system of cateri ng envisaged in the Policy was totally 
different from what was earlier.  It had undergone a paradigm shift, the very 
notion and concept behind railway cateri ng had been  changed, it was no 
longer being treated as part of p assenger amenities.  The Committee 
further noted that earlier catering on rail ways  was based  on the principle 
of no profits no loss, but in the New Catering Policy, the dominant theme 
was to  commercialise it, privatise it.  Profit motive was apparent on the 
face of it, license fee had been hiked, tendering and bidding system had 
been introduced, license would be given  to the highest bidder, tenure of 
license had been reduced and departme ntal catering was being dispensed 
with. 
 Considering all those aspects of New Catering Policy, it was 
inevitable that when the catering polic y was put into practice, it would 
directly or by implication import and impinge on the interest of the 

31 
  
passengers and railway users.  The Committee had therefore, 
recommended that the whole system of catering including the Catering 
Policy-2005 should be  reviewed so as to align the catering policy  as a part 
of passenger amenities  and not as a commercial and profit making venture 
alone.  The Policy should incorporate provisions which fulfill social 
obligations towards passengers, rail way users and those dependent on 
Railways.  Further the Committee noted that stay order was in vogue in 
awarding licence to static and mobile units till October, 2005.  The 
Committee desired that the review of New Catering Policy be done before 
the expiry of the  stay order. 
 
Reply of the Government 
There is no paradigm shift in the Catering Policy.  Catering continues to be 
an important component of passenger amenity.  Railways lose about Rs.400 
crores on catering services in case fu lly distributed costs including cost of 
haulage of panty car are taken into account.  Effort is being made to cut down the 
losses in the catering activities. 
There is no shift to profit motive.  Only charging of the licence fee has 
been  rationalised so that Railways get their fair share in the revenue, which is 
generated by various licensees.  Earlier the whole profit wa s accruing to the 
licensee alone, now a part of it is also  coming to the Railways as licence 
fee/concession fee.  The money so generated is being ploughed back for 
improving the catering infrastructure and modernization of catering processes 
like training of staff etc. so as to upgrade and professionalise catering services.  
In no way will it affect the passenger am enities  as prices at which the F&B 
products will be sold will continue to be governed by the Railways. 
The tendering process initiated has brought in transparency unlike the 
earlier  system where allotment was through a process of applications, which 
may have led to discretion at times. 
The new Catering Policy has addressed the social obligations of the 
Government Reservation quota for underpriv ileged  in small un its at A, B & C 

32 
  
categories of stations has  been introduced and it is 49.5% in the D, E & F 
categories of stations. 
As suggested by the Standing Committee,  the review of the Catering 
Policy has been initiated in Railway Board well before October. 2005. 
 
 
Para No.2 
The Committee were of the view that catering on Indian Railways 
apart from being business venture forms  a source of livelihood for most of 
the small caterers/vendors  in trains and on stations.  The entire family was 
dependent on it for generation.  In view of that, the Committee was 
constrained to note that some of the provisions of the Catering Policy-2005 
directly striked at the livelihood concerns of small caterers/vendors.  
The Committee were particularly concerned about provisions in Para 
Nos. 15.6.1, 15.6.3, 15.6.4, 16.3, 16.4 of the Catering Policy-2005:- 
 
(i) Para 15.6.1 ,  provided that the tenure of the license for small units for 
restaurants, refreshment rooms at all ‘B’ & ‘C’ cate gory stations and 
trolleys and stalls at category ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category stations would be             
3 years. The Committee felt that this wa s  unjustified and impracticable as  
3 years was too short a period to provide stability to any venture much less 
a business venture.  That provision coupled with Para 15.6.3 which 
stipulated that there w ould be no renewal or extension after expiry of the 
contract would lead to uncertainty a nd insecurity in the minds of the small 
caterers. The Committee felt that this provision was anti entrepreneurship 
as no business can develop & flourish in such an environment of 
uncertainty.  The licensee could not plan ahead for future and would not 
invest and take interest in the ven ture.  He would always be on 
tenterhooks.  Considering all those factors the Committee suggested that 
the tenure of the small units should also be made for a period of 5 years 
and thereafter only review of license sh ould be done.  After the review, the 
license should be generally renewed with necessary changes and 

33 
  
modifications in the terms and condi tions governing the license depending 
upon the performance. 
   
(ii) Similarly, paragraphs  15.6.4 a nd  16.4 of the new policy stipulatee 
that on every renewal of license of rese rved categories at “A”, “B” and “C” 
category stations or fresh allotmen ts, license fee should be increased 
based on actual sales turnover or the unit subject to a minimum of 10 per 
cent hike over the prevailing license fee of the unit. Considering that as 
unwarranted, the Committee  had recommended  that it should be reduced 
to a more reasonable level.  They had also taken note of para 16.3 which 
stipulated that ‘may rene w’ the tenure of license of small units at “D”, “E” 
and “F” category stations after every five years subject to satisfactory 
performance.  The Committee had observed  that this left much discretion 
in the hands of officials and was likely to be misused.  They, therefore, had 
recommended that  the performance criteria should be analytical and 
rational with specific parameters  so that there was no scope for 
subjectivity.   That would give confidence to the small caterers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Infrastructural input required for setting up a small static un it at a station 
does not involve any substantial cost, except a bare structure.  Three years 
period is considered more than adequate for a party allotted such a stall to 
recover his cost of infrastructure.  On ly unreserved category stall at A, B & C 
categories of stations come within the purview of the above Policy. 
Out of 8,055 stations in the country, only 935 stations approximately come 
under A, B & C category.  At 7,120 stations , existing stallholders  will continue to 
operate as they are subject to satisf actory performance.  Thus, existing 
contractors at all above stations are not being disturbed and their livelihood is not 
being affected in any way. 
 Even at A, B & C categories of stati ons, reserved category stalls in small 
unit category will remain as they are an d their livelihood wil l not be affected in 

34 
  
any way.  It is only unreserved category st all at A, B &C categories of stations, 
which are being put on tender. 
 The Committee’s observation that tenur e should be extended from 3 years 
to 5 years is under examination of Ministry of Railways. 
The provision in the Policy for incr ease of the licence fee by 10% on 
renewal or on fresh allotment  over prevailing licence f ee of the unit is justified 
because fresh allotment will be done after 3 to 5 years.  In this period the 
increase in the Wholesale Pr ice Index for a period of 5 years is generally much 
more than 10%.  Further due to increase in the number of passengers also, the 
sale will also go up to the period of 5 years. 
 The renewal system is based on  periodical assessment of the 
performance.  Performance based repor t about satisfactory performance is 
submitted on a requisite proforma which is very analytical to the committee, 
which recommends the extension.  This is  also a time-test ed system and is very 
objective and equitable. 
 

35 
  
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLEIS ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Para No.13 
 The Committee noticed that bedr olls were provided to sleeper 
classes in Rajdhani and other express trains on demand, whereas the same 
were not provided in sleeper classes in  ordinary long distance trains. They 
desired that on demand the bed rolls should be provided in sleeper classes 
of long distance trains also on payment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Bedrolls are supplied to the passenger s of  Rajdhani and all upper class 
coaches of Mail/Express trains.  The fare is inclusive of bedrolls charges in such 
classes.  Supply of bedro lls to Sleeper Class passengers  involves logistics and 
infrastructure problems.  However, the suggestion will be examined.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                    (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
      November, 2006                                                       Chairman, 
     Agrahayana, 1928 Saka               Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 

36 
  
           
                APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF  THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2006-07) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 18 th September, 2006 from                 
1500 hours to 1630 hours in Committee R oom No. 139, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
  SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya  
3. Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
4. Shri Ramdas B. Athawale 
5. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure   
6. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
7. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
8. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
9. Shri Laxman Rao Patil 
10. Shri A. Sai Prathap 
11. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan  
12. Shri K. Subbarayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
14. Maulana Obaidu llah Khan Azmi 
15. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
16. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi  
17. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
18. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
19. Shri Isam Singh 
20. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
21. Shri Abani Roy 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh       - Joint Secretary        
2.      Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
3.      Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Assistant Director 

37 
  
 

38 
  
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chai rman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee c onsidered the draft Reports on Action 
Taken by the Government on the reco mmendations/observations contained in 
their 14 th Report on -  ‘Indian Railway Ca tering and Tourism Corporation’ 
(IRCTC) and adopted the same with some modifications given in the annexure. 
 
3. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chai rman to finalise the Reports and 
present the same to the House during Winter Session.  
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

39 
  
 
     ANNEXURE 
 
Additions/Changes made by the Standing Committee on Railways in Draft Report 
on ‘Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 14th Report on ‘Indian Railway Catering & Tourism Corporation’ 
 
________________________________________________     
Sl.   Page Para  Line   Addition/Deletion  
No.  No. No. 
________________________________________________________________________ 
    
1. 6 1.12  1  Add in the beginning the following line:– 
 
The Committee find from the Action 
Taken Reply that their apprehension that 
some of the provisions of the Catering 
Policy-2005 when put into practice may 
directly strike at the livelihood of small 
caterers/vendors has not been addressed to 
by the Government at all.   
 
 
2. 8 1.16  4  Add the following line after ‘in many areas’:- 
 
The Committee feel that the proper 
maintenance of quality of food, the 
mechanism for inspection of food hygiene 
needs to be improved. 

40 
  
 
         APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKE N BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVTIONS CONTAINED IN THE 14 th REPORT 
(14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘INDIAN RA ILWAY CATERING & TOURISM 
CORPORATION’. 
 
 Total number of Recommendations/Observations   13 
 
 (i) Recommendations/observations  which have been accepted     
  by Government        03 
(Vide recommendations/observations)  
   
Para Nos. 8, 10 and 12. 
 
  Percentage of total       23% 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not   
Desire to pursue in view of Government replies    07 
(Vide recommendations/observations) 
 
 Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 11. 
 
Percentage of total       53.8% 
 
 
 (iii) Recommendations/obs ervations in respect of which replies of    
  which replies of Government have not been accepted by the  02 
Committee which require reiteration.  
(Vide recommendations/observations) 
 
 Para Nos. 1 and 2         
 
Percentage of total       15% 
   
 (iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final     
  replies of Government are still awaited.    01 
(Vide Recommendations/observations) 
   
Para Nos.13 
   
Percentage of total       7.9% 
  