      
10 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2004-05) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
[The Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 16th Report of the Standing Committee on 
Railways on ‘Resource Mobilisation’] 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka) 

 2
 
 
SCR No. 89 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2004-05) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [The Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 16th Report of the Standing Committee  
on Railways on ‘Resource Mobilisation’ ] 
 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.05.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.05.2005 
 
             
  
             
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
May,  2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka) 
 

 3
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           
 
  
Composition of the Committee              
 
Introduction            
   
PART - II 
 
CHAPTER I  Report  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee.  
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final Replies of 
Government are still awaited  
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the 26th sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways 
held on 10.05.2005 
 
II. Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/observations contained in the 16th Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (2003) 13th Lok Sabha on 
Resource Mobilisation     
 
   
 
 

 4
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAY (2004-05) 
   
Shri Basudeb Acharia  - Chairman  
 
MEMBERS 
   
LOK SABHA 
  
2.      Shri A.Sai Prathap 
3 Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
4 Shri Atique Ahamad 
5         Shri Ajaya Kumar 
6 Shri Subrata Bose  
7        Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10. Shri Pradeep Gandhi 
11. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
12. Shri Anwar Hussain 
13. Shri Mahesh Kanodia 
14. Shri C. Kuppusami 
15. Smt. Kalpana R. Narhire  
16. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
17. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
18. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
19. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
20. Ch. Lal Singh 
21. Mohd. Tahir 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Kamla Manhar 
23. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
24. Maulana Obaidu llah Khan Azmi  
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri R. Kamraj 
29. Shri Isam Singh 
30. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31. Shri Abani Roy 
 
 

 5
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary   - Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. S andhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.S. Negi   - Deputy Secretary  
4. Smt Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Under Secretary 
5. Shri U.C. Bharadwaj  - Executive Officer 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 6
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I,  the Chairman, Standing Committee on Railways (2004-05 ), having been 
authorised by the Committee to present, on their behalf, this Tenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (2004-05) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth Repor t of the Standing 
Committee on Railways on ‘Resource Mobilisation’. 
 
2. The Sixteenth Report  was presented to Lok Sabha on 04.02.2004 and it 
contained 23 recommendations/observations.  T he Ministry of Railways have furnished 
their Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 23.08.2004.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Railways (200 4-05) considered the draft Action 
Taken Report at their sitting held on  10.05.2005.   
 
4. The analysis of the action ta ken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in  the Sixteenth Repor t of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2003) Thirteenth Lok Sabha is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                          BASUDEB ACHARIA 
May, 2005                                                   Chairman, 
Vaisakha, 1927 Saka                              Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 7
Report 
 
CHAPTER-I  
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Railways – 2004 (13 th Lok Sabha) on ‘ Resource Mobilisatio n’, which was presented in Lok 
Sabha on 04.02.2004. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from  the Government in respect of all the 23 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report.   These have been broadly categorised as 
follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Government – 
Para No. 7.2, 7.3, 7.5, 7.7, 7.8  and 7.22 
(ii) Recommendations/observa tions which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government replie s- Para Nos. 7.1, 7.6, 7.9, 7.10, 7.11, 7.12, 7.13, 
7.14, 7.15, 7.17, 7.18, 7.19, 7.20, 7.21 & 7.23. 
(iii) Recommendations/observa tions in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee – Para Nos. 7.4 and 7.16  
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies are still awaited –  
NIL.  
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the Ac tion Taken by Government  on some of their 
Recommendations/observations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 8
 
Recommendation (Para No.7.2) 
 
Railway’s Overall Traffic & Revenue Growth 
4. The Committee in the aforementioned paragr aph   had noted the Railway’s volatile, 
inconsistent and irregular nature of mobilisation of res ources through traditional as well as            
non-traditional sources.  They had expressed th eir concern over the continuously decelerating 
growth particularly in goods s ector from 7 per cent in 1995-96 to  3 per cent  in 2001-02.  They 
also expressed their worry over the drifting of high va lue goods traffic like petroleum products 
through pipelines and better conditions of roads th at might pose a serious threat to the Railways 
freight earnings.  Though they had appreciated the process of refo rm and democratization of the 
Railways in the form of more Zones and Di visions, yet, they had emphasized that 
decentralization of powers should be actually pa ssed on to the Zonal and Divisional level to 
decide instantly the business pe rspective strategies and their implementation rather than 
endlessly waiting  for decisions from the Railway Board. 
  
5. In their action taken reply, the Mi nistry of Railways have stated:- 
“The advice of the Committee is noted.  Indian Railway ha ve initiated the process of 
rationalization of fare & freight structur e in the Railway Budget 2002-03 and continued 
in the year 2003-04 with a view to make the fa re & freight rates competitive and to arrest 
the declining trend in Railways’ share of freight  traffic.  Efforts have also been made in 
the process to reduce the level of cross-subsidization from fre ight to passenger segment.  
This has given the desired results in which Railways have achieved a growth of 5.32% in 
the year 2002-03 and 7.45% in the year 2003-04 in freight traffic. 
 
 Some of the other measures ta ken by the Railways are as under:- 
(i) Affecting greater de-cen tralization of powers to th e Zonal Railways, the powers 
of General Managers to quote reduced station to station rates have been enhanced 
to attract freight traffic.  General Ma nagers can now offer concessions ranging 
from 10% to 24% depending upon the cla ssification of the commodity and the 
quantum of traffic offered. 
(ii) An incentive scheme has been introduced for the Premier Customers of the 
railways, generating freight earnings of  more than 25 crore rupees per annum 
from traffic originating from their private sidings.  Under this scheme, 2% (two 

 9
per cent) rebate is granted on every five crore rupees of  ‘net’ additional freight 
earnings generated from the loading of commodities classified in class-135 and 
above over the preceding financial year.  Th e rebate is applicable in additional to 
any other freight concession availed by the freight customer. 
(iii) The charging of freight for all traffic booked upto 100 kms. has also been 
rationalised through a scheme of graded concessions ranging from 10% to 50%. 
(iv) In view of the increase in internationa l trade, the cargo arriving at the ports is one 
of the major focus areas of Indian Railway s.  Concrete steps have been taken for 
strengthening of rail connectivity of ports and the development of inter-modal 
corridors to the hinterland to increase the share of railways in transport. 
(v) In order to provide single window serv ices at the railway freight terminals for 
booking, handling, delivery and road bridging,  Indian Railways have signed an 
MOU with Central Warehousing Corporation to develop 22 rail side Warehousing 
freight complexes. 
(vi) Train load class at one stage lower than  the wagon-load class has been assigned to 
all commodities where the train load class was not notified earlier.  As a result the 
freight gets reduced by around 4% to 5.26%  when such commodities are offered 
for train – load booking. 
 
6. To cope with Railway s’ volatile, inconsistent and irregular nature of mobilisation of 
resources through their traditi onal as well as non-traditional sources, the Committee, while 
appreciating  the process of reform and democra tization of the Railways in the form of more 
Zones and Divisions,  had desired that the actual d ecentralization of  powers be passed on to the 
Zonal and Divisional  levels  to decide instan tly the business perspective strategies and their 
implementation without endlessl y waiting for the decisions from  the higher echelon of powers 
i.e. Railway Board.  They find  from the action taken reply that steps have been taken by the 
Railways to improve the earnings from both traditional as well as non-traditional sources such as 
rationalization of freight rates, reduction in the level of cross subsidization from freight to 
passenger segment and giving powers to General Managers to grant concessions ranging from 10 
per cent to 24 per cent at discretion depending upon the classification of the commodity and 
quantum of traffic offered.    However, the Committee feel that th e desired level of delegation of 
authority at Zonal and Divisional level to decide the perspective and operational needs has not 
been manifested so far in th e overall scenario of railway reforms and democratization.    

 10
Moreover they are of the firm view that the pro cess of decentralization of  Railways in the form 
of more Zones/Divisions and delegation of au thority downwards are complimentary to each 
other and have a synergetic effect to mobilise res ources and achieve the desired financial targets.  
They, therefore,  hope that th e Railways will take further st eps to decentralise the decision 
making process to Division level also so as to attain the desired financial targets consistently.  

 11
(Recommendation Para Nos. 7.4 & 7.5) 
Passenger Revenues 
7. The Committee had observed in the above  paragraph that the growth in passenger 
earnings had not been commensurate with the incr eased growth rate of   4 per cent  on an 
average over the last 4 years i. e. during 1998-2002 of the number of passengers.  They had also 
noted that the passenger earnings had increased in absolute terms i.e. from Rs.8526 crore in 
1998-99 to Rs.11,162 crore in 2001-02 but the  growth rate of passenger revenue had 
continuously declined to 6.94 per cent  in 2001- 02 from 12.87 per cent  in 1998-99, which 
showed an inversely proportional trend.     They had also found that the actual passenger 
earnings vis-à-vis Budgetary Estimate  had fallen  short to the order of  Rs.190 crore in 2001-02 
and to Rs.720 crore in 2002-03.  They had no t found tenable the reas ons advanced by the 
Railways for such shortfall in earnings to the law and order situation in some parts of the country 
and suspension of leave travel concession.   
 
8. The Committee also noted that the Railways ha d not been able to rationalize further the 
passenger fares to the requisite ex tent taking into account their so cial obligations.  Therefore, 
they had desired that the Ra ilways should supplement their passenger earnings by plugging the 
leakages of revenues by adopting fool proof stra tegies apart from further rationalization of 
passenger fares to a desired level.  In addition to this, they had imp ressed that passenger 
amenities with some value addition and safety cred ibility to the satisfaction of railway users can 
go a long way in augmenting passenger earnings. 
  
9. The Ministry of Railways in th eir action taken reply stated:- 
“Increase in earning in 1998- 99 was 12.9% (even though the passenger growth was only 
1.45%) due to increase in fares in all classes ranging from 5%  to 20%.  Similarly, in 
1999-2000, the earning improved by 12.1% due to in crease in fare ranging from 2% to 
15% (except in II ordinary and II Mail/E xpress).  In the year 2001-2002 there was no 
increase in fares and therefore, the growth in earnings was to the extent of 6.5% only. 
In the year 2002-03 Budget Estimate was Rs. 13,450 crore but it was revised and 
the Revised Estimate was Rs.12,730 crore, whereas the actual earnings was Rs.12,575 
crore.  Hence the shortfall was Rs.155 crore only.” 

 12
 The Ministry further stated:-  
“Railways do agree with the suggestion of the Committee that there is a need for 
supplementing the passenger earnings on the railways by plugging the leakage of revenue 
and also initiating measures to improve passe nger amenities along with safety credibility 
to the satisfaction of the railway users. 
 
In fact, to attract more passenger tra ffic and plugging up leakage of revenue, 
railways take a number of steps from time to time, some of which are enumerated as 
under:- 
(i) Railways run additional trains, augment the load of existing trains etc. to 
clear the rush during the busy season.   In addition monitoring of waiting 
list position is done and additional coaches  are attached in trains wherever 
long waiting lists are noticed. 
(ii) With a view to improve the ticket dispensation so as to improve earnings, 
various new methods of ticket booking/dispensation which include 
booking through Internet, Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS) have 
already been initiated.   Additional counters are ope ned from time to time 
at various stations. 
(iii) For provision and improvement in passenger amenities at station a 
separate fund is allocated every year .  In order to bring about specific 
improvements at stations, railways ha ve launched a scheme of nominating 
model stations where service related passenger amenities are provided and 
these include provision of signa ges, improvement to waiting 
rooms/retiring rooms/booking offices/enquiry counters provision of Pay & 
Use toilets, development of circulating area etc. 
(iv) To plug leakage of revenue, ticket- checking drives are launched in various 
trains throughout the country.  Du ring these drives, the passengers 
travelling without ticket etc. are appr ehended and penalize.  These checks 
also result in diverting people to booking windows for purchasing tickets. 
(v) Action is also taken from time to time to plug the leakage of revenue 
whenever any deficiency in the system is noticed.” 
 

 13
10. The Committee had noted in their original  recommendation that the growth rate of 
passenger earnings had not been commensurate with the growth rate in the number of 
passengers.  They had further noticed that in the backdrop of 4 per cent (approximately) increase 
in the number of railway commuters over the la st 4 years i.e., 1998-2002,  the passenger revenue 
growth rate had declined to 6.94  per cent  in 2001-02 from  12.87 per cent in 1998-99.   
Although the passenger earnings have  increased in absolute term s i.e. from Rs.8,526 crore in 
1998-99 to Rs. 11,162 crore in 2001-02, yet the Committee had expressed their unhappiness over 
the shortfall of Rs.875 crore in the passenger revenue against the Budget Estimates of  Rs. 13450 
crore.  They were unable to co mprehend the reason(s) advanced  by the Minist ry as to why 
passenger revenue growth rate has not been proporti onal to the rate of increase in the number of 
passengers over the last few years. The Commi ttee had desired that to supplement their 
passenger earnings Railways should plug the leak ages of revenues by adopting fool proof 
strategies apart from rationalization of passenger fares to a desired level.   
 
11. From the action taken reply, the Committee fi nd that the  Railways have taken some 
measures to attract more passenger traffic an d plug the leakage of revenues, nonetheless  
concrete and apparent action as such has not been manifested by th e Railways to check the 
rampant corruption especially in passenger related areas.  They are of the considered view that 
untill and unless the Railways do not take more stringent action against all those including 
railway officials who are found involved in co rrupt practices (causing significant revenue 
leakages), the Railways cannot enhance their grow th rate in Passenger earnings and restore their 
credibility.  They, therefore, emphasise that th e Railways should come down heavily on corrupt 
officials and touts and break their nexus so as to curb leakages on any front in Railways.    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 14
 
(Recommendation Para No. 7.16) 
Commercial Publicity 
12. The Committee in the above paragraph had noted that the ear nings from commercial 
publicity on trains, railway premises and level crossing gates had been almost static between 
Rs.21.70 crore and Rs.24.74 crore during the last fe w years i.e. from 1997-98 to 2001-02.  They 
had further noted that the Ministry could realise only Rs.27.36 crore and Rs.24.74 crore against a 
target of Rs.100 crore each during 2000-01 and 2001-02 respectively.   They had felt that the 
Railways had not been able to exploit the tremendous potential of earnings from commercial 
publicity that still exists.  They therefore, had emphasized that the Ministry should adopt a 
comprehensive marketing policy/strategies and purs ue it vigorously to cash in their tremendous 
commercial potential to the op timum level by giving some incentives to the prospective 
advertisers.   
 
13. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“The earning through commercial publicity dur ing the year 2000-01 was Rs. 27.36 crore.  
There has been a steady increase in earnings through commercial publicity from Rs.21.70 
crore in 1997-98 to Rs.29.14 crore in 2002-03 and in the current year upto December the 
earnings have been Rs. 23.40 crore and it is estimated that an amount of Rs. 32 crore 
would be earned through this in the current year. 
 
The earnings from commercial publicity on Indian Railways in previous years 
have been as under:- 
Year Earnings (Rs.in Cr.) 
1997-98 21.70 
1998-99 21.54 
1999-00 22.17 
2000-01 27.36 
2001-02 24.74 
2002-03 29.14 
2003-04 (upto Dec.) 23.40 
 

 15
There have been certain factors which came in the way of enhancing earnings and 
these include restrictions being imposed by a nu mber of local bodies in cities like Delhi, 
Chennai and other Metros. 
 
A number of new areas have been identi fied which still have not yielded the 
desired response.  These include advertisement on Freight wagons, level crossings etc.  It 
may take some more time for prospective adver tisers to get convinced about the utility of 
such new types of  media for publicity.  The steps suggested by the Committee have been 
reiterated to the Railways to maximize the earnings through commercial publicity.” 
14. The Committee had noted that  earnings from commercial publicity on trains, railway 
premises and level crossing gates had been more or less static between Rs.20-29 crore during the 
last few years.  They had also  felt that Railways had a tremendous  potential in terms of earnings 
from commercial publicity which needed to be  cashed in to the opt imum level by adopting 
aggressive marketing strategies.  They had empha sized for formulation of  a comprehensive and 
definite marketing policy by reassessing the valu e of sites, advertising in newspapers, publishing 
information brochure and conducting meetings with advertising companies to maximize 
revenues.    In their action ta ken reply the Railways have accepte d that there has been steady 
increase in earnings through commercial public ity from Rs.21.70 crore in 1997-98 to Rs.29.14 
crore in 2002-03.  The Ministry have attributed this steady incr ease in the earnings to factors 
such as  restrictions being impos ed by a number of local bodies in metro cities. However, they 
have informed the Committee that steps suggest ed by the Committee to maximise the earnings 
through commercial publicity have been reitera ted to the Zonal Rail ways.  The Committee, 
while keeping the vast potential of commercial publicity in mind  stress that Railways should 
prepare a comprehensive and definite policy on commercial publicity and pursue it emphatically.  
They emphasize that annual financial target be fixed accordingly in this regard.  They also desire 
to be apprised of the action taken by the Zonal Railways in the matter.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 16
 
(Recommendation Para No.7.22) 
Private Participation in Railway Infrastructure 
15. The Committee had noticed that the Railways had started taking initiatives to encourage 
private participation in mid ni neties and launched schemes such as BOLT which was later on 
modified to BOT Scheme, ‘Own Your Wagon’ etc.   They also noticed that the process of private 
participation in the rail infrastructure had not attain ed the required pace.    Only two projects one 
each under the Head  New Lines (in Northern Railways) and Gauge Conversion (in Western 
Railway) had been taken up during the year 2001-02.  3 more projects of doubling and new lines 
and some more proposals from the State Gove rnments of Karnataka, Jharkhand, and Andhra 
Pradesh etc. to participate under Special Purpos e Vehicle Scheme as joint venture were  under 
active consideration of the Railways which would mobilize about Rs.1534 crore. 
 
16. The Committee had been of the unanimous vi ew that private/joint participation by State 
Governments in the rail infrastructure projects  could prove a panacea to resource constraints 
being faced by  the Railways  to finance a larg e shelf of project with a huge throw forward of 
about Rs.40,000 crore.  They, ther efore, had been of the view that the Railways should pursue 
the policy of private participation more vigor ously.  They had also recommended that the 
Railways must clear all such proposals pending with them within three months and must 
encourage the viable private investors for sett ing up freight terminals/rail hubs with all model 
warehousing facilities  to cater to multimodal rail borne traffic needs. 
 
17. The Ministry of Railways in their action taken replies stated:- 
“Indian Railways have been successful in attracting priv ate participation and schemes 
such as leasing of wagons under Own Your  Wagon Scheme and private participation 
through BOT have received encouraging respon se from private entrepreneurs.  However 
private sector’s participation in constructi on of new Railway lines has not been that 
encouraging.  For Private Participation, the Railways need to iden tify projects with high 
rate of returns.  Railways identified following projects to be taken up under BOT 
Scheme:- 
I. Track, ballasting and signalling works of Viramgam-Mehesana Gauge 
Conversion (W. Railway).  The BOT contract has been finalized and work 

 17
is progressing satisfactorily.  Likely  to be commissioned in the year 2004-
05. 
II. Track, ballasting and signaling wo rks of Utratia-Chandrauli and 
Sultanpur-Bandhua Kalan (N. Railway) Doubling.  The recommendations 
of the Tender Committee are under consideration. 
III. Track, ballasting and signalling works in connection with doubling, of 
Amroha-Kankather (N. Railway).  Th e invitation of Tenders bids are 
under process. 
 
Ministry of Railways has formed Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL) for 
attracting public-private investment in rail infrastructure projects.  RVNL will 
provide focused attention towards resource mobilisation and execution for 
Railway infrastructure projects, which ar e financially viable and bankable.  The 
projects assigned to RVNL also include such as may be possible through Public 
Private Participation after assessment of their viability.  Apart from these, at 
present, there is no proposal pending w ith Ministry of Railways for private 
participation in railway infrastructure projects, which are financially viable. 
It is to advise that the project of se tting up of private freight terminal at 
Garhi Harsuru, as mentioned in the Co mmittee’s recommenda tion, did not take 
off.  However, as recommended by th e Committee, Railways are encouraging 
development of rail hubs with model ware housing facilities to  cater to the multi 
model needs of rail borne traffic.  Encouraged with the success of the pilot project 
of setting up of a rail-side warehouse in  collaboration with M/s. Central 
Warehousing Corporation (CWC) at White-f ield, Bangalore in Feb’ 2002, Indian 
Railways have signed a MOU with CWC in Dec, 2003 for the development of 
rail-side warehousing complexes at 22 locati ons in the country to develop as rail 
hubs.  Value added services in the form of warehousing and lo cal road bridging 
will be provided at such terminals.” 
 
18. In the backdrop of Railway’s inability to m obilize adequate resources to finance a large 
shelf of projects with a huge throw-forward of about Rs.40,000 crore, the Committee had been of 
the view that the private/public/state Governments pa rticipation in the rail infrastructure projects 
could prove a panacea to deal with  the inadequate mobilisation of  resources for financing large 

 18
shelf of projects and therefore,  the Railway s must vigorously pursue the policy of private 
participation.  They had reco mmended to clear all such proposal s pending with the Ministry 
within three months. 
 
19. In their action taken reply Railways have admitted that private sector’s participation in 
construction of new railway lines has not been th at encouraging as in the case of leasing of 
wagons under Own Your Wagon Scheme and private par ticipation through Build Operate 
Transfer (BOT). For private par ticipation  the Railways need to identify projects with high rate 
of returns.  Therefore, to attract  the public/private participation in rail infrastructure projects, 
Railways have constituted Rail Vikas Niga m Limited (RVNL) whic h will focus towards 
resource mobilization and pursu e execution of Railway infras tructure projects which are 
financially viable and bankable.     
 
20. The Committee construed  from the actio n taken reply of the Ministry that 
serious/definite  efforts have been made by the Railways until now to make private/public  
participation in construction of rail infrastructure projects conduc ive enough to attract more and 
more private investments, which essentially re quires such investment in the backdrop of 
inadequate availability of funds with the Railways to co mplete projects in time. They are of the 
considered view that time has now come  for the Railways to e xplore more and more 
possibilities by providing lucrative incentives to pub lic/private investors for their participation in 
the construction of rail infrastructure projects. Th ey desire that they may be apprised of the 
details of private and public proposals  received by the Railways which have been cleared so far  
and those pending for clearance.  
 
       ***** 

 19
 
MINUTES OF THE  TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2004-05) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 10 th May, 2005 from 1500 hours to 1600 
hours in Committee Room ‘E, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Ajaya Kumar 
2. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
3. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
4. Shri Anwar Hussain 
5. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6. Smt. Kamla Manhar 
7. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
8. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
9. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
10. Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri P.D.T. Achary   - Secretary 
 2. Shri V.S. Negi    - Deputy Secretary 
 3. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi  - Under Secretary 
  

 20
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft Ninth Report on `The  Railway (Amendment) 
Bill, 2004 and the Tenth Report on Ac tion Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 16 th Report of the Committee on ‘Resource 
Mobilisation’ and adopted the same with minor changes. 
  
3. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the Report after making 
consequential changes, if any, arising out of f actual verification by the Ministry of Railways or 
otherwise and present the same to the House.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 21
APPENDIX-II 
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT 
(13TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘RESOURCE MOBILISATION’  
 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations     23 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by  6 
the Government – Para No. 7.2, 7.3, 7.5, 7.7, 7.8  and 7.22 
 
Percentage of total        26% 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations  which the Committee do not  15 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies- Para  
Nos. 7.1, 7.6, 7.9, 7.10, 7.11, 7.12, 7.13, 7.14, 7.15, 7.17, 
7.18, 7.19, 7.20, 7.21 & 7.23. 
 
Percentage of total        65% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of    2 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee –  
Para Nos. 7.4 and 7.16  
 
Percentage of total           9% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in  respect of which final   NIL 
replies are still awaited  
 
 
 