           
21 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2005-06) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
‘TERMINAL FACILITIES IN METROPOLITAN CITIES’ 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka) 

 2
 
 
 
 
 
SCR No. 103 
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2005-06) 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
‘TERMINAL FACILITIES IN METROPOLITAN CITIES’ 
   
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on    .07.2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    .07.2006 
 
             
  
             
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
July, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka) 

 4
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….   (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….    (v) 
 
PART – I 
 
Report 
 
 Introductory …………………………………………………………………   1  
  
 Recommendations…………………………………………………………  2 
 
PART-II 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways         
held on  27.01.2006       ………………...26 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways  
held on   13.02.2006      ………………...28 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways 
held on 05.06.2006       ………………..30 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 3
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.       Shri A.Sai Prathap 
3 Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
4 Shri Atique Ahamad 
5          Shri Ajaya Kumar 
6 Shri Subrata Bose  
7          Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
11. Shri Anwar Hussain 
12. Shri Mahesh Kanodia 
13. Shri C. Kuppusami 
14. Smt. Kalpana R. Narhire  
15. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
16. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
17. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
18. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
19. Ch. Lal Singh 
20. Mohd. Tahir 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.       Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
22. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
23. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
24. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
26. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
27. Shri R. Kamraj 
29      Shri Isam Singh 
       30. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31.       Shri Abani Roy 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
4. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Assistant Director 
5. Smt. Sunita    - Committee Officer 
 

 5
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I,  the Chairman of  the Standing Committee on Railways (2005-06), 
having been authorised by the Committee to  present the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty First Report of t he Committee on ‘Terminal Facilities in 
Metropolitan Cities’. 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) on   27.01.2006 and 13.02.2006. 
  
3. The Committee considered and adopt ed the Report at their sitting held on 
05.06.2006. Minutes of the sittings held on 27.01.2006, 13.02.2006                           
and 05.06.2006 form Part-II of the Report.  For facility of reference, the 
recommendations/observations of the Co mmittee have been presented in thick 
type.   
 
4. The Committee wish to express their th anks to the officers of the Ministry 
of Railways (Railway Board), for appear ing before the Committee and furnishing 
the material and information which the Committee desired in connection with the 
examination of the subject ‘Terminal Facilit ies in Metropolitan Cities’ and sharing 
with them the issues concerning the subject which came up for discussion during 
evidence. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                  BASUDEB ACHARIA 
July, 2006                                                             Chairman, 
Sravana 1928 Saka                                Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 

 6
 
REPORT 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
 Metropolitan cities in India are hub of activities for both passenger as well 
as freight traffic. Railways play a ve ry important role in connecting these 
metropolitan cities with each other and to other parts of the country.  Millions of 
passengers and commuters arrive in and de part  from these metropolitan cities 
every day. Depending on the traffic ha ndled, commensurate terminal facilities 
have been provided in thes es metro cities.  However, to provide efficient, 
adequate and modern terminal facility for smooth and orderly functioning of train 
services in these cities, Railways ha s planned additional/improvement in 
infrastructure facilities  wherever possible, and planned development of 
altogether new terminal wherever such  expansion is not possible because of 
limitation of space.   
 
2. A full fledged and integrated system  of terminal facility  encompasses 
various provisions and facilities for sp eedy and hassle free entry  and exit of 
passengers, maintenance and berthing of  trains, handling of parcel, a large 
circulating area and a host of other services. 
 
3. There are four major metropolitan cities in the country namely. Delhi, 
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai.   Delhi and Chennai come s under the jurisdiction 
of Northern and Southern Railway  resp ectively. The metropolitan cities of 
Mumbai and Kolkata are being served by two railway zones each viz. Central and 
Western Railway for Mumbai and Eastern and South Eastern Railway for Kolkata.  

 7
 
4. The details of passenger, suburban and freight trains  terminating and 
passing through each of the metro  cities daily are as under:- 
Metro Passenger Suburban Freight Total 
(All trains) 
Grand Total 
(All trains.) 
 Terminat
ing 
Pass 
ing 
Termin
ating 
Passing Termin
ating  
Passing 
(UP+DN) 
Termin
ating 
Passing Terminating
+ Passing 
Delhi 102 76 75 0 23 150 200  226 426 
Mumbai 
(CR) 
132 0 1207 0 20 4.3 1359 4.3 1363.3 
Mumbai 
(WR) 
35 0 1007 0 0.6 0.1 1042.6 0 1042.6 
Total 
Mumbai 
167 0 2214 0 20.6 4.4 2401.6 4.3 2405.9 
Kolkata 
(ER) 
Howrah+ 
Sealdah) 
152 10 1004 0 17 28.6 1173 38.6 1211.6 
Kolkata 
(SER) 
Howrah+ 
Sealdah) 
73 0 135 0 4 0 212 0 212 
Total 
Kolkata 
225 10 1139 0 21 28.6 1385 38.6 1423.6 
Chennai 138 32 540 0 24 19 702 70 772 
 
5. The Metro city and year-wise funds allocated during the last 4 years for 
renovation/modernization/expansion of terminals are as under: 
                 ( F i g .  I n  c r o r e  o f  R s . )  
Allocation  of Fund Metro City Railway Terminal 
05-06 04-05 03-
04 
02-03 
Kolkata 
Metro 
ER/SER Howrah, Chitpur, Sealdah & 
Shalimar 
37.75 11.32 0.255 0.007 
Chennai SR Chennai Egmore, Chennai 
Central, Chennai Beach, 
Tambaram 
6.39 3.83 2.63 1.50 
CR CSTM, Lokmanya Tilak Terminus, 
Dadar 
19.27 11.22 11.74 82.5 Mumbai 
Metro 
WR Mumbai Central, Bandra 
Terminus & Churchgate. 
3.69 3.28 4.85 2.32 
Delhi NR Delhi, New Delhi, Hazrat 
Nizammudin, Delhi Sarai. 
22.90 25.02 16.48 12.82 
 
6. Apart from above, some small works are being taken up by Zonal 
Railways  at local level under GM’s power. 
 

 8
 
Delhi 
7. Delhi the capital city has one of the busiest terminals  of the Indian 
Railways.  It is served by 3 major passeng er terminals viz. New Delhi, Delhi Main 
and Hazarat Nizamuddin.  The 4 th  terminal Delhi Sarai is primarily meant for 
handling MG trains of Delhi area.  The 5 th terminal at Anand Vihar with facility of  
5 washing lines, 3 stabling lines and 7 platforms   was sanctioned in 2003-04 at a 
cost of Rs.83 crore.  The work such as earth work, wa shing line sick line etc., 
forest clearance plan of station building and circulating area are  in progress and 
the target date of comple tion of the first phase has been fi xed for December, 
2007. 
 
8 As regards the covered and super area of various terminals in Delhi area, 
the Ministry of Railways has submitted the following details:- 
Name Super Area 
(sqm) 
Covered Area 
(sqm) 
New Delhi Rly. 
Station 
6 lakhs sqm 50,000 sqm 
Delhi Junction 4 lakhs sqm 50,000 sqm 
Haz. Nizamuddin 4.16 lakhs sqm 11,956 sqm 
Delhi Cantt. 1.06 lakhs sqm 10,800 sqm 
 
9. The number of platforms at each of the above termin als in Delhi/New 
Delhi and their coaching capacity are as under: 
Delhi New Delhi Nizamuddin Delhi Sarai 
Rohilla 
Total – 18 Total – 12 Total – 7 Total – 2 
1-6 Coaches 1-16 Coaches 3-24 Coaches 1-23 Coaches 
2-12 Coaches 1-18 Coaches 4-26 Coaches 1-25 Coaches 
9-14 Coaches 1-20 Coaches   
2-19 Coaches 6-23 Coaches   
1-21 Coaches 3-26 Coaches   
1-22 Coaches    
1-24 Coaches    
1-26 Coaches    
 

 9
10. At New Delhi, construction of 4 plat forms is in progress and is likely  to 
be completed by November, 2006.  At Niza mmudin, parcel platform is proposed 
to be extended and converted into passe nger platform.  At Delhi Sarai Rohilla, 
MG platform will be converted into BG after Gauge Coversion. 
 
11. In response to a query whether the terminal facilities in the Delhi Area are 
commensurate with the traffic being hand led, the Ministry of Railways in a 
written reply stated that the available fa cilities are sufficient  to accommodate 
the existing traffic level.  However, to  meet the future requirement following 
works are being executed to enhance  the line capacity and terminal facilities. 
1. 4 passenger platforms at New Delhi 
2. 1 washing line at Delhi Main 
3. 1 passenger platform at Delhi Sarai Rohilla 
4. 5 th and 6th line between New Delhi and Tilak Bridge 
5. 6-line entry and exit in New Delhi 
6. Delhi Sarai-Rewari Gauge Conversion 
7. Sahibabad-Anand Vihar – 3 rd and 4th line 
8. Grade Separator at Rampura Cabin 
 
12. Further the Ministry of Railways stat ed that as the area available at the 
terminals at New Delhi/Delhi is not suffic ient to cater to future requirement, 
besides  a new terminal at Anand Vihar, terminal facilities  at Holambikalan and 
Bijwasan are also proposed. Augmentation of terminal facilities  at Sarai Rohilla 
and Hazrat  Nizamuddin is being taken up.. 
 
13. When the Committee enqu ired regarding the plans for acquisition of land 
and taking up development work in future in Delhi area, the Member 
Engineering, Railway Board stated during evidence as under:  
“On New Delhi the pressure woul d be tremendous.  We have 
thought of an integrated transpor t planning for Delhi area   We 
thought of creating a directio nal terminal.  That means one 
direction is from  East, another is from the West, another is from 
the North side etc.  We want  to construct terminals.  First terminal 
is East Bound Terminal.  Anand Vihar has been sanctioned which is 
under construction.  To connect Anand Vihar with line nos.3 and 4 
from Anand Vihar to Sahibabad  is being done so that the  traffic to 

 10
Anand Vihar terminal will come and they will have a quick 
dispersal through the road system wh ich is  by the side of the ring 
road. People can disperse from there. 
 Likewise, in other terminals are at Holambi Kalan and 
Bijwasan.  Bijwasan will be one terminal which will be a West-
directional terminal between  Gurgaon and Dwarka,.  Holambi 
Kalan is for the traffic coming from Kurukshetra side.  That means 
this will be the third terminal.  Earlier Sarai Rohilla was a meter 
gauge terminal which is now be ing developed as a full-fledged 
broad gauge terminal after the co nversion of Rewa ri-Delhi gauge 
conversion is completed.  This we want to develop.  Hazrat 
Nizamuddin station is being expanded.  What we trying to say is 
that Delhi’s requirements are quit e large.  For the next 10 to 15 
years we have to do work in this area.” 
 
 
KOLKATA 
14. Kolkata being the hub of eastern Indi a caters to a very large number of 
inbound and outbound Railway traffic. 
 The city of Kolkata is served by two major pa ssenger terminals i.e. 
Howrah and Sealdah stations.  Howrah station which started functioning in 1884, 
had only two pairs of trains originating fr om it.  It runs 297 pairs of trains now 
including express, passenger and suburb an local trains.  With 21 existing 
platforms and 2 more coming   up in the next few months, Howrah has reached 
its capacity.  The situation is the same with Sealdah station which was built in 
1869, the station now runs 311 pairs of tr ains from 17 platforms.  Howrah and 
Sealdah stations have reached saturation po int.  An additional  station at Chitpur 
in Central Kolkata at an approximate cost of Rs.40 crore was sanctioned in  
2003-04.   This terminal will not only take considerable lo ad off Howrah and 
Sealdah stations but also be convenient for a large section of people in a city 
that is expanding rapidly. The construction of this new passenger terminal was to 
complete in two  phases.  Phase-I of this new terminal ha s been commissioned 

 11
on 31.01.2006 at an approximate cost of Rs.40 crore.  Under the Phase-I, the 
following facilities are provided at this terminal :-  
1. 3DD lines with platform. 
2. Part station building and circulating area. 
3. Platform No.1, 2 & 3. 
4. Deep pit. 
5. Subway connecting PF 1, 2, 3 to circulating area. 
6. FOB connecting PF No.1, 2, 3. 
7. Water supply and C & W office. 
 
15. Phase-II of the terminal at a cost of Rs.50 crore with a target date of 
completion by 31.03.2008 has also been sanctioned.  Under this Phase the 
following activities are to be undertaken by the Railways:- 
1. Balance station building and circulating area. 
2. Parcel complex, RRI building. 
3. Coaching and ROH depot. 
4. Over head tank, water an d effluent treatment plant. 
5. 2 nd & 3rd Deep Pit. 
6. Platform No.4 & 5. 
 
16. In the next few years  25 pairs of mail and express trains will run  from 5 
platforms at this new terminal.  Furthe r to provide  better suburban and urban 
communication, there are plan s to run 20 pairs of EMU (E lectric Multiple Unit)  
trains and 10 pairs of local circular railway trains from the Chitpur terminal.     
 
17.  The Ministry of Railways have also stated in a written reply that a 
detailed Engineering  cum traffic survey fo r examining the feasibility of providing 
a fourth terminal at Shalimar/Padmapu kur/Majerhat has been done and the 
report is under examination. 
  

 12
 
18. The number of platforms at each of the existing terminals in Kolkata and  
their coaching capacity are as under:- 
HOWRAH SEALDAH CHITPUR SHALIMAR 
Old Complex New Complex    
Total – 15 Total – 4 Total – 17 Total – 5 Total – 2 
1-10 Coaches 4-22 Coaches 6-9 Coaches 3-24 Coaches  
(Completed)  
1-18 Coaches 
5-12 Coaches  5-10 Coaches  2-24 Coaches 
(In 2nd phase) 
1-24 Coaches 
2-16 Coaches  2-14 Coaches    
2-18 Coaches  1-16 Coaches    
3-21 Coaches  1-18 Coaches   
2-24 Coaches  2-24 Coaches   
 
19. On being asked whether the terminal  facilities available at present in  
Kolkata is commensurate with the traffic handled, the Ministry of Railways in a 
written reply stated that the available fa cilities were not co mmensurate with the 
traffic  handled in the city .  The following steps have been taken to enhance the 
terminal facilities:-  1) Decongesting of  the existing  terminals at Sealdah and 
Howrah by constructing a new Terminal at Chitpur  2) Extension of Circular 
Railway from Princep  Ghat to Ma jerhat  has taken place.  3) Two additional          
24-coach  length platforms have  been  c o m m i s s i o n e d  a t  S e a l d a h .   4 )  W o r k s  
related to extension of platform on Howrah-Bandel, Sheoraphulli-Tarakeshwar 
and Sealdah-Diamond Harbour are in prog ress. 5) Extension of platforms on 
Bandel-Bardhaman section and Sealdah-Bongaon-Ranaghat section is under 
active consideration. 
 
20. The Ministry further st ated that  a Sankrail Goods Terminal Yard, steel 
stock yard hub has been planned.  At Shalimar, one completely independent full-
length line to deal with parcel traffic is under construction. 
 
21. The works for provision of two addi tional platforms at Howarh station 
have since been sanctioned and th ese platforms are proposed to be 
commissioned for reception of long distance mail/express trains.  
 

 13
 
 
22. Howrah station is choked  now.  To tackle this problem  some years back 
on the basis of the Report prepared on Howrah station, double discharge 
platform was sanctioned for Howrah station which could not be materialized later 
on.  On being asked the reasons for the same, the Chairman, Railway Board 
stated as under:-  
“As for double discharge, even if we want to implement it, it will 
take not less than 10-15 years.  VT is a very fine example where 
we tried one platform to be converted into double discharge.  It 
took a very long time.  It means that for that length of time 
everybody will going through discomfort.  The main issue here is to 
handle more traffic and increase the frequency of train.” 
 
23.  When the Committee  en quired about  the status  of Shalimar Terminal 
and the reasons for its low popularlity,  the Chairman, Railway Board stated 
during evidence as under:  
“Shalimar terminal will be very po pular, if dispersal problem can be 
solved. It has  plenty of space and can expand there and provide 
all the facilities.  Our only limitation  at Shalimar is dispersal.  It can 
develop into a beautiful terminal.  Land is not a prob lem.  For that 
terminal to develop it require the involvement of  both the Railways 
and the local State Govt.  Some ad justment in respect of traffic 
pattern and road movement needs to take place which is not 
difficult to provide.” 
 

 14
MUMBAI 
 
24. The port city of Mumbai is serv ed by 5 passenger terminals namely 
Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminal (CST), Mu m b a i  C e n t r a l ,  D a d a r ,  B a n d r a   a n d  
Lokmanya Tilak Terminal.  The number of  platforms at each of these terminals 
and their coaching capacity is as below: 
Mumbai 
Central 
Bandra 
Terminus 
Churchgate Mumbai CST Lokmanya 
Tilak 
Terminus 
Dadar 
Total – 5 Total – 3 Total – 4 Total – 15 Total – 4 Total – 8 
 3-24 Coaches 1-9 Coaches 2-9 Coaches 4-26 Coaches 6-12 Coaches 
1-12 Coaches  3-12 Coaches 5-12 Coaches  1-17 Coaches 
2-16 Coaches   2-12 Coaches  1-18 Coaches 
2-18 Coaches   2-17 Coaches   
   2-18 Coaches   
   2-21 Coaches   
 
25 Work of additional 2 platforms at Ba ndra Terminal has been sanctioned.  
Work of extension of platforms at Mumbai Churchgate is in progress.  Work of 3 
platforms faces of 26 coach length each at Carnac Bunder is in progress. 
 
26 The details of  Ar ea of each of the terminals at Mumbai are as under: 
S.N
o 
Terminal Circulating 
area (Sq.m) 
Built up area 
(Sq.m) 
1. Mumbai Central 4040 22998 
2. Bandra Terminus 5245 20042 
3. Dadar 280 44563* 
4. Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus 50000 140000 
5. Lokmanya Tilak Terminus 60000 150750 
 
* The existing building of suburban section controlling the movement of local as 
well as main line trains.  
 
27 According to the Ministry of Railway s the available facilities at Mumbai 
passenger terminals  are not commensurate with the traffic handled in city.   The 
present level of passenger services is handled with certain constraints.  For 
increasing terminal capacities and decongestion of the  existing terminals the  

 15
 
following works are being undertaken by the Railways:- 
1. Mumbai CST – Remodellin g of main line complex. 
(Target Dec., 07) 
2. Dadar, Malkapur, Murtijapur  &  W a r d h a  –  E x t n .  O f  P / F  t o  
accommodate 24 coach trains – work has already been completed. 
3. Kurla passenger trminus – Traffic facilities. 
(Target June, 07) 
4. Mumbai-Kurla-Thane-Kalyan – Train describer system. 
(Target March, 06) 
5. CST Mumbai-Development of  D’Mello road side entry. 
6. Churchgate-Borivali-Extension of  PF and covering of 12 coach EMU 
rake. 
(Target 28.02.06) 
7. Bandra Terminus – Augmenta tion of terminal facilities. 
(Target 30.06.2006) 
8. Bandra Terminus – Augmentati on of Coaching facilities and 
provision of one pit. 
(Target 30.06.2006) 
 
28. Completion of above mentioned works will facilitate handling of more long 
distance trains to and from Mumbai Ar ea and running of 12 Car EMU rakes for 
Suburban Passengers. 
 
29 Giving the details of terminal facilit ies in Mumbai the representative of 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) stated  during evidence as under:-: 
“As far as Mumbai City is con cerned, there are two terminals – 
Chatrapati Shivaji Terminus, wh ich was known as Bombay CST 
earlier and Mumbai Central.  Ap art from that, we have Dadar, 
Bandra and Lokmanya Tilak Terminal, which have already come up.  
We have a lot of things coming up in Bandra and it should be a full-
fledged  terminal very shortly.  Th e idea is that all the traffic need 
not go to Mumbai Central as we ll as Mumbai VT side and they 
should be terminated outside so that people can get down and go 
to various places on that side.” 

 16
 
30. Regarding steps taken for augmenting   terminal facilities  in Mumbai, 
Chairman, Railway Board submitted that : 
“We are  working  on Augmenting Terminal Facilities  that is, 
platform length etc. at Bandra, Mumbai Central and Dadar 
Terminal.  Work of provision of platforms washing cum pit lines, 
transfer lines and stabling siding have been sanctioned at Mumbai 
CST.  Work is going slow because of problem  in acquiring land for 
which we have had two meetings with the Chief Minister of 
Maharashtra.  The GM, has also met the Chief Minister,  who had 
shown considerable interest in solving these problems particularly 
lengthening of platform at Mumbai VT.” 
 
CHENNAI 
 
31. Chennai city is served mainly by  two major passenger terminals i.e. 
Chennai Central and Chennai Egmore,  Ap art from these there are terminals at 
Tambaram and Chennai beach also.  On an average 772 trains including 
passenger, suburban and freight pass and terminate at Chennai daily. 
 
32. The number of platforms at each of the terminals in Chennai and their 
coaching capacity is as under: 
Chennai Central Chennai Egmore Tambaram Chennai Beach 
Total – 12 Total – 9  Total – 9 Total –7  
1-16 Coaches 1-11 Coaches 2-12 Coaches 3-9 Coaches 
1-18 Coaches 1-14 Coaches 4-24 Coaches 4-12 Coaches 
1-21 Coaches 2-15 Coaches 3-18 Coaches 
(MG) 
 
3-22 Coaches 3-17 Coaches   
5-24 Coaches 1-22 Coaches   
1-26 Coaches 1-26 Coaches   
 

 17
 
33. When the Committee desired to know the progress regarding connecting 
Chennai Egmore and Chennai Central with each other the repr esentative of the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)  informed the Committee during evidence 
as under:- 
“Chennai Egmore, was earlier a me ter gauge terminal. With the 
commissioning  of broad gauge, Chennai Egmore has become  a 
full fledged terminal.  At some po int of time  we had thought of 
connecting Chennai Egmore with Ch ennai Central.  The work was 
contemplated but subsequently on detailed examination  we found 
that Chennai Central and Chennai Egmore  can remain as it is.  
Chennai Egmore earlier used to de al with all South-bound  traffic 
like Madurai and Trivandrum, Chennai  Central is connecting  all the 
traffic  coming from the North side.  But with rationalisation of 
traffic it should be possible now to deal with Chennai Egmore and 
Chennai Central separately and th ey may not be connected.  That 
means the trains to Chennai either stops at Chennai Egmore or 
Chennai Central.” 
 
34. When the Committee enquir ed about the link between these two stations,    
the Member Engineering, Railway Board  stated:- 
“There is a link bypass.  The trains   which are going to South need 
not terminate at Central.  They have to be routed in a manner 
which by passes  Central and goes  to Egmore and vice-versa.  
Moreover both the station are not for away; they are just 3 km. 
away.  Earlier it was thought that they should  be connected but it 
is not necessary.” 
 
35. The Ministry of Railways informed fu rther in their written replies that the 
work of new BG line connecting Chen nai Central and Chennai Egmore was 
sanctioned as material modification to Chennai Beach-Tambaram-Chengalpatty 
Gauge conversion project vide Railway Board letter No.99/Proj./MAS/2/3 dated 
08.04.2003 at a cost of Rs.90.44 crore. 

 18
 
36. Railways had examined the proposal  subsequently and found a number of 
technical difficulties in executing  this project.  There are important safety 
considerations in laying this connection.   In order to dete rmine the technical 
feasibility of the proposal, the Ministry  of Railways have decided to get the 
feasibility  study done through RITE S and accordingly th e work has been 
entrusted  to M/s RITES on 23.12.2005. 
 After the RITES Report on feasibili ty of the connectio n is received, a 
decision will be taken by Ministry of Railways. 
 
37. A detailed survey for additional te rminal facilities and development as 
world class Mega Terminal for Chennai Central has been  sanctioned and is being 
awarded.  Capacity augmentation of platforms at Chennai Egmore is in progress. 

 19
 
FREIGHT TERMINALS 
 
 
38. The number of freight terminals available at present in each of metro 
cities is as under:- 
 
Metro No. of Railway 
Terminals 
No. of non-Railway 
Terminals 
Total no. of Freight 
Terminals  
Delhi 10 05 15 
Mumbai (CR) 08 21 29 
Mumbai (WR) 01 01 02 
Total  09 22 31 
Kolkata (ER) 15 14 29 
Kolkata (SER) 02 --- 02 
Total 17 14 31 
Chennai 04 13 17 
 
 The Plan formulated to develo p the Terminals are as under:- 
 
Sl.No. Metropolitan 
Cities 
Plans formulated to develop Terminals 
1. New Delhi Improvement in goods handling facilities at Badli, Shakurbasti 
and Ghaziabad is in progress.  Apart from this, Warehousing 
facilities are being develope d by Central Warehousing 
Corporation at 2 major terminals, i.e. Shakurbasti and 
Ghaziabad. 
2. Chennai Chenai Harbour has expansion plans for additional container 
terminal Ennore Port Limited Siding at Attipattu has plans for 
handling coal, iron ore and containers.  These facilities are 
planned on BOT basis. 
The capacity of goods shed at  Royapuram is being increased 
from 45 BOXN to 58 BOXN for full rake handling in single 
placement. 
3. Kolkata For proper and smooth working of all terminals, works regarding 
top wiring of the goods shed, capacity augmentation and 
development of allied infrastructure are in progress and 
expected to be completed shortly. 
4. Mumbai Development of 4th terminal is being planned by JNPT.  Work of 
conversion of Down Ballast Siding into full-length loop line is in 
progress. 
 
39. When asked to state the procedur e being followed in monitoring the 
terminal detention and at what level the monitoring is being done, the Ministry of 
Railways  informed the Committee in a written reply as under:- 
 

 20
Delhi 
Northern Railways 
40. Each terminal is monitored by th e divisional operat ing officers, who 
monitor not only the unloading/loading performance  but also the pipeline for 
that terminal so as to avoid congestion at the terminal.  If required the loading is 
regulated for a certain period.  Based on the performance, infrastructure 
improvement works have been  planned for augmenting  the capacity  of the 
terminal.  Headquarter also monitors th e detentions and takes action to avoid 
congestion and wastage of precious  rolling stock. 
 
Mumbai 
Central Railway 
41. Divisional Control Offi ce keeps a continuous watch on the inward rakes & 
sorts out various problems when faced in  unloading of a rake.  After unloading, 
the rake is dispatched at the earlier po ssible by advance planning of locomotive 
and staff.  Freight Operations Information System (FOIS) is also used to keep a 
watch on inward rakes. 
Monitoring is done:- 
• By Station Master and Goods Supervisor at the Terminals. 
• By Chief Controller Stock, Divisional Opearations Manager 
(DOM)/Divisional Commercial Manager (DCM and Senior Divisional 
Manger (Sr. DOM)/Senior Divisional Commercial Manager (Sr. DCM) 
at Divisional level. 
• By Dy. Chief Operations Manager (Dy. COM)/Dy. Chief Commercial 
Manager (Dy. CCM) & other higher officers at Zonal Level. 
 
Western Railway 
42. Terminal detention is monitored on  day to day basis by the Divisional 
Officers and in morning conference by Headquarter Officers. 
 Besides this, periodic analysis on monthly basis is done to identify the 
terminals requiring system change and infrastructural  inputs both at divisional  
and Headquarter. 

 21
 The terminal monitoring  is done at the divisional level by Senior 
Divisional  Operations Mangers (Sr. DOMs) and Divisional Railway Managers 
(DRMs) and at the Headquarter’s level by  Dy. Chief Operatio n Manager (G) (Dy. 
COMs) and Chief Freight Traffic Manager (CFTM) 
 
Kolkata 
Eastern Railway 
43. There are well laid down practices fo r monitoring the terminal detentions.  
Each terminal is under the direct supervis ion of field level supervisors.  There is 
target fixed for terminal detention for each  major terminal which functions as 
the yard-stick for monitori ng.  Terminal detentions are also monitored  at 
divisional level by Divisional Operating  Officers and at Head  Quarter level by 
Operating Officers on daily basis.  With the introduction of Computerised Freight 
Operation Information System (FOIS), all details regarding terminal detentions 
are readily available for scrutiny. 
 
South Eastern Railway 
44. Terminal detentions are generally monitored by DOM/Sr. DOM of the 
divisions.  Presently this detention is  being monitored by GM and COM through 
FOIS (arrival to placement, placement to release and release to departure). 
 
Chennai 
Southern Railway 
45. The detentions to Freight trains at terminals have been fully computerized 
in the Freight Operations Information System (FOIS) format.  The complete 
detentions rake-wise are monitored:- 
a) from the time of arrival to actual placement 
b) from the time of pl acement to release and  
c) from the time of rake release to  the actual time of rake dispatch 
The complete data as per the above matrix is documented and monitored 
by officers concerned right upto the Apex level. 
 
 

 22
 
46. The detention from the arrival to  final dispatch, which exceeds 24 hours 
are monitored even at the Railway Board’s level. 
 
47. The terminal detention in FOIS ar e discussed during the Daily Operating 
Conference between Headquarters and Divisional Officers and inputs for 
corrective action constantly provided to  ensure that these detentions are 
controlled progressively and brought down. 
 
48. The Committee observed that there was growing demand for freight and 
passenger terminals  side by side in all the metro cities.  When the Committee 
desired to know as to what steps Railways proposed  to take to avoid problem of  
congestion and pollution in these freight terminal s, the Member (Traffic) 
informed the Committee during evidence as under:- 
“We are taking action on that front also.  According to our 
assessment, Pune goods terminal in the heart of the city which 
needs to be taken  away outside the city.  We proposed to do that.  
However, the local Hon.ble MP, MLAs and the labourers of the 
terminal resisted it.  We tried to take them on our side but we have 
not succeeded.  The same situation we found at Hoobly which has 
become a big city  over a period of time.  Zonal Railways wanted to 
take the goods terminal a little aw ay from the passenger terminal 
in view pollution and congestion.  We asked them to kindly get 
confirmation from the State Government,  The merchants and the 
local MPs etc., so that later on after we develop the facility, the 
merchants do not create a problem saying that they would not 
s h i f t .   W e  a r e  a w a r e  o f  t h i s  p r o b l e m .   W e  a r e  t a k i n g  a c t i o n  i n  
consultation with everybody.” 

 23
 
49. The Committee desired to know wh ether the Terminal Incentive Scheme 
announced recently had been notified, the Ministry of Railways in a written reply 
stated that to examine the feasibility of  Terminal Incentive Scheme a study has 
been conducted by M/s Centre for Tran sportation Research  and Management 
(CTRAM).  Formulation of Terminal Incentive Scheme is presently under 
progress. 
 
50. When the Committee desired to know  the details in this regard, the 
Member Traffic stated during evidence as under:- 
“The terminal incentive scheme is being finalised now.  The overall 
Turn Round (TR) means what is  the time taken between two 
successive loadings.  We are grad ually reducing the TR over the 
years.  It was 15.2 days in 1980-81. Last year it was 6.7 days.  This 
year it is coming down to below six days at 5.9 to 5.4 days.  A 
major part of this total Turn Ro und time, say 20 to 25 per cent, is 
taken at the terminals.  Excepti ng the railway goods sheds the 
terminals are Railway sidings.  What we are trying to do is, 
whatever required development of railway goods shed is being 
undertaken through our works programme, we are placing it to the 
Parliament for approval.  For the private siding, to give the 
incentive to the sidings owner fo r doing  some  work in their 
portion of the siding and release wagons faster, so that wagon 
Turn  Round improves, this will be  introduced.  For that the study 
was given to the Consultant and they have submitted their 
recommendations.  We are examinin g them. We expect very soon 
we will be able to issue our inst ructions to all the zonal railways 
about this Terminal Incentive Scheme.” 

 24
 
51. When asked whether the scheme woul d result in reduction of congestion 
during boarding and off loading of wa gons the Member (Traffic) stated as 
under:- 
“Activities are going on in these sidings mainly to reduce detention 
to wagons.  If they can do that and give us an undertaking we can 
consider it.” 
 

 25
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
1. Terminal capacities, both passenger and freight, are one of the 
most important determinants of a transport’s system carrying 
capacities. Full benefits of the Li ne Capacity Works like New Line, 
Gauge Conversion, Doubling and Traffic Facilities Works cannot be 
derived until terminal constraints are removed.  Such constraints or 
bottlenecks at terminal result in sluggish movement of trains as well as 
undue detention to rolling stock result ing in their poor turn around.  
They do not permit optimal utilizat ion of the assets so created and 
result in majority of public complaints .  Therefore, it is imperative that 
the terminals be developed to handle the existing as well as projected 
level of traffic efficiently and ad equate amenities be provided at 
terminals for satisfaction of customers. 
 
2. The Committee note that the capi tal city of Delhi is served by 3 
major passenger terminals namely Ne w Delhi, Delhi Main and Hazrat 
Nizamuddin. Delhi Sarai (Sarai Rohilla) is the 4 th Terminal primarily 
meant for handling MG trains of Delhi Area. They also take note of 
upcoming fifth terminal at Anand Vi har for the east bound trains, the 
work for which is in progress.  Further, they have also noted the 
proposal of the Railways to have directional terminal in Delhi area 
thereby providing two separate terminals at Holambikalan  for north 
bound trains and at Bijwasan for west bound trains.  They appreciate 
the concern shown by the Railways  to improve and augment  terminal 
facilities in Delhi area.  However, at  the same time taking note of rapid 
increase in population and increasing inbound and outbound traffic,  
they recommend  that an integrated transport  planning should be 
undertaken in consultation with the Government of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi, Minist ry of Urban Development and other 
civic  agencies.  Proper connectiv ity  of Road, Rail and Mass Rapid 
Transit System (MRTS) with all the existing and future terminals 

 26
should be planned so that th e passengers are not put to any 
inconvenience  due to the ongoing continuous expansion of Delhi area.   
 The Committee further observe that there is heavy rush of 
railway traffic at Narela Railway Station  which often results in delay of 
trains.  They desire that Narela Railway Station should be expanded 
and all the terminal facilities should be provided there. 
  
3. The Committee  find that city of Kolkata is at present being 
served by Howrah and Sealdah stations.  Recently, Chitpur (Kolkata) 
terminal has also been commissioned.  They further note the problem 
of congestion at Howrah and under utilisation  of Shalimar terminal.  
Taking all these factors into consideration,  they desire that an 
integrated and comprehensive action plan to augment terminal 
facilities  in Kolkata metropolitan area should be prepared.  The said 
plan should look  at short term and long term needs and provide 
solution for the various problems being faced by the users at terminals.  
They suggest that Howrah yard should be remodelled by  increasing 
the number of platforms and providing  double discharge platforms.  
The Committee also recommend to take necessary steps to 
operationalise the existing Shalimar Terminal to its fullest  capacity.   
 The Committee further desire that  in order to solve the problem 
of dispersal of passengers at Shalimar Terminal, Railway should 
discuss the matter with the State Go vernment in order to improve the 
traffic pattern and road movement.   They observe that a Report on 
setting up of a new terminal at Majerhat has been submitted to the 
Railway Board.  They desire that the Fifth  Terminal to be  set up at 
Majerhat should be sanctioned at the earliest and it should be planned 
in such a way so that the passenger s can avail the bene fit of Circular 
Railway and there is no problem of dispersal of passengers at Majerhat 
Terminal.  Long distance trains of  South Eastern Railway can directly 
come to Kolkata  via Majerhat Te rminal so that the passengers can 
directly reach Kolkata. 

 27
   
The Committee find that the terminal facilities in upcoming Mega 
cities like Bhuwaneshwar, Guwahati etc. is also insufficient to meet the 
future requirements.  They desire that while formulating plans for 
expansion of Railway Stations, Railway should give due consideration 
to these cities also.  They  furthe r desire that the work for Kamakhaya 
terminal which is being developed as Second Terminal at Guwahati 
should be expedited. 
 
4. The metropolitan city of Mumb ai is being served by Chatrapati 
Shivaji Terminal, Mumbai Central, Dadar, Bandra and Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminal.  The Committee also take note of the work of remodelling of 
Chatrapati Shivaji Terminal at a cost of Rs.92.56 crore, the extension of 
platforms to accommodate 24 coach terminal at Dadar, Phase-II work 
of Lokmanya Tilak Terminus and the work for augmentation of  
terminal facilities at Bandra.  The Comm ittee in this regard desire that 
length of existing platforms at each of these terminals should be 
extended so that these can accommo date 24 coach  trains and 12 car 
EMU rake.  The Committee have been informed that there are problems 
in acquiring land for augmentation of terminal facilities  in Mumbai 
area.  They desire that concrete steps should be taken earnestly to 
resolve the issue in consultation with the State Government. 
 
5. The Committee note that Chennai is being served by two major 
passenger terminals of Chennai Central and Chennai Egmore. The work 
for new BG line connecting Chennai Central and Chennai Egmore was 
sanctioned at a cost of Rs.90.44 crore. They  have been  informed that 
a feasibility study has been entrusted to M/s RITES for connecting 
Chennai Egmore and Chennai Cent ral. The Committee are unable to 
understand the basis on which the project was sanctioned  without 
studying the technical feasibility.  Th ey deprecate such casual attitude 
of the Railways towards such an important project and desire that the 
study should be completed within a fixed  time frame.   They also 

 28
desire to be apprised of the action taken in this regard within three 
months. 
 
6. The Committee are of the view that with increase in passenger 
traffic and number of trains, stations and platforms get choked 
particularly at peak hours.  They take note of rece nt incidents of 
stampede at New Delhi and Lucknow Railway Stations.  With a view to 
prevent further occurrence of such in cidents in future and to provide 
smooth, easy, convenient and hassle free entry and exit at stations 
particularly in Metropolitan cities, where at  peak hours traffic becomes 
unmanageable, they recommend that suitable measures be  taken in a 
time bound manner to rectify the same.  They desire  that while 
formulating policy in this regard, ch anges in design and configuration 
of platforms, provision of double discharge platforms, widening of 
platforms,  reduction in the number of stalls and trolleys so as to 
increase the circulating area for free movement of passengers and 
increase in  number of platforms should be taken into consideration.   
 They also recommend that the Ministry should consider changes 
in the width and design of the FOBs.  The width should be suitably 
increased  and it should have divider in the middle.  This will help in the 
smooth and free movement of passenger s.  The Committee also desire 
to install more escalators  and li fts to facilitate easy movement of 
physically challenged and old age persons at the important railway 
stations. 
  
7. The Committee find that station premises particularly in 
metropolitan cities are always crowded which causes a lot of 
inconvenience to the genuine passengers in entry and exit and it also 
leads to chaos and confusion.  The Committee suggest that some 
concrete action should be taken for crowd management at the station 
premises.  They desire that only genuine passengers with the restricted 
number of accompanying persons should be allowed at the platforms 
as is being done in the case of airports.   

 29
 
8. The Committee are of the view that  in recent years volume of rail 
traffic in metropolitan cities  has in creased  manifold.  They also note 
the rapid growth in population an d expansion of these cities.  The 
Committee, in view of these fact ors, feel that unless remedial 
measures are taken urgently, existing terminal facilities in 
metropolitan cities would come under  heavy pressure.  As a long term 
solution to the problem of overcrowding they recommend that every 
metropolitan and mega city should  b e  p r o v i d e d   w i t h  d i r e c t i o n a l  
t e r m i n a l s  j u s t  a s  i n  t h e  c a s e  o f  Delhi area,  whereby trains arriving 
from and departing for each of th e directions would terminate and 
start from their respective directional terminals.  The Committee desire 
that   these terminals should be suitably connected with each other 
and with the prominent locations to facilitate easy movement of 
passengers.  
 
9. The Committee note that with a view to reduce the unit cost and 
increase the revenues per train kilometer, the Railways are planning to 
switch over to use of 24-26 coach length trains in a big way. While 
lauding the initiative taken by th e railways in this regard they 
recommend that in future all platforms should be made so as to 
handled a minimum of 24-26 coach trains.  With regard to the existing 
platforms the Committee suggest that wherever feasible, the length of 
the platforms be suitably increased. 
 
10. The Committee have been informed that there are 15 freight 
terminals in Delhi, 31 in Mumbai, 31 in Kolkata and 17 in Chennai.  The 
Committee have observed that Railways have taken a number of steps 
to develop the terminals.  They have been further informed that these 
terminals are regularly monitored at different level so that the 
detention of wagons  at these terminals does not remain for long.   The 
Committee feel that a little action has been taken by the Railways to 
prevent congestion and pollution in these terminals.  They, therefore, 

 30
desire that while considering the proposals for providing of more 
freight terminals,  railways should ensure that nuisance to the general 
public is not caused due to pollution and congestion. 
 
11. The Committee note that the Mi nistry of Railways are actively 
considering to give certain incentives to private sidings owners to 
further bring down the turn around time of wagons, which is presently 
assessed at 5.9 to 5.4 da ys.   To this effect, the Ministry of Railways 
appointed a Consultant to make recommendations in this regard.    The 
Ministry further informed the Committee that the Consultant had 
submitted its recommendations and are under the examination of the 
Railways. The Ministry assured the Committee that very soon 
instructions to all the Zonal Railways would be issued about the 
proposed Terminal Incentive Scheme.   The Committee are appreciative 
of the vision of the Railways and desire that the decision on the 
Terminal Incentive Scheme be take n expeditiously and they may be 
apprised of the same.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                  BASUDEB ACHARIA 
July, 2006                                                              Chairman, 
Sravana 1928 Saka                                Standing Committee on Railways 
 

 31
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2005-06) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27 th January, 2006 from 1100 hours to                        
1230  hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
3. Shri Ajaya Kumar 
4. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
5. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
6. Smt. Paramjeet Kaur Gulshan 
7. Shri Anwar Hussain 
8. Shri Mahesh Kanodia 
9. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana   
10. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
11. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
12. Mohd. Tahir 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Smt. Kamla Manhar 
14. Shri Karnendu Bhattarcharjee 
15. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
16. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
17. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
18. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Assistant Director 

 32
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
 
1 Shri J. P. Batra  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex-officio 
Principal Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
2. Shri R. Sivdasan  Financia l Commissioner, Railways &  
Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
3. Shri R.R. Jaruhar  Member Engineering, Railway Board  &  
Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
4. Shri S.B. Ghose Dastidar Member Traffic, Railway Board  &  
Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of the 
Ministry of Railways to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the representatives of 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) brie fed the Committee about the various facilities 
available in Railway Terminals in Metropolita n Cities and the Ministry’s plan about the 
development of these Terminals.  The repres entatives of the Ministry of Railways then 
replied to the various queries raised by the Members.  
 
3. A verbatim  record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 33
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RAILWAYS (2005-06) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 13 th February, 2006 from 1500 hours to                        
1645  hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
6. Shri Ajaya Kumar 
7. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
8. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
6. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
7. Mohd. Tahir  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Smt. Kamla Manhar 
9. Shri Karnendu Bhattarcharjee 
10. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
11. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
12. Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Assistant Director 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
1 Shri J. P. Batra  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex-officio 
Principal Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
2. Shri R.R. Jaruhar  Member Engineering, Railway Board  &  
Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
3. Shri S.B. Ghose Dastidar Member Traffic, Railway Board  &  
Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 

 34
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of the 
Ministry of Railways to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, The Committee took 
evidence of the representatives of the Mini stry of Railways on th e subject – ‘Terminal 
Facilities in Metropolitan Cities’. The evidence was concluded.  
 
3. A verbatim  record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 35
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2005-06) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 5 th June, 2006 from 1500 hours to 1600 hours 
in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Ajaya Kumar 
3. Shri Subrata Bose 
4. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure   
5. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
6. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gushan 
8. Shri Anwar Hussain 
9. Shri Mahesh Kanodia 
10. Shri C. Kuppusami 
11. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
13. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi  
14. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
15. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
16. Shri Abani Roy 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh       - Joint Secretary        
2.      Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Assistant Director 
 

 36
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed  the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft Report on ‘Terminal 
Facilities in the Metropolitan Cities’ and adopted the same with minor additions as given 
in the Annexure. 
 
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairman  to finalise the aforesaid Report after 
making consequential changes, if any, arising out of factual verification  by the Ministry 
of Railways or otherwise and present the same to the House during Monsoon Session. 
 
4. Thereafter the Committee discussed  and finalized the t our programme to 
Srinagar, Jammu, Kapurthala,  Patiala, Chandigarh and Ambala and decided  to undertake 
the same w.e.f. 3rd July to 7th July, 2006.   
 
5. The Committee selected two subjects (i ) Land Management and (ii) Performance 
of Railway Zones for detailed examination for the remaining tenure of the Committee. 
  
 The Committee then adjourned. 

 37
 
ANNEXURE 
ADDITIONS/CHANGES MADE BY THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS IN DRAFT REPORT ON ‘TERMINAL FACILITIES IN 
METROPOLITAN CITIES’ 
 
Sl.No. Page  Para  Line  Addition/Deletion 
 N o .   N o .        
1. 21  2  3  Add sub para  – 
        
The Committee further observe 
that there is heavy rush of 
railway traffic at Narela Railway 
Station  which often results in 
delay of trains.  They desire that 
Narela Railway Station should be 
expanded and all the terminal 
facilities should be provided 
there. 
 
2. 21  3  20  Add the sub paras – 
    
The Committee further desire 
that in order to solve the problem 
of dispersal of passengers at 
Shalimar Terminal, Railway 
should discuss the matter with 
the State Government in order to 
improve the traffic pattern and 
road movement.   They observe 
that a Report on setting up of a 
new terminal at Majerhat has 
been submitted to the Railway 
Board.  They desire that the Fifth 
Terminal to be set up at Majerhat 
should be sanctioned at the 
earliest and it should be planned 
in such a way so that the 
passengers can avail the benefit 
of Circular Railway and there is 
no problem of dispersal of 
passengers at Majerhat Terminal.  
Long distance trains of South 
Eastern Railway can directly 
come to Kolkata via Majerhat 
Terminal so that the passengers 
can directly reach Kolkata. 

 38
 
 
 
The Committee find that 
the terminal facilities in upcoming 
Mega cites like Bhuwaneshwar, 
Guwahati etc. is also insufficient 
to meet the future requirements.  
They desire that while 
formulating plans for expansion 
of Railway Stations, Railway 
should give due consideration to 
these cities also.  They further 
desire that the work for 
Kamakhaya Terminal which is 
being developed as Second 
Terminal at Guwahati should be 
expedited. 
 
 