          
 28 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 24th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha)  
on ‘Land Management’] 
 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 

 2 
           
SCR No.: 115 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 24th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha)  
on ‘Land Management’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.09.2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.09.2007 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) 

 3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
            PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….     (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….       (v) 
 
PART - I 
 
CHAPTER I  Report…………………………………………………       1  
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been  7 
   accepted by the Government ………………………….        
 
CHAPTER  III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  14 
   do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
   reply .…………………………………………………..         
   
CHAPTER  IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   15 
   Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
   Committee and which require reiteration ……………….       
 
CHAPTER  V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final  17 
   Replies of Government are still awaited ………………..       
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX    I.     Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways 
      held on 06.09.2007    
        
APPENDIX    II.   Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
      Recommendations/Observations contained in the 24th Report 
      of the Standing Committee on Railways (14th Lok Sabha) 
       on ‘Land Management’.         
  
        
(iii)

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  (2007 -08) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.          Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3.         Dr. Dhirendra Agarwal 
4.         Shri Atiq Ahamad 
5.          Shri S. Ajaya Kumar 
6. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
7.       Shri H.D. Devegowda 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10.   Shri Anwar Hussain 
11.        Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
12.        Ch. Lal Singh 
13.        Shri Ananta Nayak 
14.        Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
15.        Shri A. Sai Prathap 
16.        Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
17.        Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
18.        Shri Manik Singh 
19.        Shri K. Subbarayan  
20. Shri C.H. Vijayashankar 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.        Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee 
23. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri A. Elavarasan 
29. Shri Isam Singh 
30. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31. Shri Abani Roy 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director  
4. Shri Hoti Lal    - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Vinay P. Barwa   - Executive Officer 
 
 (iv) 
 
 

 5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2007 -08), having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Twenty Eighth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Gov ernment on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways on ‘Land Management’.  
 
2. The Twenty Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28.11.2006 and 
it contained 11 recommendations/observa tions. The Ministry of Railways have 
furnished their Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 
18.01.2007.  
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at 
their sitting held on 06.09.2007.  
 
4. An analysis o f the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/ observations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;               BASUDEB ACHARIA  
6 September, 2007             Chairman,  
15 Bhadrapada, 1929 Saka         Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

 6 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations and observations contained in the                      
24th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways on ‘Land Management’.  The 
Report was presented in Lok Sabha on 28 th November, 2006 and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 29.11.2006. 
 
1.2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Go vernment in respect 
of all the 11 recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These 
have been broadly categorised as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 8, 9, 10 and 11 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Para No. Nil 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
Para Nos. 6  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are 
still awaited: 
Para Nos. 3, 5 and 7 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the 
recommendations for which only interim replies have been given by 
the Government should be furnished to them expeditiously.   
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by Government on 
some of their recommendations. 
 

 7 
 
A. Land Management Cells  
(Recommendation Para No.4) 
1.5 The Committee observed that to strengthen Land  Management Cells in 
each Zone,  Railways had directed the Zonal Railways to augment the staff 
strength of these Cells from the available resources and provide them regular 
training in land management.  The Committee, keeping into account the 
importance and the seriousness of job assigned to these Land Management Cells 
were of the considered view that the Railways should accord utmost priority for 
strengthening of these cells by providing all necessary inputs like trained 
manpower and requisite technology e tc. so that these cells may function more 
effectively and scientifically.   
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
 
“The recommendation of the Committee is noted for issuing suitable 
direction to all Zonal Railways.” 
 
1.7 It is not clear from the reply of the Ministry of Railways whether 
or not the Railways have since issued directions to Zonal railways for 
strengthening of Land Management Cells as recommended by the 
Committee.  They desire that the Railways should immediately issue 
suitable directions to all the Zonal Railways in this regard, if not 
already issued, and furnish a copy of the same to the Committee for 
their information.   
  
B. Fixation of responsibility and accountability for encroachment   
(Recommendation Para No.6) 
 
1.8 The Committee observed that as per the Joint Procedure Order (JPO) of 
2001, responsibility for the removal of encroachment on railway land lies with 
many Departments.  They were of the firm view that unless and until there is a 
nodal agency/officer responsible for prevention/detection/removal of 
encroachments, it would be difficult to fix the responsibility for any 

 8 
encroachment on any single Department.  They, therefore, had 
recommended that the Officer -in-charge of Land Management Cel l at Zonal 
Railway and Divisional Railway Manager at the Division level be assigned with 
this responsibility and these officials should be held directly responsible for any 
further encroachment.  It was also recommended that to ensure their 
accountability penal action may also be fixed.   
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
“Civil Engineering department in the Zonal Railways continue to be the 
nodal department for, inter -alia, maintenance of Railway land free of 
encroachments.  However, prevention of encroachment on a particular 
area of Railway land coming in the jurisdiction of a particular department 
can be best handled by the official -in-charge of that particular 
department, who can take action immediately, being present at site. 
The Senior Administrative Grade officer -in-charge of the land 
management organization in the Headquarters of a  Zonal Railway is 
entrusted with many other responsibilities in addition to dealing with 
encroachments for which he has to coordinate with a number of officers in 
the Divisions.  Therefore, fixing direct responsibility on a single officer in 
the Headquarter may not be quite practical.  Moreover, if a single officer 
is directly held accountable for each and every encroachment, th is may 
create a sense of irresponsibility in the attitude of the officials manning 
posts in the field. 
Similarly, in the Division, the Divisional Railway Manager is 
responsible for functioning of all the departments in the entire Division.  If 
he is held d irectly responsible for simple day -to-day activities of all the 
departments, he may not be able to discharge his duties, instead he may 
be burdened with responding to all the individual instances of minutest 
irregularity noticed in all the departments.  Th erefore, it may not be quite 
practical to make the DRM directly accountable for every encroachment.” 
 
1.10 The Ministry of Railways have neither agreed to the Committee’s 
recommendation nor have they proposed any effective mechanism 
within the existing arr angement to ensure accountability on an 
important activity of preventing encroachment of Railway lands.  Such 
indifference on the part of the Ministry of Railways is deplorable.  No 
one seems to have been entrusted with specific responsibility of 
preventing encroachment of lands held by the Railways.  It is high time 
that the Ministry of Railways look into this problem in right earnest and 

 9 
do the needful to fix responsibility on officers at various levels in 
Divisions and Zones for effectively preventing en croachments.  They 
desire that action taken in this regard be intimated to them within 
three months. 
 
C. Amendment of Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized 
Occupants) Act, 1971  
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
 
1.11 The Committee were informed that a sugge stion to amend the Public 
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 so as to empower 
Estate Officers had been made to the Ministry of Urban Development in the year 
2003 but their final reply is still awaited.  The Committee had desired that t he 
Railways should take up the matter with the Ministry of Urban Development at 
the highest level and necessary amendments in the PPE Act be brought out at 
the earliest. 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated that a 
letter from Hon’ble Minister of Railways to the Hon’ble Minister of Urban 
Development will be sent and thereafter, it will be vigorously pursued. 
 
1.13 It is not clear whether the matter has since been taken up by the 
Minister of Railways with the Minister of Urb an Development and if so, 
with what result.  The Committee would like to be informed of the 
outcome. 
 
D. Certification and Computerization of Land Plans 
(Recommendation Para No.8) 
1.14 The Committee had found inter alia that almost in all the Zonal Railway s 
the works relating to computerization and certification of land plans were too 
slow and in case of Eastern Railway computerization of land development plans 
had not at all taken place so far.  According to the Ministry of Railways, 
consequent upon creation of new Zones in 2003-04, land development plans had 
to be transferred from one Railway to another, which had affected the progress 

 10 
of computerization.  It was stated that this work had been taken up as a 
mission area and that the work would be completed  within a year or so.  The 
Committee had desired that the work relating to computerization and 
certification of land records should be completed without any further delay and 
the information in this regard be made available also on the Railway website 
simultaneously. 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under:- 
“All possible efforts are being made to expedite the process of certification 
and computerization of land plans and the data of land plans will soon be 
made available in the web.” 
 
1.16 The Committee had been informed earlier by the Ministry that 
the task of computerization and certification of land records of all 
Zonal Railways would be completed within a year.  The Ministry have 
now informed that all possible efforts are be ing made by the Railways 
to expedite the process of certification and computerization of land 
plans.  From what is stated by the Ministry, there appears to be some 
uncertainty about fully computerizing land plans in time.  Nine months 
have passed after pre sentation of the report by the Committee.  The 
Committee emphasize that the work should be completed within the 
assured time frame and the Committee be informed of the position.   
  
E. Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA) 
(Recommendation Para No.9) 
 
1.17 The Committee had noted that Railways in the year 2005 had brought out 
an amendment in the Railway Act, 1989 so as to set up a separate Land 
Development Authority (RLDA) to deal with developmental activities.  However, 
this Authority could not be constitu ted and notified as the Ministry of Law and 
Justice had desired that before notifying the setting up of RLDA, rules for the 
proposed authority be framed.  The rules since framed in this regard were being 
sent to the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative  Wing) for vetting and 
Authority was expected to be set up in the next couple of months.  The 

 11 
Committee had strongly disapproved the delay and recommended that the 
constitution of the RLDA be notified at the earliest so that the land development 
works may not get hampered.  
 
1.18 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:- 
“The Authority has since been constituted  w.e.f. 1 st November, 2006.  
The delay was mainly due to elaborate long process of drafting of Rules & 
the vetting of the same by the Ministry of Law & Justice…...”   
 
1.19 The Committee are happy to note that the Rail Land 
Development Authority (RLDA) has since been set up.  The Committee 
hope that the establishment of RLDA will give greater thrust to all 
tasks rel ated to property development on Railway land under the 
control of the Ministry of Railways.   
 
---- 
 

 12 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Railway Land 
(Recommendation Para No.1) 
 The Committee find that as  on 31.3.2006, Railways own 4.31 
lakh hectares of land.   They were informed that as on 1 st April, 2004, 
3.26 lakh hectares of land was in use for locating service and 
operational infrastructure such as track, workshops, production units, 
stations, staff c olonies etc.  and 0.03 lakh hectares for commercial 
licensing and many other miscellaneous uses like afforesation, grow 
more food and  pisciculture. When the Committee wanted to know the 
actual position of land used as on 31.3.2006, they were informed that   
as some more acquisition of land has  been made for the new projects 
taken up, it would take some time to give an updated figure.  The 
Committee express their serious concern over the failure of the 
Railway Board in maintaining proper and accurate data o f land use.   
They desire that the requisite information be furnished to them within 
a period of three months.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 The data on land holding is maintained on Zonal Railways and not in 
Railway Board.  Therefore, Zonal Railways were asked to furnish updated data as 
on 01.04.2006. 
The break up of the land as on 01.04.2006 is as follows:- 
(Area in lakhs of hectares) 
S.No. Land Use Area 
(lakhs of 
hectares) 
Percentage 
of total land 
holding 
(i) Track and structure including stations, colonies etc. 3.26 75.7 
(ii) Afforestation 0.45 10.5 
(iii) ‘Grow More Food’ Scheme 0.06 1.40 
(iv) Commercial licensing 0.03 0.7 
(v) Other uses like pisciculture 0.04 0.8 
(vi) Encroachment 0.02 0.5 
(vii) Vacant land  0.45 10.4 
 Total 4.31  
    [Ministry of Railways No.2006/BC-II/XIV/300/5] 

 13 
Afforestation of Railway Land 
(Recommendation Para No.2) 
 The Committee note that out of 4.31 lakh hectares of land 
holdings as on 1.4.2004, 10.5 per cent of land was under afforestation 
done through State Forest Department on vacant land along the tracks, 
near workshops and colonies etc.  They have been informed that 
though afforestation policy  has helped in providing green cover but  
Railways had  the problems with State Forest Departments such as non 
execution of the agreements, denial of legitimate access for 
undertaking routine safety works connected with railway safety, works 
connected with railway operations, getting back the land for railway 
purposes etc.  The Committee feel that Railways should not get 
detracted from their policy of afforestation by these problems rather 
they should make efforts to solve such problems amicably by taking up 
the matter with State Government Authorities.  Since, afforestation is 
the need of the hour, the Committee desire that Railway s should 
continue with their afforesation policy with more vigorous efforts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Railway is continuing with its afforestation policy.  However in case of 
afforestation by State Forest Department, land will be entrusted to Forest 
Department for plantation only after execution of agreement and on the 
condition that land will not be declared as ‘Protected’ or ‘Reserve’ forest. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No.2006/BC-II/XIV/300/5 dated 18.01.2007] 
 
Land Management Cell 
(Recommendation Para No.4) 
 Land being an important non traditional resource, a proper and 
scientific management of the same becomes essential and in order to 
put this highly important area of activities on proper footing, Railways 
have set up Land Management Cells in each Zone .  The Committee 
were informed that the officers of Land Management Cells,  apart from 
dealing with issues related to land management such as 

 14 
licensing/leasing of Railway Land,  commercial development of 
Railway Land/airspace, afforestation, removal of enc roachment, 
verification of land records, recovery of license fee, liquidation of 
arrears and  dealing with litigations etc.,  are also entrusted with some 
other responsibilities.  However, after the constitution of Railway Land 
Development Authority (RLDA) , the work relating to commercial 
development of Railway Land which are vacant/surplus and which do 
not have any immediate use will be entrusted to it and the remaining 
works will continue to be handled by the Land Management Cell.  To 
strengthen these Cel ls, Railways have directed the Zonal Railways to 
augment the staff strength of these Cells from the available resources 
and provide them regular training in land management.  The 
Committee, keeping into account the importance and the seriousness 
of job assigned to these Land Management Cells are of the considered 
view that the Railways should accord utmost priority for strengthening 
of these cells by providing all necessary inputs like trained manpower 
and requisite technology etc. so that these cells may f unction more 
effectively and scientifically.   
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for issuing suitable 
direction to all Zonal Railways. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No.2006/BC-II/XIV/300/5 dated 18.01.2007] 
 
Certification and Computerization of Land Plans 
(Recommendation Para No.8) 
 The Committee find that land record register and land boundary 
verification registers are maintained,  as per the prescribed proforma,  
in Chief Engineers Office at Zonal level and in Divisions.  Section 
Engineers are duty bound  to ensure that the land records and 
boundaries are kept intact in revenue records.  They further notice that 
out of the 52560 land plans available with the Railways as on 1.4.2006, 
42978 plans so far  have been certified by the Revenue Authorities and 
38711 plans are computerized by the Railways. From the statistics 

 15 
furnished to them by the Railways in this regard, they find that 
almost in all the Zonal Railways the works relating to computerization 
and certification of la nd plans are too slow and in case of Eastern 
Railway computerization of land development plans have not at all 
taken place so far.  The Ministry of Railways informed the Committee 
that consequent upon creation of new Zones in 2003 -04, land 
development plans had to be transferred from one Railway to another 
which has affected the progress of computerization. Now this has been 
taken up as a mission area and would  be completed within a year or 
so. In case of Eastern Railway, computerization of land plans is b eing 
outsourced.  Railways are monitoring the position of computerization 
on monthly basis and it will definitely improve in the coming months. 
The Committee desire that the work relating to computerization and 
certification of land records should be compl eted without any further 
delay and the information in this regard be made available also on the 
Railway website simultaneously. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 All possible efforts are being made to expedite the process of certification 
and computerization of la nd plans.  The date of land plans will soon be made 
available in the web. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No.2006/BC-II/XIV/300/5 dated 18.01.2007] 
 
Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA) 
(Recommendation Para No.9) 
 The Committee note that IX Plan document had envisaged 
development of surplus/vacant land for commercial utilization to 
supplement the internal resource generation of the Railways.  
However, due to absence of clear mandate in the Railway Act, 1989 
and inadequate expertise in the field of real estate development 
activities, Railways could not make much headway in this direction.  
They further find that to garner clear cut mandate to utilize 
surplus/vacant land for commercial development like setting up of 

 16 
shops in the subways, shopping complex etc.  Ra ilways in the year 
2005  have brought out an amendment in the Railway Act, 1989 so as 
to set up a separate Land Development Authority to deal with 
developmental activities.  However, this Authority could not be 
constituted and notified as the Ministry of L aw and Justice has desired 
that before notifying the setting up of RLDA, rules for the proposed 
authority be framed.  The Ministry have informed the Committee that 
the rules now framed  in this regard and approved by the Minister of 
Railways are being sent  to the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Wing) for vetting and Authority is expected to be set up in the next 
couple of months.  The Committee take a serious view of the fact that 
although almost a year has elapsed after the notification of the 
Railways (Amendment) Act, 2005, the RLDA is yet to be constituted by 
the Railways. Such  an apathetic attitude reflects lack of seriousness of 
the Ministry in constitution of  the proposed Authority.  They strongly 
disapprove this delay and recommend that the constitution of the RLDA 
be notified at the earliest so that the land development works may not 
get hampered.  They would like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard.    
 Apart from this, they also  recommend that the surplus railway 
land for c ommercial development be leased on short term basis  only 
i.e. for not more than 25-30 years with the specific proviso that in case 
of requirement for business operation any time in future the lessor i.e. 
the Railways can retrieve such land. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Authority has since been constituted  w.e.f. 1 st November, 2006.  The 
delay was mainly due to elaborate long process of drafting of Rules & the vetting 
of the same by the Ministry of Law & Justice.  As regards commercial 
development of railway land  on short term basis, it may be submitted that the 
matter of lease period has been dealt with extensively at the time of framing of 

 17 
standard bid documents and the following lease periods as fixed 
depending upon the use of land are considered appropriate: 
1. Development/lease of shops : 30 years extendable to 45 years 
2. Development of air-space  : 45 years extendable to 60 years 
3. Development of vacant land : 60 years extendable to 90 years 
 However, provision for retrieval of land in case the sa me is required by 
Railway for its own use already exists in the bid documents. 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No.2006/BC-II/XIV/300/5 dated 18.01.2007] 
 
Leasing of encroached  lands/shops to cooperatives 
(Recommendation Para No.10) 
 The Committee note that th ere are certain hard encroachments 
by shopkeepers on Railway land which are continuing for more than 50 
years or so and the Railways have not been able to vacate them.  They 
further find that to solve such chronic  encroachments, Railways have 
formulated a  policy in 2002 to regularize such encroachment on 
cooperative basis by providing shops/lands on lease at one station per 
Division.  The Committee are of the view that by restricting it to one 
station per  Division, Railways may not be able to resolve the problem 
as such.  They, therefore, desire that the extant policy be extended to 
more than one station per Division. 
Reply of the Government 
 In line with the recommendation of the Standing Committee, it has been 
decided to extend the scheme to two (2) stat ions per Division, as an 
experimental measure. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No.2006/BC-II/XIV/300/5 dated 18.01.2007] 
 
Use of Railway Land for Social Activities 
(Recommendation Para No.11) 
 The Committee observe that there is a well laid down policy of 
the Railways to hand over the land to State Governments/Local bodies 
for various social activities viz. construction of Schools, Bus Terminals, 

 18 
Stadium etc., if such land is not required by the Railway for their 
operations.  However, the Committee note that it takes years for State 
Governments/Local bodies to acquire such land due to lengthy 
procedure followed by the Railways.  They also find that there are 
certain demands/requisitions by the State Governments/Local bodies 
which are still pending   with   the   Railways  for  the  last  many years.  
In views of this, the Committee desire that the Railways should 
process these demands/requisitions expeditiously  and the extant 
procedure for clearance of such land be simplified and made amenable 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As per extant  policy, railway land if separable may be considered on long 
term lease basis to State Government/Public Sector Undertakings on payment of 
99% of market  value of land as lease money plus Rs.1000/ - per annum as 
nominal charges.  Powers have been delegated to General Managers for lease of 
railway land upto Rs.5 lakh.  Proposals involving value of land more than Rs.5 
lakh require approval of Railway Board.  Proposals as and when received are 
processed on priority basis and disposed of as expeditiously as possible. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No.2006/BC-II/XIV/300/5 dated 18.01.2007] 
 

 19 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY  
 
 
 
-  Nil  - 

 20 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Fixation of responsibility and accountability for encroachment 
(Recommendation Para No.6) 
 
 The Committee find that as per the Joint Procedure Order (JPO) 
of 2001, many Departments are  responsible for the removal of 
encroachment on railway land.  They are of the firm view that unless 
and until there is a nodal agency/officer responsible for 
prevention/detection/removal of encroachments, it becomes dif ficult 
to fix the responsibility for any encroachment on any single 
Department.  They, therefore, strongly recommend that the Officer -in-
charge of Land Management Cell at Zonal Railway and Divisional 
Railway Manager at the Division level be assigned with t his 
responsibility and in case of any further detection of such 
encroachment, these officials should be held directly responsible for 
the same and penal action may also be fixed to ensure their  
accountability.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 Civil Engineering  department in the Zonal Railways continues to be the 
nodal department for, inter -alia, maintenance of Railway land free of 
encroachments.  However, prevention of encroachment on a particular are of 
Railway land coming in the jurisdiction of a particular d epartment can be best 
handled by the official -in-charge of that particular department, who can take 
action immediately, being present at site. 
 The Senior Administrative Grade officer -in-charge of the land 
management organization in the Headquarters of a  Zonal Railway is entrusted 
with many other responsibilities in addition to dealing with encroachments for 

 21 
which he has to coordinate with a number of officers in the Divisions.  
Therefore, fixing direct responsibility on a single officer in the Headquarter  may 
not be quite practical.  Moreover, if a single officer is directly held accountable 
for each and every encroachment, this may create a sense of irresponsibility in 
the attitude of the officials manning posts in the field. 
 Similarly, in the Division, the Divisional Railway Manager is responsible for 
functioning of all the departments in the entire Division.  If he is held directly 
responsible for simple day-to-day activities of all the departments, he may not be 
able to discharge his duties, instead he  may be burdened with responding to all 
the individual instances of minutest irregularity noticed in all the departments.  
Therefore, it may not be quite practical to make the DRM directly accountable for 
every encroachment. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No.2006/BC-II/XIV/300/5 dated 18.01.2007] 
 
 
 

 22 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
Plantation of Jatropha Curcas 
(Recommendation Para No.3) 
 
 The Committee have been further informed that Railways hav e 
asked the Zonal Railways to take up plantation of ‘Jatropha Curcas’ 
through Departmental effort on a massive scale along the tracks and 
other areas and a target of 72 lakh saplings have been fixed for the 
year 2006 -07.  The Committee also notice that the  Railways have 
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Indian Oil 
Corporation (IOC) for plantation of Jatropha Curcas  on 500 hectares of 
land to be leased by Railways to IOC for producing environment 
friendly fuel, bio -diesel for use by Rail ways.  So far, plantation on 48 
hectares of land has been completed by IOC.  However, during the 
evidence, the Committee were informed that subsequent to this first 
project taken up for plantation of   Jatropha Curcas, Railways found 
that many other partie s are also interested in this field.  Therefore, to 
finalise the modalities of the contract with concerned parties, Railways 
have engaged consultant and based on their report,  some areas have 
been identified by Railways and open tender is being invited in order to 
select party.  The Committee desire that the process of selection of 
parties be expedited and decision taken in this regard be intimated to 
them at the earliest.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 The consultant has since submitted the final report and the same is under 
examination.  Further action taken will be advised to the Committee in due 
course. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No.2006/BC-II/XIV/300/5 dated 18.01.2007] 

 23 
 
 
Encroachment 
(Recommendation Para No.5) 
The Committee note with concern that as on 3 1.3.2006 about               
2033 hectares of Railway Land are under encroachment mostly in 
Metro cities and in and around urban areas.  The Northern Railway 
ranks first in all Zones with 1145 hectares of land under encroachment.  
The Committee were inform ed during evidence that there are in all 
1,59,323 cases of encroachments out of which 39, 733 cases are 
pending in courts under Public Premises Eviction Act, 1971.  Although 
in 44.473 cases the Estate Officer has passed orders under PPE Act to 
vacate the land, however, the eviction could not take place because of 
lack of cooperation from State Governments in execution of the orders 
of  Estate Officer. In 3539 cases, the encroachers have gone to High 
Court against the decision of the Estate Officer.   
 
 The Committee observe that the action for removal of 
encroachment on Railway Land is taken by the Railways under the 
provisions of Public Premises Eviction Act, 1971,  Section 147 of 
Railway Act, 1989 and also under Section 42.4 of Railway Protection 
Force Act, 1957.  As per the Joint Procedure Order (JPO) of 2001, the 
prevention/detention/removal of encroachment is the joint 
responsibility of many Departments including Railway Protection 
Force. The latter  provides assistance within their limitations as this i s 
not covered under the Provisions of Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 
and Railway Act, 1989.  However, the Committee have been informed 
by the representative of the Ministry of Railways during evidence that 
a proposal to amend the Railway Protection For ce Act, 1957 so as to 
include ‘railway lands’ and ‘immovable property’ in the definition of 
‘railway property’ was taken up with the Ministry of Law and Justice 
but the latter did not concur with the proposal.  The Ministry further 
informed the Committee t hat the problem of encroachment is not only 

 24 
with the railway lands but same is the case with other 
Ministries/Departments of the Union Government.  Therefore, to find 
out the ways to deal encroachment problems, a discussion is going on  
to form a Task Force in the Ministry of Urban Development to formulate 
a unified policy to deal with such encroachments.  The Committee find 
that there is no substantial decline in Railway Land under 
encroachment.  However, they appreciate the idea of formation of Task 
Force to deal with such problems and desire to be apprised of the final 
outcome of the same.   They also desire that while removing 
encroachments on the railway land, a humanitarian view should be 
taken towards the settlement colonies and vendors who have exist ed 
on railway land for more than 50 years. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As desired by the Committee, the final outcome of the proposal for 
formation of Task Force in the Ministry of Urban Development will be advised to 
the Committee in due course of time. 
 All encroachers of Railway land whether fresh or old are required to be 
removed.  In the process of removal the procedure like serving of prior notices, 
holding the hearings with affected parties etc. is adopted.  As far as possible the 
process of eviction is handled in a humanitarian manner. 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No.2006/BC-II/XIV/300/5 dated 18.01.2007] 
 
Empowering of Estate Officer 
(Recommendation Para No.7) 
 The Committee further note with concern that as on 31.3.2006 as 
many as 39733 cases were pen ding with the Estate Officer. Out of 
these, 16,964 cases were pending for more than five years.  Further, 
they find that under the PPE Act, 1971, the Estate Officer, a quasi 
judicial authority, is not invested with adequate powers to deal with 
encroachment cases effectively. The orders of eviction passed by him 

 25 
under the Act is not a decree of court and at times in the absence 
of assistance from the State Government, Railways are unable to 
execute the same.  They were informed by the Railways that a 
suggestion to amend the PPE Act so as to empower Estate Officer was 
made to Ministry of Urban Development in the year 2003 but their final 
reply is still awaited.  The Committee are of the strong view that to a 
great extent the problem of encroachment can be coun teracted by 
empowering the Estate Officer at par with the Civil Courts. They, 
therefore, desire that the Railways should take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Urban Development at the highest level and necessary 
amendments in the PPE Act be brought out at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As recommended by the Committee, a letter from Hon’ble Minister of 
Railways to the Hon’ble Minister of Urban Development will be sent, and 
thereafter it will be vigorously pursued. 
 [Ministry of Railways O.M. No.2006/BC-II/XIV/300/5 dated 18.01.2007] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                    (BASUDEB ACHARIA) 
6 September, 2007                                              Chairman, 
15 Bhadrapada, 1929 Saka        Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 

 26 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 24th REPORT       
(14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘LAND MANAGEMENT’  
 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations     11 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by  7 
the Government (Vide recommendations/observations) 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 8, 9, 10 and 11 
 
Percentage of total         64% 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not  NIL 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies 
NIL 
 
Percentage of total         NIL 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of    01 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
Para Nos. 6  
 
Percentage of total            9% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final   3 
replies of Government are still awaited  
Para Nos. 3, 5 and 7 
 
Percentage of total            27% 
 
 
 
 
 

 27 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FOURTH  SITTING  OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2007-08) 
 
The Committee s at on Thursday, the 6 th September, 2007 from 1000 hours to                        
1030  hours in Committee Room  ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA -  CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
4. Shri Anwar Hussain 
5. Shri Mahesh Kumar Kanodia 
6. Ch. Lal Singh 
7. Shri Manik Singh 
8. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
9. Shri K. Subbarayan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
11. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
12. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
13. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S. Negi    - Director 
3. Shri Hoti Lal    - Deputy Secretary-II 

 28 
 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the following draft Action Taken 
Reports without any amendment:- 
 
(i) Draft report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in 24 th report on ‘Land 
Management’. 
 
(ii) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
(iii) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
(iv) xxxx  xxxx   xxxx  xxxx 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
   
 
 
 
 