           
7 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2004-05) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the 1st Report of the Standing Committee on Railways on 
Demands for Grants  2004-05 of the Ministry of Railways] 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
       
  
      
        
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) 

  
 
 
SCR No. 86 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2004-05) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
  
  [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the 1st Report of the Standing Committee on Railways on 
Demands for Grants  2004-05 of the Ministry of Railways] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.03.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 01.03.2005 
 
             
  
             
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
February, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 

  
CONTENTS 
 
 
            
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
CHAPTER I   Report 
            
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government   
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
   Replies of the Government  have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration  
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which final  
replies of the Government  are still awaited   
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on 17.02.2005 
  
 
 
 
 
 

  
COMPOSITION  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAY (2004-05) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.       Shri A.Sai Prathap 
3 Shri Dhirendra Agarwal 
4 Shri Atique Ahamad 
5          Shri Ajaya Kumar 
6 Shri Subrata Bose  
7          Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
8. Shri Kishan Lal Diler 
9. Shri Giridhar Gamang 
10. Shri Pradeep Gandhi 
11. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
12. Shri Anwar Hussain 
13. Shri Mahesh Kanodia 
14. Shri C. Kuppusami 
15. Smt. Kalpana R. Narhire  
16. Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
17. Shri Kishan Singh Sangwan 
18. Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi 
19. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
20. Ch. Lal Singh 
21. Mohd. Tahir 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Kamla Manhar 
23. Shri Karnendu Bhatttacharjee 
24. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi  
25. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
27. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28. Shri R. Kamraj 
29. Shri Isam Singh 
30. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
31. Shri Abani Roy 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary   - Secretary 
2. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.S. Negi    - Deputy Secretary  
4. Smt Abha Singh Yaduvanshi  - Under Secretary 
5. Smt Archana Srivastava  - Sr. Executive Assistant  
 

  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I,  the Chairman of  the Standing Committee on Railways (2004-05), having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Seventh Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2004-05) on ‘Demands for Grants 2004-05’ of the Ministry 
of Railways. 
 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok  Sabha on 19.08.2004 and it contained 
9 recommendations/observations.  The Mini stry of Railways have furnished their 
Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 06.12.2004.   
  
3. The Standing Committee on Railways ( 2004-05) considered the Action Taken 
Report and adopted the same at their sitting held on 17.02.2005.    
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in  the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2004-05) Fourteenth Lok Sabha is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                         BASUDEB ACHARIA 
February, 2005                                                Chairman, 
Phalguna, 1926 Saka                             Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

  
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
  
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations/observations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (2004) on ‘Demands for Grants                  (2004-05) of the 
Ministry of Railways’ which was presented in Lok Sabha on 19.08.2004. 
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the 9 recommendations/observations c ontained in the Report.  These have been 
broadly categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government – Para Nos. 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147 and 148. 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies – Para Nos.140, 141. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee – Nil. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are 
still awaited  – Nil.   
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by Government on some 
of their Recommendations/Observations. 
 
RAKE MANAGEMENT & AVAILABILITY 
(Para No. 144) 
 
1.4 The Committee in the above paragraph had observed that due to 
mismanagement and non-availabi lity of rakes, freight traffic of Railways was 
affected to a significant extent.   They found that on a number of occasions due to 
non-availability/uncertainty in  availability of rakes, t he customers deviate to road 
sector.  At the same time, the Railways lose much needed freight earning by non 
utilization of capacity by keeping the rakes unused.  The Committee had also felt 
that this leads to not only immediate loss of business to Railways but also loss of 

  
faith and dependability on Rail ways.  They had desired that there should be 
optimum utilization of  capacity and proper management in  allotment of rakes.  The 
Committee had emphasized that Rai lways should not only stress proper 
management of rakes but also maintain co mplete transparency in their allotment.  
The availability status and list of allotment of rakes should be published in local daily 
newspapers, displayed at t he stations and through websit es.  They had also urged 
that in case of non availability of rakes the likely time of the availability be made 
known to the customers.  
 
1.5 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
 
“While there have been occasional instances of shortage of railway rakes to 
customers, this has not been due to any  mismanagement.  There is a regular 
system of ensuring balancing of rolling st ock including empty railway rakes from 
railways having surplus to railway requiring  stock.  Shortage of railway rakes has 
been felt in the recent years, primarily, due to sudden spurt of demand in a particular 
segment of economy, like export iron ore, ex port foodgrain, coal for power houses, 
FCI foodgrain for PDS due to drought in some States, etc.  At times, rakes have not 
been supplied to the railway customers for loading due to problems of 
transit/destination terminals like contro lled loading for N.E. Region due to 
infrastructural constraints of the region or limited loading for Bangladesh Railways 
due to inability of the Bangladesh to accept traffic freely.  However, even in these 
situations, all possible efforts are made to ensure optimization of freight earning and 
capacity utilization. For impr oving availability of rakes, Indian Railways have taken 
various steps like capacity enhancement works, de-congestion of busy terminals, 
improving turn around of wagons by bette r terminal management, etc. Introduction 
of Freight Operating Information System (FOIS) has provided considerable help to 
the Indian Railways in optimizing wagon utilization. 
 
Indian Railways maintain complete transpar ency in the allotment of rakes.  The 
system of allotment of railway rakes is governed by the pr ovisions of Preferential 
Traffic Schedule of Indian Railways.  Transparency of the system will further 
improve after computerization of rake al lotment procedure will  get implemented in 

  
the Phase-II of Freight Operating In formation System (FOIS) and Terminal 
Monitoring System (TMS) will become operational. 
 
Allotment of rakes is normally done one day  before the date of loading, primarily, 
because of availability of stock for loading of freight traffic cannot be accurately 
assessed much in advance due to variables involved – uncertain availability of 
railway rakes at terminals, dislocations in  rail movements, requirements of stock for 
loading of other priority item s, delay in loading and unloading of rakes, restrictions 
due to route congestion, congestion at terminals, et c.  Therefore, it is not feasible to 
publish allotment of rakes in newspapers.  Displaying allotment of rakes at Divisional 
Headquarters will not serve any purpose as r egular interface of freight customers 
with railways is not at the Divisional Headquarters but at the concerned railway good 
sheds/stations. Zonal Railways have already been advised to ensure display of rake 
allotment at the goods sheds/stations. 
 
1.6 The Committee had found that due to mism anagement and                
non-availability of rakes, Railway’s  freight  traffic  has suffered significantly  
thereby resulting in loss of much need ed freight earnings.    They had, 
therefore, desired that the Railways should properly manage,  optimally utilize 
the capacity and maintain transparency in allotment of rakes. The availability 
status of rakes should be published in local daily newspapers and displayed 
at the stations and through websites.    From the action taken replies of the 
Ministry, the Committee find that the Ra ilways have taken various initiatives 
such as capacity enhancement work , decongestion of busy terminals, 
improving turn around of wagons by better terminal management, 
introduction of Freight Operating Information System (FOIS) etc. for improving 
availability of rakes and optimise wagon ut ilization.  As per the Ministry the 
transparency in the system will further improve after comput erization of rake 
allotment procedure is implemented in phase-II of FOIS and Terminal 
Management System (TMS) becomes oper ational.   The Committee would like 
to be apprised of further action taken by Railways in this direction.    
 

  
Though the Committee are aware of  the difficulties mentioned  by the 
Ministry of Railways in their action t aken reply with regard to publishing the 
availability status and list of allotment of rakes in local daily newspapers, yet 
they emphasise upon the display of info rmation at stations and through their 
website. They do not agree with the contention of the Railways that displaying 
allotment of rakes at Divisional Hea dquarters will not serve any purpose as 
regular interface of freight customers with railways is not at the Divisional 
Headquarters but at the concerne d railway good sheds/stations.  The 
Committee stress  that  though the regul ar interface of freight customers is 
with the concerned railway goods shed s/stations, yet the information about 
allotment, likely time of the availability of rakes should also be made available 
at the Divisional Headquarters so that the customers could plan for future 
accordingly.   
 

  
SLEEPER PROCUREMENT 
(Para No. 146) 
 
1.7 The Committee had in the aforesaid paragraph noted that the Railways were 
having huge indent of concrete sleepers due to track re newal and gauge conversion 
works on large scale during the last thre e years.  The Ministry had informed the 
Committee that open tenders was invited fo r manufacture and supply of 160 lakhs 
BG PSC line  sleepers to co ver the requirement of 2 years (2003-05) of the Zonal 
Railways.  The Ministry had also stated th at 95 offers (71 from existing sleeper 
manufacturers and 24 from new firms) for o pen tender were received and finally 75 
existing sleeper plants were awarded order s to supply the required sleepers.  
However, the Ministry had admitted that no orders  were awarded to new firms.   
 
1.8 The Committee had noted that the proc urement of concrete sleepers became 
a very sensitive matter because a lot of unscrupulous existing manufacturers had 
formed a cartel to secure orders by unfai r means or tempering with procedure and 
simultaneously keeping the new competitors out of the race.   They further observed 
that the Railways had to transport t he sleepers themselves  without transport 
cost/charge from the manufacturers and consequentially suffered losses.  The 
Committee were constrained to notice that t here exists a regional imbalance in the 
setting up   of concrete sleeper manufacturi ng units.  They had also expressed their 
unhappiness that new ent rants were not encouraged, wh ich ultimately strengthen 
the cartel of old/existing manufacturers.   The Committee, in view of the above had 
recommended that the proce dure of procurement of concrete sleepers be 
streamlined and made foolproof  and transparent.  The existing regional imbalance 
may also be fairly addressed to forthwith.  They further observed that the Railways 
had to transport sleepers from one zone to  another distant zone  thereby incurring 
large transportation charges resulting into  heavy losses to the Railways.  The 
Committee had desired that the losses incu rred on this account should be enquired 
into by an independent agency. 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:-  
 

  
“(A) The procedure for procurement of c oncrete sleepers is under review by the 
Board. 
(B) To address the problem of regional imbalances, proposal for opening new 
plants in Zonal Railways having deficiency in production vis-à-vis requirement 
is under consideration of the Railway Board. 
(C) Inter-railway transportation of sleepers is inevitable for the following reasons: 
 
(i) Failure of some plants to produce sleepers as targeted. 
(ii) Change in priorities  of projects, and ther efore, requirement of 
sleepers in various zones. 
(iii) Suspension of production at t he instance of Railway on quality 
considerations or for any other  reason (e.g. CSP/Rewari and 
CSP Kosikalan of Northern Railway). 
(iv) Reorganisation of zones lead ing to deficiency in production 
vis-à-vis requirement in some zones & excess in others. 
(v)   Change in need of Railways for local reasons for out of turn 
works etc. 
 
Railway Board decides inter-railway dive rsion without specifying plants.  
Zonal Railway are supposed to decide the same so as to optimize the 
transportation needs & costs. 
 
The matter has been taken up CBI for in vestigation.  Views of “Standing 
Committee” have been communicated to CB I with a request to look into the 
matter with reference to Standing Committee’s observations”. 
 
1.10 The Committee while expressing their unhappiness over the 
procedure being followed by the Railw ays in procurement of concrete 
sleepers whereby allowing unscrupulou s existing manufacturers to form a 
cartel to secure orders by unfair mean s or by tempering the procedure thus 
keeping the new competitors out of th e race, had recommended that this 
procedure should be streamlined, made  foolproof and transparent.  They 
had also recommended that existing regional imbalances in setting up of 

  
concrete sleeper manufacturing uni ts be taken care of as huge 
transportation charges were incurred by Railways in transportation of 
sleepers from one Zone to another resulting in heavy loss to the Railways.  
In this context, the Committee had desire d that an enquiry be made by an 
independent agency.   The Committee notice from the action taken reply 
furnished by the Railways that the procedure for procurement of concrete 
sleepers is under review by the Board.  Similarly to address the problem of 
regional imbalances, proposal for opening new plants in Zonal Railways 
having deficiency in production vis-à-vis requirement is under consideration 
of the Board.  As regards the matter relating to losses suffered by Railways 
due to transportation charges of concrete sleepers, same has been handed 
over to CBI for investigation.  The Co mmittee desire that the enquiry report 
of the CBI and the new guidelines finalized for procurement of sleepers and 
decision taken for opening of new pl ants in Zonal Railways having 
deficiency in production be placed  before the Committee as and when 
received/reviewed.  
  
ROAD OVER/UNDER BRIDGES AND LEVEL CROSSINGS 
(Para No. 147) 
 
1.11 The Committee were dismayed over the fact that during the preceding  
years the allocations under road safety wo rks i.e. construction of road over/under 
bridges and manning of unmanned level cro ssings remained grossly underutilized.   
The Railways had utilized approximately Rs . 149 crore out of  Rs. 325 crore 
allocated for ROBs/RUBs during the year 2002-03.  Similarly, the allocation under 
the same Head had been revised downwards  to Rs.  80.03 crore from Rs. 313 
crore during 2003-04.  Elaborat ing the reasons for slow  progress of the works 
under this Head, the Ministry had submitted before the Committee that 
construction of ROBs/RUBs was a joint work of Railways and State Governments 
and the latter were not fulfilling their commitment for construction of approach 
works.   The Committee had desired that the matter may be pursued vigorously at 
the highest level with the State Governments.   In view of the fact that many of the 
State Governments were facing financial crunch, the Committee had desired that 

  
Railways should consider utilizing am ount accrued from diesel cess for 
construction of approach works. 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:-  
 
“Railways construct Road Over/Under br idges on cost sharing basis with 
concerned road authorities in lieu of existing busy level crossings where the 
traffic density exceeds one lakh Train Ve hicle Unit (TVU – A unit obtained 
by multiplying the number of trains  with the number of road vehicles 
passing over the level crossing in 24 hour s).  The road authorities have to 
undertake to close the level crossing on completion of the Road Over/Under 
bridges.  In such cases, where the traffic density is less than one lac TV 
units the ROB/RUB can be built on deposit terms if the road authority so 
desires.  Proposals in both cases hav e to be sponsored by the State 
Government concerned duly fulfillin g certain preliminary pre-requisites 
required under extant rules.  Rail ways construct bridge proper over the 
tracks and approaches are constructed by  the State Government and total 
expenditure on ROB/ RUB is shared by Railway and State Govt in 50:50 
proportion.  Following the above criteria , at present there are 433 works of 
ROBs/RUBs sanctioned by Railways on cost sharing basis which are 
estimated to cost a total of approx. Rs. 5000 crore out of which Railways’ 
share of cost will be about Rs. 2500 crores.  Funds to meet this expenditure 
are received by the Railways from Central Road Fund (CRF), a fund 
collected by Central Govt. by imposing cess on sale of diesel and petrol.  
Out of this, Railways’ share is credit ed to Railway Safety Fund (RSF) which 
is used to meet the ex penditure on its 50% share of the cost of ROB/RUB 
as per rules in vogue and also Safety Works at level crossings.  Safety 
Works at Level Crossings are also im portant safety items like manning of 
unmanned level crossings, providing standard infrastructure at level 
crossings & inter locking of level cro ssing gates.  Further there are 1252 
level crossings having traffic density of more than one lakh TVUs. I.e. 
qualifying for replacement by ROBs/ RUBs on cost sharing basis but not 
sanctioned so far.  These are required to be taken up for replacement by 

  
road over/under bridges in near future.  These works are estimated to cost 
a further of Rs. 15000 crores out of which Railway’s share is expected to be 
about Rs. 7500 cr on the basis  of present cost sharing pattern.  Moreover, 
Railways liability has further increas ed with the recent decision of the 
Ministry of Railways to assume enhanced responsibility in construction of 
ROBs/RUBs where traffic density is very  high.  This would provide greater 
relief to road users.  These areas include  
(i) Sharing of cost for four lanes  ROB/RUBs where minimum TVUs at 
level crossings are 3 lakh comprising not less than 6000 road vehicle units 
and concerned Road Authorities agree for four laning of approach portion. 
(ii) Sharing cost of widening of ex isting 2 lane ROB/RUBs to 4 lane 
ROB/RUBs provided TVUs ar e not less than 5 lakh comprising not less 
than 10,000 road vehicle units.  In addi tion an incremental increase of 2 
lakh TVUs comprising 4000 road vehicle units should have taken place 
after construction of two lane ROB/RUB. 
 
These initiative shall further strain the Railways financial position.  However, 
Railways are making their best efforts to  complete their portion of work 
before or simultaneously with the work of approac hes being done by the 
State Govt. concerned.  However, State Govts. have been found wanting in 
counterpart support in completing their portion of works due to various 
reasons, mainly resource crunch.  This issue has been raised by this 
Ministry at the highest levels.  Successive Ministers for Railways have 
written to the Chief Ministers of  States on 19.6.2 001 and 17/21.7.03 
Member Engineering has again written to the Chief Secretaries of the State 
Govts on 20.12.2002 and 2.4.2004 alon gwith the request to sponsor 
proposals for replacement of all the bu sy level crossings falling in their 
States.  General Manager s of Zonal Railways hav e also been holding 
regular meetings with the Chief Secretaries of State Govts.  However, these 
efforts have not borne desired fruits as the State Govts. have not been 
meeting their liabilities of share of cost out of the contribution received by 
them also out of the Cent ral Road Fund.  To provide relief to State Govts.  
Ministry of Railways have already decid ed to share cost of ROBs as per 

  
existing cost sharing pattern even in  cases where State Govt. may raise 
their share through commercial means i. e. levy of toll tax or commercial 
utilization of space under ROBs outside Railway land.  Railway is not 
asking for any share in the funds so generated.   
 
Regarding the other suggesti on that Ministry of Railways bear the entire 
cost of work of Road Over/Under Bridges out of its share of the Central 
Road Fund the following is submitted: 
 
1. Railways already has a huge liabilit y towards its 50% share of cost 
(as per existing pattern of cost-sharing) for 433 sanctioned Road over/under 
bridges.  this liability alone is approx. Rs. 2500 crore.  
 
2. There are already over  1252 level crossings wh ere traffic density is 
more than 1 lakh and Road over/under  bridge need to be sanctioned on 
cost sharing basis at the earliest.  Ra ilways’ liability towards its 50% share 
of cost as per existing pattern of cost sharing fo r these bridge would be 
around Rs. 7500 cr. 
 
Therefore, to complete the above Ra ilways alone would require Rs. 10,000 
crores to meet its share of 50% cost as per existing cost sharing pattern.  
Even to meet Railways 50% share the allocations to Railways need to be 
augmented.  In view of this Railways are at present not in a position to take 
up the work of construction of appr oaches of ROBs/RUBs through their 
share of CRF.    
  
However, in case Railways has to meet the entire cost of ROB/RUB, 
following would be required: 
 
(i) Railways share of Diesel and Pe trol Cess will need to be further 
increased to a suitable level, consistent with actual funding requirements.  If 
the yearly contribution fr om the Diesel and Petrol Cess to the Ministry of 
Railways for construction of Road Ov er/Under bridges is increased from 

  
present level of Rs. 400 crore per annum (Approx) to Rs. 800 to Rs.900 
crore per annum then perhaps suggesti on for Railways to fund the entire 
cost of ROB and take up the construction as a single agency for expeditious 
completion of works can be considered; and  
 
(ii) Ministry of Railways may be exempted from paying towards the 
Diesel-Petrol Cess and instead utilize the same towards construction of 
Road over/under bridges.” 
 
1.13 The Committee were informed that the expenditure on construction of 
Road Over Bridges/Road Under Bridge s (ROBs/RUBs) is  jointly shared by 
Railways and the State Governments in 50:50 proportion. However, the State 
Governments have not been able to discharge their 50% share for 
construction of approach works  due to financial crunch being faced by 
them.  The Committee, therefore, had desired that the Railways should bear 
the entire cost of work of ROBs/RUBs out of its share of the Central Road 
Fund.  In their action taken reply the Ministry have expressed their inability 
to bear the entire cost as they are already carrying a huge liability towards 
its own 50% share of Rs. 2500 crore in respect of already sanctioned 433 
works of ROBs/RUBs.  Further, there are 1252 level crossings for 
replacement by ROBs/RUBs on cost sharing basis to be taken up in near 
future at an estimated cost of Rs.15,000 crore out of which Railways share is 
expected to be about Rs.7500 crore.  However, the Railways have offered to 
meet the entire cost of ROBs/RUBs solely by them with the pre requisite that 
their share of Diesel and Petrol cess be increased to a suitable level, 
consistent with actual funding requireme nts, i.e. yearly contribution from 
diesel and petrol cess to the Railways is enhanced from the present level of 
Rs. 400 crore to Rs. 800-900 crore a nd by making the Railways a single 
agency for completion of works. Secondly, the Railways be exempted from 
paying towards the Diesel-Petrol cess and instead be allowed to utilize the 
same towards construction of ROBs/RUBs.  The Committee note that 
although it will be strenuous on the financia l health of the Railways if they 
bear the entire cost of work of RO Bs/RUBs as their own share involved is 

  
huge.  However, they desire that the conditions as enumerated above by the 
Railways be placed before the Planning Commission and the Ministry of 
Finance for their consideration at the earliest so that the construction work 
of ROBs/RUBs could be taken up  by the Ministry of Railways 
solely/independently and completed expeditiously.     
 
SAFETY 
(Para No. 148) 
 
1.14 The Committee in the above paragr aph had observed that Railways had 
taken several initiatives and adopted some measure fo r safety enhancement such 
as ‘electronic  verification by means of  Block Proving by Ax le Counters, Train 
Protection & Warning System (TPWS) and C entral Traffic Control System.  TPWS 
provides an aid to the driver to prev ent him from passing signals at danger as a 
Safety measures and if he passes it  unnoticed this system  will apply brake 
automatically.   They had found that TP WS system is being provided on Southern 
and North Central Railways on approximat ely 280 track Kms.  They had also 
found that CTC system is planned to be introduced for the first time on Ghaziabad-
Kanpur high density speed route to improve safety & operation. 
 
1.15 The Committee while appreciating t he emphasis and focus of Railways 
towards the safety in terms of introducin g new initiatives were convinced that 
these initiatives would go a long way in  enhancing safety on Indian Railways.    
They had emphasized that feasibility study be conducted on  all sections of Indian 
Railways for the introduction of Centralis ed Traffic Control System and TPWS to 
enhance safety and operations.   They had des ired that the initiatives taken by 
Railways in regard to safety be implemented and brought in vogue at the earliest. 
 
1.16 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated:- 
“Sufficient initiatives ha ve already been taken in introducing Block Proving 
by Axle Counters (BPAC).  BPAC wo rks are in progress at about 1300 
block sections.  The sanctioned works of BPAC, Train Protection and 
Warning System (TPWS) and Central Tra ffic Control (CTC) are targeted for 
completion by 2007-08 subject to availability of funds. 

  
All Railways have been advised to assess the need and to carry out 
feasibility studies for the introduction of TPWS and CTC to enhance safety 
in train operation.” 
 1.17 The Committee while appreciating the initiatives being taken by the 
Railways to introduce new techniques for safety in Railways had desired that 
a feasibility study be conducted on all th e sections of Indian Railways for 
implementation of Centralised Traffic Control System and TPWS to enhance 
safety and for efficient operations.  They note that the Ministry have directed 
all the Railways to carry out feasibili ty studies for the introduction of TPWS 
and CTC in their respective Zones.  The y desire that the status of the 
feasibility studies carried out by Zonal Railways be intimated to them.  

  
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
  
PASSENGER AMENITIES 
(Para No. 142) 
 
Passenger amenities are t he fundamental responsibility of Railways towards the 
commuters.  Ironically, the Committee had f ound that most of the complaints of 
the passengers were with regard to absenc e or inadequate basic facilities like 
drinking water, toilets, light s, cleanliness etc. being av ailable at the stations and 
in the trains.  The Committee were gi ven to understand t hat the Railways had 
identified certain basic am enities known as ‘Minimum Essential Amenities’   
(MEA) and  varying scale of amenities had been laid down for various categories 
of stations based on passenger traffic at stations and annua l earnings there 
from. 
 
The Committee had noticed that over a period of time there had been a drastic 
change in the general awareness among the passengers with the result that they 
expect visible, qualitative and effect ive improvement on ev ery item of public 
utility that they were payi ng for.  Although the year 2003-04 was declared as 
‘Customer Satisfaction Year’, yet no tangible change had been noticed at the 
stations as well as in the trains so far as amenities were concerned.  The 
Committee had found that the Railways  had undertaken a review of these 
amenities way back in 1995.  They were of  the considered view that on account 
of the changed scenario as well as ever increasing awareness and expectations 
among the passengers, there was a dire need to review those types of amenities 
which can be provided at different categories of stations.  They had desired that 
this exercise should be taken up at the earliest.  At the same time the basic 
facilities should be made available at all the stations in a time bound manner. 
  
The Committee were of the view that  the passenger amenities could not be 
implemented as per the expe ctations of the general pub lic till the allocation 
under the head be suitabl y enhanced and the works be  completed expeditiously 
almost on a war footing.  The Committ ee had therefore, urged upon the Ministry 

  
to take concrete steps in this direction and ensure completion of the 
existing/pending works on priority besides allocating sufficient outlay for meeting 
the just demands of the public. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As observed by the Committee, there has indeed been a s ea change in the 
attitude of the people over the years.  In view of t he increased expectations of 
the passengers/daily commuters, Indian Ra ilways are making all out efforts to 
provide various facilities at the stations. 
 
Indian Railways has more t han 8000 stations.  It has a lways been the endeavor 
of the Railways to provide adequate amenities to the passengers at the stations.  
Certain amenities are provided at the time  of construction of new stations based 
on anticipated traffic.  Amenities are fu rther augmented from time to time based 
on the needs and expectations of the trav eling public and the availability of 
funds. 
 
Regarding Committee’s observations that norms for Minimum Essential 
Amenities were laid on 1995 and require review in view of changed scenario, it is 
informed that keeping in view the continuously changing needs and expectations 
of the commuters,  Railways have revi sed the norms for Minimum Essential 
Amenities in 1999 and thereafter again in 2003. 
 
While Committee’s concern is noted for ta king remedial action, it is Railways 
endeavor to complete the Passenger Amenities work in a time bound manner.  
The same are also completed except save few exceptions which are mostly due 
to contractual failures.  Railway also ta ke necessary remedial action to avoid 
inconvenience to the passengers.  
 
Regarding the funds, it is brought out that adequate funds  are provided keeping 
in view the requirements projected by the Zonal Rai lways and the actual 
progress of works.  For example, in the year 2003- 04, the expenditure under 

  
Plan Head ‘Passenger Amenities’ wa s Rs. 181 crore and against this, Rs. 215 
crore have been allotted during 2004-05. 
 
PLANNED INVESTMENT THROUGH INTERNAL GENERATION 
(Para No. 143) 
 
The Committee had noted that over the recent years the share of planned 
investment through Internal Generation h ad touched the lowest ebb and is likely 
to plummet to 20% approximately during the Tenth Plan in comparison to 58% in 
Eighth Plan.  Contrary to this, the s hare of Budgetary Suppor t from the General 
Exchequer had galloped to almost 60% in the Tenth Plan from 23% in the Eighth 
Plan.  They had also noticed that the plan size of the Railwa ys had increased in 
absolute terms to Rs. 60,600 crore in t he Tenth Plan from  Rs. 32306 crore in 
Eighth Plan.  They had furt her noted that market borro wings have substantially 
increased to Rs. 14003 crore (31%) in the Ninth plan from Rs. 2520 crore (15%) 
in the Seventh  Plan and the Railways have projected Rs. 14774 crore to be 
mobilized during the Tenth Plan thr ough market borrowings.  The Committee 
had found the huge invest ment needs of the Railw ays and the present 
inadequate resources availa ble with them, do call for market borrowings which 
was an inevitable phenomenon, but at the same time ever increasing borrowings 
and fall in the internally generated re sources was not a healthy trend by any 
means. 
 
The Committee had, therefore, str ongly recommended t hat the Railways 
must put in every earnest effort with a view to augmenting their internal 
resources by following aggressive ma rketing strategies on the one hand and 
curbing leakages of revenue on the ot her hand. They must also explore 
new/innovative areas for raising additional revenue as adequate internal 
resources were vital for meeting the expansion needs of t he Railways in the 
future.   
 
The Committee had also noticed that  the Railway had increased the 
freight loading target from  540 MT (BE) to 550 MT wh ile revising the estimates 
for the year 2003-04 and corresponding freight earnings had been scale down to 
Rs.27115 crore from Rs.28815  crore.  The Committee were informed that the 

  
Railways had been able to achieve 557.39 MT (7.39 MT more) freight loading at 
the end of the year and the earning was Rs .27118 crore provisionally i.e. Rs.197 
crore less than the Budget Es timates.  They were also informed that due to 
commodity mix and lead factors the goods earnings did not pick up during the 
year.  The Committee were of the view that as major porti on of the internal 
resources were from the freight earnings,  Railways were lagg ing behind in this 
area.  Therefore, the Committee had recommended that Railways should identify 
the areas where from more freight were likely to be obtained and serious efforts 
be made to get traffic for higher leads besides adopting vigorous marketing 
strategies.  The Committee would like to  be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
The advice of the Committee is noted.  Th e process of rationalization of freight 
structure for re-balancing of tariffs wa s initiated in the Railway Budget 2002-03 
and is being continued.  In  the Railway Budget  2003-04, freight rates for certain 
high-rated commodities were reduced to attract more traffic to rail.  
 
Some of the other steps taken to get more traffic by the Railways are as under:- 
i) There has been no increase in the freight rates for the year 2004-05. 
ii) Freight structure has been rati onalized to remove anomalies and 
provide smooth telescopic reduction in per per-kilometer rates.  
iii) Number of Classes for freight ra tes has been reduced from 59 to 27. 
iv) Highest Class has been reduced from Class-300 to Class 250. 
v) Classification of POL, Iron & Steel, Cement etc. have been suitably 
reduced, resulting in r eduction in freight rates ranging from 3.7% to 
10%  
vi) Train-load classification has  been extended to all commodities. 
vii) Powers of GMs have been enhanced to grant freight concessions upto 
24% to quote Station-to-Station rates.  
viii) Increase of 2% rebate on every Rs. 5 crore net additional freight 
earnings granted for Premier Custom ers, generating a nd originating 

  
earning of Rs. 25 crore p.a. from their sidings for commodities in 
Class-135 and above. 
ix) A rebate of 10% in freight c harges for the transportation of heavy 
machinery consignments by special trains in a special type of wagons 
owned by the customers has been granted. 
x) MoU has been signed with CWC to develop a network of 22 freight 
terminals to provide single-window service, including 
loading/unloading, storage and road-bridging at the originating and 
destination points. 
xi) In order to remove anomalies in  the method of arriving at the 
chargeable distance for fare and frei ght by different zonal railways, 
total distance will be rounded off to the next higher kilometer only once 
at the end, instead of multiple r ounding off at intermediate stages.  
This rationalization which bring uni formity in charging of fare and 
freight is being implemented shortly. 
xii) A new scheme, ca lled “Engine-on-Load” (EOL) scheme, wherein the 
train engine will wait during loading or unlo ading operation has been 
introduced to ensure faster clearance of rakes and better availability of 
wagons.  The EOL customers are ex empted from payment of engine 
hire charges, siding charges, shunti ng charges and the cost of all the 
railway staff posted in the sidings.  A system of debit/credit hours, for 
computation of demurrage has also been introduced.  
xiii) The benefit of train-load rate fo r booking of “two-point” block rakes has 
been granted for the entire distance of transportation on end to end 
basis. 
xiv) Customer have been allowed cl ubbing up to 12 consignments in a 
Broad Gauge 8-wheeler wagons. 
 
FREIGHT OPERATIONS INFORMATION SYSTEM (FOIS) 
(Para No. 145) 
 
The Committee were happy to note that recently the Railways had improved the 
productivity and turn over of the rolling stock due to introduction of better devices 
such as improvement in handl ing capacity of freight te rminals, control over the 

  
number of ineffective wagons, bette r management of terminals through the 
intensive use of Freight Operations  Information System (FOIS) and given 
incentives to customers to reduce detention of rakes at the terminals.    
However, at the same time they could not ignore the fact t hat the Railways had 
to do much more in this field particularly by ensur ing availability of adequate 
number of wagons/rakes keeping into a ccount regional balance and operational 
viability factors.   The Committee had, therefore, recomm ended that FOIS be 
replicated at the earliest on all important and viable  sections where optimum 
freight can be obtained.   
  
Reply of the Government 
 
Standing Committee on Railways (2004) on “Demands for Grants (2004-05) of 
the Ministry of Railways”  has appreciated the improvement in productivity of 
rolling stock through the intensive use of Freight Operation Information System 
(FOIS) and has recommended that the system be replicated at the earliest on all 
important and viable sections where optimum freight can be obtained. 
 
The current strategy of Indian Railways fo r implementation of FOIS is same as 
recommended by the Committee.  The cost of FOIS project has been estimated 
as about Rs. 423 crores.  The budget allo tment for the current year 2004-05 is 
Rs. 40 crore.  The total expenditure on t he project is about Rs. 304 crores up to 
September 2004.  the physical progress achieved in the pr oject, so far, is about 
82 per cent.  
 
Freight Operation Information System (FOIS) consists of two main sub-modules, 
namely, Rake Management System (RMS ) and Terminal Management System 
(TMS).  RMS essentially captures information relating to goods train movement 
on line in terms of rakes for entire I ndian Railways.  The RMS is now being 
upgraded to capture Train O peration Information in terms of wagons.  For this 
purpose, additional terminals are being established. 
 

  
TMS essentially captures the informa tion relating to Goods Shed working 
including all the commercial activities re lating to freight traffic.  After the 
completion of current phase of TMS, wo rking of all important goods terminals 
(TMS locations) on IR will be computer ized, covering about 90 per cent of 
originating goods traffic.  In the latter phase of implementat ion, remaining non-
computerized goods shed will also be covered. 
 
In the first phase of implementation, RMS has been implemented at 233 
locations on Indian Railways.  In addition, in the current phase, TMS is under 
implementation at 530 locations.  So far, 180 TMS locations have been 
commissioned.  The target date for completi on of the project is 31.03.2005.  It is 
expected that all the TMS terminals will be commissioned as per the target.  
  

  
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
NEW TRAINS 
(Para No. 140) 
 
The Committee had found that 54 pairs  of additional services had been 
announced in this budget to meet the risi ng aspirations of the traveling public 
from all parts of the country.  T he additional services announced were 17 
Sampark Kranti Express Train (SKET) (one Karnataka SKET had already been 
introduced) as proposed in the Interim B udget, 15 new Express trains, extension 
of 9 express trains and increase in fr equency of 12 other trains.  The Committee 
had been informed that new trains were introduced based on availability of 
resources, operational feasib ility, availability of demand, path, maintenance, 
infrastructure and rolling stock.    Ho wever, the Committee had observed that all 
these new trains introduced in th is budget were mainly on already 
congested/saturated routes and  the Rai lway system was already over stretched 
because of paucity of funds for creation of additional in frastructure required for 
new trains.   The Committee had desired that a comprehensive perspective plan 
should be drawn up by the Railways proj ecting the growth and capacity for the 
next five years and the existing capacity should be fully utilized by introducing 
high speed trains. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Introduction of additional train services over Indian Railwa ys is a continuous 
exercise.  However, a major portion of thes e services is introduced on the basis 
of Inter Railway Time Table Committee (IRTTC) and Railway Budget which are 
annual exercises.  A large num ber of request for train services are continuously 
received by Railways at various level viz. Headquarter, Zonal, Divisional and 
Station from various associations/or ganizations/groups like Divisional Railway 
Users Consultative Committee, Passenger  Associations, Hon’ble MPs, MLAs 

  
and other VIPs and dignitaries.  As per ex isting practice, provision of additional 
train services is preceded by a proposal  from the Zonal Railway approved by 
General Manager and after duly considering the basic factors like availability of 
demands, availability of path, availa bility of maintenance infrastructure, 
availability of Rolling Stock, manpower requ irement, impact on freight traffic etc.,  
Every year, Zonal Railways are asked to  send recommendations for introduction 
of new services.  Zonal Railways in turn  hold meetings with respective divisions 
at their headquarters before they send t he recommendations to the Board. All 
the recommendations received from the Zonal Railways are complied and from 
the basis of the agenda for the Inter Railway Time Table Committee meeting 
(IRTTC).  The decisions taken during the IRTTC meeting together with the 
announcements made by Minister of Railwa ys for introduction of new trains, 
increase in frequency, extens ion of trains and services on completion of gauge 
conversion and new line projects form the basis of annual working time table that 
gives minute to minute det ails of trains running.  These train services are 
introduced during the course of the financial year.  
 
The system is working satisfactorily over the years on Indian Railways.  
Introduction of new trains is  not a part of perspective planning.  Assessment of 
the number of trains requir ed in a particular section, availability of travel 
accommodations, need for additional train in the section, however, are a part of 
real-time planning.  However, line capacit y of train route is augmented by laying 
of new lines, doubling, gauge conversion,  improvement in signaling systems, 
augmenting trains to 24 coaches etc. to decongest the saturated routes and 
incorporated in Railway’s Five year and Annual plans.  Introduction of high-
speed train at the speed of 150 kmph between De lhi and Agra under 
consideration.   
 
 
WAGON PROCUREMENT 
(Para No. 141) 
 
The Committee had observed that ther e had been a considerable shortfall in 
supply of wagons during 2003-04 to the Ra ilways by the Private as well as 
Public Sector Units.   As  against the require ment of 19050 four wheeler units of 

  
wagons, only 13471 were supplied.  The shortfall reportedly was on account of 
price rise of the steel and other inputs besides the financial constraints being 
faced particularly by the PSUs and lock out and strike at on e of the Private 
Wagon Builders.  The Committee were al so given to understand that only a 
small quantity of wagons (2046) we re being produced in the Railways’ 
workshops and there was no proposal to manufacture the entire quantity of 
wagons required by the Railways as the present system is reported to be 
working satisfactorily. 
  
The Committee were apprised that fixe d criteria was being followed by the 
Railways in awarding the contracts to t he manufacturers of wagons.  Under this 
system 75% of the order is based on av erage performance of the firm during the 
last five years and 25% based on the lowest  or second lowest bidder in the open 
tender.  They had found that despite the Mini stry following this criteria, only 2/3 rd 
of the order placed could be suppli ed by the Private Sector and 1/3 rd by the 
Public Sector Units.  The main reason for the shor tfall was stated to be on 
account of the hike in the cost of inputs resulting thereby in the increased cost of 
production which happened to be higher t han the price fixed contractually and 
hence not cost effective.    They we re also informed that the Railways had 
discontinued the practice of supplying free bogie couplers to the firms which 
were engaged in production.  The Committee were however, given to 
understand that from 2005-06 supply of bogies couplers  would be given free of 
cost to the manufacturers on demand. 
 
The Committee had noted that shortfall in the supply of requisite number of 
wagons resulted in causing undue loss to th e Railways as they remain unable to 
meet the demand for these on time.  The Committee had expressed their 
concern and impressed upon the authorities to tackle this problem with due 
seriousness.  They were of the view t hat the contractual price of the wagons 
should take into account the price hike in the various inputs.  Besides, in order to 
mitigate the financial problems of the uni ts, the Railways should continue to 
make available at least 50% of the amount payable in advance particularly to 
those units which were facing acute fi nancial constraints.   They had also 

  
emphasized that the production capacity of the individual supplier as well as his 
financial viability should also be asse ssed properly apart from adhering to the 
criteria of selection on t he basis of past performance and bidding.   In order to 
clear the backlog of the wagons, the Ra ilways should make available bogie 
couplers free of cost even dur ing the current year.  They should also consider 
making Bharat Wagon Engineering Co. Ltd ., Muzaffarpur & Mokamoh and Burn 
Standard Co. Ltd. as their captive Units. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Railways have adopted Gove rnment of India policy to make all 
Government purchases through tender system.  Though the process of open 
tendering is being adopted by Ministry of  Railways for procurement of wagons 
yet bulk of the quantity is produced from all the established wagon 
manufacturers with specific purchase pr eference to PSUs as per policy of the 
Government.  This policy was adopted to  place the order amongst all the wagon 
manufacturers on equitable basis keeping in view the fact that wagon industry is 
highly labour intensive industry.  The s hortfall of supply of wagons by the wagon 
industry is largely attributable to poor productivity, overstaffing mismanagement 
in the units etc., which is required to  be addressed by the wagon manufacturers 
themselves.  Ministry of  Railways have always considered to utilize the capacity 
of PSUs to the extent possible within the existing policy framework of the 
Government.  So far as contractual price of the wagon are concerned it is stated, 
that the prices of wagons are decided on the basis of tender prices quoted by the 
industry themselves.  The system of adv ance payment of 50% to the wagon 
builders for 6 months target ed production is already in  vogue.  An escalation 
clause is already provided in the contract which takes care  of most situations of 
price increase.  So far as provision of  making bogie and couplers as free supply 
items is concerned as informed, the same is being started from 2005-06 onward. 
 
Regarding taking over of Bharat Wagon Engineering Co. Ltd. Muzaffarpur and 
Mokameh and Burn Standard Co. Ltd. as a captive units are concerned, it is 
informed that wagon manufactu ring is not a core activity for the railways and as 

  
brought out above, that railways entir e need is being met with by the well 
established wagon manufacturing industry  which has much higher capacity than 
that of Railways’ requirement.  Howeve r, a high level study was made to the 
proposal received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries regarding taking over of 
Bharat Wagon Engineering & Co. Ltd.  as a captive unit of the Railways and it 
was not considered feasible.  It has howev er, decided that Ministry of Railways 
as well as Ministry of Heavy Industry s hall provide all possibl e assistance to the 
above units for their revival. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 

  
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;    
February, 2005    
Phalguna, 1926 Saka                    
 