           
1 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2009-10) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 36th Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of 
Railways’] 
 
 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2009/ Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
_______________________________________________ 
 
 
 

 2 
           
 
FIRST REPORT 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2009-10) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 36th Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of 
Railways’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.12.2009 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.12.2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2009/ Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
_______________________________________________ 
 
 
 

 3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….         (iii) 
  
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….…            (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report………………………………………………………                1      
    
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been          8 
accepted by the Government  …………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee       20 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which         29 
   Replies of the Government  have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….…. 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final    33 
replies of the Government  are still awaited  …………. 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX-I  Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on         34 
Railways held on 29.10.2009 
  
APPENDIX-II  Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the         37 
   Recommendations/observations contained in the  
36th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2008-09) of the Ministry of Railways’ 
    
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
Shri T. R. Baalu - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.  Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3.  Shri Kameshwar Baitha (Palamau) 
4.  Shri K. Bapiraju 
5.  Smt. Rajkumari Chauhan 
6 .  Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
7 .  Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
8.  Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
9.  Shri Pralhad Joshi 
10.  Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
11.  Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
12.  Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
13.  Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
14.  Smt. Shatabdi Roy 
15.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
16.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
17.  Shri Gopal Singh Shekawat 
18.  Chaudhary Lal Singh 
19.  Shri Umashankar Singh 
20.  Shri Lalji Tandon 
21.    Dr. Girija Vyas         
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
23.  Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
24.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
25.  Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
27.  Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28.  Shri Ambeth Rajan 
29.  Shri N. Balaganga 
30.  Shri K.E. Ismail 
31.  Shri Abani Roy 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijeet Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Vivek Saini   - Executive Assistant 
 
(iii) 

 5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2009 -10), having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this First 
Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty -sixth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways on ‘Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Railways’. 
 
2. The Thirty-sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 16.04.2008 and it 
contained 17 recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways have furnished 
their Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations.   
  
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 29.10.2009.  
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Thirty -sixth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                         T.R. BAALU 
02 December, 2009                                                         Chairman, 
11 Agrahayana, 1931 Saka                Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 6 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2009 -10) 
deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
and observations contained in the Thirty -sixth Report of the Committee 
on ‘Demands for Grants (2008-09)' of the Ministry of Railways.   
 
1.2  The Thirty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 
16.04.2008 and laid  on the table of  Rajya Sabha on the same day .  It 
contained 18 recommendations/observations. 
 
1.3 Action Taken Notes  in respect of all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report  have bee n 
received and categorized as under: 
  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government –  
 
Para Nos.  2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 16.   
                 
Total : 11 
Chapter-II 
    
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Commi ttee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
 
Para No. 7, 8, 10, 17 and 18.  
Total : 5 
Chapter-III 
    
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration –  
 
Para Nos. 1 and 15.         
Total : 2 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited -  
 
Total : NIL 

 7 
Chapter-V 
    
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given 
to implementa tion of the recommendations/observations accept ed 
by the Government.  In cases  where it is not possible for the 
Department to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit 
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee 
with reasons the reof.  The Committee further desire that Action 
Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations contained in 
Chapter-I and final action taken replies to the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -V of this Report should be furnished to them 
at an early stage. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by  the 
Government on some of their recommendations/observations.   
 
 
A. Completion of throughput enhancement works by removing 
bottlenecks on the system & modernization of its network and 
scaling down of budgeted physical targets 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
1.6 The Committee appreciated the performance of the Railways 
during the year 2007 -08 in comparison to the year 2006 -07.  The 
Committee however, found that the operating ratio of the Railways is 
likely to go up to 81.4 percent during 2008 -09 from 76.3 percent in 
2007-08.  The Committee were of the view that the Railways should 
make concerted efforts to accelerate the pace of completion of throughput 
enhancement works by removing bottlenecks on the  system and 
speeding up modernization of its network so that the growth momentum 
achieved in 2007-08 is maintained in 2008-09 also. 
 
The Committee , expressing their displeasure over invariably 
scaling down the budgeted physical targets under various Plan H eads 
such as New Lines, Gauge Conversions, Doublings, Signalling, 
Electrification, etc. by Railways at the Revised Estimates stage, strongly 

 8 
recommended that such practice should be avoided and realistic 
targets be set at the Budget Estimate stage itself. 
 
1.7 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under: 
“To maintain the growth momentum achieved during the last few 
years the Railways have been providing higher allotment for works 
relating to throughput enhancement under the plan heads Gauge 
Conversion, Doubling, Traffic Facilities and Signalling & 
Telecommunication Works.  Keeping the same objective in view the 
Capital Fund has been revived since 2005 -06 (Revised Estimates) 
to provide sufficient funds from the internally genera ted resources 
to finance such works so as to ensure their expeditious 
completion. 
 
The physical targets of construction of projects are fixed in the 
beginning of the year depending upon the availability of funds and 
taking the physical progress of the ongo ing projects into 
consideration.  The targets are reviewed during the course of the 
year based on the actual progress being achieved at the field levels 
and various other factors coming up during the execution of a 
project which affect the progress of the project.   
 
Measures are being contemplated to address the problem of 
contractors on account of steep hike in prices of steel and cement. 
The progress of projects is monitored at regular intervals at the 
appropriate levels. The necessary empowerment of fie ld units and 
changes in various rules and practices related to contract 
management will surely bear better results.  As regards 
throughput enhancement works relating to signalling, the Railways 
have been permitted to float composite tenders for S&T works 
requiring construction and electrification of service 
buildings/structures to accelerate the pace of works.  Inputs like 
sleepers, glued joints, liners, etc. will be made available on priority. 
 
The concern of the Committee regarding slippage in targets has  
been noted and efforts will be made to expedite the works to 
complete them in the targeted time. Although the Railways 
endeavour to fix optimistic targets initially so as to gear up the 
entire system, men and machinery to achieve the same, efforts 
remain to project as realistic targets as are within reach to 
accomplish.” 
 
 
1.8 The Committee are not convinced with the reasons tendered 
by the Ministry for the shortfall and resultant s caling down of 

 9 
physical targets at the Revised Estimates Stage.  Almost all  the 
reasons cited by the Ministry were very much present at the 
planning stage itself, given the perennial nature of these problems.  
The Ministry, the Committee feel, have failed either to set realistic 
targets or achieve the same. The Ministry in their action taken reply 
have stated that the Railways fix optimistic targets initially to gear 
up the entire system, men and machinery.  The Committee  are of 
the view that such unrealistic planning lead to subsequent slippages 
in targets, thereby blocking the scarce resources which could have 
otherwise been used in other  developmental activities.  The 
Committee are also of the considered view that gearing up of entire 
system is a part of administrative process and cannot be cited as a 
reason for meeting the targ ets laid down .  The Committee, 
therefore, again impress upon the Mi nistry to fix realistic targets  
taking into consideration all constraints and strengthen  and 
augment the Planning, Implementation and Monitoring mechanisms  
in the Ministry . The Committee fu rther desire that their 
recommendation should be placed before the Planning Commission 
and views of the Commission, if any, may be included in the Final 
Action Taken Statement. 
 
B. Health Services 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
1.9 The Committee took seri ous note of the shortage of doctors and 
lack of adequate health facilities, particularly at smaller Railway 
hospitals in rural areas.  They felt that there is an urgent need to 
address this problem.  The Committee recommended that rural posting 

 10 
of doctors should either be made more lucrative or a mandatory 
roster system for postings be worked out.  They further desired that 
Railway Hospital should also have full time doctors in Indian System of 
medicines such as Ayurvedic, Homeopathic, etc. 
 
1.10 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under: 
“To make the rural posting lucrative, this is agreed in principle.  
However, this involves the Class -I Group ‘A’ Officers, therefore, the 
modalities will be worked out in consultation with t he other 
Ministries. 
  
Though, there is a unified cadre in Railways but large number of 
doctors are involved in Specialists and Super -Specialists services 
as well as administrative jobs of Hospitals. 
  
However, rural postings are done on need basis and at most of 
times, it is ensured that Health Units are manned either by regular 
or contract doctors. 
  
The issue of regularization of the services of 
Homeopathic/Ayurvedic Practitioners in the Indian Railways 
Medical services has been dealt with in detail in t he past and not 
found feasible.  However, it will be examined afresh.” 
 
1.11 The Committee, not convinced with the reply of the Ministry, 
once again reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that 
the Ministry should take concrete measures , including policy 
decisions, to make available  appropriate health infrastructure and 
adequate number of doctors in rural areas.  They also desire to be 
informed about the decision taken on the issue of regularization of 
the services of Homeopathic/Ayurvedic practit ioners in the Indian 
Railway Medical Services.   The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the complete list of full time doctors posted in rural 
areas against the vacancies, the details of existing vacancies and 

 11 
whether the roster system was properly followed in respect of 
these postings including backlog in reservations, if any. 
 
C. Secret ballot for recognition of unions 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
1.12 The Committee was happy to note that at the instance of Supreme 
Court, Railways have successf ully conducted the Secret Ballot in 
September 2007 to recognize Unions.  They however, found that these 
elections were not allowed in Railway Production Units and Kolkata 
Metro. The Committee in this regard reiterated their earlier 
recommendation in 33 rd Report on ‘Industrial Relations and Staff Welfare 
in Railways’ that the Unions/Associations of the Production Units as well 
as the Metro Railway, Kolkata should also be allowed to participate in the 
Secret ballot. 
 
1.13 In their action taken reply, the Mini stry of Railways have stated as 
under: 
“The existing grievances redressal machinery in the productions 
units and MTP Railway is working satisfactorily. All General 
Managers and Chief Personnel Officers of the Production Units in 
the meetings held with Board on 10.8.98 had reached consensus to 
continue with the existing system of Staff Councils and meetings of 
the Board with Staff Councils. The full Board in their meeting held 
on 11.10.96 had also decided    not to change the existing system of 
Staff Councils in Production Units.” 
 
 
1.14 The Committee note with serious concern that t he Ministry 
has once again tendered the same reply, which they had submitted 
in pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation on the issue in 
their 33 rd Report on ‘Industrial Relati ons & St aff Welfare in 
Railways’.  The C ommittee strongly note that they are not in 
concurrence with the views forwarded by the Ministry.  They, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that 

 12 
the Ministry should h old wider consultation on the issue with all 
the stakeholders  and that the Committee be informed about the 
decision taken in this regard. 
 
-------*****-------

 13 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
 The Committee find that the physical target for construction 
of new lines during the year 2007 -08 has been reduced to 155 Kms. 
at Revised Estimate stage, which is nearly 70 percent of the 
budgeted estimate.  The reasons cited by the Railways for downward 
revision of the target is delay in land acquisition, adverse law and 
order conditions, failure of contracts due to increase in prices of 
steel and cement, the sudden spurt in infrastructure development 
causing a serious crunch of the resourceful contractors an d not 
getting adequate response in the tenders.  The Committee note that 
the Railways have taken up Ordinance to counter the problem of 
land acquisitions and in some case the projects are being 
transferred to RVNL for early execution.  To check contractual  
failures due to rising prices of steel, Railways have decided to 
procure steel on its own and give to the contractors so as to avoid 
delay in execution of project because of rise in price of steel.  
Cement is another important component in the constructio n area.  
The Committee desire that just as in the case of steel, the Railways 
should also work out the feasibility of procuring cement themselves 
by taking up the matter with the concerned Ministries.  The 
Railways are also working towards empowerment of f ield units and 
increasing the financial and administrative powers of the CAO and 
General Managers so that work can proceed faster.  The Committee 
hope that these measures would improve the situation.  The 
Committee further note that precious time is lost b etween planning 
and execution of projects resulting in cost escalation of various 
inputs viz. land, steel, cement etc.   The Committee desire that the 
Railways should revise their methodology to bridge the gap between 
conceptualization and implementation o f new line projects.  There 
should also be proper monitoring and accountability at all levels viz. 
Railway Board, Zonal level for any lapses in execution of the project.   
They further desire that one time grant should be given to Railways 
to complete all pending projects.  The Committee also feel that 
while sanctioning new projects revenue earnings should not be the 
sole consideration and projects should be sanctioned with a view to 
developing backward areas also. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The physical targ et of construction of new lines are fixed in the 
beginning of the year depending upon the availability of funds and taking 
the physical progress of the ongoing new line projects into consideration. 

 14 
The targets are reviewed during the course of the year  ba sed on the 
actual performance and various factors which come up during the 
execution of a project and are likely to affect the target of the project.  
The problems relating to law and order conditions, failure of contracts, 
steep hike in prices of steel an d cement and other materials etc. used in 
the construction cannot be foreseen at times and are beyond the control 
of the Railways.  This compels the Railways to revise the targets at 
Revised Estimate stage.  Measures are also being contemplated to 
address the problem of contractors on account of steep hike in prices of 
steel and cement. However, it is not considered feasible to supply cement 
and steel by the Railways as this procedure involves large investment in 
nature of storage capacity and staff etc.  f or accountal purposes and also 
cause problems in contract management. In fact, this procedure was 
being followed in Railways earlier and was dispensed with so that 
contractors could timely arrange materials as per requirement.  The 
progress of projects is monitored at regular intervals at the appropriate 
levels.   The necessary  empowerment of field units and changes in 
various rules and practices relating to contract management will surely 
have positive impact on the progress   
As regards, sanctioning of pr ojects in backward areas, it is 
mentioned that large number of new line and gauge conversion projects 
in such areas have already been taken up for socio -economic 
development of backward areas.  The recommendation of Committee for 
one time grant to Ministry of Railways has been noted and will be put up 
to Government for decision. 
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
Doubling is required in order to meet the growing increase in 
traffic, reducing  congestion and saturation and for capacity 
augmentation.  During  2007 -08 Railways had targeted 700 Km of 
doubling which was reduced to 500 Km and the actual 
achievements till the end of March, 2008 was expected to be 453 
Km.  The Committee note that the doubling projects do not face 
the shortage of funds nor do they face usual constraints and 

 15 
bottlenecks such as land acquisition, forestry clearance, 
etc. as in the case of New Line projects.  Yet, Railways are unable 
to meet the targets set.  The reasons f or the slow progress are 
stated to be contractual problems, finding complimentary material 
inputs etc. Not convinced with the reasons cited by the Ministry, 
the Committee feel that such bottlenecks could have been 
visualized at the initial stages and appro priate remedial measures 
should have been taken by making periodic review of the progress 
in the execution of the projects.  They hope that in future the 
Railways would not be found wanting in the achievements of 
targets set by them.  They also desire that  for any lapses in this 
regard, the Zonal Railways should be made accountable.  They 
further stress that the Doubling projects once sanctioned should 
be completed within the stipulated time. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
In case of doubling, work has to be exe cuted in the vicinity of 
running track and a number of precautionary measures have to be 
taken which also includes speed restrictions on the bridges to avoid 
any mishap.  Doubling work also involves modification in the existing 
yards and changes in signali ng installations.  The existing assets are 
required to be relocated.  All these often hamper the execution of 
work. The progress is thus slow.    Besides, contractual problems are 
also being faced.  The targets of doubling have been set higher than 
previous years. The endeavour is to fix higher targets and gear up 
Railways to achieve the same.  Against the achievement of 386 Km. of 
doubling during 2006 -07, the achievement during 2007 -08 has been 
426 Km.   
The concern of the Committee regarding slippage in ta rgets of 
doubling has been noted and efforts will be made to expedite the 
doubling works to complete them in the targeted time.   
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that t o meet the growth in traffic, 
Railways are in the process of capacity augmentation.  Modern 
signalling systems are vital in improving line capacity  as well as 
Railways safety.  The Committee note with regret that there has 
been a shortfall in achievement of target, particularly in 

 16 
rehabilitation works during 2007-08 and the spill over work 
is likely to be completed by 31 st March,2009.  Similarly, in case of 
replacement work also there has been a minor shortfall in the 
achievement of target.  The Ministry o f Railways at the time of 
examination of the subject have informed that more replacement 
works are likely to be completed during the remaining period   of 
the financial year.  Other reasons advanced in this regard by the 
Railways are inadequate number of w orks contractors and shortage 
of signal engineers and staff for design and execution of works 
commensurate with requirement because of high attrition rate and 
curtailment in recruitment of Signalling Engineers.  The Committee 
note that this is an area  of serious concern which requires 
immediate attention.  They, therefore, urge the Railways to strongly 
take up the matter with regard to filling up of vacancies in  Signal 
Engineers and staff with the Department of Personnel and Training.  
They also  desire t hat achievements  made in the replacement 
works at the end of March,2008 be apprised to them.  With regard to 
the spill over in rehabilitation works while expressing their concern, 
the Committee stress that such recurrence should be avoided in 
future.  The  Committee   desire that measures should be taken to 
entrust the signalling and telecommunication works to the 
contractors who are able to deliver and all efforts should be made to 
modernize the Signalling workshops in order to  have the in -house 
technology  required for manufacture of equipments for Signalling 
and telecommunication works.   The Committee also opine that a 
multi-ministerial group should be formed to work on the matter 
regarding shortage of material etc. required for Signalling works. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The concerns expressed by the Committee for shortfall in 
achievement of target in rehabilitation work  and replacement work   
have been noted.  Railways has made following action plan to execute 
projects on fast track :- 
(i) Railways have been empowered to float composite tenders for S&T 
projects/works. 
(ii) Bigger contracts are being called to encourage participation of 
contractors who are able to deliver. 
(iii) Some of the works have been transferred to Rail Tel Corporation of 
India Ltd. 
 

 17 
 
(iv) Intensive training is being given to staff and contractors. 
(v) Only proven systems are being used to increase the reliability and 
maintainability.  
 
Railways have been able to achieve the target  of completion of 
replacement works at  407 stations during 2007 -08 and 439 stations are 
targeted for commissioning during 2008-09. 
There is no problem regarding adequacy of supply capacity with 
trade and Signal Workshops.  
Regarding filling up of vacancies for safety/operation category of 
posts including of signal engineers and staff, Ministry of Railways have 
taken up the issue with the Deptt. of Personnel and Training (DOP&T) 
and is actively pursuing the matter. 
 (Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that the outlay of Rs. 2,51,000 crore proposed 
by the Railways for the 11 th Five Year Plan (2007 -2012) has been 
advised by the Planning Commission at Rs. 2,55,909 crore 
considering current prices. According to the Railways, the physical 
targets for the  Plan period in respect of New Line,                     
Gauge Conversion, Doubling, Electrification and Signalling have 
been set but the detailed break -up plan-head wise of the final outlay 
has not yet been finalised by the Planning Commission. The 
Committee note with concern that even after the completion of the 
first year of the 11 th Five Year Plan, the break -up of outlay Plan 
Head-wise is yet to be finalised. This reflects poorly on the Railways. 
They urge that the Ministry of Railways should take up th e matter 
with the Planning Commission without any further delay and the 
Committee be apprised of the final break-up Plan-Head wise finalised 
by the Planning Commission. 

 18 
 
Reply of the Government 
 A requirement of Rs. 2,51,000 Crores was projected to the 
Planning Commission to be mobilised as under:- 
Gross Budgetary Support (GBS)  Rs. 86,000 Crores. 
Internal Resources    Rs. 90,000 Crores. 
Extra Budgetary Resources   Rs. 75,000 Crores 
Total              Rs. 2,51,000 Crores. 
 
 Planning Commission, however, had  advised a plan size of Rs. 
2,33,289 Crores at current prices with a GBS of Rs. 63,635 Crores at 
current prices (including National Projects) and excluding private 
investment. 
 Based on the revised Plan size of Rs. 2,33,289 Crores including 
GBS of Rs. 63,6 35 Crores, the Planhead -wise outlay for the XI Plan has   
been  communicated to the Planning Commission. The revised Planhead -
wise outlay for XI Plan for Railways is as under:-  
                       
(Rs. In Crores) 
Plan Head Total Projected requirement 
as per Working Group 
Report on Railway 
Programmes 
Total Revised 
Allocation 
New Lines 16000 21188 
Gauge Conversion 18700 17300 
Doubling 19000 16000 
Traffic Facilities 8000 6630 
Computerisation 5200 3940 
Railway Research 425 425 
Rolling Stock 59475 58500 
Road Safety Works-Level 
Crossings 
1000 700 
Road Safety Works-Road 
Over Bridges 
11000 3540 
Track Renewals 21565 21405 
Bridge Works 2895 3400 
Signalling & 
Telecommunication 
Works 
12500 9900 
Electrification Projects 3500 3000 
Other Electrical Works 3460 2160 
Machinety & Plant 2200 2000 
Workshop-including 
Production Units 
10700 8700 

 19 
Staff Quarters 1085 788 
Staff Amenities 1455 1455 
Passenger Amenities 3500 7208 
Investment in Public 
Undertakings 
41000 37500 
Other Specified Works 1000 900 
Inventories 2590 2200 
Metropolitan Transport 
Projects 
4750 4450 
Grand Total 251000 233289 
 
 The resource mobilisation for the outlay of Rs. 2,33,289 Crores will 
be as under:- 
Gross Budgetary Support (GBS)   Rs., 50,063 Crores. 
National Projects      Rs. 13,572 Crores. 
Internal Generation and Extra Budgetary   Rs. 1,69,654 Crores 
Resources 
Total        Rs. 2,33,289 Crores   
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that there will b e 11% increase in 
Passenger Earnings in 2007 -08. However, they are disappointed to 
note that for 2008 -09, the proposed earnings are projected at 
around 8% only. The Committee are not convinced of the reasons 
advanced by the Railways in this regard viz. the  same lines have to 
carry passengers and freight traffic, resulting in constrain to 
introduce more trains, increasing the frequency of trains, lines 
getting more congested, non -punctuality etc. The Committee feel 
that there are some lines which have almost  reached the saturation 
point; whereas there are certain lines where the frequency of trains 
plying on those routes is relatively very low but have the potential 
of carrying more traffic. They, therefore, feel that Railways should 
work on augmenting the ca pacity of saturated routes and introduce 
new trains on non -saturated routes having passenger traffic 
potential. This will not only reduce the congestion on saturated 
routes but also fetch more revenue to the Railways. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
                 Railway Board has undertaken a detailed study of the routes 
on which capacity is saturated and has identified works required to 
augment capacity on these routes. A Blue Print on High Density 
Network (as identified by the study) has been prepared and w orks as 

 20 
identified to augment capacity are being undertaken by the Railway. 
The suggestion of introducing new services on non -saturated routes 
having demand potential is noted. 
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
         The Committee find that Public Private Partnership 
options are being explored by Railways in areas like port 
connectivity and production units with the aim of looking after 
needs of the Railways and bringing in better techno logy. The 
Committee apprehend that this is a major policy deviation on part 
of the Railways, which uptill now has been maintaining itself as an 
exclusive public domain. The Committee are of the view that the 
Railways are entering into PPP without a well th ought out policy 
and without assessing as to how much public -private partnership 
will bring resources and technology. They desire that before 
entering into the PPP, the Railways should formulate a cogent 
policy defining all terms and parameters clearly. Fu rther, they also 
desire that the interest of the Railways be safeguarded and core 
sectors should not be brought under PPP. The Committee also 
recommend that Railways should explore the possibility of 
augmenting the capacity of their own production units be fore 
entering into Public Private Partnership. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Due to the massive investment requirement of the Railways and 
the decline in gross budgetary support in future, Railways would have to 
depend on its own resources, borrowings and priva te investments for 
growth, expansion and modernisation. It is confirmed that as a 
conscious strategy, Ministry of Railways has been encouraging private 
participation only in projects in non -core areas. At this stage, a 
beginning has only been made. Adequat e care has been and is being 
taken to safeguard the interest of Railways. 
As recommended by the Committee, Ministry of Railways would 
carefully assess the costs and benefits of Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 
initiatives after adequate experience is avail able. A policy on PPP can be 
formulated after such an exercise is completed.  
It is clarified that Ministry of Railways have initiated action to 
augment the capacity of existing Production Units before setting up new 
Units in Joint Venture with the participation of Private Sector. 
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 

 21 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
The Committee note with regret that at many places railway staff 
quarters are presently in dilapidated condition. Most of the staff 
quarters are very old and poorly maintained. Money provided for 
their renovation/maintenance remained unutilized over the years. 
The Committee therefore, recommend that proper and timely 
maintenance of these quarters should be done by the Railways. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Corporate Welfare Plan (2006-15) has been prepared to pay special 
attention towards maintenance and improvement of staff quarters with 
particular emphasis on substandard quarters lacking basic amenities. 
The total requirement of fu nds for works planned to be taken up over a 
10-year period under CWP has been estimated to be in the range of 
approximately Rs 5000 cr.  
General Managers of Zonal Railways and Production Units have 
been directed to make sure that funds allotted under Plan Heads 
‘51(Staff Quarter)’ and ’52 (Amenities for Staff)’ are utilized fully and are 
not surrendered.  
 (Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
   
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
 The Medical Department of the Indian Railways ful fills the 
medical needs of working and retired Railway employees.  The 
Committee take serious note of the shortage of doctors and lack of 
adequate  health facilities, particularly at smaller Railway hospitals 
in rural areas.  They, therefore, feel that the re is an urgent need to 
address this problem.  The Committee recommend that rural 
posting of doctors should either be made more lucrative or a 
mandatory roster system for postings be worked out.  They further 
desire that Railway Hospital should also have f ull time doctors in 
Indian System of medicines such as Ayurvedic, Homeopathic etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
          To make the rural posting lucrative, this is agreed in principle.  
However, this involves the Class -I Group ‘A’ Officers, therefore, the 
modalities will be worked out in consultation with the other Ministries. 

 22 
 Though, there is a unified cadre in Railways but large number 
of doctors are involved in Specialists and Super -Specialists services as 
well as administrative jobs of Hospitals. 
 However, rural postings are done on need basis and at most of 
times, it is ensured that Health Units are manned either by regular are 
contract doctors. 
 The issue of regularization of the services of 
Homeopathic/Ayurvedic Practitioners in the Indian Railways M edical 
services has been dealt with in detail in the past and not found feasible.  
However, it will be examined afresh.  
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
The Committee find that henceforth  Railways propose to run 
only high capacity coaches which are being manufactured by them. 
In this connection, the capacity of old coaches is also proposed to 
be enhanced through retro fitment, compromising with certain 
amenities being provided to the passe ngers. They strongly 
recommend that while doing the retro fitment in old coaches, the 
amenities should not be compromised with. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
         The design and fitment details for retrofitment additional berths in 
existing sleeper class and AC Three Tier coaches have been finalized with 
due consideration to passenger comfort and safety. All passenger 
amenities shall be provided/retained as in the original design of coaches. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
  The Committee observe that there is  shortage of personnel in 
various category of posts in RPF, Signalling, loco running staff, etc. 
They feel that shortage of staff in such categories has resulted in 
long and strenuous working hours for the existing staff forcing them 
to do multiple tasks particularly the loco running staff. The 
Committee apprehend that this may seriously affect railway’s safety 
and increase the chances of Rail accidents.  The Committee strongly 
feel t hat there is an urgent need to fill all existing vacancies in 
different categories.  They, therefore, stress that the recruitment 

 23 
procedure be reviewed and simplified and Railways must 
ensure that recruitment is done within stipulated time frame.  
 The Com mittee also recommend that the Agreement which 
was signed between Ministry of Railways and All India Loco Running 
Staff Association in 1973 with regard to 10 hours duty norm 
between signing on and signing off should be strictly adhered to. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
          Occurrence and filling up of vacancies is a continuous process.  
While a few vacancies are likely to exist in this continuous process at any 
point of time, the policy of the Government is to fill up the vacancies 
promptly as per procedu re which is reviewed from time to time.  Filling 
up of vacancies in safety categories and in Railway Protection Force (RPF) 
have been kept out of the purview of rightsizing.  General Managers are 
empowered to assess the requirement and get the same filled up from 
time to time by placing indents on Railway Recruitment Boards (RRBs) in 
case of Group ‘C’ categories.  For Group ‘D’ requirement the recruitment 
is done by Railways themselves.  The vacancies in Railway Protection 
Force are filled up by Security Di rectorate of Ministry of Railways.  There 
are detailed guidelines for recruiting staff so that any arbitrariness is 
avoided.  The vacancies to be filled up are given wide publicity in 
conformity with the Constitutional provisions and guidelines issued by 
the Department of Personnel & Training pursuant to directive of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of India. Vide D.O. No. E (NG) -II/2007/RR-1/10/Pt. 
dated 30.4.2008, Railway Establishments have already been directed to 
expedite filling up of vacancies by taking pro -active action for reviewing 
the staff requirement and placing indents with Chief Personnel Officers 
to enable publication of notification in the Employment News by first 
week of June, 2008.   
 
Railways have further been instructed to fill up the vacancies 
immediately which exist due to non -joining/medical failure of 
empanelled candidates by approaching concerned Railway Recruitment 
Board to provide list of extra candidates.  A meeting of Chairmen, 
Railway Recruitment Boards was also held on 21.5.2008 in Board’s office 
to expedite the recruitment process.  

 24 
Railway staff working hours are limited by Factory Act or Hours of 
Employment Regulations framed and approved by M inistry of Labour.  
Extra hours of work are in exceptional circumstances and staff is 
financially or otherwise compensated for that.  
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee find that the Railways are planning to close 
down printing presses being run by them. They note that there are 
around 7000 ‘E’ and ‘F’ category stations where printed tickets are 
still required for sale. Further a large number of Forms and other 
official material are also required to be printed. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that   Railways should not outsource these works 
and review their decision. Efforts should be made to modernize the 
existing printing presses. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
          Railway   Board in its meeting held on 29/30 th Nov.2007, 
have approved the action plan for evolving alternative printing solutions 
and phased closure of in -house printing presses. Board’s decision has 
been communicated vide letter No.2006/E&R/2800/Imp/Rlys dated 
6.12.2007 to all the General Managers, all Indian Railways. 
 The views/recommendations of  the  Standing Committee on the 
Railways, various MPs and Railway Federations were considered by 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) and it has been decided to 
constitute a Review Committee to examine the various issues related to 
phased closure of in -house Pri nting Presses of Indian Railways and 
submit its report  at the earliest. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 

 25 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
The Committee note that there are four categories of 
platforms   viz. high, medium, low and rail level platforms at the 
Railway Stations and whenever track renewal works are taken up, 
the track level becomes higher th an the platforms at certain 
stations.  The Committee further note that Railways propose to 
upgrade 135 ‘B’ category stations and 203 ‘D’ category stations to 
high level platforms.  Similarly, 281 low level platforms at ‘D’ 
category stations are proposed to  be upgraded to medium level 
platforms and their up gradation to high level platform would be 
taken up subsequently.  The Committee desire that these 281 low 
level platforms  at ‘D’ category stations selected for upgradation to 
medium level platforms shoul d instead be upgraded to high level 
platforms as eventually Railways have to upgrade these platforms to 
a high level platforms .  This will avoid incurring of double 
expenditure on upgradation of these platforms.  The Committee 
further desires that there s hould be only two category of platforms 
viz high level and low level platforms. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
On Indian Railways there are three types of platform levels, viz. 
high, medium and Rail level.   
  Through the Budget 2008 -09 it has been proposed to  raise the 
level of all existing Rail level and medium level platforms to high level  
at ‘B’ Category Stations involving about 135 stations.  Similarly, all 
existing medium level platforms at ‘D’ category Stations involving 
about 203 stations are also prop osed to be raised to high level 
platforms. 
 All  existing Rail level platforms on the ‘D’ Category stations 
(involving about 281 stations) are ,however, planned to be raised to 
medium level in the first phase at an approx cost of Rs.108 Cr., which 
will be considered for raising to high level subsequently depending 
upon requirement and priorities.    

 26 
 Raising of all Rail level platforms at ‘D’ category stations to 
high level directly at this stage will not only increase the cost but also 
the time span requir ement to execute the work. Moreover, as per the 
policy stated in the Budget 2008 -09, FOBs will need to be provided at 
platforms raised to high level. Hence if all Rail level platforms at ‘D’ 
category stations are raised to High Level, there will be require ment of 
foot over bridges at about additional 115 stations costing another about 
Rs.80 cr. to 100 Cr.  
 Considering the fact that with above proposals High Level platform 
facility will be available to about 85% of the total passengers on Indian 
Railways in cluding suburban traffic, it has been decided to go ahead 
with the work of raising of platforms as proposed in the Railway Budget 
2008-09 in phases. 
 The suggestion of the Committee to keep only two levels, viz Rail 
level and high level platforms is noted for consideration by the 
Government.   
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
 The Committee are disappointed to note that out of the target 
of 95 ROBs/RUBs for completion during 2007 -08, the Railways have 
been able to complete only 43 ROBs/RUBs.  The reasons for this 
shortfall in achievement is stated to be non -cooperation   by the 
State Governments in making adequate provision in their annual 
budget for the work on cost sharing basis, delay in finalizing the 
profile sketch and the location of the proposed bridges, etc. The 
Committee are not convinced with the reasons advanced in this 
regard and find that it is a perennial problem. They note that the 
present criterion of sharing the cost of const ruction of ROBs/RUBs 
with the State Governments at 50:50 ratio is not working 
satisfactorily. They, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation made in their 8 th Report on ‘Demands for Grants 
2005-06’ that the Railways should work out the feasibility of bearing 
the expenditure on ROBs/RUBs at 75:25 ratio with the State 
Governments.  Further, only those ROBs/RUBs should be taken up 
for execution where necessary provision of funds has been ensured 
by the State Government. 
 

 27 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Committee have extended two remedies for expeditious completion of 
ROBs/RUBs. 
i. Their earlier recommendation given in 8 th Report that cost 
pattern be changed from existing 50:50 ratio to 75:25 ratio as 
the existing one is not working satisfactorily. 
ii. Only those R OBs/RUBs be taken up for execution where 
necessary provision of funds is ensured by the State Govt. 
In regard to remedy No.1, i.e. implementation of Committee’s 
earlier recommendation (8 th Report of 2005 -06) regarding change in 
pattern of cost sharing from  50:50 to 75:25 between Railways and 
State Govt. it is stated that without enhancement of Railway’s 
allocation for the purpose it will be not possible for the Railways to 
accede to the suggestion (recommendation). 
This Ministry had raised the issue before the Govt (Cabinet) 
requesting to increase allocation from CRF. Cabinet had advised to re -
examine the issue in consultation with the State Govts. as State 
Govts. were to part with a little allocation and to spare for 
construction of ROBs/RUBs from CRF they are receiving for Road 
development.  But in spite of best efforts this Ministry have been able 
to get response from only 6 State Govts. who too have not agreed to 
part with their share.  Hence, nothing could be done in this direction 
as without increase in  Railway’s share of allocation it will not be 
possible to change the present cost sharing pattern.  Railways are 
already having heavy liability viz. 587 works already sanctioned upto 
2007-08, during 2008 -09, 88 more works have been added.  This 
implies that taking approximate cost of complete work as Rs. 15 cr. 
(Railway’s share as Rs. 6 Cr.) each these will cost Rs. 10125 cr. for 
complete work (Railway portion cost as Rs. 4050 cr.) Railways are 
having a throw -forward of Rs. 2489.84cr. exclusive of works cos ting 
below Rs. 2.5cr.  Inclusive of that the throw -forward goes beyond Rs. 
2600 cr. during 2008 -09. In addition 1010 LCs, on date have already 
crossed the traffic density of one lakh TVUs i.e. having become due for 

 28 
replacement by ROBs/RUBs.  Taking an aver age cost of an 
ROB as Rs. 15 cr. Railways need Rs. 15150 cr. for 1010 LCs, in 
addition to the funds needed to complete the sanctioned works 
mentioned above (587+88=675 less 30 completed = 645). In addition 
recently, Railways have started replacement of unm anned and 
manned LCs where feasible, by limited height subways costing upto 
Rs.1.5cr. as single line and Rs.2.50 cr. on double line sections.  Nearly 
572 such LCs have already been identified for the purpose.  Taking an 
average cost of Rs. 1.00 cr. these w ill cost Railways Rs. 572 cr. on 
date setting aside escalation in coming years. Since, Januray 2003, 
Railways have further relaxed the norms of cost sharing from 2 lane 
width to 4 lane in case of busy level crossings which has resulted in 
substantial incre ase in Railway’s liability. Hence, with the present 
allocation of Rs.450-500 cr. to Railways from CRF for the safety works 
- Construction of ROBs/RUBs.  it is not possible even to complete the 
on-going works before 5 -6 years what to say of taking up other new 
works and shouldering the additional liability of bearing  larger share 
of cost when 1010 LCs, 572 LH subways are also in pipeline for taking 
up. Burden of 4 lanning of existing 2 lane ROBs remains extra. 
Change in cost sharing pattern from existing 50 :50 to 75:25 will 
further aggravate Railway’s position. Hence, the recommendation can 
not be agreed to at this stage till Railways get enhanced allocation 
through any other channel, if not from CRF. However to ease the 
situation this Ministry is actively c onsidering to introduce a modified 
concept of BOT under PPP which will not only lessen the financial 
burden on State Govts & Railways but also enable completion of larger 
number of ROBs/RUBs in clusters.  Under this scheme Private 
Entrepreneurs/developers will arrange funds, 20 -40% Viable Gap 
Fund will be provided by Railways and State Govts and investors will 
get reimbursed their investment by collecting toll. 
For 2 nd recommendation, Railways are already following this 
system.  Physical execution of work f or construction is taken generally 
when State Govt. starts construction of approaches.  Even before 
sanctioning the work on cost sharing basis State Govts have to furnish 

 29 
undertakings like undertaking for cost sharing, acquisition of land & 
closure of LC etc. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
        IRCTC is managing all static catering services at ‘A’, ‘B’ an ‘C’ 
category stations including Food Plaza and all Mobile Catering Units  
in Rajdhani/Shatabdi/other Mail Express Trains.  The Committee find 
that the awarding of license through tender system has encouraged 
speculative and excess bidding with a view to grab the tender.  With 
the result the quality of food has deteriorated over the yea rs whereas 
there has been an increase in the prices.  They therefore recommend 
that   the quality of food must be improved and the prices should be 
rationalized.  The Committee desire that catering                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
system, a passenger amenity should not be  made a purely 
commercial venture.  They further desire that when  new contractors 
are engaged, Railways should ensure that the interests of workers are  
safeguarded, the workers who are engaged by the old contractors are 
not removed and minimum wages are paid.  They also desire that as 
they have recommended in their earlier reports, the Catering Policy – 
2005 may be reviewed by the Railways at the earliest and the  
Committee be apprised of the same.  The Committee further note 
that there are large number of unauthorized hawkers selling tea, 
snacks etc. in trains.  The Committee desire that they should  also be 
provided a licence for hawking in trains and also formulate a policy in 
this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Catering services at ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ category stations and  in 
trains are presently  being managed by Indian Railway Catering and 
Tourism Corporation (IRCTC).  Contracts for providing catering  
services under IRCTC – management are awarded through two-packet 
tender system.  Packet –A contains the technical offer and the Packet 
– ‘B’ contains the financial bid.  Financial bids of the applicant are 
opened only after they qualify in the technical b id.  This system of 
awarding contract is transparent and  ensures that only the reputed  
and qualified caterers are allowed to take part in the financial bids for 
getting the contracts.  However, sometimes it is seen that, in order to 
get the contract, bid ders have quoted excess licence fee, which has 
resulted in poor quality of services in some cases.   

 30 
Improvement  in catering services as an ongoing process, 
receives constant attention of the Railways and Indian Railway 
Catering and Tourism Corporation (I RCTC).  IRCTC, a  wholly owned 
company of Indian Railways has been formed to upgrade and 
professionalize the catering and hospitality services of Indian 
Railways.  IRCTC has taken  various steps to ensure improvement in  
quality of foods served to the passengers, like setting up multi-cuisine 
state - of - the - art Food Plazas, Automatic Vending  Machines to 
dispense hot and cold beverages, and modernization  of existing 
railways base kitchens.  Regular monitoring of catering services is 
done by Railway and  IRCTC officials.  IRCTC has engaged 
independent  food audit agencies to ensure quality of food being 
supplied to the passengers of Indian railways.  Good practices like, 
progressive ISO (International Organization for Standardization) and 
HACCP (Hazard An alysis and Critical Control Points) certification of 
catering units are being followed.    IRCTC has set up control offices at 
New Delhi, Mumbai, Howrah, Chennai and Secunderabad for receipt 
and redressal of complaints.  Any  passenger can make a telephone  
call to any of these control rooms and immediate action is taken on 
these complaints/suggestion. 
 Further  special drives are conducted on premium trains 
including Rajdhani, Shatabdi and other Mail/Express trains through 
Quality Control Professional (QCPs ) so as to improve quality of 
catering services. Also  introduction of Colored Menu Cards depicting 
a-la-carte items along with their rates etc., have been done.  
  Since catering services in Railways are considered as a 
passenger amenity, it has been ensured in successive catering policies 
that the tariff of tea/coffee, breakfast and standard meals remains 
reasonable and is kept outside the purview of market forces. Ministry 
of Railways accordingly, fixes tariff of these items. Revision of tariff for 
Rajdhani/Shatabdi Express trains was undertaken  in  1999  and the  
last revision of tariff  for other Mail/Express trains was done in 2003.  
Tariff for catering  services for Rajdhani/Shatabdi Express trains  and 
standard food and beverages has not been increas ed thereafter.  

 31 
Market driven tariff have been allowed only in the segment 
where the customers have the capacity to pay the market -determined 
prices, and the licensees can get reasonable profits. A Committee was 
set up  to review menu  and  calculating  the tariff of  catering services 
of Railways and the  recommendations of this Committee are under 
examination. Catering services have not been commercialized.   These  
being treated as a passenger amenity;   and  the prices of essential 
catering items are being  regulated by Railway . 
 
  With regard to engagement of the same workers by a new 
contractor, it is stated that as per the  terms and conditions of 
licence, workers are engaged by the licensees on their own terms and 
conditions.  IRCTC does not exercis e control over engagement of 
workers by a particular licensee.    
 Some amendments in earlier Catering Policy issued on 
16.3.2005 have been undertaken and revised instructions have been 
issued in December 2005 in respect of tenure of licence, renewal of 
licence, etc.  The amendments in the policy have been done keeping in 
view the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Railways & representations received from various quarters.  The 
position has been advised to the committee   in the Acti on Taken Note 
submitted thereon.    There is no further need to change the existing 
policy.   
 As regard the  question of giving licence  to unauthorised hawkers,  the 
same is not possible under the extent guidelines.   Unauthorised hawking 
is not permitted in Railway premises as per Indian Railways Act, 1989 and 
as amended from time to time.  Unauthorised vending and hawking in 
trains and in passenger area is prohibited and constitutes an offence 
under section 144 of Railway Act 1989 and Railways Act 2003 (Second 
Amendment). Further Hon’ble High Court, Kolkata has directed to ensure 
that there is no violation of the said section.   
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 

 32 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 The Committee note that  after expiry of the period of 
Special Railway Safety Fund (SRSF), ‘Safety Surcharge’ subsumed 
in the actual fare as “Development Fund’ is still being charged 
from the passengers.  The Committee recall their earlier report on 
‘Demand for Grants - 2007-08’ where they had disapproved this 
policy and had strongly recommended that the Railways should 
refrain from adopting such deceptive practices. The Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the 
practice should be discontinued forthwith. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 “Safety Surcharge” stands subsumed in Passenger fares on as is where is basis in the form of a Development Charge to fund Ded icated Freight 
Corridor (DFC).  The receipts on this account are now part of passenger 
earnings w.e.f. 1.4.2007. 
  It is again clarified that imposition of Development Surcharge 
on passenger fares has not resulted in any change in the chargeable 
passenger fares of any class. It may be noted that despite increase in 
input costs and WPI, there has been no incr ease in the passenger fares 
since 2002-03. In fact, Second Class fares had been reduced thrice in 
recent past.   AC Ist Class and AC 2 -Tier fares have also been reduced 
by 29% and 17% respectively.  Fares for High Capacity New Design 
Coaches have also been  reduced by upto 10% in AC Chair Car and AC 
3-Tier and by 6% in Sleeper Class. 
            It is reiterated that the massive expansion necessary in rail 
infrastructure to match the requirement of the growing economy and the 
increasing burden on Railways to  fund investment out of internal 
generation or market borrowing would make it difficult for Railways to 
consider withdrawal of Development Surcharge. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
 The Committee find that in Public Sector domain under 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises there are five 
factories manufacturing Wagons. The Minister of Railways has 
announced in his Budget Speech that the Wagon manufacturing 
factories at Mokam a and Muzaffarpur, subsidiaries of Bharat Bhari 
Udyog Nigam Limited (BBUNL) will be transferred to the Railways so 

 33 
that their production capacities are fully utilized physical and 
financial health are turned around. While appreciating the 
announcement made  by the Minister, the Committee desire that 
other two units of BBUNL namely, Burn Standard and Braithwaite 
should also be transferred to Railways. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Railways has been giving full support to M/S 
Burn Standard Company Ltd.  and M/S Braithwaite Co Ltd. by giving 
them adequate orders for production of wagons, supply of inputs which 
are required for wagon manufacture, sanction of advances etc.  
Public Sector undertakings like Braithwaite & Co. Ltd. have 
already been sanctioned plan and non -plan support by Deptt. of Heavy 
industries for liquidating outstanding wages, statutory dues, 
technological upgradation and revamping of plant and machinery. 
Railways would continue to support these units with wagon orders. 
  It is not  practi cally possible for Ministry of Railways to take 
over all the sick or loss making units, which are dealing with the Railway 
sector, under its fold. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 

 34 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
The Committee appreciate the performance of Railways with 
an estimated net revenue of Rs.18, 416 crore a nd improvement of 
operating ratio to 76.3 percent in comparison to 78.7 percent 
during 2006 -07.  Railways have registered in December, 2007 a 
growth of 8.2 percent in freight earnings and 14 percent in 
passenger earnings.  The return on capital invested in  Railways is 
likely to reach a level of 21 percent.  However, during the year 
2008-09, the surplus after dividend is likely to go down by nearly 
13% and the total working expenditure is expected to go up by 17 
percent.  As a result, the operating ratio of the Railways is likely to 
go up to 81.4 percent during 2008-09 from 76.3 percent in 2007-08.  
The Committee are of the view that Railways should make 
concerted efforts to accelerate the pace of completion of throughput 
enhancement works by removing bottlen ecks on the system and 
speeding up modernization of its network so that the growth 
momentum achieved in 2007-08 is maintained in 2008-09 also. 
The Committee further note that Railways are invariably 
scaling down their budgeted physical targets under variou s Plan 
Heads such as New Lines, Gauge Conversions, Doublings, Signalling, 
Electrification, etc. at Revised Estimates stage.  While expressing 
their displeasure, the Committee strongly recommend that such 
practice should be avoided and realistic targets be set at the Budget 
Estimate stage itself.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Speedy completion of throughput enhancement works to eradicate 
traffic bottlenecks, improvement of terminal and other traffic facilities 
have been the thrust areas of the Railways’ Annual Plans over the years.  
To maintain the growth momentum achieved during the last few years 
the Railways have been providing higher allotment for works relating to 
throughput enhancement under the planheads Gauge Conversion, 
Doubling, Traffic Facilities and Signalling & Telecommunication Works, 
as can be seen from the following table.  Keeping the same objective in 
view the Capital Fund has been revived since 2005 -06 (Revised 
Estimates) to provide sufficient funds from the internally generated 

 35 
resources to finance such works so as to ensure their expeditious 
completion. 
 
 
(Rs in cr) 
  Gauge 
Conversion 
Doubling Traffic 
Facilities 
Signalling 
& Telecom 
Works 
2005-06 BE 690.00 509.39 487.59 1195.10 
RE 1282.67 678.62 415.51 1172.28 
2006-07 BE 1450.88 1056.80 616.60 1528.50 
RE 2045.71 1178.31 597.60 1354.68 
2007-08 BE 2714.31 2002.00 804.50 1607.90 
RE 3011.85 1744.80 917.34 1557.29 
2008-09 BE 2744.10 2524.00 988.50 1530.40 
 
The physical targets of construction of projects are fixed in the 
beginning of the year depending upon the availability of funds and taking 
the physical progress of the ongoing projects into consideration.  The 
targets are reviewed during the course of the year based on the actual 
progress being achieved at the field levels and various o ther factors 
coming up during the execution of a project which affect the progress of 
the project.  The problems relating to law and order conditions, failure of 
contracts, steep hike in prices of steel and cement and other materials 
etc. used in the const ruction are the factors which cannot be foreseen 
and are beyond the control of the Railways, which compel to revise the 
targets after a review at Revised Estimate stage. 
In case of Doubling, the work has to be executed in the vicinity of 
running track and a number of precautionary measures have to be taken 
which also include speed restrictions on the bridges to avoid any mishap. 
Doubling work also involves modification in the existing yards and 
changes in signalling installations.  The existing assets are required to be 
relocated.  All these often hamper the smooth execution of work and the 
progress therefore is slow.  
For signalling works the reasons for shortfall in achievement of 
targets include inadequate number of works contractors and personnel 
for design and execution of works. 

 36 
Measures are being contemplated to address the 
problem of contractors on account of steep hike in prices of steel and 
cement. The progress of projects is monitored at regular intervals at the 
appropriate levels. The necessary em powerment of field units and 
changes in various rules and practices related to contract management 
will surely bear better results.  As regards throughput enhancement 
works relating to signalling, the Railways have been permitted to float 
composite tenders  for S&T works requiring construction and 
electrification of service buildings/structures to accelerate the pace of 
works.  Inputs like sleepers, glued joints, liners etc will be made available 
on priority. 
The concern of the Committee regarding slippage i n targets has 
been noted and efforts will be made to expedite the works to complete 
them in the targeted time. Although the Railways endeavour to fix 
optimistic targets initially so as to gear up the entire system, men and 
machinery to achieve the same, ef forts remain to project as realistic 
targets as are within reach to accomplish. 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that at the instance of 
Supreme Court, Railways have successfully conducted the Secret 
Ballot in September 2007 to recognize Unions.  They however, find 
that these elections were not allowed in Railway Production Units 
and Kolkata Metro.   The Committee in this regard reiterate their 
earlier recommendation in 33 rd Report on ‘Industrial Relations and 
Staff Welfare in Railways’ that the Unions/Associations of the 
Production Units as well as the Metro Railway, Kolkata should also 
be allowed to participate in the Secret ballot. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The existing grievances redressal machinery in the 
productions units and MTP Railway is working satisfactorily. All 
General Managers and Chief Personnel Officers of the Production Units 
in the meetings held with Board on 10.8.98 had reached consensu s to 

 37 
continue with the existing system of Staff Councils and meetings of 
the Board with Staff Councils. The full Board in their meeting held on 
11.10.96 had also decided    not to change the existing system of Staff 
Councils in Production Units. 
The present system of Staff council is a well established system 
and any change may lead to disturbance in industrial relations. The 
subject of Staff Council has found acceptance, both with the 
management and the workers. At present, the institution of Staff 
Council is maintaining harmonious industrial relations in Production 
Units. 
 
(Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2007/BC-II/XIV/300/8 dated 31.12.2007) 
 
 
 

 38 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                         (T.R. BAALU) 
02 December, 2009                                            Chairman, 
11 Agrahayana, 1931 Saka                     Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 

 39 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29 th October, 2009 from 1100 hours 
to 1235 hrs. in Committee Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI T. R. BAALU -  CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3.  Shri K. Bapiraju 
4.  Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
5.  Shri Pralhad Joshi 
6.  Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
7.  Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
8.  Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
9.  Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
10.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
11.  Shri Umashankar Singh  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12.  Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
13.  Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
14.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
15.  Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
16.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
17.  Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
18.  Shri N. Balaganga 
19.  Shri K.E. Ismail 
20.  Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Deputy Secretary 

 40 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the officers who 
had come to attend the meeting.  Thereafter, the Chairman mentioned about the 
collision of Goa Express train and Mewar Express train on 21 st October, 2009 in 
which at least 22 persons were killed and about 26 persons were injured.  The 
Committee expressed their profound sorrow on the unfortunate inciden t and 
observed silence for a while as a mark of respect to the departed souls. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered draft Reports on Action Taken  by 
Government on the recommendations contained in 36 th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (14 th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants – 2008-09 of 
the Ministry of Railways' and adopted the same with some modifications as given 
in Annexure - I.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report 
and present the same to the House.    
 
4. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

 41 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
AMENDMENTS/MODIFICATIONS MADE IN DRAFT REPORT OF  THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  (15TH LOK SABHA) ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN 36TH REPORT OF T HE 
STANDING COMMITTEE RAILWAYS (14 TH LOK SABHA) ON DEMAND 
FOR GRANTS 2008-09 OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
 
Sl. Page Para  Line  Additions/Modifications 
No. No. No.  No. 
1 2 3  4   5 
 
  
1. 5 1.11            5  Add the following sentence in the  
end: 
“The Co mmittee would also like  
to be apprised of the complete list 
of full time doctors posted in 
rural areas against the vacancies, 
the details of existing vacancies 
and whether the roster system 
was properly followed in respect 
of these postings including 
backlog in reservation, if any." 
       

 42 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
 
xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx

 43 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 36th REPORT        
(14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS’  
 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations     18 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by  11 
the Government (Vide recommendations/observations) 
Para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 16 
 
Percentage of total         80% 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not  05 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies 
7, 8, 10, 17 and 18 
 
Percentage of total         NIL 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of   02 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
Para No. 1 and 15 
 
Percentage of total            10% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final   NIL 
replies of Government are still awaited  
NIL 
 
Percentage of total            NIL 
 
 
  
 
 