2 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2009-10) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 40th Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘Review of Plan Performance and 11th Five Year Plan 
Projections’] 
 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2009/ Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
___________________________________________________ 

 2 
      
SECOND REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2009-10) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 40th Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘Review of Plan Performance and 11th Five Year Plan 
Projections’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.12.2009 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.12.2009 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2009/ Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
___________________________________________________ 
 

 3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….         (iii) 
  
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….…            (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report………………………………………………………               1      
    
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been         16 
accepted by the Government  …………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee       27 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which         29 
   Replies of the Government  have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….…. 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final    39 
replies of the Government  are still awaited  …………. 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX-I  Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on         40 
Railways held on 29.10.2009 and 19.11.2009 
  
APPENDIX-II  Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the         43 
   Recommendations/observations contained in the  
40th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of Plan 
Performance and 11th Five Year Plan Projections’ 
    
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
Shri T. R. Baalu - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3.  Shri Kameshwar Baitha (Palamau) 
4.  Shri K. Bapiraju 
5.  Smt. Rajkumari Chauhan 
6 .  Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
7 .  Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
8.  Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
9.  Shri Pralhad Joshi 
10.  Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
11.  Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
12.  Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
13.  Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
14.  Smt. Shatabdi Roy 
15.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
16.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
17.  Shri Gopal Singh Shekawat 
18.  Chaudhary Lal Singh 
19.  Shri Umashankar Singh 
20.  Shri Lalji Tandon 
21.    Dr. Girija Vyas         
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
23.  Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
24.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
25.  Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
27.  Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28.  Shri Ambeth Rajan 
29.  Shri N. Balaganga 
30.  Shri K.E. Ismail 
31.    Shri Abani Roy 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijeet Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri R.S. Negi   - Executive Officer 
(iii) 

 5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2009 -10), having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Second 
Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government  on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fortieth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways on ‘Review of Plan Performance and 11 th Five Year Plan 
Projections’. 
 
2. The Fortieth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 21.10.2008 and it 
contained 17 recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways have furnished 
their Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations. 
  
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 19.11.2009.  
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Fortieth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                         T.R. BAALU 
02 December, 2009                                                         Chairman, 
11 Agrahayana, 1931 Saka                Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 6 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee  deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations and observations contained in the Fortieth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2008 -09) on ‘Review of Plan 
Performance and 11 th Five Year Plan Projections’.  The Report was pre sented to 
the Lok Sabha on 21.10.2008 and laid in the Rajya Sabha simultaneously.  
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the 17 recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These 
have been broadly categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government –  
 
Para Nos.  1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, and 16. 
    
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
 
Para Nos. 5 and 9 
    
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration –  
 
Para No. 3, 10, 14, 15 and 17 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are 
still awaited -  
 
Nil    
 
1.3 The Committee desire that replies to the observations/comments 
contained in Chapter I of the Report be furnished to them 
expeditiously. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations/observations.   

 7 
 
 
A. XI Plan t argets for new lines, gauge conversion, doubling, 
electrification & track renewal  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
1.5 The Committee fou nd that during the X Plan , the Railways had fixed a 
target of 1310 Kms of new lines, 2365 kms of gauge conversion, 1575 Kms of 
doubling, 23000 kms of track renewals and 1800 kms of railway electrification. 
While the Railways had exceeded the targets fixed for gauge conversion (4289 
kms), track renewals (24739 kms) and electrification (1810 kms), they, however, 
could not meet the targets set for the new lines and doubling which stood at 920 
kms and 1300 kms , respectively, at the end of the Plan. In the XI Plan, the 
Railways have projected 2000 kms of new lines, 10000 kms of gauge conversion, 
6000 kms of doubling, 3500 kms of electrification and 16500 kms of track 
renewal. The Committee were not satisfied with the reasons such as land 
acquisition, contractual failure, forestry clearance , etc. put forward by the 
Railways for the non-completion of new lines and doubling targets during X Plan. 
They found that these problems were perennially being cited by the Railways for 
the non-completion of targets. They hope d that the targets set for the XI Plan 
under new lines, dou blings, electrification and gauge conversion would be 
achieved by the Railways during the Plan period itself and the problems cited by 
them will be sorted out with advance planning and suitable corrective measures. 
The Committee further note d that the proj ections set for under the heads new 
lines and doubling during the XI Plan include the spillover from  the X Plan. The 
Committee, while not appreciating this practice adopted by the Railways , desired 
that in future the spillovers should be indicated separately and given preference. 
 
1.6 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have , inter alia, stated 
as under:- 
“The concern expressed by the Committee has been noted. All out efforts 
are being made to expedite implementation of ongoing projects bu t there 
are certain areas which are not under fully control of the Ministry. The 
delays in land acquisition and forestry clearance, adverse law and order 
conditions in many parts of the country, contractual failures particularly 
due to steep market fluctua tions in prices of construction material have 

 8 
been effected the implementation of projects adversely. 
The availability of funds through budgetary support particularly for new 
lines is not at all sufficient to progress the sanctioned projects in a 
reasonable time frame. The corrective measures are being taken to 
improve contract management by modifying the contract conditions and 
empowering field units.    The Land Acquisition Act has been modified for 
expediting acquisition of land for special projects. As regards targets for 
plan period, it is mentioned that the targets are finalized based on total 
outlays being provided and it may not be feasible at that stage to pin 
point individual projects. The spill overs get carry forward to the 
subsequent plan period  and at the time of carrying out exercise for the 
plan preparation, it is not feasible to indicate as to which of the projects 
will get spilled over.  
 
As already observed by the Committee, the targets of electrification for X 
Plan were successfully met wi th within the Plan period itself. In the first 
year of XI Plan, i.e. in 2007-08, 502 RKMs have been electrified. 
 
 To achieve the target of 3500 RKMs of electrification for XI Plan, IR has 
planned to award turn key contracts in certain select routes. Advan ce 
material planning for two years and mechanized working for expediting 
the progress are also envisaged. At the field level, powers of GMs to 
sanction detailed/revised estimates have been enhanced. Likewise, 
powers of accepting authorities have been raise d and Chief Project 
Managers at field level have been empowered to sign contractual 
agreements." 
 
 
1.7 The Committee would like to know the  details of the  corrective 
measures being taken by the Railways to improve the contract 
management system.  The Committee fail to understand as to how it is 
not feasible for the Ministry of Railways  to indicate projects spill overs 
separately.  The Committee reiterate the earlier recommendation in 
this regard.  The Committee are further unable to  understand why 
Indian Ra ilways ha ve planned to award turn key contracts  for 
electrification only in certain select routes  and not considering all 
electrification projects on turn key contract basis .  The Committee also 
desire to know the details of routes identified for turn key contracts by 

 9 
the Ministry of Railways  and the criteria adopted thereof .  The 
Committee recommend that all electrification projects should be 
executed under turn key contracts basis. 
 
 
B. Augmentation of the production capacity of Railways production 
units & setting up new manufacturing unit 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
 
1.8 The Committee note d that keeping in view the growth in passenger and 
freight traffic in the XI Plan, the Railways have projected a rolling stock 
requirement of 155,000 nos. Wagons, 18 00 nos. Electric locos, 1800 nos. Diesel 
locos, 17,500 nos. BG Conventional coaches and 2800 nos. EMUs and 2,200 nos 
DEMUs/MEMUs. The Committee found that the EMU demand is on the increase 
and in order to cater to this demand EMU production in ICF is being  ramped up 
further. The Railways are also planning to outsource EMU/MEMU & DEMU 
Coaches. The Committee desire d that the Railways should augment the 
production capacity of their own Production Units specially for EMUs and also 
expedite the setting up of new  manufacturing units for coaches, diesel 
locomotives & electric locomotives to meet the rolling stock requirement 
commensurate with the growth of traffic during XI Plan. They also desire d that 
the Railways should have a perspective plan covering longer ter m for the 
assessment of rolling stock requirement.  
 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:-   
 
"Considering the need of acquiring 1800 electric locos during XI Plan, 
work for augmentation of capacity of Chitt aranjan Locomotive Works 
(CLW) from 150 to 200 locos per annum has been sanctioned in Budget 
2007-08. The out turn of 200 locos per annum is considered the maximum 
sustainable out turn from CLW. 
 
 
 

 10 
 
 
 
 
Also, a new Green Field Electric Loco Factory at Madhepura, Bihar has 
been sanctioned in Budget 2007 -08. The request for proposal (RFP) for 
setting up of factory to manufacture 800 locos over 10 years period has 
been issued for deliveries to commence in 2010 -11 and reach a capacity 
of up to 120 locos per year. 
 
Setting up of new factory is essential as CLW will produce, on completion 
of sanctioned expansion, about 1.2 million HP per annum. Additional 120 
locos of 12000 HP per year implies a doubling of CLW’s capacity, which 
has several disadvantages. 
 
GM/CLW vide le tter no. ELDD/II01/GB dated 13.05.08, has also informed 
of inadequate industrial support to manufacture 200 three phase locos. 
There are constraints to get sub assemblies like car bodies, cabs, side 
walls and other equipments from trade. 
 
Further, manufact uring of three phase locos requires more of highly 
skilled content at all levels and production of more than 200 advanced 
technology locos per annum on a sustainable basis is not strategically 
advantageous. Moreover, technology to manufacture 1200 HP new 
generation locos is not available with Indian Railway. 
 
In the overall perspective, yearly manufacture of 200 locos of 6000 HP at 
CLW, after the ongoing works of augmentation are completed is 
considered as a sustainable level for CLW.  
 
To increase the prod uction capacity, the following works have been 
sanctioned at ICF, which is the coach production unit manufacturing 
EMUs: 
(a) Augmentation of capacity for manufacture of 1250 shells. 
(b) Further Augmentation of capacity for manufacture of 1500 coaches 
per annum. 
(c) Augmentation / Upgradation of facilities of MRVC electrical multiple 
units. 
  
The increase in production capacity will also increase the corresponding 
production capacity of EMUs at ICF, for which a separate work is also 
under way (as mentioned i n Para (c) above). The production capacity of 
ICF for EMU manufacture, after completion of these works is estimated to 
be 5.5 twelve car EMU rakes per month, i.e. approximately 800 EMU 
coaches per month. 
  

 11 
 
 
 
Action taken on setting up new rolling stock units is as under: 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the unit Year of 
approval in 
Budget 
Anticipated 
cost 
Remarks 
1. Setting up of new coach 
factory at Rae Bareilly 
2006-07 1685.00 Land 
procurement 
and bid 
process for 
setting up 
these units in 
Joint Venture 
is in progress. 
2. Setting up of diesel loco 
manufacturing unit at 
Marhoura. 
2006-07 2052.00 
3. Setting up of Greenfield 
electric loco 
manufacturing factory. 
2007-08 1293.57 
  
 
Projection for requirement of Rolling Stock are based on replacements, as 
well as on Traff ic projections regarding increase in passenger traffic. It 
has been seen that over the last several years, there have been very wide 
fluctuations in passenger traffic growth patterns. In view of this, an 
attempt to project requirement of Rolling Stock beyo nd 4 to 5 years is 
also likely to be fraught with significant variations. The accent of the 
Railways has been to develop flexibility in manufacturing set up, so that 
increases or decreases in requirement of Rolling Stock can be met in the 
shortest possible time. 
 
In view of this, it is submitted that a prospective plan covering longer 
term for the assessment of Rolling Stock requirement would be subject to 
major uncertainty and therefore, would require substantial mid -course 
corrections.  
 
It is further sub mitted that the projections for Rolling Stock acquisition 
made for the Five Year period provide the basic frame work for Rolling 
Stock requirements and annual acquisition programs are made in line with 
the Plan Projections." 
 
 
1.10 The Committee are satisf ied to note the efforts taken by the 
Railways to augment the production capacity of their production units.  
However, the Committee are unhappy to note the delay in the setting 
up of new rolling stock units at Rae Bareilly and at  Marhoura which 
were approved during 2006 -07 and the Greenfield electric loco 

 12 
manufacturing factory  which was approved during 2007 -08.  The 
Committee desire that the Ministry of Railways will expedite the 
various works , particularly acquisition of land required for each of 
these production units so that the objectives of the Railways to set up 
these units can be achieved in time.  
 
C. Provision of Minimum Essential Amenities (MES) at stations 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
1.11 The Committee took note of the fact that there are many stations where 
the minimum essential amenities as per laid down guidelines are yet to be 
provided, causing hardships to the passengers. They, therefore, desire d that 
during the XI Plan period, the Railways should identify all such stations and 
ensure that minimum essential amenities are provided to the passengers at all 
such stations. 
 
1.12 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“All Zonal Railways have been addressed to identify stations where 
minimum essential amenit ies (MEA) have not been provided as per laid 
down norms. Railways have also been asked to ensure that deficiencies in 
MEA, if any, are made good during the 11th Five Year Plan period.” 
 
 
1.13 The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry of 
Railways have not so far identified the stations where minimum 
essential amenities as per the laid down norms are not available , even 
after the lapse of more than 2 years of the current Five Year Plan.  The 
Committee desire that the Ministry of Railways will expe dite the 
identification process and provide MEA in each of such stations during 
the 11th Five Year Plan period. 

 13 
 
D. Rail connectivity to North-Eastern Region and other 
underdeveloped and tribal areas 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
1.14 The Committee were informed during the evidence by the representatives 
of the Planning Commission that a thrust is being made during the XI Plan to 
complete the  national projects in the North -Eastern region to provide Rail 
connectivity to that area. They further apprised that in addition to the North East 
Region, there were other areas in the country that are underdeveloped and 
inhabited by tribals like in the States of Ch hattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, parts of 
West Bengal, etc., that needed to be connected by Rail for overall  development 
and exploitation of the economic potentia l of those areas. The Committee fou nd 
that Rail connectivity to the Capitals of the North-Eastern States and other 
underdeveloped and tribal areas are essential from a strategic and 
developmental point of view. They felt  that the immense economic potential in 
tribal areas is not being realised due to the lack of Rail infrastructure. They , 
therefore, recommended that the Railways should make survey in such areas for 
developing the Rail infrastructure. The y may also consider to set up a special 
implementing agency such as the North-East Railway Construction Corporation in 
coordination with the Planning Commission for this purpose. The Committee 
strongly felt that the hilly, tribal and backward areas should be put on a separate 
footing and given some priority in the allocation of funds. They further stress ed 
that the criteria of 14% RoR should not be rigidly applied for such regions and 
the Ministry should take up this matter with the Planning Commission. 
 
1.15 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“The concern expressed by the Committee has been noted. As regards 
connectivity to the capital cities of the N.E. States, it is mentioned that the 
two capital cities i.e. Guwa hati (Dispur) and Agartala are already 
connected by the Railway line. Further works have been taken up for 
providing connectivity to the state capitals of Manipur, Mizoram, Arunachal 
Pradesh and Nagaland. The surveys for connecting Gangtok and Shillong 
have also been taken up. The efforts are to connect all the capital cities of 
NE States as mentioned in Vision 2020  document  released  by  Ministry  
of  Development   of North  East  Region.    9 Projects of the region have 

 14 
been declared as national projects and to provide necessary 
funds for implementation of these projects, proposal has been mooted for 
setting up Non -lapsable North East rail development fund. The North 
Frontier Railway is already having General Manager / Construction for 
implementation of these projects.  
 
The projects have already been taken up in other states also and most of 
the new line and many gauge conversion projects are on socio -economic 
considerations which are not financially viable. The cut off norm of 14% 
prescribed for FIRR is not being fulfilled by all such projects." 
 
 
1.16 The reply of the Ministry of Railways is silent regarding provision 
of rail connectivity in underdeveloped and tribal areas which the 
Committee feel are essential from a strategic and developmental point 
of view.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation for survey of such areas for developing the rail 
infrastructure and to give  priority in the allocation of funds for hilly, 
tribal and socially backward areas. 
 
E. Unmanned level cros sings, ROB/RUBs and other technological 
measures to increase the safety  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
1.17 The Committee noted that while the total number of accidents have come 
down from 351 in 2002 -03 to 195 in 2006  07 the numbers however, are 
significantly high especially in the case of level crossing gate accidents. The 
Committee ha d observed that there has been an increasing trend i n such 
accidents since 2004 -05. The Committee ha d been informed that in order to 
address the problem of level crossing gates accident in the current budget a 
programme of manning a larger number of unmanned level -crossing gates and 
also a programme of upgrading the standard of inter -locking of the existing 
gates has been started. The Committee were further informed that Ra ilways 
would need funds of about Rs.1000 crores during the XI Plan period for manning 
and interlocking works of 1632 unmanned level crossings. They also note d that 

 15 
in the Report of the Working Group on Railways Programme it has been 
stated that a consolidated policy is being formulated on Rail-Road level crossings 
to cut down the vulnerability and also that during the Eleventh Plan some 
enhanced and ingenuous standards will be put in place to save human lives. The 
Committee were concerned with the rising nu mber of level crossing gates 
accidents and desire d that the Railways should take urgent measures for the 
manning of unmanned level crossings and construction of ROB/RUB as well as 
other technological measures to increase the safety of Road/Rail users. They  
also desired to be apprised of the final policy being formulated as stated in the 
Report of the Working Group for Railways Programme. 
 
1.18 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
The number of unmanned level crossing accidents and their percentage 
to the total accidents since 2003-04 is as under:  
Year 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2007-08 
Apr. to 
Oct.07 
2008-09 
Apr. to 
Oct.08 
Total Accidents 325 234 234 195 194 121 105 
Unmanned Level 
Crossing 
Accidents 
86 65 65 72 65 45 39 
Unmanned Level 
Crossing 
Accidents (in %) 
26.46 27.78 27.78 36.92 33.51 37.19 37.14 
 
From the above, it would be seen that although the percentage of 
unmanned level crossing accidents has increased, their absolute number 
has remained in  the same range except for the year 2006 -07. However, 
this is equally worrying for Railways. As most of them are caused due to 
the negligence of road users, Public awareness programs are undertaken 
regularly for educating road users for observing safe prac tices while 
negotiating unmanned level crossings. Publicity campaigns are periodically 
launched through various media such as quickies on television, slides, 
newspapers, street plays, etc. Joint ambush checks with the involvement 
of civil authorities are a lso conducted. As the traffic densities go up, such 
level crossings are being progressively manned on their qualifying the 
manning criteria.  
 
 
 

 16 
 
However, there has been delay in manning of unmanned level crossings 
primarily due to the following reasons: 
 
(a) Delays taking place in creation of posts of gate keepers and 
finalization of recruitment process of Gangman/Gatekeepers to man 
the unmanned level crossings. 
(b) Delays taking place in finalization of tenders due to lack of 
response, and or high rates a nd finalization of the tender award 
keeping within the prescribed procedures, norms etc. for tender 
finalization. 
(c) Delays taking place in obtaining approval of Commissioner of 
Railway Safety for manning of unmanned level crossings. 
 
Zonal Railways, as a  special measure, have also been asked to sanction 
Limited Height Subways costing upto Rs. 50 lakh and normal height sub -
ways costing upto Rs.1.25 crore on single line and Rs. 1.50 crore on 
double line wherever technically feasible so that number of unmann ed 
level crossings can be reduced. Emphasis is also being given to close 
down sparsely used unmanned level crossings suggesting their merger 
with another level crossing/Road Over Bridge/Road under Bridge in the 
close vicinity with the cooperation of civic and local bodies. 
 
Measures to take up works of ROBs/RUBs 
The policy adopted in vogue for construction of ROBs/RUBs as under:  
 
(i)  During laying of new tracks and upto 10 years thereof Road 
Over/Under Bridges are provided at such locations where 
necessitated and demanded by the State Government concerned as 
an accommodation work at the cost of the Railways. 
 
(ii) After expiry of 10 years of laying of tracks ROBs/RUBs are provided 
in lieu of existing busy level crossings on cost sharing basis if traffic 
density at level crossing reaches at one lakh Train Vehicle Unit (A 
unit obtained by multiplying the number of trains to the number of 
road vehicles passing over the level crossing within 24 hours) 
otherwise on deposit terms. In both conditions the proposal  have 
to be sponsored by the State Government concerned duly fulfilling 
certain preliminary pre -requisites required under extant rules with 
undertaking to bear their share of cost, closure of level crossing on 
completion of Road over/under bridge and advance action taken for 
acquisition of land required for approaches etc. 
 
(iii) Private entrepreneurs are attracted to invest their precious 
resources on construction of ROBs/RUBs under BOT (Built, Operate 
and Transfer) concept in lieu of which they are offere d to levy toll 
on ROB or utilize the space underneath commercially for a specified 
period of 10 years or so. 

 17 
 
(iv) The BOT concept has further been modified under PPP (Public 
Priviate Partnership) scheme under which the work will be taken by 
the private pa rty in clusters and viable gap funds to the extent of 
40 percent will be arranged by the Railways and the State 
Government concerned." 
 
1.19 The Committee are surprised to note the reasons cited by the 
Ministry of Railways for the delay in manning of unman ned level 
crossings.  The Committee  have taken a serious view of the fact that 
despite knowing the reasons,  the Railways have no t taken any 
corrective measures  such as creation of posts of gate keepers, 
finalization of recruitment of Gangman/Gatekeeper  expeditiously, 
obtaining approval of Commissioner of Railway Safety , lowering the 
rate of the tenders, etc. for manning of unmanned level crossings.   The 
Committee desire to know the total number of unmanned level 
crossings in various zones.   The Committee desire that the Railway s 
will now take appropriate and expeditious action to ensure that 
unmanned level crossings are  manned and construction of ROB /RUBs 
is expedited within the fixed timeframe. 
 
F. Conversion of all narrow gauge lines into broad gauge and 
electrification of non-electrified tractions 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
1.20    The Committee found that there have been many narrow gauge lines still 
to be converted into broad gauge. Similarly, there are many non -electrified 
tractions between two elec trified tractions. They, therefore, desire d that during 
the XI Plan the Railways should take appropriate steps to convert all narrow 
gauge lines into broad gauge and non -electrified tractions between two 
electrified tractions should also be electrified. 

 18 
 
1.21 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
"At the start of the XI plan, there was a network of 13399 km of MG / NG 
lines consisting of 10417 km of MG lines and 2982 km of NG lines. The XI 
plan envisages conversion of  10000 km of MG / NG lines to BG. The 
majority of conversion will be of MG lines as the network has become 
isolated in many cases due to conversion of adjoining sections. In this 
also, priority is being given for the conversions which will provide alternate 
routes to meet with the demand of traffic. The conversion of all narrow 
gauge lines is not planned during the planned period. Minister of Railways 
in his budget speech 2007 -08 also mentioned that all efforts would be 
made to convert the majority of mete r gauge lines to broad gauge during 
the 11th five year plan.  
 
Indian Railways have focused on electrification of links between two 
electrified sections. Some of the illustrative examples are given below: 
S.No. Section RKMs Year of Sanction 
1. Kanpur-Jhansi 220 2008-09 
2. Bina-Kota 303 2006-07 
3. Khurja-Meerut-Saharanpur 207 2007-08 
4. Madurai-Tuticorin-Nagercoil 262 2008-09 
  
Zonal Railways have also been asked to identify other similar unelectrified 
links falling between electrified routes that can be taken up as viable 
projects." 
 
1.22 The Committee are satisfied to n ote the efforts taken by the 
Railways to convert majority of meter gauge lines to broad gauge 
during the 11th Five Year Plan.  However, the Committee are concerned 
at not prioritizing conversion of narrow gauge line s into broad gauge 
and also not fixing any timeframe for electrification of non -electrified 
tractions between two electrified tractions.  The Committee  reiterate 
their earlier recommendation that  the Railways should  take 
expeditious action to convert all narrow gauge lines  except tourist and 
heritage sites and priority to be given to commercially viable lines  into 

 19 
broad gauge and electrify the non- electrified tractions between two 
electrified tractions. 
 
G. Completion of works u nder the Corporate Welfare Safety Plan 
(CWP)  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
1.23    The Committee note d that the Railways have prepared a Corporate 
Welfare Safety Plan (CWP) with an objective to pay special attention towards 
maintenance and improvement of  staff quarters with part icular emphasis on 
substandard quarters lacking basic amenities. They also note d that the CWP 
works proposed by the Zonal Railways are sanctioned in the Annual Works 
Programme. The Committee , however, regret ted to note that these w orks are 
not being executed timely. They desired that the works under the CWP should be 
completed in time bound manner and adequate funds be provided for the same. 
 
1.24 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“Railways have prepared a Corporate Welfare Plan (CWP), not Corporate 
Welfare Safety Plan as stated above, with an objective to pay special 
attention towards maintenance and improvement of staff quarters with 
particular emphasis on substandard quarters lacking bas ic amenities. 
Efforts are always made to provide adequate funds for works under CWP, 
however this is subject to the over all ceilings limit regarding availability of 
funds for Plan Head 51 (Staff Quarters) and Plan Head 52 (Staff 
Amenities). Efforts are al so made to execute all the works under these 
Plan Heads, including the works under CWP in a time bound manner, 
however, execution of works are subject to various factors including those 
which are beyond Railways control. 
 
The recommendation has been noted and Railways have been advised to 
execute the works under CWP in a time bound manner." 
 
 
1.25 The Ministry of Railways , in their reply , have not specified what 
are the various factors which are beyond the ir control that hinder the 
implementation of works.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the 

 20 
same.  The Committee would also like to know whether these issues 
were ever taken up with the agencies concerned and if so, when and 
the outcome thereof and the corrective measures taken thereon. 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 21 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
The Committee take note of the financial performance of the Railways 
during the X Plan and substantial progress and achievements made in meeting 
the objectives and targets of the X Plan. Against the initial outlay of Rs.60,600 
Crores, the actual expenditure at the end of Plan period was to the tune of Rs. 
84,003 Crores. The increase in Plan outlay/ size was due to the additional 
expenditure on new lines, gauge conversions, rolling stock and track renewals 
and on account of allocations for SRSF (Special Railway Safety Fund) and 
National Projects resulting in higher level of gross budgetary support. The 
Committee find that during the X Plan the mobili zation of internal resources by 
the Railways had gone up from Rs.3,113 Crores of the total resource mobilization 
in the first year to more than Rs.12,000 Crores of the total resource mobilization 
in the final year of the Plan. This is a welcome achievement  by the Railways 
given the fact that in the past they had been heavily relying on budgetary 
support for their operations. The Committee hope that the Railways would 
sustain this performance during the course of the XI Plan Period also. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
"Noted, Railways have set higher targets of financial performance during the 11 th 
Five Year Plan.  
 Ministry of Railways is thankful to the Committee for appreciating the 
Railway’s efforts in generating higher internal resources." 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
 

 22 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
The Committee are satisfied to note that the Railways have performed 
well and exceeded the targets fixed for freight and passenger traffic during the X 
Plan. As agains t the freight traffic target of 624 million tonnes of originating 
freight and 396 BTKMs of freight output for the terminal year of the plan, the 
Railways have achieved 728.4 MTs of originating freight and 475 BTKMs of 
freight output. Similarly, in passenge r traffic also as against a target of 5686 
million originating passengers and 593 billion passenger kilometers, the Railways 
have achieved 6352.1 million originating passengers and 691.8 billion passenger 
kilometers. For the XI Plan, the Railways have proj ected freight traffic of 1,100 
MTs of originating freight and 702 BTKMs of freight output. The Passenger traffic 
projected at 8400 million originating passengers, is expected to grow at a rate of 
about 5.5 per cent. The Committee while appreciating the gro wth in freight and 
passenger traffic achieved by the Railways during X plan hope that the Railways 
would sustain this growth during XI Plan also and will take adequate steps 
including augmentation of their capacity in order to achieve the same. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
"Noted.  The Railways are maintaining the momentum of growth in both 
passenger & freight traffic in the first 2 years of the 11 th Plan and expect to 
achieve the targets set for traffic during the 11th Plan." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
 
The Committee have been informed that in order to ensure timely completion of 
projects, a number of changes have been effected in the contract system and 
powers have been delegated to f ield units so as to improve efficiency in the 
construction organization on the Railways. Further, an Additional Member 
Committee has been set up to go into the issues involved for empowering field 
unit by suitable delegation of powers, streamlining procedu res for improving 
efficiency and output. The Committee are of the view that in order to meet the 

 23 
growing traffic requirements and decongestion of saturated routes 
during the XI Plan, there is an urgent need for the Railways to ensure timely 
completion of new lines and doubling projects. The Railways have admitted that 
there is a dearth of resourceful and reliable contractors. To address this problem, 
the Committee desire that the Railways should ensure a strong contract 
management system with in - built clause for risk management for execution of 
projects speedily and give contracts to genuine contractors only who do not 
compromise with the quality and safety of the project. The practice of sub -
contracting by the contractors should be stopped. With regard to the problem 
related to the land acquisition, the Committee hope that the recent amendment 
made in the Land Acquisition Act would help Railways a great deal in getting land 
acquisition formalities cleared faster. To deal with the other issue related to 
forestry clearance, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Railways 
should take up this matter at the Ministerial level with the concerned Ministry to 
find out ways and means to address the issue. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
"The Railways already have a s trong contract management system and 
contracts are awarded through laid down procedure and detailed deliberations 
after judging the contractors capability to execute the work. However, as 
mentioned earlier, due to sudden spurt in infrastructure development , there is 
dearth of resourceful and reliable contractors to execute works at the required 
pace. In fact, the capacity of the construction industry in the country is limited 
and is not considered enough to match the infrastructure growth with the 
economic growth. To assess the difficulties of the construction industry, a 
contractors’ meet was organized in the Ministry to interact with them and get 
their feedback on system improvement. Based on the interaction, the contract 
conditions are under modification so as to bring efficiency in contract 
management.  The amended provisions of the land acquisition act are being 
applied to special Railway projects only and not as a general. However, the land 
acquisition requires close coordination with state authorities in getting the 
revenue records, verifications etc. Chief Secretaries of the States have been 

 24 
requested to conduct regular meetings on progress of Railway projects in their 
states where issues related to State Government are also addressed." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
 
The Committee observe that in States like Orissa, Jharkhand and 
Chattisgarh where heavy loading of minerals, coals and iron ore takes place, 
preference is being given to  freight traffic at the cost of passenger traffic. The 
Committee desire that in such areas there should be a balanced growth in 
passenger and freight traffic and the Railways should not ignore the 
transportation needs of the population of that area. They a lso note that in some 
areas without augmenting the infrastructure, the Railways have increased the 
loading capacity. The Committee desire that the Railways should take necessary 
steps to augment the infrastructure before increasing the loading capacity in 
such areas. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
"It is true that in certain areas, the quantum of freight traffic movement 
and the demand for such movement is higher than that of passenger traffic. 
However, Indian Railways do not ignore the passenger transportation  
requirements of those areas and catering to passenger traffic requirement an 
ongoing process.  
 
 As regards increase in loading capacity and augmentation of 
infrastructure, Railways have adopted various innovative strategies to increase 
loading capacity b y better asset utilization. At the same time, capacity 
augmentation of infrastructure is one of the priority areas of the 11th Plan." 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
 

 25 
 
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
 
The Committee note  that as on date the Railways have a large shelf of 
ongoing projects viz. New Lines, Gauge Conversion, Doublings etc. with a total 
throw forward of  Rs.86,000 crores approximately. Some of these projects are 
yet to be completed despite a passage of many ye ars. The Committee are of the 
strong view that if the projects are prioritized, Railways would be able to have 
clear vision of the projects that are to be completed and thus be able to clear 
some of the backlog of pending projects within stipulated timefra me. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that Railways should examine these pending 
projects and prioritize and categories them. A time frame of completion may also 
be fixed and adhered to in respect of these pending projects. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
"As regard prioritization of projects it is mentioned that the categorization 
of Railway Projects under New Line and Gauge Conversion was approved by the 
Government in April, 2005 in the following Categories:  
(i) Category (I) - Projects where progress is more than 60% and 
throw forward is less than Rs. 100 Crore. 
(ii)  Category (II) - Viable/Operationally required projects. 
(iii)  Category (III) - National Projects, Projects in Assam & North East 
Region, Cost Sharing with State Governments, Defense Funded 
Projects and projects covered under Public Private Partnership. 
(iv)  Category (IV) - Other ongoing projects not covered in Categories 
(I, II & III) The funds to various new line and gauge conversion 
projects being funded through  budgetary   support  is being   
provided  on  the  basis of  a    state    wise   formula in which 
weight-age  of 70% is given to throw forward of projects in the 
state and 15% each to area and population of the state. 
Due to improvement in internal generation, certain gauge conversion  and 
all doubling projects are now being funded through internal generation. These 
ongoing projects may get completed in next 4-5 years. The constraint of funds is 

 26 
being faced for implementation of new line projects and unless matching funds 
are provided t hrough additional budgetary support, it is not feasible to indicate 
time frame of completion of these projects. However, in implementation, priority 
is being given to operational requirements and other projects where part funding 
is being provided by State Governments and other beneficiaries." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
The Committee find that in the X Plan period there was substantial growth 
in freight traffic and this trend is goi ng to be carried forward by the Railways in 
the XI Plan too. However, there is no matching growth in the Railway 
network/infrastructure leading to over utilization of assets. Many industries that 
have come up in the iron and steel sector are suffering for want of timely supply 
of raw material as there is lack of siding facilities, line capacities etc. The 
Committee desire that taking into account the upcoming industries the Railways 
should prepare a comprehensive plan in this regard in consultation with the  
Planning Commission and the State Governments so that these industries do not 
suffer for want of infrastructure facilities. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
"It is true that while Freight traffic (NTKM's) and passenger traffic (PKM's) 
have grown by 10.9 and 9. 7 times respectively over the last 50 years or so, the 
growth in route kms and running track kilometers has been very meager at 1.18 
and 1.44 times respectively. However the infrastructure is being upgraded to 
handle larger volumes. The Railways have prepared a B1ue Print for high density 
routes connecting the major metros of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata 
which carry the bulk of the passenger and freight traffic. Further a large number 
of works like Doubling/third line, automatic signaling, IBS’s, Rail way 
Electrification etc. have been sanctioned in areas where the growth is expected 
to be substantial. Special emphasis is being paid to cater to traffic of steel, coal 

 27 
and iron -ore sectors. Railways have also announced an iron -ore siding 
policy for giving a fillip to this sector.  
A blue print has already been prepared identifying the critical doubling 
and other works on heavy density network and other routes. Capacity 
enhancement including eliminating bottlenecks is a priority area. As mentioned in 
reply to recommendation no.3, efforts are being made to expedite 
implementation of ongoing projects and other works." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
During the XI Plan, the Railways propose  to develop 22 Stations all over 
the country into world class Stations through the PPP model. In future also, the 
Railways might identify some more Stations for Upgradation to world class 
stations. The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that Railways  should do 
some advance planning in this regard and identify stations that could be 
developed as world class Stations. They recommend that necessary formalities 
for land acquisition etc. may be initiated at the right earnest for such stations to 
avoid last minute run for land and to avoid cost overrun. The Committee desire 
to be apprised of the criteria of identifying such stations that are to be developed 
into world class Stations. They also desire that before entering into PPP for the 
upgradation of these Stations into world class stations, the Railways should first 
explore the possibility of upgrading these stations through their own funds. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
"26 stations have been identified for development as world -class stations 
through the PPP route. These are located at important cities and tourist centers 
with significant passenger traffic and potential for development through the PPP 
route. In future also, the stations for development as world -class stations would 
be on the basis of their im portance and the possibility of development through 
private investment. 
The stations identified for development as world -class stations require 
massive investments in the range of Rs.3000 to 8000 crores. Such investments 

 28 
cannot be mobilized by Ministry of Railways on their own. Further, 
execution of such complex projects also requires high level of project 
management skills. These are expected of the concessionaire who would be 
competitively selected. The development of the identified stations would be done  
after preparation of a master plan and feasibility report for which architects and 
technical consultants would be engaged by leveraging the surplus land around 
and air-space above the stations. Acquisition of land in general is not ensured.   
However,   t he   observations and recommendations of the Committee with 
regard to advance planning have been noted. Zonal Railways have been advised 
to undertake the preparatory work including identification of marginal 
requirements of land transfers/acquisition in ad vance to avoid any problem 
during implementation phase. 
Railways is upgrading and undertaking station improvements through 
their own funds in keeping with the normal requirements of passenger amenities 
and related facilities. Developing world -class station s require massive 
investments which is not fully sustainable through budgetary resources and 
hence the PPP route has been adopted." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
The Committee while taking note of the fact that there are many stations 
where the minimum essential amenities as per laid down guidelines are yet to be 
provided causing hardships to the passengers. They, therefore, desire that 
during the XI plan period, the Railways should i dentify all such stations and 
ensure that minimum essential amenities are provided to the passengers at all 
such station. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
"All Zonal Railways have been addressed to identify stations where 
minimum essential amenities (MEA) have n ot been provided as per laid down 

 29 
norms. Railways have also been asked to ensure that deficiencies in MEA, if 
any, are made good during the 11th Five Year Plan period." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
The Committee note that the introduction of additional train services, 
including inter -city services is done after screening proposals received from 
Members of Parliament, MLAs, VIP's and members of the Zonal Railway User 
Consultative Committee(ZRUCC), Divisional Railway User Consultative Committee 
(DRUCC), passenger associations etc. The Committee foresee that with the rise 
of fuel prices and road transport etc. the demand for inter -city trains is bound to 
grow in future. They however, find that the Railways do not have a detailed plan 
for the -introduction of inter -city trains to meet this future demand. They 
therefore, desire that the Railways should draw a detailed plan in consultation 
with the Zonal Railways User Consultative Committee ( ZRUCC) and Divisional 
Railways User Consultative Committee (DRUCC) in this regard and identify such 
places where there is a requirement of inter -city trains connecting with long 
distance trains. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
"Introduction of additional train services including intercity services over 
Indian Railway is a continuous exercise. However, a major portion of these 
services is introduced on the basis of Inter Railway Time Table Committee 
meeting (IRTTC) and Railway Budget which are annual exercises. 
New trains are introduced mainly on the basis of factors like availability of 
demand/traffic, availability of path, availability of maintenance infrastructure, 
availability of Rolling Stock, manpower requirement, Impact on freight traffic etc.  
Requests for  introduction of trains including intercity services are 
constantly received from various quarters and the demands far exceed the 
resources available with Indian Railway. As a result, train services are provided in 
a phased manner subject to availability of resources and operational feasibility. 

 30 
In view of the dynamic nature of travel requirement of travelling public 
and availability  of  resources  at hand, this process can only be a  point   of real   
time planning. Indian Railways thus make yearly planni ng on the basis of 
discussions in the Inter Railway Time Table Committee meeting which in the 
opinion/view of Zonal Railway User Consultative Committee (ZRUCC), Divisional 
Railway User Consultative Committee (DRUCC). As such, this system is working 
satisfactorily over the years on Indian Railway and does not  warrant any change 
at present." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
The Committee find that there have been many narrow gauge lines sti ll to 
be converted into the broad gauge. Similarly, there are many non -electrified 
tractions between the two electrified tractions. They, therefore, desire that 
during the XI Plan the Railways should focus take appropriate steps to convert all 
narrow gauge  lines into the broad gauge and the non -electrified tractions 
between the two electrified tractions should also be electrified. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
"At the start of the XI plan, there was a network of 13399 km of MG / NG 
lines consisting of 10417 km  of MG lines and 2982 km of NG lines. The XI plan 
envisages conversion of 10000 km of MG / NG lines to BG. The majority of 
conversion will be of MG lines as the network has become isolated in many cases 
due to conversion of adjoining sections. In this also , priority is being given for 
the conversions which will provide alternate routes to meet with the demand of 
traffic. The conversion of all narrow gauge lines is not planned during the 
planned period. . Minister of Railways in his budget speech 2007 -08 al so 
mentioned that all efforts would be made to convert the majority of meter gauge 
lines to broad gauge during the 11th five year plan.  
  
 

 31 
Indian Railways have focused on electrification of links between two 
electrified sections. Some of the illustrative examples are given below: 
S.No. Section RKMs Year of Sanction 
1. Kanpur-Jhansi 220 2008-09 
2. Bina-Kota 303 2006-07 
3. Khurja-Meerut-Saharanpur 207 2007-08 
4. Madurai-Tuticorin-Nagercoil 262 2008-09 
  
Zonal Railways have also been asked to identify ot her similar unelectrified 
links falling between electrified routes that can be taken up as viable projects." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 32 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee find that on saturated routes where there is requirement 
of doubling and gauge conversion in a section, the Railways take up these works 
in small phases r ather than the entire section e.g. Gunurpur - Thiruvalli (gauge 
conversion extension) and Baripada – Tata Nagar Section (gauge conversion). 
The Committee feel that this does not tackle the problem fully and causes 
uncalled for delays. They therefore, recommend that the Railways should take up 
the doubling and gauge conversion works at the entire section so that the 
problem of bottlenecks in saturated routes is removed at one go and the benefits 
of doubling and gauge conversion start accruing. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"The recommendation made by the Committee has been noted. It is 
mentioned that due to constraint of resources, patch doubling of sections was 
generally being undertaken so as to provide relief to the traffic in the congested 
sections particularl y near to junction stations. Since the availability of funds 
through internal generation has improved, the doublings of routes where 
capacity constraints are being faced is being undertaken in one go only. The 
gauge conversion is however being done for a p articular line in one go only. The 
two projects mentioned Gunupur -Thiruvalli and Baripada -Tatanagar are not 
gauge conversion project but new line extension of conversion projects. The 
surveys for extension had been done in the past and projects were not 
considered to be viable. The beneficiaries were also not coming forward to 
participate in the projects. However, for extension of Rupsa -Baripada Bangriposi 
line, a new line from Buramara to Chakulia has been approved which will provide 
shorter connectivity between Baripada and Tatanagar. This line is to be 
implemented through public private partnership." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  

 33 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
The Committee find that the Railways prefer bulk movem ent of freight in 
the process neglecting small farmers and industries who require to move only 
small quantities of goods at a time. They desire that the Railways should explore 
the possibility of allowing 20 wagon rakes for movement of piecemeal freight -
traffic. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"Over the years the Railways have increased their transportation capacity 
for bulk traffic in keeping with the requirements of the economy. While 
piecemeal movement is no longer feasible, to cater to customers who can not 
move their goods in bulk, the Railways already have provisions for running mini -
rakes (comprising of minimum 20 wagons) and two -point/ multi  point 
combinations of traffic." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
  

 34 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
     The Committee find that during the X Plan the Railways had fixed a targ et of 
1310 Kms of new lines, 2365 kms of gauge conversion, 1575 Kms of doubling, 
23000 kms of track renewals and 1800 kms of Railway Electrification. While the 
Railways had exceeded the targets fixed for gauge conversion (4289 kms), track 
renewals (24739 k ms) and electrification (1810 kms), they however, could not 
meet the targets set for the new lines and doubling which stood at 920 kms and 
1300 kms respectively at the end of the Plan. In the Eleventh Plan, the Railways 
have projected 2000 kms of new lines , 10000 kms of gauge conversion, 6000 
kms of doubling, 3500 kms of electrification and 16500 kms of track renewal. 
The Committee are not satisfied with the reasons such as land acquisition, 
contractual failure, forestry clearance etc put forward by the Rai lways for the - 
non -completion of new lines and doubling targets during X Plan. They find that 
these problems are perennially being cited by the Railways for the non -
completion of targets. They hope that the targets set for the XI Plan under new 
lines, doublings, electrification and gauge conversion would be achieved by the 
Railways during the Plan period itself and the problems cited by them will be 
sorted out with advance planning and suitable corrective measures. The 
Committee further note that the proje ctions set for under the heads, new lines 
and doubling during XI plan include the spillover from X Plan. The Committee 
while not appreciating this practice adopted by the Railways desire that in future 
the spillovers should be indicated separately and given preference. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 "The concern expressed by the Committee has been noted. All out efforts 
are being made to expedite implementation of ongoing projects but there are 
certain areas which are not under fully control of the Ministry. T he delays in land 

 35 
acquisition and forestry clearance, adverse law and order conditions in 
many parts of the country, contractual failures particularly due to steep market 
fluctuations in prices of construction material have been effected the 
implementation of projects adversely. The availability of funds through budgetary 
support particularly for new lines is not at all sufficient to progress the 
sanctioned projects in a reasonable time frame. The corrective measures are 
being taken to improve contract mana gement by modifying the contract 
conditions and empowering field units.    The Land Acquisition Act has been 
modified for expediting acquisition of land for special projects. As regards targets 
for plan period, it is mentioned that the targets are finalize d based on total 
outlays being provided and it may not be feasible at that stage to pin point 
individual projects. The spill overs get carry forward to the subsequent plan 
period and at the time of carrying out exercise for the plan preparation, it is not 
feasible to indicate as to which of the projects will get spilled over.  
 
As already observed by the Committee, the targets of electrification for X 
Plan were successfully met with within the Plan period itself. In the first year of 
XI Plan, i.e. in 2007-08, 502 RKMs have been electrified. 
 
 To achieve the target of 3500 RKMs of electrification for XI Plan, IR has 
planned to award turn key contracts in certain select routes. Advance material 
planning for two years and mechanized working for expediting the p rogress are 
also envisaged. At the field level, powers of GMs to sanction detailed/revised 
estimates have been enhanced. Likewise, powers of accepting authorities have 
been raised and Chief Project Managers at field level have been empowered to 
sign contractual agreements." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
The Committee note that keeping in view the growth in passenger and 
freight traffic in the XI Plan, the Railways have projected a rol ling stock 

 36 
requirement of 155,000 nos. Wagons, 1800 nos. Electric locos, 1800 nos. 
Diesel locos, 17,500 nos. BG Conventional coaches and 2800 nos. EMUs and 
2,200 nos DEMUs/MEMUs. The Committee find that the EMU demand is on the 
increase and in order to cat er to this demand EMU production in ICF is being 
ramped up further. The Railways are also planning to outsource EMU/MEMU & 
DEMU Coaches. The Committee desire that the Railways should augment the 
production capacity of their own Production Units specially f or EMUs and also 
expedite the setting up of new manufacturing units for coaches, diesel 
locomotives & electric locomotives to meet the rolling stock requirement 
commensurate with the growth of traffic during XI Plan. They also desire that 
the Railways shou ld have a perspective plan covering longer term for the 
assessment of rolling stock requirement. 
Reply of the Government 
 
"Considering the need of acquiring 1800 electric locos during XI Plan, 
work for augmentation of capacity of Chittranjan and Locomotive  Works (CLW) 
from 150 to 200 locos per annum has been sanctioned in Budget 2007 -08. The 
out turn of 200 locos per annum is considered the maximum sustainable out turn 
from CLW. 
Also, a new Green Field Electric Loco Factory at Madhepura, Bihar has 
been sanctioned in Budget 2007 -08. The request for proposal (RFP) for setting 
up of factory to manufacture 800 locos over 10 years period has been issued for 
deliveries to commence in 2010 -11 and reach a capacity of up to 120 locos per 
year. 
Setting up of new facto ry is essential as CLW will produce, on completion 
of sanctioned expansion, about 1.2 million HP per annum. Additional 120 locos of 
12000 HP per year implies a doubling of CLW’s capacity, which has several 
disadvantages. 
GM/CLW vide letter no. ELDD/II01/GB  dated 13.05.08, has also informed 
of inadequate industrial support to manufacture 200 three phase locos. There 
are constraints to get sub assemblies like car bodies, cabs, side walls and other 
equipments from trade. 

 37 
Further, manufacturing of three phase l ocos requires more of highly 
skilled content at all levels and production of more than 200 advanced 
technology locos per annum on a sustainable basis is not strategically 
advantageous. Moreover, technology to manufacture 1200 HP new generation 
locos is not available with Indian Railway. 
In the overall perspective, yearly manufacture of 200 locos of 6000 HP at 
CLW, after the ongoing works of augmentation are completed is considered as a 
sustainable level for CLW.  
 To increase the production capacity, the fo llowing works have been 
sanctioned at ICF, which is the coach production unit manufacturing EMUs: 
(a) Augmentation of capacity for manufacture of 1250 shells. 
(b) Further Augmentation of capacity for manufacture of 1500 coaches per 
annum. 
(c) Augmentation / Upgradation of facilities of MRVC electrical multiple units. 
 The increase in production capacity will also increase the corresponding 
production capacity of EMUs at ICF, for which a separate work is also under way 
(as mentioned in Para (c) above). The p roduction capacity of ICF for EMU 
manufacture, after completion of these works is estimated to be 5.5 twelve car 
EMU rakes per month, i.e. approximately 800 EMU coaches per month. 
 Action taken on setting up new rolling stock units is as under: 
S. 
No. 
Name of the unit Year of  
approval  
in 
Budget 
Anticipated 
cost 
Remarks 
1. Setting up of new coach 
factory at Rae Bareilly 
2006-07 1685.00 Land procurement 
and bid process for 
setting up these 
units in Joint 
Venture is in 
progress. 
2. Setting up of diesel loc o 
manufacturing unit at 
Marhoura. 
2006-07 2052 
3. Setting up of Greenfield 
electric loco manufacturing 
factory. 
2007-08 1293.57 
  
Projection for requirement of Rolling Stock are based on replacements, as 
well as on Traffic projections regarding increas e in passenger traffic. It has been 
seen that over the last several years, there have been very wide fluctuations in 
passenger traffic growth patterns. In view of this, an attempt to project 

 38 
requirement of Rolling Stock beyond 4 to 5 years is also likely t o be fraught 
with significant variations. The accent of the Railways has been to develop 
flexibility in manufacturing set up, so that increases or decreases in requirement 
of Rolling Stock can be met in the shortest possible time. 
 In view of this, it is s ubmitted that a prospective plan covering longer 
term for the assessment of Rolling Stock requirement would be subject to major 
uncertainty and therefore, would require substantial mid-course corrections.  
It is further submitted that the projections for R olling Stock acquisition 
made for the Five Year period provide the basic frame work for Rolling Stock 
requirements and annual acquisition programs are made in line with the Plan 
Projections." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
The Committee were informed during the evidence by the 
representatives of the Planning Commission that a thrust is being made during 
the XI Plan to complete the national projects in the North -Eastern region to 
provide Rail connectivity to that area. They further apprised that in addition to 
the North East Region there were other areas in the country that are 
underdeveloped and inhabited by tribals like in the States of Chattisgarh, 
Jharkhand, Orissa, parts of the West  Bengal etc. that needed to be connected 
by Rail for overall development and exploitation of the economic potential of 
that area. The Committee find that Rail connectivity to the Capitals of North - 
Eastern States and other underdeveloped and tribal areas a re essential from 
strategic and developmental point of view. They feel that immense economic 
potential in tribal areas is not being realised due to the lack of Rail 
infrastructure. They therefore, recommend that the Railways should make 
survey in such area s for developing the Rail infrastructure. They may also 
consider to set up a special implementing agency such as North -East Railway 
Construction Corporation in coordination with the Planning Commission for this 
purpose. The Committee strongly feel that the  hilly, tribal and backward areas 
should be put on a separate footing and given some priority in the allocation of 

 39 
funds. They further stress that the criteria of 14% RoR should not be 
rigidly applied for such regions and the Ministry should take up this matter with 
the Planning Commission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"The concern expressed by the Committee has been noted. As regards 
connectivity to the capital cities of the N.E. States, it is mentioned that the two 
capital cities i.e. Guwahati (Dispur) and A gartala are already connected by the 
Railway line. Further works have been taken up for providing connectivity to the 
state capitals of Manipur, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland. The 
surveys for connecting Gangtok and Shillong have also been taken u p. The 
efforts are to connect all the capital cities of NE States as mentioned in Vision 
2020  document  released  by  Ministry  of  Development   of North  East  
Region.    9 Projects of the region have been declared as national projects and to 
provide necessary funds for implementation of these projects, proposal has been 
mooted for setting up Non -lapsable North East rail development fund. The North 
Frontier Railway is already having General Manager / Construction for 
implementation of these projects.  
The projects have already been taken up in other states also and most of 
the new line and many gauge conversion projects are on socio -economic 
considerations which are not financially viable. The cut off norm of 14% 
prescribed for FIRR is not being fulfilled by all such projects." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
 Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
The Committee note that while the total number of accidents have come 
down from 351 in 2002 -03 to 195 in 2006  07 the numbers ho wever, are 
significantly high especially in the case of level crossing gate accidents. The 
Committee has observed that there has been an increasing trend is such 
accidents since 2004 -05. The Committee have been informed that in order to 
address the problem  of level crossing gates accident in the current budget a 
programme of manning a larger number of unmanned level -crossing gates and 

 40 
also a programme of upgrading the standard of inter -locking of the 
existing gates has been started. The Committee were furth er informed that 
Railways would need funds of about Rs.1000 crores during the XI Plan period for 
manning and interlocking works of 1632 unmanned level crossings. They also 
note that in the Report of the Working Group on Railways Programme it has 
been state d that a consolidated policy is being formulated on Rail -Road level 
crossings to cut down the vulnerability and also that during the Eleventh Plan 
some enhanced and ingenuous standards will be put in place to save human 
lives. The Committee is concerned with the rising number of level crossing gates 
accidents and desire that the Railways should take urgent measures for the 
manning of unmanned level crossings and construction of ROB/RUB as well as 
other technological measures to increase the safety of Road/R ail users. They 
also desired to be apprised of the final policy being formulated as stated in the 
Report of the Working Group for Railways Programme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"The number of unmanned level crossing accidents and their percentage 
to the total accidents since 2003-04 is as under:  
Year 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2007-08 
Apr. to 
Oct.07 
2008-09 
Apr. to 
Oct.08 
Total 
Accidents 
325 234 234 195 194 121 105 
Unmanned 
Level 
Crossing 
Accidents 
86 65 65 72 65 45 39 
Unmanned 
Level 
Crossing 
Accidents 
(in %) 
26.46 27.78 27.78 36.92 33.51 37.19 37.14 
 
          From the above, it would be seen that although the percentage of 
unmanned level crossing accidents has increased, their absolute number has 
remained in the same range except for the year 2006 -07. However, this is 
equally worrying for Railways. As most of them are caused due to the negligence 
of road users, Public awareness programs are undertaken regularly for educating 

 41 
road users for observing safe practices while negotiating unmanne d level 
crossings. Publicity campaigns are periodically launched through various media 
such as quickies on television, slides, newspapers, street plays, etc. Joint 
ambush checks with the involvement of civil authorities are also conducted. As 
the traffic densities go up, such level crossings are being progressively manned 
on their qualifying the manning criteria.  
However, there has been delay in manning of unmanned level crossings 
primarily due to the following reasons: 
(a) Delays taking place in creation of posts of gate keepers and finalization of 
recruitment process of Gangman/Gatekeepers to man the unmanned level 
crossings. 
(b) Delays taking place in finalization of tenders due to lack of response, and 
or high rates and finalization of the tender award keeping within the 
prescribed procedures, norms etc. for tender finalization. 
(c) Delays taking place in obtaining approval of Commissioner of Railway 
Safety for manning of unmanned level crossings. 
Zonal Railways, as a special measure, have also been aske d to sanction 
Limited Height Subways costing upto Rs. 50 lakh and normal height sub -ways 
costing upto 1.25 crore on single line and Rs. 1.50 crore on double line wherever 
technically feasible so that number of unmanned level crossings can be reduced. 
Emphasis is also being given to close down sparsely used unmanned level 
crossings suggesting their merger with another level crossing/Road Over 
Bridge/Road under Bridge in the close vicinity with the cooperation of civic and 
local bodies. 
Measures to take up works of ROBs/RUBs 
The policy adopted in vogue for construction of ROBs/RUBs as under:  
(i)  During laying of new tracks and upto 10 years thereof Road Over/Under 
Bridges are provided at such locations where necessitated and demanded 
by the State Government  concerned as an accommodation work at the 
cost of the Railways. 
(ii) After expiry of 10 years of laying of tracks ROBs/RUBs are provided in lieu 
of existing busy level crossings on cost sharing basis if traffic density at 
level crossing reaches at one lak h Train Vehicle Unit (A unit obtained by 

 42 
multiplying the number of trains to the number of road vehicles passing 
over the level crossing within 24 hours) otherwise on deposit terms. In 
both conditions the proposal have to be sponsored by the State 
Government concerned duly fulfilling certain preliminary pre -requisites 
required under extant rules with undertaking to bear their share of cost, 
closure of level crossing on completion of Road over/under bridge and 
advance action taken for acquisition of land required for approaches etc. 
(iii) Private entrepreneurs are attracted to invest their precious resources on 
construction of ROBs/RUBs under BOT (Built, Operate and Transfer) 
concept in lieu of which they are offered to levy toll on ROB or utilize the 
space underneath commercially for a specified period of 10 years or so. 
(iv) The BOT concept has further been modified under PPP (Public Priviate 
Partnership) scheme under which the work will be taken by the private 
party in clusters and viable gap funds to the e xtent of 40 percent will be 
arranged by the Railways and the State Government concerned." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
The Committee note that the Railways have prepared a Corporate Welfare 
Safety Plan (CWP) with an objective to pay special attention towards 
maintenance and improvement of staff quarters with particular emphasis on 
substandard quarters lacking basic amenities. They also note that the CWP works 
proposed by the Zonal Railways are sanctioned in the Annual Works Programme. 
The Committee however, regret to note that these works are not being executed 
timely. They desire that the works under the CWP should be completed in time 
bound manner and adequate funds be provided for the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"Railways have prepared a Corporate Welfare Plan (CWP), not Corporate 
Welfare Safety Plan as stated above, with an objective to pay special attention 
towards maintenance and improvement of staff quarters with particular emphasis 
on substandard quarters lacking basic amenities. Efforts are always made to 

 43 
provide adequate funds for works under CWP, however this is subject to 
the over all ceilings limit regarding availability of funds for Plan Head 51 (Staff 
Quarters) and Plan Head 52 (Staff Amenities). Efforts are also made to execute 
all the works under these Plan Heads, including the works under CWP in a time 
bound manner, however, execution of works are subject to various factors 
including those which are beyond Railways control. 
 The recommendation has been noted and Railways have been advised to 
execute the works under CWP in a time bound manner." 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/2  
dated 23.02.2009]  
 

 44 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL   - 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                    T.R. BAALU, 
02 December, 2009                              Chairman, 
11 Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Railways 

 45 
 
APPENDIX I  
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29 th October, 2009 from 1100 hours 
to 1235 hrs. in Committee Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI T. R. BAALU -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3.  Shri K. Bapiraju 
4.  Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
5.  Shri Pralhad Joshi 
6.  Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
7.  Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
8.  Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
9.  Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
10.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
11.  Shri Umashankar Singh  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12.  Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
13.  Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
14.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
15.  Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
16.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
17.  Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
18.  Shri N. Balaganga 
19.  Shri K.E. Ismail 
20.  Shri Abani Roy 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Deputy Secretary 

 46 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the officers who 
had come to attend the meeting.  Thereafter, the Chairman mentioned about the 
collision of Goa Express train and Mewar Express train on 21 st October, 2009 in 
which at least 22 persons were killed and about 26 persons were injured.  The 
Committee expressed their profou nd sorrow on the unfortunate incident and 
observed silence for a while as a mark of respect to the departed souls. 
 
3. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx    
 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on Action 
Taken by Government on the re commendations contained in 40 th Report of 
Standing Committee on Railways (14 th Lok Sabha) on 'Review of Plan 
Performance and 11th Five Year Plan Projections'.  With respect to the 
recommendation para No. 1.7 the Committee desired to have an electronic 
presentation by the representatives of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on 
the Contract Management System prevailing in Indian Railways.  The Committee 
approved the other recommendations made in the draft report with some 
modifications as given in Annexure – II. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 47 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
 
 
xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
   

 48 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
AMENDMENTS/MODIFICATIONS MADE IN DRAFT REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (15TH LOK SABHA) ON ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN 40 TH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE RAILWAYS 
(14TH LOK SABHA) ON 'REVIEW OF PLAN PERFORMANCE AND 11 TH FIVE YEAR PLAN 
PROJECTIONS' 
 
Sl. Page Para  Line  Additions/Modifications 
No. No. No.  No. 
1 2 3  4   5 
 
 
1. 9 1.16   7  Add the word 'socially' before 'backward  
Areas' 
 
2. 12 1.19  8  Add the following new sentence after the  
words  'level crossings.' -   
'The Committee desire to know the total 
number of unmanned level crossings in 
various zones.' 
     
Last line Add – 'within the fixed t ime frame ' after 
the word 'expedited.'  
  
3. 13 1.22  8  Add  'except tourist and heritage sites and  
priority to be given to commercially 
viable lines' before the words 'into broad 
gauge'  
      
 
 
 

 49 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 19th November 2009, from 1500 Hrs. 
to 1610 Hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI T.R. BAALU  - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Shri K. Bapiraju 
4. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
5. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
6. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
7. Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
8. Smt. Shatabdi Roy 
9. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
10. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
11. Chaudhary Lal Singh 
12. Shri Umashankar Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
14. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
15. Shri N. Balaganga 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   -  Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 50 
 
xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and official s to the 
sitting of the Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee considered the following 
draft Reports and adopted the same: 
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 40 th Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways on 'Review of Plan Performance 
and 11th Five Year Plan Projections'; and 
 
(ii)  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports and 
present the same to Parliament. 
 
 
4. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
 
 
5. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
 
 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
       

 51 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 40th REPORT        
(14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘REVIEW OF PLAN PERFORMANCE AND 11TH FIVE 
YEAR PLAN PROJECTIONS’  
 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations               17 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by            10  
the Government (Vide recommendations/observations) 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13 and 16 
 
Percentage of total          58% 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not   02 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies 
Para Nos. 5 and 9 
 
Percentage of total          12% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of    05 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
Para Nos. 3, 10, 14, 15 and 17 
 
Percentage of total             30% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final     
replies of Government are still awaited  
NIL 
 
Percentage of total             NIL 
 
 
  
 