 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD)  
 
 
  
                PROTECTION AND SECURITY OF RAILWAY 
PROPERTY AND PASSENGERS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/ Shravana, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  
(2009-10) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
   8 

 SCR NO. 155 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2009-10) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
         MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
       (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PROTECTION AND SECURITY OF  
RAILWAY PROPERTY AND PASSENGERS 
 
 
 
 
    Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.08.2010 
 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.08.2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/ Shravana 1932 (Saka) 
 
                     (i) 

 CONTENTS  
  PAGE 
 PART – I  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………………………………… (iii) 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………… (v) 
REPORT……………………………………………………………………………………… 1 
Chapter-I Introductory……………………………………………………..…… 1 
Chapter-II Railway Land……………………….………………………….……... 3 
 Sensitive Stations…………………………………………....…..… 6 
 Integrated Security System…………………………….………… 8 
 
Accident Relief Medical Equipment Van (ARME), 
Accident Relief Train (ART)…………………….…………….…… 9 
 Accident Analysis..………….…………………….……….…….…. 10 
 Cause-wise Failure Analysis………….………………………… 11 
 Accidents on Account of Track Maintenance Work……… 13 
 
Steps Taken to Protect the Workers/Gangman on Track 
Maintenance Job…………………..…………….……..………….. 13 
 Measures Taken to Reduce Derailments of Trains…..…. 14 
 Level Crossings……………………………………….…….……… 15 
 Blowing off of Railway Tracks……………….…….…………… 16 
 Signalling………………………………… …………………………… 18 
 Safety Measures.………………………….………………………… 19 
 Global Positioning System (GPS)………………………….…. 22 
 Technology Mission for Railway Safety (TMRS)…………. 23 
 Railway Protection Force (RPF)………………………………… 24 
 Weapons, Bullet Proof Jackets…………………………………. 25 
 Drug Laced Food Related Cases………………………………. 27 
 
Protection of Senior Citizens, Physically Challenged  
& Lady Passengers…..……………………………………………… 29 
 PART – II  
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 31 
 APPENDIX  
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on  
11.02.2010, 15.03.2010, 29.06.2010, 30.06.2010, 20.07.2010, 
03.08.2010 and 18.08.2010 ……………………. …………………………………… 47 
 (ii)  

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
 
Shri T. R. Baalu     - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa  
3. Shri Kameshwar Baitha (Palamau)   
4. Shri K. Bapiraju  
5. Smt. Rajkumari Chauhan  
6. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome  
7. Smt. Maneka Gandhi  
8. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi  
9. Shri Pralhad Joshi  
10. Dr. Nirmal Khatri   
11. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe  
12. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel  
13. Shri Rudramadhab Ray   
14. Smt. Shatabdi Roy  
15. Smt. Sushila Saroj  
16. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia   
17. Shri Gopal Singh Shekawat   
18. Chaudhary Lal Singh  
19. Shri Umashankar Singh  
20. Shri Lalji Tandon   
21. Dr. Girija Vyas  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
23.  Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
24.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
25.  Vacant* 
26.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
27.  Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28.  Vacant* 
29.  Vacant# 
30.  Shri K.E. Ismail 
31.  Shri Abani Roy 
 
 
* Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi and Shri Ambeth Rajan retired on 04.07.2010  
# Nomination of Shri N. Balaganga was changed w.e.f. 15.07.2010 to Standing  
Committee on HRD 
(iii) 

  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar - Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2009 -10), having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Eighth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Railways on „Protection and Security of Railway 
Property and Passengers‟. 
 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board) on 11.02.2010, 15.03.2010, 29.06.2010, 30.06.2010, 20.07. 2010 and 
03.08.2010. The Committee also took oral evidenc e of representatives of Ministry  of 
Law and Justice, Ministry of Urban Development on 15.03.2010 and Ministry of Home 
Affairs on 20.07.2010. 
 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 
18.08.2010. Minutes of the related sittings are given in appendix to the Report.  
 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Boar d), Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Law and Justice 
and Ministry of Home Affairs  for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the 
material and information which the Committee desired in connection with the 
examination of the subject. They would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the valuable assis tance rendered to them by officials of Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;   T.R. BAALU 
 20 August, 2010 Chairman, 
 29 Shravana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
 (v) 

 
 
2 
 
REPORT 
 
PART I 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
The Indian Railways Vision Statement 2020 spells out:- 
“Indian Railways shall provide efficient, aff ordable, customer -focused and 
environmentally sustainable integrated transportation solutions.  It shall be a 
vehicle of inclusive growth, connecting regions, communities, ports and centres 
of industry, commerce, tourism and pilgrimage across the country.  The reach 
and access of its services will be continuously expanded and improved by its 
integrated team of committed, empowered and satisfied employees and by use 
of cutting-edge technology.”  
 
1.2 Notwithstanding this vision outlined by the Indian Railway s, the issue of 
protection and security of Railway property and passengers continues to be a crucial 
concern which needs urgent coordinated action.    
 
1.3 It goes without saying that the Indian Railways is the lifeline of the nation.  But 
when the life of  passengers and the property of the Railways themselves become a 
casualty in the wake of accidents, etc., it is a cause of worry which should warrant 
serious introspection.  Statistically speaking, the behemoth, i.e., the Indian Railways, is 
one of the wor ld‟s largest networks with over 64,000 route kilometer of route length, 
employing around 1.4 million regular employees that catered to the needs of over 6900 
million passengers and lifted 833 million tons of freight traffic during the year 2008 -09.  
Keeping in view the aforesaid statistics, there has to be constant and continuous 
monitoring of safety aspects so as to augment protection and security of Railway 
property and passengers.  Globally, India is an economic force to reckon with, excelling 
in the fie ld of Science and Technology, various Engineering disciplines, Information 

 
 
3 
 
Technology and Space Science; in spite of this, the Indian Railways have been found 
wanting in making use of our advancements in these fields to strengthen the safety and 
security of the Railway network.  Efforts and endeavours at modernization and a far -
sighted policy have not been commensurate with our capabilities and with the needs of 
the time.  Routine announcements during the presentation of the Railway Budget to 
introduce more new trains on the already saturated track system have often resulted in 
compromising safety standards, leading to the perception that no study has been 
undertaken by the Railways to examine the feasibility at ground level whenever any 
such new train is an nounced.  That being so, it is high time that the utmost priority 
should be accorded for the protection and security of Railway property and passengers 
to enable the Railways to achieve the targets they themselves have set, and compete 
with the best globally so as to provide world class railway services.   
 
1.4 In the year 2001, 2007 and 2008, the Railways had set up a Committee on 
Railway Security, Composite Security Planned Committee and Committee to Draw 
Integrated Security System, respectively.  Accordi ng to the written replies furnished by 
the Railways, the recommendations of these Committees are under various stages of 
implementation.  During the coming years, keeping in view the burgeoning economy, 
the Railways would be called to haul more goods and c arry more passengers which will 
definitely put tremendous strain on the existing Railway system.  As such, the Railways 
should accord the highest of priority to protection and security measures to ensure 
smooth, safe and timely operations throughout the length and breadth of the country.   
  
1.5 In the light of this, the Report of the Committee touches upon some important 
aspects of the protection and security of Railway property and passengers, including 
safety measures, sensitive stations, accident analysis, the role of the Railway Protection 
Force (RPF), protective gears and weaponry for RPF personnel, etc.  
 

 
 
4 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RAILWAY LAND  
 
  The Indian Railways have very extensive infrastructure in the country.  Over the 
years, the Railways have been acquiring land for its operations.  Today, they have more 
than 4.31 lakh hectares of land under their control.  During evidence, the Committee 
desired to know whether the railway land is a property of the Railways or not.  The 
Member Staff, Railway Board, stated as under: 
 
“After your directive and suggestion that land should also be included as a 
property, then we deliberated in the Board and the eviction Act was deliberated 
upon because that has been issued by the Ministry of Urban Development.  We 
discussed the issue with them and finally we discussed with the Ministry of Law.  
Both the Ministries were not in agreement.  They were saying that there will be 
contradictions if we include the land as property in the RPUP Act.  That is why 
the Ministry of Law has gi ven in writing also their opinion that this is not 
desirable.” 
 
2.2 The Committee further desired to know the manner in which the Railways will 
secure the land under them if that land is not included as property.  The Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) replied as under:   
"...let us consider that the RPF Act is not there.  We are maintaining the land 
records with the railways and as rightly observed by the hon. Member, once the 
land is purchased by us, it becomes our property in the record also and we are  
maintaining the records.  After maintaining the records, there are a couple of 
things which we do.  One is that we have inspectors to look into encroachment 
when it is there.  There is an encroachment register which we maintain. 
If encroachments take place, they try to remove it.  If there are pressures and if 
the man does not get out of it, then case is filed against him under the Public 

 
 
5 
 
Premises Eviction Act.  In some places, there are some constructions also.  There 
are some sort of permanent encroachments also.  We have also boundary pillars.  
If you have been travelling by train, you can see red pillars on the boundaries 
which we put on the railway land so that no trespassing is allowed.  Recently, 
instructions have also been issued that wherever we ha ve lands, where they are 
isolated, there are also boundary walls or pillars on the corners, after 
ascertaining from the records.  Despite all these efforts, encroachments do take 
place.  We have had encroachments in the past and we have been evicting the 
encroachments.  We are taking the help of the Public Premises Eviction Act.  We 
are authorized to give magisterial powers to our own officers.  All the land 
records are being reconciled and are being digitized so that we do not lose the 
land records.  In so me places we have got old land records.  There have been 
some difficulties in reconciling the records.  As you will see, we have a system 
and we are following the procedures." 
2.3 The Committee desired to know the views of the Ministry of Urban Development  
and the Ministry of Law and Justice.  The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Law and 
Justice, clarified as under: 
“xxx  the expression railway property is different in section 2 clause (d) of RPUP 
1966.  It is as under: 
"Railway property includes any goods , money, valuable security or animal 
belonging to or in the charge or possession of the railway administration.‟ 
The scope of the Act is only for consolidating the amending of the law relating to 
unlawful possession of railway property.  Definition of rail way property does not 
contain the land belonging to the railway administration.  That is covered under 
the Railway Act, 1989.  As rightly pointed out, if anybody is unauthorisedly 
occupying any railway land action by the Estate officer to evict the person under 
the Public Premises (Eviction of unauthorized occupation) Act 1971 is resorted to.  
That is the present position." 

 
 
6 
 
2.4 The Chairman, Railway Board, further clarified that the Railway land and the land 
of other Central Government Departments are dealt  with under the Public Premises 
Eviction Act.  So, since the Railways is also a Central Government Department, it will 
have to be dealt with under the same provisions.  Otherwise, if the land is property of 
the Central Government or any State Government, t hen theft of the land under RPUP 
Act should be dealt with under the criminal law whereas it is dealt with under the civil 
law at present. 
2.5 The representative of the Ministry of Urban Development stated before the 
Committee that the Public Premises Evict ion Act, 1971 covers all the Central 
Government properties, including land, building, any encroachment, unauthorized 
occupation, etc.  Railways are also one of the Government Ministries/Departments; so, 
they are also covered. 
2.6 The Committee then desired  to know the reasons for having a separate Railway 
Act, 1989. The representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice informed the 
Committee that “the Railway Act deals with land acquisition for railway purposes.  It is 
one of the chapters there.  Chapter IV  A deals with land acquisition for special railway 
projects.  Land related to Railways is governed under the Railway Act and eviction of 
unauthorized occupants as in the case of other Government property eviction is under 
general laws, that is the Act of 1 971.  He further stated that the 1971 Act is 
administratively the concern of the Ministry of Urban Development.  Every Ministry and 
Department is authorized to appoint an Estate Officer under Section 3 of the Act. 
2.7 The representative of the Ministry of Urban Development informed the 
Committee that Section 11 of the Public Premises Eviction Act, 1971 defines and 
provides for criminal offence if anybody is found an unauthorized occupant of public 
premises.  It is punishable with imprisonment and fine. 
2.8 The Committee further desired to know the name of the Department which 
would take cognizance of any such complaint and go for a report and then take up the 
matter to the court.  The representative of the Ministry of Urban Development stated 

 
 
7 
 
that the Estate  Officers concerned who are nominated and notified by the respective 
Department and Ministries have to take action.  If there is a railway land, the Ministry of 
Urban Development does not come into the picture.  It is the State Government officer 
or the Railway Ministry which takes up.  The law is common.  It is not that the Urban 
Development Ministry is removing encroachments all over the country. 
 
SENSITIVE STATIONS  
2.9  With the increase in the incidents of terrorist activity, arson and militancy, the 
Railway Stations become the prime target of anti -social elements.  The Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board), in their written reply, informed the Committee that based on 
the recommendation of a high level committee comprising of officers from NSG, Delhi 
Police, CISF, RPF, Railways and the Ministry of Home Affairs, the fol lowing 202 Railway 
Stations had been identified as Sensitive Stations: 
Sl. Zone Name of Stations 
1 CR 
 
 
Mumbai Area 
Bhusawal, Nasik Road, Manmad, Chalisgaon, Jalgaon, Akola, 
Murtijapur, Badnera, Nagpur, Pune, Miraj     
Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminal (Main line & Suburban), Dadar, 
Kurla, Lokmanya Tilak Terminus, Thane & Kalyan    
2 ER 
Kolkata Area 
Malda, Bardhaman, Asansol, Durgapur,    
Sealdah, Kolkata(T), Bidhannagar, Majherhat, Ballygunge,  
Dum Dum, Howrah   
 
3 Kolkata 
Metro  
Dum Dum Jn, Belgachia, Shyambazar, Sovabazar, Girish 
Park, Mahatma Gandhi Road, Central, Chandni Chowk, 
Esplanade, Park Street, Maidan, Rabindra Sadan, Netaji 
Bhawan, Jatindas Park, Kalighat, Rabindra Sarobar, 
Tollygunge, Kudghat, Bansdram, Naktala, Garia Bazar, Birji 

 
 
8 
 
(Previous Pranab Nagar) New Garia    
4 ECR Dhanbad, Mughalsarai, Patna Jn., Rajendra Nagar, Muzzafar 
Pur, Samastipur, Raxaul   
5 ECoR Puri, Cuttack, Bhubaneshwar, Vishakapatnam  
6 NR 
 
 
 
 
 
Delhi Area 
Lucknow, Varanasi, Faizabad, Ayodhya, Srinagar, Badgam, 
Anantnag, Jammu Tawi, Udhampur, Amritsar, Jalandhar, 
Ludhiana, Ambala, Saharanpur,  Kalka, Bathinda, 
Chandigarh, Patiala, Bareilly, Moradabad, Haridwar, 
Chakkibank, Brijbehra, Panjgam, Awantipura, 
Kakapore, Pampore, Rajwansher,  
New Delhi, Delhi Main, H.Nizamuddin, Shahdara, Tilak 
Bridge, Sarai Rohilla, Delhi Cantt., Shivaji Bridge, Anand 
Vihar, Ghaziabad 
7 NCR Agra, Mathura, Jhansi, Kanpur, Allahabad   
8 NER Lucknow, Gorakhpur, Chapra   
9 NFR Guwahati, Dimapur, New Jalpaiguri, Diphu, Lumding, 
Maibong, Katihar, Kishanganj, Siliguri, Kokrajhar, New 
Tinsukia, Simalguri, Jorhat Town, Mariani, Furkating, 
Dibrugarh 
10 NWR Jaipur, Ajmer, Bikaner, Jodhpur  
11. SR Trivandrum, Ernakulam, Coimbatore, Madurai,  Calicut, 
Tiruchirapalli, Mangalore, Chennai Central, Chennai Egmore, 
Beach,  Mamblam, Tambaram, Basin Bridge, Tiruvallur 
12 SCR Secunderabad, Hyderabad, Tirupati   
13 SER Kharagpur, Ranchi, Tatanagar, Chakradharpur, Rourkela, 
Jharsuguda, Bokaro, Puruliya, Adra, Muri, Midnapur   
14 SECR Bilaspur, Raipur, Gondia   
15 SWR Bangalore, Yaswantpur, Mysore   

 
 
9 
 
16 WCR Bhopal, Itarsi    
17 WR 
Mumbai Area 
Surat, Vadodara, Godhra, Ahmedabad, Ujjain  
Church Gate, Marine Drive, Charni Road, Grant Road, 
Mumbai Central , Mahalaxmi, Lower Parel, Elphiston Road, 
Dadar, Matunga Road, Mahim, Bandra Local, Bandra 
Terminus, Khar Road, Santa Kruz, Vile Parle, Andheri, 
Jogeshwari, Goregaon, Malad, Kandivali, Borivali, Dehisar, 
Miraraod, Bhayander, Nayagaon, Basairoad, Nalasupara , 
Virar, Palghar, Boisar, Dahanuroad    
 
INTEGRATED SECURITY SYSTEM 
2.10  The Committee wanted to know whether there is any proposal with the Ministry 
of Railways for introducing an integrated security system consisting of luggage scanner, 
metal detectors, dog squads and CCTVs, and if so, the stations where such system is 
working satisfactorily.   
2.11 The Ministry replied that for the first time, an Integrated Security System had 
been approved and included in the Works Programme 2009 -10 at an estimated co st of 
Rs. 353 crore to strengthen the surveillance mechanism over 202 sensitive and 
vulnerable stations of the Indian Railways.  The system consists of the following four 
broad areas – 
(a) Internet Protocol (IP) based CCTV surveillance system  
(b) Access control  
(c) Personal and baggage screening system 
(d) Bomb Detection and Disposal System.  
2.12 General Managers of the Zonal Railways have been directed to ensure 
implementation of the system by the end of 2010. 
 

 
 
10 
 
ACCIDENT RELIEF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT VAN (ARME), ACCIDENT REL IEF 
TRAIN (ART) 
2.13  The Committee felt that railway relief reaches accident sites quite late, thereby 
failing to provide the much need medical succour during emergencies.  They desired to 
know the action plan for Disaster Management system in place to mo ve in a speedily 
and coordinated manner to accident sites for evacuation, extrication of victims, crowd 
management and transporting the victims to hospitals.  The Ministry of Railways, in 
their written reply, informed the Committee as under:   
"The ARTs/AR MEs are located at a distance ranging from 200 to 300 kms. 
approx. away from each other. This is based on availability of manpower and 
existing facilities where staff works in normal situations, eg. C&W sick line, loco 
shed, etc. These can cover a distance  of 100-150 kms. approx from each side. 
The ARMEs are used for immediate Medical relief and evacuation of the seriously 
injured to the nearest bigger hospitals of the State Govt., private hospitals and 
also the Railway hospitals. The ARMEs are mini -hospitals on wheels which have 
facilities for minor surgeries in mini operation theatre.  They have medicines, 
blankets, eatables, drinking water and life saving surgical equipment, etc.  
Even in normal circumstances with 20 -30 minutes time for turning out of the  
ARME and 45 -60 minutes for ART, the time to travel to the site ranges from 2 
hrs. to 4 hrs. approx. However, during the „Golden hour‟, we are dependent on 
the local resources, including district hospitals, private hospitals, etc. for medical 
relief. These resources have been included in the Disaster Management plan of 
Railways.  
With the promulgation of a Disaster Management Act in 2005 now it is 
mandatory that all Ministries and Departments of the Central Government and 
State Governments will extend their  resources to jointly provide relief, rescue, 
mitigation, etc." 

 
 
11 
 
2.14 The Committee desired to know the number of accidents that had occurred on 
account of ongoing track maintenance work, the details of the measures taken to 
protect the workers/gangmen and the measures taken to reduce derailment of trains.  
The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), in their written reply, informed the Committee 
as under:   
 
ACCIDENT ANALYSIS 
2.15  According to the information supplied by the Indian Railways, there has been a  
continuous reduction in the number of train accidents over the last 10 years as 
indicated in the Table below: 
Safety Performance in last 10 years: 
Year Collisions Derail 
ments 
LC 
Accidents 
Fire Misc. Total Acct./ 
MTKm*
* 
1999- 00 20 329 93 21 -    463 0.65 
2000-01 20 350 84 17 2    473 0.65 
2001-02 30 280 88 9 8    415 0.55 
2002-03 16 218 96 14 7    351 0.44 
2003-04 9 202 95 14 5    325 0.41 
2004-05 13 138 70 10 3     234 0.29 
2005-06 9 131 75 15 4     234 0.28 
2006-07 8 96 79 4 8     195 0.23 
2007-08 8 100 77 5 4     194 0.22 
2008-09 13 85 69 3 7 177 0.20 
**Accidents per million train kms 

 
 
12 
 
2.16 This could be achieved by the concerted efforts of IR for timely replacement of 
the over -aged assets, adoption of suitable technologies for upgradation and  
maintenance of Track, Rolling Stock, Signalling & Interlocking systems, Safety Devices 
and Inspections at regular intervals to educate the staff for observance of safe 
practices. 
CAUSE-WISE FAILURE ANALYSIS 
2.17 Failure of Railway staff and other than Rai lway staff constitutes the major cause 
of accidents, followed by sabotage. There has been a continuous reduction in failure of 
equipment being the cause of accidents as seen in the Table below: 
CAUSES 2000-01 200-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008- 09 
Failure of 
Railway Staff 
293 248 186 161 119 120 85 87 73 
(61.9%) (59.8%) (53) (49.5%) (50.9%) (51.3%) (43.6%) (44.8%) (41.2%) 
Failure of Other 
than  Railway 
staff 
109 103 118 107 78 86 84 81 75 
(23%) (24.8%) (33.6%) (32.9%) (33.3%) (36.8%) (43%) (41.8%) (42.4%) 
Failure of 
equipment 
33 24 18 18 14 8 9 9 - 
(7%) (5.8%) (5.1%) (5.5%) (6%) (3.4%) (4.6%) (4.6%) - 
Sabotage 
 
19 14 10 18 4 5 8 7 13 
(4%) (3.4%) (2.9%) (5.5%) (1.7%) (2.1%) (4.1%) (3.6%) (7.3%) 
Miscellaneous 19 26 19 21 19 15 9 10 16 
(4.1%) (6.2%) (5.5%) (6.4%) (8.1%) (6.4%) (4.6%) (5.2%) (9%) 
Grand Total 473 415 351 325 234 234 195 194 177 
 
2.18 Safety Performance of IR for the period 1 st April to 24 th November, 2009, 
Category-wise break-up of accidents is as follows: 
Type of Accident 1st Apr to 24th Nov, 2008   
(2008-2009) 
1st Apr to 24th Nov, 2009 
(2009-10) 

 
 
13 
 
Collisions 06 06 
Derailments  55 49 
Manned Level Crossing 
Accidents 
02 04 
Unmanned Level Crossing Accidents 46 39 
Fire incidents 02 02 
Miscellaneous 04 00 
Total 115 100 
 
This shows a substantial reduction in the number of consequential accidents over 
the corresponding period of the previous year.  
Cause-wise analysis of the accidents for the period Apr to 24 th Nov 2009 is as 
follows: 
CAUSES Apr to 24th Nov 08 Apr to 24th Nov 09 
Failure of Railway Staff 44 42 
(38.3%) (42%) 
Failure of Other than  Railway staff 55 44 
(47.8%) (44%) 
Failure of equipment 0 1 
(0%) (1%) 
Sabotage 
 
11 8 
(9.6%) (8%) 
Miscellaneous 5 5 
(4.3%) (5%) 
Grand Total 115 100 
 

 
 
14 
 
ACCIDENTS ON ACCOUNT OF TRACK MAINTENANCE WORK 
2.20 The Safety Directorate maintains a break -up of the cause -wise analysis of the 
consequential train accidents. If the cause of an accident is attributed to more than one 
department, the „accident‟ is equally distributed to those concerned departments. 
Accidents on account of failure of Engineering maintenance staff, combination of staff 
(engineering account) and track failures during the past 3 years are as follows: 
S.No. Accidents 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
i) Direct Engg. Maintenance Staff 28 26 18 
ii) Combination of staff, Engg account 4.8 6.5 0.5 
iii) Track failure 5 3 0 
 
2.21 Further, the number of Consequential Train Accidents which took place at 
Worksites during construction of track or track maintenanc e during the last three years 
and current year upto November 2009 are as follows: 
 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
(upto Nov) 
No. of Train Accidents at Worksites 02 04 02 04 
 
STEPS TAKEN TO PROTECT THE WORKERS/GANGMEN ON TRACK 
MAINTENANCE JOB: 
2.22 Ample safety instructions for carrying out works safely at work spots have been 
issued from time to time. Routine inspections are also being carried out constantly by 
various field officials to ensure compliance of these instructions. Detailed instructions 
already exist in Indian Railway Permanent Way Manual on precautions while working on 
track.  

 
 
15 
 
2.23 RDSO/Lucknow and IIT/Kanpur are conducting tests for two devices: one for 
warning gang-men and trackmen working on the railway tracks and other for warning 
road users at manned & unmanned LC gates through SIMRAN.  
MEASURES TAKEN TO REDUCE DERAILMENTS OF TRAINS 
2.24 Derailment of trains is another concern area for the Indian Railways.  As such, 
the Indian Railways have taken a number of steps to check derailments of  trains.  They 
are as follows:- 
(i) Replacement of over -aged tracks, bridges, S&T gears and Rolling 
Stock. 
 
(ii) Gradual phasing out of derailment prone 4-wheeler tank wagons. 
 
(iii) Reduction in Thermit welded joints on rails, use of SPURT Cars for Rail 
flaw detection. 
 
(iv) Track Circuiting for enhanced safety in train operations. 
(v) Introduction of Self Propelled Accident Relief Medical Van (SPARMV) 
and Wheel Impact Load Detector (WILD). 
 
(vi) Replacement of majority of wooden/cast iron/steel sleepers with 
sturdier concrete sleeper s. 60kg/52 kg rail sections are being 
progressively used. 
 
(vii) The specifications of rail steel have been upgraded and are in 
conformity with the International Union of Railways (UIC) 
specifications. 
 
(viii) Railways have been asked to procure modern digital SRT/DRT 
machines for ultrasonic flaw detection (USFD) of rails to detect hidden 
flaws in rails. 
 
(ix) For better and improved maintenance, mechanized maintenance of 
track with the help of state -of-the-art on –track machines are being 
introduced progressively. As on 01/0 4/09, nearly 78% of Broad Gauge 
track is under mechanized maintenance. 
 
(x) Provision of Thick Web Switches in place of conventional overriding 
type of switches is being planned for important routes in phased 
manner. 

 
 
16 
 
 
(xi) Gause Face Corner (GFC) testing is being d one along with normal 
USFD testing of Rails on track on higher axle load routes. This will help 
in timely detection of GFC defects developing in Rails. 
 
LEVEL CROSSINGS 
2.25 Accidents at level crossings account for a major part of rail accidents.  The 
Railways are seized of the matter and the following steps are taken by them to check 
such accidents:-   
Public awareness campaigns to educate the road users of level crossing gates by 
issuing paid advertisements in local newspapers.  
Nukkud nataks at villages, dhabas, schools/colleges near LC gates are organized 
to educate in passing unmanned level crossing gates.  
Making awareness among the Railway staff and road users by counseling and 
displaying posters at level crossings and station premises regarding preca utions to be 
taken at unmanned level crossings.  
Improvement to level crossing gates:  
1. Manning of level crossing gates.  
2. Interlocking of level crossing gates.  
3. Closure of unmanned level crossing gates with the consent of local people.  
4. Closure of manned le vel crossing gates by providing ROB, RUB and limited 
height subways/RUBs.  
5. Improvement to road surfaces at level crossings.  
6. Provision of speed breakers on the approach roads.  
7. Provision of whistle boards on railway lines.  
8. Provision of sign boards for alerting the road users.  
Other measures: 

 
 
17 
 
1. Intensive training/counseling/refresher courses and periodical medical 
examination of safety category staff are conducted regularly to ensure their 
competency and suitability for the job.   
2. Safety seminars are organiz ed to inculcate safety consciousness among the 
staff.  
3. Advertisements are published and displayed at important stations; also 
announcements are made through the Public Announcement System that 
passengers are not to carry inflammable articles.   
4. Frequent in spections and ambush checks are conducted to ensure 
implementation of Safety Rules.  
5. Person-to-person contact at village level to educate road users is being done 
on regular basis.  
6. Track circuiting work, provision of panel interlocking, block proving by a xle 
counter.  
7. Priority given in rail renewal to fracture prone areas and also 90 R rail 
stretches.  
BLOWING OFF OF RAILWAY TRACKS 
2.26 The Committee observed that incidents of blowing off of railway tracks, train 
hijacking as well as running away with engines have been increasing in the country and 
wanted to know the measures contemplated by the Railways to check such incidents.  
The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), in their written reply, informed the Committee 
as under: 
"A statement showing the numbe r of incidents of blowing off railway tracks by 
anti-social elements in last four years are as under: 

 
 
18 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
2.27 According to Entry No. 2 of the State List of the Constitution of India,  „Police‟ 
(including Railways and Village Police) is a State subject. Prevention of crime, 
registration of cases, their investigation and maintenance of law and order in Railway 
premises as well as on running trains are, therefore, the statutory responsibi lity of the 
State Police, which they discharge through the Government Railway Police (GRP) of the 
State concerned. Although the security of track, bridges and tunnels are the 
responsibility of State Police, but the following measures are being taken by the  
Railways: 
1. Close liaison is maintained with State Police and Government Railway Police 
for taking suitable preventive measures in vulnerable sections of affected States 
to avert incidents of anti-social attacks. 
2. Periodical meetings with State Adminis trations of affected States and police 
authorities are being held regularly by Railway Administration to formulate 
effective joint strategy to combat the problem of anti-social elements‟ attack over 
Railway system. 
3. Sharing of intelligence between Railway Protection Force, Government Railway 
Police and Intelligence Bureau of affected States have been given priority to 
combat terrorist attacks on Railways. 
4.  Gangmen patrolling of track is intensified during specific threats." 
They further informed the Committee as under:  
Years No. of incidents reported 
2006 16 
2007 23 
2008 11 
2009  26 

 
 
19 
 
"Crisis Management Plan (CMP) 2009 for Ministry of Railways has already been 
approved. Para 1.4 part (ii) deals with terrorism/security related crisis.  
“Railways will take all necessary steps/actions for crisis concerning its properties  
and Ministry of Home Affairs will step into lead role…….”   
2.28 A Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for flow of information and 
coordination/liaison with civil police and GRP in various crisis situations has been drawn 
by the Group constituted by Min. o f Home Affairs. A compendium of SOPs has been 
circulated to Zonal Railways for information and necessary action.  
 
SIGNALLING 
2.29 Signalling plays a very vital role not only in promoting safety and minimizing the 
impact of human error in train operations,  but also in enhancing line capacity through 
the introduction of modern signalling systems.  Indian Railways have undertaken 
technological upgradation in signalling.  The Committee is aware of the crucial role of 
signalling in the Indian Railways.  Therefo re, the Committee wanted to be apprised of 
the system and its functionality.  The Railways informed as under:- 
 To reduce human dependence for verification of clearance of track, track 
circuiting of the complete station section has been taken up.  Track cir cuiting 
has been done at 26221 locations up to March 2009. 
 Further, to increase efficiency and enhance safety in train operations, modern 
signaling systems with Route Relay/Panel/Electronic Interlocking along with 
Multi Aspect Colour Light Signalling in re placement of over -aged 
Mechnical/Multi Cabin Signalling System have been provided progressively.  
4250 stations have been provided Route Relay/Panel/Electronic Interlocking 
as on March, 2009.  

 
 
20 
 
 Interlocking of level crossing gates is being done on the volum e of road-cum-
rail traffic to enhance safety.  The interlocking of 8,903 level crossing gates 
has been completed upto March, 2009.  
 Provision of telephones of manned level crossing gates improves safety as it 
enables gatemen to communicate with the station  master.  Telephonic 
communication has already been provided at 16,641 level crossing gates upto 
March, 2009.  
 Block Proving Axle Counters (BPACs) are being provided progressively which 
helps in automatic verification of complete arrival of train and incre ase line 
capacity by reducing block closure time.  1929 Block Sections have been 
provided with Block Proving Axle Counters upto March, 2009.  
 For improving reliability and visibility of signals, outdated filament type signals 
are being replaced by long lif e highly durable LED signals.  2695 stations 
have been provided with LED signals upto March, 2009.    
SAFETY MEASURES 
2.30 The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) has the following system in place for 
safety and protection of Railway Property and Passengers:- 
 Contribution to Depreciation Reserve Fund (DRF) has been enhanced to 
Rs.7,800 crore in 2009 -10 so that renewal/rehabilitation of over aged assets 
is taken care of through internal sources.  
 Safety Action Plans were continuously implemented with a view  to reduce 
accidents caused by human errors.  A multi -pronged approach with focus on 
introduction of newer technologies, mechanization of maintenance, early 
detection of flaws, etc. to reduce human dependence in the first place, along 
with upgrading the sk ills of the human resources were the prime drivers for 
accident prevention.   
 Periodical safety audits of different Divisions by multi -disciplinary teams of 
Zonal Railways as well as inter -railway safety audits were conducted on 
regular basis.  During 2008 -09, 49 internal safety audits and 19 inter -railway 
safety audits were carried out.  In addition, inspections were also conducted 
by Railway Board teams.  

 
 
21 
 
 Four multi-disciplinary safety teams have been constituted in March, 2009 at 
Board‟s level to audit t he safety preparedness on Zonal Railways.  Each team 
has been allocated four zones.   
 Training facilities for drivers, guards and staff connected with train operation 
have been upgraded.  Disaster Management Modules have also been 
upgraded.  During 2008 -09, 98,334 safety category employees attended 
refresher training.   
 Anti Collision Device (ACD) to prevent cases of collisions and to minimize the 
extent of damage caused by collisions has been installed on 1,736 route 
kilometres of North-east Frontier Railway.  Improved ACD system with revised 
specifications is planned to be installed for trial on Southern, South Central 
and South Western Railways on 1,600 route kilometres. 
 Fouling Mark to Fouling Mark track circuiting on the entire „A‟, „B‟, „C‟ „D‟ and 
„D Special‟ routes, where permissible speed is more than 75 kilometres per 
hour, was completed.  Further, Fouling Mark to Block Section Limit (straight) 
track circuiting and Fouling Mark to Home Signal (straight) track circuiting 
was completed on „A‟, „B‟ and „C‟ routes.   
 Last vehicle check by Axle Counter 9BPAC was introduced in 257 Block 
Sections.   
 Auxiliary Warning System to prevent cases of signal passing at danger has 
been working on Mumbai suburban sections.  Trials for an improved version 
of this system are under progress on North Central and Southern Railways.   
 Two pilot projects on Train Protection Warning System (TPWS) have been 
sanctioned, out of which one has been commissioned in May 2008 on 50 
route kilometers of Southern Railway.  The work on the second pilot project – 
Delhi-Agra section (200 route kilometers) – is in progress.  
 To improve reliability and visibility of signals, filament type signals are being 
replaced by long life highly durable LED signals.  
 To improve maintenance and reliabili ty of assets, efforts to eliminate fish -
plated joints by welding single rails into long welded rails were continued.  
During relaying/construction of new lines/gauge conversion, long welded rails 
are laid on concrete sleepers.  Turnouts are also being impr oved 
systematically.   
 There has been a progressive increase in the use of Tie Tamping and ballast 
cleaning machines for track maintenance.  Also, sophisticated Track 
Recording Cars, Ultrasonic Flaw Detectors, Self Propelled Ultrasonic Rail 
Testing Cars, O scillograph Cars and Portable Accelerometers are being used 
progressively.   

 
 
22 
 
 Modern bridge inspection and management system has been adopted, which 
include non -destructive testing techniques, under water inspections, fibre 
composite wrapping, mapping unkno wn foundations and integrity testing, 
etc. 
 Based on threat perceptions due to adverse weather conditions or external 
interference, patrolling of railway track, including night patrolling, is carried 
out at vulnerable locations regularly.   
 To minimize effe cts of accidents, coaches with Center Buffer Coupler (CBC) 
are being manufactured with anti-climbing features.  
 Design of passenger coaches with features of crashworthiness to absorb most 
of the impact energy leaving the passenger area unaffected has been 
developed and coaches are being manufactured accordingly. 
 Derailment prone 4 -wheeler Tank Wagons are being progressively phased 
out.  
 To educate road users about safety at unmanned level crossings, publicity 
campaigns are periodically launched through diff erent media like quickies on 
television, cinema slides, posters, radio, newspapers, street plays, etc.  
 Joint ambush checks with civil authorities are conducted to nab erring road 
users under the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and the Indian 
Railways Act, 1989. 
 Construction of 38 ROBs/RUBs was completed during 2008 -09.  102 
ROBs/RUBs have been further sanctioned for 2009-10. 
 Adequate powers were delegated to Zonal Railways to sanction Limited 
Height Subways, wherever feasible, with a view to red uce the number of 
unmanned level crossings.  632 level crossings were identified for 
replacement by Limited Height Subways, out of which 516 were sanctioned in 
2008-09.  Against the target of 160 Limited Height Subways in 2008 -09, 65 
have been completed during the year.  
 Unmanned level crossings are also being progressively manned in a need 
based and planned manner.  During 2008 -09, 259 unmanned level crossings 
were manned.  
 Improved material for electrical fittings and fixtures such as MCB, light 
fittings, terminal boards, connectors, etc., are being used progressively.  
 Intensive publicity campaigns to prevent the travelling public from carriage of 
inflammable goods are regularly undertaken.     
 Coaches are being provided with fire retardant furnishing material.     
2.31 Safety devices installed in the diesel locomotive for the safety of the locomotives 
and engine are as under: 

 
 
23 
 
Safety devices installed for the safety of engine are as under: 
1. Low water switch 
2. Oil pressure switch 
3. GFOR 
4. Over speed trip assembly 
5. Safety Auxiliary Relay 
6. Dead man Relay 
7. Engine Run Relay 
8. Ground Relay 
 
Safety devices installed for the safety of Locomotive are as under: 
1. Head light/flasher light 
2. Marker light 
3. Cattle Guard 
4. Rail Guard 
5. Hand Brake 
6. VCD 
7. Fire Extinguisher 
8. Set of wooden wedges 
9. PECP set                                                                          
 
GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM (GPS) 
2.32 The Committee further desired to know the installation of the Global Positioning 
System to know the exact location of trains.  The Ministry  of Railways (Railway Board) 
informed the Committee as under:- 
"Telecom Directorate has developed a Pilot Project called SIMRAN using the 
Global Positioning System (GPS) to know the exact location of trains. A brief on 
Simran is as under –  
This pilot project was one of the 14 sanctioned under Technology Mission 
for Railways Safety (TMRS) in 2003. 
The project is jointly funded by Ministry of Railways and Ministry of 
Human Resource and Development.  

 
 
24 
 
This project is envisaged to provide On -line train running information to 
public/passengers through Internet, SMS through mobile phones, Interactive Voice 
Response System (IVRS), Station Display Boards, Call Centers and to passengers on 
board. The SIMRAN platform has been designed to communicate the on -board loco 
diagnostic parameters to central location for monitoring health of loco.  
Field trials of this project have been conducted. It is working successfully since 
December 2006 on 18 rakes of Rajdhani Express, 6 rakes of Shatabdi Express, 14 rakes 
of MEMUs, 3 ra kes of Pushpak Express and 1 rake of New Delhi -Sealdah Duronto 
Express trains.  
RDSO/Lucknow and IIT/Kanpur are conducting tests for two more devices; one 
for warning gang -men and trackmen working on the railway tracks and other for 
warning road users at manned and unmanned LC gates though SIMRAN.  
A Committee headed by Shri Sam Pitroda is also examining the ways and means 
to use ICT (Information Communication Technology) to improve safety of trains." 
 
TECHNOLOGY MISSION FOR RAILWAY SAFETY (TMRS) 
2.33 The Committee was aware of the Pulse Laser Technology which can cut through 
haze and fog and provide clear vision to the engine driver which can counter accidents.  
The Committee desired an update on the issue.   
The Railways replied: Under Technology Mission f or Railway Safety (TMRS), a 
project on fog vision has been undertaken by RDSO in association with IIT/Kanpur.  
Under this project, Lab experiments with CO2 laser along with scanner arrangement 
have been carried out by IIT/Kanpur to form the image of an obj ect under foggy 
condition.  However, Prototype using this technology for field trials is still not 
developed.  Discussions have been held by RDSO with Central Mechanical Engineering 
Research Institute (CMERI), Durgapur, to identify additional/alternative t echnology to 

 
 
25 
 
enhance results received from arrangement already experimented, which may lead to a 
working solution.    
 
RAILWAY PROTECTION FORCE (RPF) 
 
2.34 Indian Railways are the largest organization in the country with mostly open, 
easily accessible and unguarded assets.  These include equipment such as signaling, 
track, open line installations, overhead wires, yards, stations towers, etc. which are 
prone to theft and vandalism.  With various threats to the law and order situation in 
different parts of the country, including terrorism, sabotage, Naxalism, etc., the railway 
operations and safety get seriously affected. 
2.35 The responsibility for providing security on Indian Railways has been assigned to 
two agencies, i.e. the Government Railway Police (GRP ) which works under the 
respective State Governments and the Railway Protection Force (RPF) which works 
under the Ministry of Railways (Government of India).  With amendments in the 
Railway Act and the RPF Act in the year 2003, the RPF has taken over escor ting of 
important mail/express trains along with the GRP. At present, RPF personnel are 
escorting 1257 mail/express trains in the vulnerable and terrorist affected areas to 
combat crime.  Previously, the domain of the RPF was to protect Railway property only. 
2.36 In addition to the Government Railway Police, 69,302 Railway Protection Force 
personnel have been providing protection and security to Railway property and 
passengers.  The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), in their written reply, informed 
the Committee that earlier 973 posts were created for RPF/RPSF personnel in the year 
2008.  Recruitment against these posts has already been completed.  5134 posts have 
again been created in non -gazetted rank recently and the process of recruitment has 
also started.  Another proposal for creation of 4008 posts to cater to the needs of the 
newly set up 3 PRSF Batallions and 12 Mahilla coys is under consideration for sending 
to the Ministry of Finance for approval.  Recruitment of Sub -Inspectors has been 
completed.  834 Sub -Inspectors have been posted recently to various zones after 

 
 
26 
 
successful completion of training.  Recruitment for the posts of Constables in North 
Frontier Railway, South Central Railway is under process.  Recruitment in West Central 
Railway has been completed. 
 
WEAPONS, BULLET PROOF JACKETS 
2.37 During on-the-spot study visit, the Committee was surprised to learn that even 
after the November 2008 terrorist attack at the CST in Mumbai, the procurement of 
essential life saving bullet proof jackets , bullet proof helmets and assault weapons like 
the AK -47, etc. by the Indian Railways have not been completed.  The Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) informed the Committee that RPF and RPSF personnel are 
already provided with sophisticated modern weap ons: pistol and revolver (19249), 
Carbine (8668), INSAS rifle (5662), SLR (4033) and LMG (357).  So far as availability of 
AK 47 is concerned, the present holding is only 100. These have been distributed 
among sensitive zones and Battalions.  An indent has  been placed with the Ministry of 
Home Affairs for procurement of 3,000 AK 47 rifles for use by RPF/RPSF personnel. It 
has been included in the centralized tender.  However, centralized tender is reported to 
be delayed due to some technical problems.  When asked the reasons for the delay in 
procurement of these safety items, the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), during 
evidence, informed the Committee as under:  
"About AK -47, indent to MHA was sent on 17.09.2007.  This is an indent for 
3,000 AK-47 weapons. This tender was opened on 4 th June, 2008. After that, a 
number of meetings have been organised and our representatives have attended 
these meetings for technical scrutiny. The matter is not still finalised by MHA.  
We wrote to them on 25 th February, 20 09 giving the urgency of the tender 
getting finalised. We have also indicated that we are in need of 3,000 more AK -
47 rifles, and if that could be added into this tender, it would be well and good.  
Otherwise, the total requirement is of 6,000 AK -47.  The MHA has replied on 8 th 
April, 2009 that the tender will be finalised very early. They have also indicated 

 
 
27 
 
that once this tender is finalised, our request for another 3,000 rifles will be 
examined and attended to by the MHA.  But it is not yet finalised." 
 
2.38 The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) further informed that: 
"there have been meetings.  We have regular meetings with the MHA, in which 
we have been raising this issue.  In every meeting, we are reviewing this issue of 
AK-47.  About the bullet pro of jackets, these are being indented as per the 
DRDO specifications.  These specifications are well laid out by the DRDO.  In fact 
our first lot of bullet proof jackets were procured by the DRDO and given to us.  
This is the first time we are now procuring  after having got the experience of 
DRDO procured jackets, and we take them for actual hits by bullets on a range.” 
2.39 The Committee then decided to call the Ministry of Home Affairs and desired to 
know the reasons for the inordinate delay in the procure ment of AK -47 rifles for the 
Ministry of Railway.  The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, informed the Committee 
as under: 
"…One of the reasons was, earlier a tender had been issued, and the Members 
would be aware of it.  Last year, there was a sting ope ration by one of the TV 
channels which showed the irregularities in the testing procedure in one of the 
DRDO laboratories as a result of which we were forced to cancel that tender on 
the 15th March, 2010 this year.   We opened a new tender and we decided t o go 
in, without going in for a global tender, for a short notice tender on 19 th March, 
2010 and the tender was opened on 19th May, 2010. 
The technical bid was sent for valuation on 19 th May, 2010.  One of the 
documentations was completed on 4 th June, 2010 .  The trials of the weapons 
were started on 19th June and completed on 16th July, 2010.  I am glad to inform 
that the Technical Committee will open the bids and take a final decision on the 

 
 
28 
 
bids today itself.  We hope to place the supply orders by the 26 th of July this 
year." 
 
2.40 The Committee further desired to know the steps taken by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to protect the railways and the passengers during the Commonwealth Games 
which could be targeted by terrorists and anti -national elements.  Th e Secretary, 
Ministry of Home Affairs, inter -alia stated that so far as the Commonwealth Games are 
concerned, the Ministry is taking adequate precautions and the entire security plan is 
put into operation.  When the Committee wanted to know whether the DG of the RPF is 
part of the security discussions, the Secretary, Ministry of Home replied in affirmative 
and stated that the Railways will be associated in all security related meetings. 
DRUG LACED FOOD RELATED CASES 
2.41 When asked for the steps taken by th e Indian Railways to check the increasing 
incidents of drug laced foods offered to passengers by anti -social elements who 
subsequently robbed the passengers, the Ministry of Railway (Railway Board), in their 
written reply, stated as under: 
"A statement showing the cases of drugging reported over Zonal Railways during 
the last four years is as under:- 
Years No. of incidents reported 
2006 699 
2007 877 
2008 812 
2009 957 
 
It is pertinent to mention that maintenance of law and order is a State 
subject and the power to investigate in IPC crimes are vested with Police.   

 
 
29 
 
Registration and detection of IPC crimes is the responsibility of the 
Government Railway Police which works under the control of the State 
Governments and as such, Ministry of Railways has to depend largely on them 
for control of such crimes over the Railways. In spite of the above fact, Railways 
is supplementing the efforts of the State Governments in controlling crime on the 
Railways by deploying Railway Protection Force staff to escort train s for security 
of passengers.  
1. Exhibiting leaflets in the coaches cautioning passengers not to accept 
eatables from strangers. 
2. Making frequent announcements through public address 
system/megaphones and CCTV cautioning the passengers at the originatin g 
stations and major junctions so that the traveling public do not fall prey to such 
unscrupulous elements.  
3. Sharing of Special Intelligence and Crime Intelligence between RPF and 
GRP is being done at all levels. 
4.  Periodic High Level co -ordination Me etings with Government Railway 
Police and Local Police are being conducted to analyze such crime on Railways 
with a view to take suitable preventive measures." 
2.42 When asked about the problems faced by the victims in registering FIRs in such 
cases in moving trains, the Member, Staff, informed the Committee as under: 
"In fact, already a high powered committee had examined this issue which was 
appointed by the Ministry of Home Affairs and they had given the 
recommendations.  Those recommendations are under examination by the 
Railways as well as the Ministry of Home Affairs.  Exactly this issue has been 
addressed as to what should be the arrangement between the GRP and the RPF; 
how GRP should gradually get reduced its presence in the Railway premises and 
how RPF should take over.  This exactly is the recommendation on this very 
topic." 
2.43 The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) further added that: 

 
 
30 
 
"There are no two opinions on this.  That is the ideal solution.  But there are 
many factors why this is not ge tting implemented or this is not getting 
recommended.  There is State resistance also." 
 
PROTECTION OF SENIOR CITIZENS, PHYSICALLY CHALLENGED & LADY 
PASSENGERS 
 
2.44 For ensuring safe, secure and protected journey for senior citizens, 
unaccompanied physically challenged persons and lady passengers, the Railways have 
in trains reserved accommodation, a combined quota of two lower berths per coach 
earmarked in sleeper, AC 3 tier and AC 2 tier classes for the following category of 
passengers when traveling alone :-  
i)  Senior Citizens;  
ii)  Female passenger 45 years of age and above; and  
iii)  Pregnant women. 
(II)  Besides there is already a provision in Computerized Passenger Reservation 
system (PRS) to provide lower berths automatically to male passengers of 60 years and 
above and female passengers of 45 years and above, subject to the availability of lower 
berths at the time of booking of tickets.  
(III)  After departure of the train, if there are vacant lower berths available in the 
train, and if any seni or citizen, who has been allotted upper/middle berth, approaches 
for allotment of vacant lower berths, the Conductor/Train Ticket Examiner (TTE) has 
been authorized to allot the vacant lower berth to them making necessary entries in the 
chart. 
 
 

 
 
31 
 
2.45 They further informed the Committee that they have issued policy guidelines for 
allowing free round-the-clock service of battery operated cars at the platforms of major 
railway stations for carrying physically challenged and old age passengers for boarding 
trains. 

 
 
32 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
1. The Committee fully understands the onerous responsibilities that lie 
with the Indian Railways.  It has, among other things, the mammoth task in 
its hand of providing protection and security to Railway property and 
passengers.  This becomes all the more important in the context of the huge 
Railway network that we have in the country, the number of passengers 
travelling on the Indian Railway System daily, the property, including land, 
and other infrastructure which are in  the custody of the Railways, etc.  The 
safety and security of both passengers and Railway property should be of 
paramount concern for the Railways.  While the Railways have undertaken 
various measures to protect both property and passengers, it is observe d 
that much more needs to be done proactively by the Railways to adequately 
safeguard the travelling public and preserving property that belongs to the 
Railways.  Remarkable advancements in communication technologies can be 
optimally utilized by the Railwa ys to facilitate this process.  What is 
important is that the Railways should take concrete steps, urgently, to 
integrate various processes so as to ensure the safety of passengers and 
property in an effective manner.  The Committee‟s recommendations are 
intended to help the Indian Railways to discharge their duties to the nation 
in a more professional manner. 
2. While examining the Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) 
Amendment Bill, 2008, the Committee had found that Section 2 of the 

 
 
33 
 
Railway Property (U nlawful Possession) Act, 1966 defines „railway property‟ 
as „goods‟, „money‟, or „valuable security‟ or „animal‟, belonging to, or in the 
charge or possession of a Railway administration.  The Committee was 
informed that the Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966 does not 
include immovable property.  The Committee was of the opinion that there is 
some ambiguity in the definition of „Railway Property‟ in the Act which is 
required to be rectified.  They, therefore, recommended to the Government 
to b ring a comprehensive Bill before Parliament widening the definition of 
„property‟ in the Act, giving more powers to the Railway Protection Force 
relating to the security and property of passengers as well, and devising a 
better coordination mechanism among  the State Police, the Government 
Railway Police and the Railway Protection Force. 
3. The Railway network and property are often threatened by anti -social 
and anti -national elements, terrorists, etc.  The Committee found that 195 
stations in the Indian Rai lway network have been identified as sensitive 
stations.  An integrated security system has been approved and included in 
the „Works Programme 2009 -10‟ at an estimated cost of Rs.344.31 crore.  
While conducting on -the-spot study tours of some of these stat ions, the 
Committee was dismayed to find that the said integrated security system has 
not been effectively put in place.  Except for an odd baggage scanner, door 
frame metal detectors and the presence of a handful of RPF personnel in the 
stations, the Comm ittee did not find any noticeable change in the way the 

 
 
34 
 
security system functions.  Most of the equipment like hand held metal 
detectors, door frame metal detectors (DFMD) and X -Ray baggage scanners 
were not in operation or where they were functioning, the  personnel 
manning the scanners were not equipped to properly scan the luggage.  In 
some places, the DFMD was not at all functioning.  The Committee did not 
find a single hand held metal detector in most of the stations they visited; 
even at those stations  where they were in use, the same was operated in a 
casual manner, without any professionalism warranted for a serious 
operation.  The same was noted in the case of door frame metal detectors as 
well.  In most of the stations, the metal detectors were inst alled in the 
middle of the door, thus letting the passengers enter the station from the 
sides, without going through the door frame metal detectors.  No RPF 
personnel was seen to be manning the metal detectors.  Wherever RPF 
personnel were operating the DF MD, they too failed to stop any passenger 
and frisk him/her so as to find whether he/she was carrying any contraband 
or fire arms or lethal weapons which could threaten the safety of passengers 
and Railway property.  However, the Committee was happy to not e that the 
use of closed circuit television (CCTV) was being handled in a professional 
manner, thereby building up confidence in the minds of the travelling public.    
4. The Committee noted that X -Ray baggage machines were being 
installed by the Indian Ra ilways with much publicity.  In most of the cases, 
baggage scanners have been simply indented and the Committee was 

 
 
35 
 
informed that it would take some time to install the same.  The Committee 
recommend that a proper time frame should be laid for installation  of 
scanners.  The Committee also noted that baggage scanners failed to serve 
the purpose even where they were in operation.  Baggages were scanned in a 
non-serious manner and the personnel manning the scanner were unable to 
decipher from the monitor as to  whether any weaponry or explosive was 
being smuggled into the Railway Station premises.  In one particular station, 
the Committee directed an RPF personnel to place his pistol in a baggage and 
make it pass through the baggage scanner.  The RPF personnel w ho was 
monitoring the scanner failed to notice the handgun.  The Committee also 
found that there was no provision for putting any sticker in the scanned 
luggage to enable the RPF personnel to identify such scanned luggage.   
 
5. The Committee, therefore, r ecommend that the RPF personnel who 
man such sensitive equipment should be urgently given intensive training.  
They should be well -versed in handling the equipment, patiently and 
proficiently.  The staff should not only be vigilant but also have a professional 
approach considering the fact that the safety and security of passengers and 
Railway property are involved.  All scanned luggage should be properly 
secured with fluorescent sticker which can be seen from a distance to 
indicate that a particular piece of luggage has already been scanned/cleared.  
Baggages which have not been scanned/cleared, should be re -routed 
through the scanner.  The Railway Station authorities should ensure that 

 
 
36 
 
baggage scanners are spread out in two to three entry points so that th e 
passengers entering the station are not put to any inconvenience which can 
be caused if there is only one entry point.  To safeguard the safety of railway 
property and passengers, the Railway authorities must ensure that all items 
of luggage entering the Railway platforms are properly scanned.   
6. The Committee was deeply concerned that bullet -proof jackets, 
helmets, poly -carbonated lathis, shields, binoculars, fluorescent tapes, 
dragon search lights, etc., are still under procurement.  The Committee 
observed that for instance, under the Western Railways, while there are 
more than 800 railway stations, only 300 bullet -proof jackets are made 
available to the security personnel.  Such insufficient and inadequate 
provisions can seriously undermine safety and  security of both passengers 
and Railway property.  
7. The Committee reiterate that all requisite security related equipment 
should be procured within a specific time frame, without compromising on 
the quality of the product.  The quality of the bullet -proof jackets and 
helmets should comply with the strictest international norms to meet any 
eventuality.  It should offer confidence and a sense of security to the Railway 
Protection Force personnel who are using the same.  The Committee found 
that RPF/RPSF pe rsonnel are already provided with sophisticated modern 
weapons like pistols, carbine INSAS rifles, SLR and LMG, but only a handful 
of AK-47 rifles were available to the force.  On enquiry, the Committee was 

 
 
37 
 
apprised that indent for procuring 3,000 AK -47 rifles had been placed with 
the Ministry of Home Affairs, which is pending.  The Committee took a 
serious note of the matter and took evidence of officials of the Home 
Ministry.  The Committee was informed that by the end of July, 2010 orders 
for procuring the weapons would be placed.  The Committee wants that there 
should be no delay whatsoever in such matters, failing which the safety and 
security of passengers and property would be in seriously imperiled and 
compromised.    
8. The issue of upgradation of t echnology for signaling system presently 
in vogue in the Indian Railways is also a matter of worry for the Committee.  
The Committee was seriously concerned at the slow pace of 
modernization/upgradation of the signaling system.  The Committee, while 
on an inspection visit to the Indian Railway Institute of Signal Engineering 
and Telecommunication (IRISET) Secunderabad, had recommended that the 
faculty of the Institute should be sent abroad for refresher courses to enable 
them to understand the latest techno logy available there so that the Indian 
Railways can also consider infusing such technology in our system.  This 
would give a fillip to the Railways in upgrading their signaling system.  
9. The Committee was deeply concerned at the regularity with which ra il 
accidents were happending, leading to loss of many innocent lives, besides 
loss of invaluable property.  The Committee particularly noted with distress 
that there were several incidents of collisions of trains in the recent past.  

 
 
38 
 
The Committee are full y aware of the importance of the need to install Anti 
Collision Device (ACD) in trains so as to prevent such incidents in the future.  
In this context, the Committee felt that the pace of installing the ACD is still 
unsatisfactory for various reasons.  The  Committee, while appreciating the 
efforts of the Konkan Railway in installing ACDs, direct that the Railway 
Board should come out with a concrete strategy within six months in this 
regard after examining all issues involved and studying the best practices  
available.  In the interim, the Committee direct the Railway Board to apprise 
the Committee, every two months, of the progress made in this regard 
without fail.   
10. Unmanned level crossings are another problem area for the Indian 
Railways, and one of th e major causes of accidents.  In spite of various 
measures taken by the Indian Railways, level crossing accidents have 
continued to occur, that too frequently.  The Committee, during their 
interaction with the Central Railway, found that on a trial basis, the Central 
Railway authorities have painted the unmanned railway crossing in certain 
areas with bright colours so that the person trying to cross the unmanned 
crossing is able to judge the speed of the incoming train.  This initiative of 
the Central Railw ay has borne results and led to a drastic cut -down of the 
accident rate in the heavily populated areas.  The Committee, while 
appreciating the initiative of the Central Railway, recommend to the Indian 
Railways to take similar steps in other zones also so that accidents at 

 
 
39 
 
unmanned crossing may be checked, without any exorbitant expenditure.  
The Committee further direct that efforts should be made by the Railway 
Board to convert all unmanned crossings into manned level crossings in a 
time bound manner.  RUBs/ROBs should be constructed at unmanned level 
crossings expeditiously, more so, in rural areas, to prevent accidents.    If 
need be, more budgetary allocation should be made for these purposes every 
year.   
11. The Committee was informed that various rail way zones conduct mock 
drills on regular intervals to check the preparedness of their staff and 
officials, ancillary organizations like hospital authorities, fire brigade, etc.  
While appreciating the initiative of the Indian Railways, the Committee are 
of the view that during such mock drills, the Railways should invariably 
involve the general public and sensitize them as well, so that they become 
aware as to how to conduct themselves in any untoward situation.  Besides, 
the local administration, NGOs, civ il society organization etc. should be fully 
involved in the mock drills so that ordinary citizens get fully aware of the 
importance of safe practices during crisis situations.  Further, a display board 
should be prominently placed in every railway station  on which all important 
telephone numbers should be available in case of any emergency, including 
that of senior Railway and local administration, hospitals in the nearby 
vicinity of the railway station, etc.  The said hospitals should also be 
instructed to be fully equipped to meet any eventuality.    

 
 
40 
 
12. As regards positioning of Accident Relief Medical Vans and Accident 
Relief Trains (ARME & ART), the Committee was concerned at the slow 
response of the vans in times of accidents/emergencies.  The Committ ee 
found that it takes approximately 3 to 4 hours for the vans to reach the site 
of the accident.  The Railways rely more on local assistance thereby robbing 
the victims of immediate succour during the „golden hour‟.  The Committee 
recommend that ways and means should be found to ensure that the Relief 
Vans are at site within 2 hours.  If need be, more vans with all requisite 
medical facilities should be spread over various locations and dedicated 
teams of workers should be available 24 hours, 365 days, rea dy to be at the 
place of an accident within short notice.  Simultaneously, the Railways 
should be able to mobilize relief, rescue and medical assistance locally in an 
expeditious manner pending arrival of ARMEs and ARTs.  As mentioned 
earlier in the Report , display panels should prominently enumerate disaster 
management instructions/guidelines at every station.  In this context, the 
Committee recommend that the Committee should be apprised of the 
resources available, Zone -wise, for disaster management.  The  Committee 
further recommend that the Indian Railways “Trains At A Glance” which 
gives out the time table should also carry a section incorporating disaster 
management guidelines as applicable to the Railways.  Needless to 
emphasize, disaster management sh ould be given top priority in the Railway 
system so that all crisis situations can be properly tackled. 

 
 
41 
 
13. The Committee recommend that more fire arm simulators should be 
provided to train the officers for accuracy.  At present, only 9 such simulators 
are available to the RPF.  The Committee further recommend that at least 4 
simulators in each of the 12 zonal RPF training centres and the Jagjivam Ram 
RPF Academy, Lucknow, should be immediately provided.   
14. The Committee would also like to recommend to the Indian Railways to 
study the feasibility of launching their own „intelligence wing‟ as part of the 
RPF.  With the increasing number of incidence of sabotage, the home grown 
intelligence wing may be of immense help to the Indian Railways to address 
specific issues.  
15. The Committee was informed that there is a vacancy of 7135 personnel 
in RPF and efforts are being made to fill up the vacancies.  The Committee 
was further informed that the Railway Board had proposed the creation of 
21,000 posts out of wh ich only 5000 posts have been approved by the 
Government of India and they will be apportioned to various Zones of 
Railways by the Railway Board.  The recruitment is centralized.  The 
Committee noted with concern that keeping in view the vast area of 
operation of the Railways, 5000 posts may be inadequate.  Therefore, the 
Committee direct the Railway Board to take up the matter with the 
Government of India once again for creation of at least 15,000 additional 
posts.  Keeping in view the present security sce nario, adequate security 
personnel may be recruited at the earliest to man railway property and 

 
 
42 
 
passengers.  The Committee also feel that the Railway Board should create 
new posts only after all the vacant posts have been filled up.  Moreover, 
intensive training should be imparted to newly recruited RPF personnel and 
refresher courses may be introduced for officers/staff of RPF at regular 
intervals.  Inadequate training is one of the major causes that can lead to 
inadequate protection and security of Railwa y property.  The Committee 
were informed that recruitment and transfers/postings were made on a 
centralized basis and conducted from the Railway Board Headquarters.  In 
order to have a flexible approach, the Committee recommend that the 
General Manager sho uld be given adequate powers not only to recruit at 
zonal levels but also initiate transfers and postings on a „need basis‟. 
16. The Committee have found to their dismay that the Railways do not 
have their own fire fighting brigade.  The Committee were inf ormed that the 
local fire fighting brigade authorities provide necessary help in case of any 
accident.  The Committee was of the opinion that in the eventuality of any 
fire hazard at any Railway station, it will take some time for the local fire 
brigade to  reach the station, cutting through traffic jams which are very 
common near the entrance of railway stations, thereby losing much precious 
time.  If the Railways have their own fire brigade stationed within the 
precincts of the railway station, they will b e able to reach immediately to 
take appropriate action.  As such, the Committee feel that it may be useful 

 
 
43 
 
for Railway authorities to have their own fire brigade to meet any 
eventuality.     
17. The Committee found that the Indian Railways are still not ab le to 
provide foolproof security to passengers travelling on trains.  
Dacoity/robbery on running trains is a regular feature.  The Committee noted 
that such incidents not only erode the faith of passengers on the working of 
the Indian Railways, but put a q uestion mark on the whole security system.  
The Committee, therefore, direct that the Railways should ensure that 
adequate numbers of RPF personnel, properly armed, should be located in 
trains which pass through sensitive areas.  The local police should al so be 
alerted to meet any eventuality.  Moreover, the Railway Board should come 
out with a mechanism to facilitate lodging of FIR in a moving train, in case of 
theft, dacoity, etc., without putting the passengers into any inconvenience by 
forcing them to t erminate their journey.  The redressal of grievance of the 
aggrieved party should be foremost in the minds of the Railway Board.  The 
Committee direct that the Railway Board should apprise the Committee 
urgently of action taken in this regard.     
18. The Committee are of the opinion that not enough is being done for 
senior citizens, women passengers, differently abled passengers and sick 
passengers.  The Committee noted that the Bangalore Railway Station 
provides battery operated trolley for senior citizen s.  The Committee 
recommend that all the major stations in the metropolitan cities should 

 
 
44 
 
invariably have 4 battery operated trolley each to ferry senior citizens as well 
as sick and differently abled passengers.  For sick passengers, efforts should 
be mad e to provide special diet for them as is being done by the Konkan 
Railways.  Women passenger coaches should have RPF personnel manning 
the same.  As far as the differently abled passengers  are concerned, the 
Railways should study the facilities provided to  them in developed countries 
and adapt them to make their journey more comfortable.  Accessibility 
infrastructure should be developed for their benefit which should enable 
access not merely to the station/platform but also to the train.  If there are 
stairs in a station, lifts should be available so as to facilitate easy movement 
with wheelchairs.  The Railways should consider expeditiously innovatively 
designed coaches for the benefit of differently abled passengers which may 
be introduced starting with the major stations in the metropolitan cities.      
19. For the safety of passengers, and to check incidence of drug -laced food 
related cases, the Railway authorities should be more vigilant and make 
extra efforts to educate the passengers.  More awareness c ampaigns should 
be launched through various mediums, to apprise the passengers of the 
perils of accepting eatables from strangers.      
 
20. After having a series of discussions with the Members of the Railway 
Board, visits to various Zonal Railways and in teracting with the respective 
General Managers, the Committee felt that the Railways require immediate 

 
 
45 
 
decentralization of power to enable the Railways to perform more efficiently 
and effectively.  As per the present scheme of things, a majority of the 
decisions are taken at the Railway Board level.  More power is required to be 
entrusted to the General Managers at the zonal level to enable them to 
execute jobs in a time -bound manner.  It will also give them the much 
required flexibility in discharging thei r duties.  As the matter stands at 
present, it appears that the General Managers have to look up to the Railway 
Board housed in New Delhi for approval of even routine transfers/postings.  
The Committee observed that several important decisions get tangled in red-
tapism, leading to delay in taking expeditious decisions for the smooth 
working of projects.  Decentralization, which is the order of the day in most 
of the public sector undertakings, needs to be introduced in the working of 
the Indian Railways in a substantial way.  As such, the Railway Board needs 
to have a re-look at the present state of affairs. 
21. The Committee found that inadequate training is one of the major 
causes which leads to compromising on the protection and security of 
Railway property and passengers.  The Committee feel that most of the staff 
receive only routine training, and that too in a limited manner.  Not much 
emphasis is given on refresher and advanced level training programmes.  It 
seems that by trial and error method, the st aff gets accustomed to the job 
entrusted to them.  With the introduction of new equipment and gadgets in 
day-to-day operations, training is a must at the ground level to handle the 

 
 
46 
 
system in the proper manner.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
officers and staff should be provided intensive training at regular intervals 
followed by refresher courses.  Wherever needed, officers should be sent 
abroad for training and trained personnel from abroad should be brought for 
capacity building of officers in various Divisions of the Indian Railways.  The 
officers and staff should be made to undergo tests at the end of the training 
programmes to see the level of their participation/involvement.   
22. The Committee noted that the Loco Pilots work under very stre ssful 
conditions.  Breath analyser tests of the Loco Pilots should be conducted at 
regular intervals to ensure that when they are on duty, they are in their 
fittest mental and physical capabilities.  To reduce the physical and mental 
stress of Loco Pilots, they should be given adequate rest between duty shifts 
and comfortable accommodation should be provided to them.  Periodic 
medical check-up should be done on all Loco Pilots with special emphasis on 
physical fitness, eye test, etc.    
23. While visiting t he Diesel Loco Shed and Central Workshop at 
Tiruchirappalli, the Committee noted with concern that there was no full 
utilization of the assets of the Workshop.  It was felt that senior members of 
the Railway Board do not visit the premises regularly.  The Committee, 
therefore, direct the Railway Board to have a far -sighted policy not only to 
enhance the capacity of the Workshop but also to fully utilize the assets.  
Moreover, regular visits should be made by senior members of the Railway 

 
 
47 
 
Board which would k eep the authorities at the Loco Shed Workshop alert to 
their duties and responsibilities.  The Committee desire that the Railway 
Board should apprise the Committee periodically of such visits conducted by 
senior officers of the Railway Board and follow -up action taken in respect of 
the visits/findings.  
24. The Committee find that every year, during the Budget Speech, a 
number of new trains are introduced in a routine manner.  Yet, no efforts are 
being made to ensure that tracks are renewed to face the exce ss load.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that before new trains are announced, 
proper scientific study should be conducted by the Railways to assess the 
capacity of the system to sustain such excess load.  The Committee would 
like to reiterate that tr ack renewals should be given top priority by the 
Indian Railways.   
 
 
NEW DELHI T.R. BAALU 
20 August, 2010 Chairman, 
29 Shravana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 

 
 
48 
 
APPENDIX 
MINUTES OF THE  TWELFTH  SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 11 th February, 2010 from 1400 hours to                        
1520  hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI T. R. BAALU -  CHAIRMAN  
       MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Shri K. Bapiraju 
4. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
5. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
6. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
7. Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
8. Smt. Shatabdi Roy 
9. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
10. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
11. Shri Umashankar Singh  
12. Shri Lalji Tandon 
13. Dr. Girija Vyas 
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
15. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
16. Shri Ishwar Singh 
17. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
18. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
19. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
20. Shri K. E. Ismail 
21. Shri Abani Roy 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 

 
 
49 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
 
1. Shri S. S. Khurana  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex-officio 
Principal Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 2. Mrs. Sowmya Raghavan Financial Commissioner, Railways & Ex.-officio 
      Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
3. Sh. Rakesh Chopra  Member Engineering, Railway Board, & Ex.- 
Officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 4. Sh. Praveen Kumar  Member Mechanical, Railway Board, & Ex.- 
Officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 5. Sh. Sudesh Kumar  Member Electrical, Railway Board, & Ex.-officio 
      Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 6. Sh. A. K. Goyal  Member Staff, Railway Board, & Ex.-officio 
      Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 7. Sh. Vivek Sahai  Member Traffic, Railway Board, & Ex.-officio 
      Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
   
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and representatives of the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) to the sitting of the Committee.  Thereafter, the 
representatives of the Ministry of R ailways (Railway Board) briefed the Committee on 
the subject „Protection and Security of Railway Property and Passengers‟ and clarified 
the points raised by the Members.   
 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
     

 
 
50 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 15 th March 2010, from 1500 Hrs. to 1540 
Hrs. in Committee Room No. 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI T.R. BAALU  - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
4. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
5. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
6. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
7. Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
8. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
9. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
10. Shri Lalji Tandon 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
12. Shri Ishwar Singh 
13. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
14. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
15. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
16. Shri Abani Roy 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   -  Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  -  Deputy Secretary 
 

 
 
51 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
 
1.  Shri S.S. Khurana  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex -officio Principal 
Secretary to the Government of India 
 
2.  Smt. Sowmya Raghavan  Financial-Commissioner, Railways & Ex -officio 
Secretary to the Government of India  
 
3.  Shri Rakesh Chopra  Member-Engineering, Railways & Ex -officio 
Secretary to the Government of India  
 
4.  Shri Praveen Kumar  Member-Mechanical, Railways & Ex -officio 
Secretary to the Government of India  
 
5.  Shri Sudesh Kumar  Member-Electrical, Railways & Ex -officio 
Secretary to the Government of India  
 
6.  Shri A.K. Goyal  Member-Staff, Railways & Ex -officio Secretary to 
the Government of India  
 
7.  Shri Vivek Sahai  Member-Traffic, Railways & Ex -officio Sec retary 
to the Government of India  
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
 
1.  Shri N.K.N. Nampoothiry  Additional Secretary 
 
2.  Shri P.B. Singh  Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development 
 
1.  Shri R.C. Mishra  Additional Secretary 
 
2.  Dr. D. Suresh  Director of Estates 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of 
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), Ministry of Law & Justice and Ministry of 
Urban Development to the sitting of the Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee took 
oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministries on the subject 'Protection and 
Security of Railway Property and Passengers'.   

 
 
52 
 
3. The Chairman observed that the railway la nd is not included as the railway 
property as far as the RPUP Act was concerned and desired to know as to why the 
'Railway Land' could not be included in the definition of Railway Property in the Act. 
 
4. The representative from the Ministry of Law and Jus tice submitted that as per 
the RPUP Act, 1966, “Railway property includes any goods, money, valuable security or 
animal belonging to or in the charge or possession of the railway administration" and 
hence the scope of the Act is only for consolidating and amending the law relating to 
unlawful possession of railway property; definition of railway property does not contain 
the land belonging to the railway administration, but is covered under the Railways Act, 
1989.   If anybody is unauthorisedly occupying an y railway land, action by the Estate 
Officer to evict the person under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized 
Occupation) Act, 1971 is resorted to.   
 
5. The Chairman, Railway Board, stated that the railway land as well as the land of 
other Central Government Departments was dealt with under the Public Premises 
Eviction Act.  Since the Railways being a Central Government Department, the railway 
land will have to be dealt with the same provisions.   
 
6. The representatives from the Ministry of Urban D evelopment submitted that the 
Public Premises Eviction Act, 1971 covered all the Central Government properties, 
including land, building, any encroachment, unauthorised occupation, etc. and the 
Railways are also one of the Government Ministries/Departments.  
 
7. The Committee, however, felt that railway land should be included in the 
definition of Property under the RPUP Act, as already recommended in their 5 th Report 
which was presented in the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha on 09.12.2009, so that 
they themselves could protect their land from the encroachments and fast action could 
be taken by the Railways to remove any such encroachments.  There was, therefore, no 
change in the views of the Committee. 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
53 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29 th June, 2010 from 1600 hours to                        
1715  hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
        PRESENT 
SHRI T. R. BAALU  -  CHAIRMAN  
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
4. Dr. (Smt). Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
5. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
6. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
7. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
8. Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
9. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
10. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
11. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
12. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
13. Shri Umashankar Singh 
14. Shri Lalji Tandon 
15. Dr. Girija Vyas 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
17. Shri Ishwar Singh 
18. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
19. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
20. Shri N. Balaganga 
21. Shri Abani Roy 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 
 

 
 
54 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Sahai  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex-officio 
Principal Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 2. Mrs. Sowmya Raghavan Financial Commissioner, Railways &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 3. Sh. Rakesh Chopra  Member Engineering, Railway Board, &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
  
 4. Shri Sudesh Kumar  Member Electrical, Railway Board &  
      Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 5. Sh. A. K. Goyal  Member Staff, Railway Board, &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman congratulated Shri Vivek Sahai on his appointment 
as Chairman, Railway Board and welcomed him and other representatives of the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee, then, sought cl arifications on the observations made by the 
Members during their study visit to Mumbai, Hyderabad, Madurai, Tiruchirappalli and 
Chennai from 24 to 28 May, 2010 in connection with the examination of the subject 
"Protection and Security of Railway Property and Passengers". The representatives of 
the Ministry responded to the queries of the Members.  The discussion remained 
inconclusive.  
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
    

 
 
55 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH  SITTING  OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 30 th June, 2010 from 1100 hours to                        
1240  hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
     PRESENT 
SHRI T. R. BAALU  -  CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Shri K. Bapiraju 
4. Dr. (Smt). Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
5. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
6. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
7. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
8. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
9. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
10. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
11. Shri Lalji Tandon 
12. Dr. Girija Vyas 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
14. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
15. Shri Abani Roy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 

 
 
56 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Sahai  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex-officio 
Principal Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 2. Mrs. Sowmya Raghavan Financial Commissioner, Railways &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 3. Sh. Rakesh Chopra  Member Engineering, Railway Board, &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
4. Sh. Sanjiv Handa  Member Mechanical, Railway Board, & Ex.- 
officio  Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
5. Shri Sudesh Kumar  Member Electrical, Railway Board &  
      Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 6. Sh. A. K. Goyal  Member Staff, Railway Board, &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Chairman, Railway Board and other 
representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee sought further clarifications on the observations made 
by the Members during their recent visit to Mumbai, Hyderabad, Madurai, Tiruchirappalli 
and Chennai from 24 to 28 May, 2010 in connection with the examination of the subject 
"Protection and Security of Railway Property and Passengers".  The Committee decided 
to invite the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs to seek clarificatio n with 
regard to delay in procurement of security related equipments such as bullet proof 
jackets/AK-47 rifles etc. for Railways. 
  
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
57 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH  SITTING  OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20 th July, 2010 from 1100 hours to                        
1145  hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
     PRESENT 
SHRI T. R. BAALU  -  CHAIRMAN  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Shri K. Bapiraju 
4. Dr. (Smt). Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
5. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
6. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
7. Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
8. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
9. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
10. Shri Umashankar Singh 
11. Shri Lalji Tandon 
12. Dr. Girija Vyas 
RAJYA SABHA 
13. Shri Ishwar Singh 
14. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
15. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
16. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 

 
 
58 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
1. Shri G.K. Pillai   - Home Secretary 
2. Shri U.K. Bansal   - Special Secretary (MSA) 
3. Shri Dharmender Sharma  - Joint Secretary (IS) 
4. Dr. Kashmir Singh   - Joint Secretary (NM) 
5. Shri S. Suresh Kumar  - Joint Secretary (PM) 
6. Shri Sadakant   - Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Committee expressed their deep sorrow on the death of 
passengers in the New Cooch Behar -Sealdah Uttarbanga Express and the Bhagalpur -
Ranchi Vananchal Express collision a t Sainthia Junction in West Bengal on 19.07.2010.   
Thereafter, the Members and officers stood in silence as a mark of respect to the 
departed souls.  
 
3. The Chairman, then, welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, the 
Chairman, Railway Board and other representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) to the sitting of the Committee.   
 
4. Thereafter, the Members sought clarification from the Home Secretary regarding 
delay in procurement of AK -47 Rifles again st the projection of 6000 AK -47 rifles made 
by the Ministry of Railways and the Home Secretary clarified the position. 
 
5. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs for 
appearing before the Committee and informing the Committ ee on the issues related to 
the delay in procurement of AK-47 Rifles.  
  
The representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs then withdrew.    

 
 
59 
 
 
6. The Committee, then, held discussion with the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways and enquired about the train collision at Sainthia Station, West Bengal on 
19.07.2010.  The Chairman, Railway Board, narrated the sequence of events of the  
whole incident and the witnesses replied to the queries of the Members.  
 
7. The Committee further decided to seek clarification from the experts on the anti-
collision device being deployed in Konkan Railway in their next meeting.  It was also 
decided to call the representatives of the Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. in the 
meeting.  
  
The witnesses then withdrew.  
  
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
*****  
  

 
 
60 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING  OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 3 rd August, 2010 from 1700 hours to                        
1800  hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
       PRESENT 
SHRI T. R. BAALU  -  CHAIRMAN  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Shri K. Bapiraju 
4. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
5. Dr. (Smt). Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
6. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
7. Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
8. Chaudhary Lal Singh 
9. Shri Umashankar Singh 
10. Dr. Girija Vyas 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
12. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
13. Shri Ishwar Singh 
14. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
15. Shri Abani Roy 
 
        SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 

 
 
61 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Sahai  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex-officio 
Principal Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 2. Smt. Sowmya Raghavan Financial Commissioner, Railways &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 3. Shri Rakesh Chopra  Member Engineering, Railway Board, &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
4. Shri Sanjiv Handa  Member Mechanical, Railway Board, & Ex.- 
officio  Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
5. Shri Sudesh K umar  Member Electrical, Railway Board &  
      Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 6. Shri A. K. Goyal  Member Staff, Railway Board, &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
Representatives of Konkan Railway Corporation Limited (KRCL) 
 
1. Shri B.P. Tayal  Managing Director, Konkan Railway                     
Corporation    Ltd. (KRCL) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) and the Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Member, Electrical, Railway Board, made a power -point 
presentation on the Anti -Collision Device (ACD) being installed in the Indian Railways.  
The Chairman and Members sought clarification about the efficacy of the AC D system 
being developed.  The Committee also sought clarification from the MD, KRCL, about 
the efficacy of the ACD installed in the Konkan Railway.  The evidence was concluded.  
 

 
 
62 
 
4. The Committee, thereafter, discussed about the study tour programme and 
decided to undertake the study tour to Bangalore and Thiruvananthapuram from 
28.08.2010 to 30.08.2010 in connection with the examination of the subject “New 
Railway Recruitment Policy”. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 The Committee, then adjourned.  
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
63 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18 th August, 2010 from 1600 hours to                        
1730  hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
    PRESENT 
SHRI T. R. BAALU -  CHAIRMAN  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Shri K. Bapiraju 
4. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
5. Dr. (Smt). Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
6. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
7. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
8. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
9. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
10. Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
11. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
12. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
13. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
14. Shri Chaudhary Lal Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
15. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
16. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
17. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
18. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 

 
 
64 
 
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members and the officers to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee to ok up the items listed in the agenda for 
consideration:- 
 
A. Draft Report on „Protection and Security of Railway Property and 
Passengers' 
 
 The Committee considered the above Draft Report and adopted the same with 
some modification/alterations as indicated in the Annexure.  
 
B. XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
3. The Committee considered the above ATR and adopted the same without any 
modifications. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports after making 
consequential changes, if any, arising out of factual verification by the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) in case of Report at A and present the same to the House. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
 
 

 
 
65 
 
  ANNEXURE 
AMENDMENTS/MODIFICATIONS MADE IN DRAFT REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (15TH LOK SABHA) ON 'PROTECTION AND 
SECURITY OF RAILWAY PROPERTY AND PASSENGERS' 
Sl. 
No. 
Page 
No. 
Para 
No. 
Line 
No. 
Additions/Modifications 
1 2 3 4 5 
1 34 3 4 
(from 
below) 
For  ‘unauthorized item’ Read  ‘contraband or fire arms or lethal 
weapons’  
2 36 6 1 For  ‘found to its disappointment’ Read ‘was deeply concerned’ 
3 37 7 Last 
line 
For ‘in serious peril’ Read ‘seriously imperiled and compromised’ 
4 37 8 3 For ‘not satisfied’ Read ‘seriously concerned at’  
5 37 9 1 Replace ‘As regards t he Anti Collision Device (ACD) is concerned’ 
With ‘ The Committee was deeply concerned at the regularity with 
which rail accidents were happening, leading to loss of many 
innocent lives, besides loss of invaluable property.  The Committee 
particularly noted with distress that there were several incidents of 
collisions of trains in the recent past.  The Committee are fully aware 
of the importance of the need to install Anti Collision Device (ACD) 
in trains so as to prevent such incidents in the future.  In th is 
context’ 
6 38 9 At the 
end 
Add ‘In the interim, the Committee direct the Railway Board to 
apprise the Committee, every two months, of the progress made in 
this regard without fail’ 
7 38 10 1 For ‘another  major problem’ read ‘another problem’ 
8 38 10 2 After ‘Indian Railways ’ Add ‘and one of the major causes of 
accidents’ 
9 38 10 At the 
end 
Add ‘The Committee further direct that efforts should be made by 
the Railway Board to convert all unmanned crossings into manned 
level crossings in a time bound m anner.  RUBs/ROBs should be 
constructed at unmanned level crossings expeditiously, more so, in 

 
 
66 
 
rural areas, to prevent accidents.   If need be, more budgetary 
allocation should be made for these purposes every year’ 
10 38 11 5 For ‘should involve’ Read ‘should  invariably  involve’  
11 39 11 
contd.  
4 After ‘public’ Add ‘and sensitize them’  
12 39 11 
contd. 
At the 
end 
Add ‘Besides, the local administration, NGOs, civil society 
organization etc. should be fully involved in the mock drills so that 
ordinary citizens get fully aware of the importance of safe practices 
during crisis situations.  Further, a display board should be 
prominently placed in every railway station on which all important 
telephone numbers should be available in case of any emergency, 
including that of senior Railway and local administration, hospitals in 
the nearby vicinity of the railway station, etc.  The said hospitals 
should also be instructed to be fully equipped to meet any 
eventuality’ 
13 39 12 3 (from 
below) 
After ARTs Add ‘As mentioned earlier in the Report, display panels 
should prominently enumerate disaster management 
instructions/guidelines at every station.  In this context, the 
Committee recommend that the Committee should be apprised of 
the resources available, Zone -wise, for disaster management.  The 
Committee further recommend that the Indian Railways “Trains At A 
Glance” which gives out the time table should also carry a section 
incorporating disaster management guidelines as applicable to the 
Railways.  Needless to emphasize,’ 
14 42 17 At the 
end 
Add ‘Moreover, the Railway Board should come out with a 
mechanism to facilitate lodging of FIR in a moving train, in case of 
theft, dacoity, etc., without putting the passengers into any 
inconvenience by forcing them to termi nate their journey.  The 
redressal of grievance of the aggrieved party should be foremost in 
the minds of the Railway Board.  The Committee direct that the 
Railway Board should apprise the Committee urgently of action 
taken in this regard’ 
15 42 18 7 For ‘and physically’ challenged Read ‘differently abled passengers’ 
16 42 18 7 For ‘physically challenged’ read ‘differently abled passengers’ 
 

 
 
67 
 
17 42 18 1&2 
(from 
below) 
Replace ‘For sick passengers…….Konkan Railways’ with ‘Accessibility 
infrastructure shoul d be developed for their benefit which should 
enable access not merely to the station/platform but also to the 
train.  If there are stairs in a station, lifts should be available so as to 
facilitate easy movement with wheelchairs.  The Railways should 
consider expeditiously innovatively designed coaches for the benefit 
of differently abled passengers which may be introduced starting 
with the major stations in the metropolitan cities’ 
18 42 Bring Recommendation at para No.24 after para no.18 as as para No.19 
19 44 21 -- Replace ‘The Committee……capabilities’ with ‘The Committee noted 
that the Loco Pilots work under very stressful conditions.  Breath 
analyser tests of the Loco Pilots should be conducted at regular 
intervals to ensure that when they are on dut y, they are in their 
fittest mental and physical capabilities.  To reduce the physical and 
mental stress of Loco Pilots, they should be given adequate rest 
between duty shifts and comfortable accommodation should be 
provided to them.  Periodic medical chec k-up should be done on all 
Loco Pilots with special emphasis on physical fitness, eye test, etc’ 
20 44 22 At the 
end 
Add ‘The Committee desire that the Railway Board should apprise 
the Committee periodically of such visits conducted by senior 
officers of the Railway Board and follow -up action taken in respect 
of the visits/findings’ 
21 45 23 
Contd. 
3 For’ burden’ read ‘load’ 
22 45 23 
Contd. 
3 Replace  ‘As such……..infrastructure facility ’ with ‘The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that before new trains ar e announced, 
proper scientific study should be conducted by the Railways to 
assess the capacity of the system to sustain such excess load.  The 
Committee would like to reiterate that track renewals should be 
given top priority by the Indian Railways’ 
 
----------- 
  