g   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
NEW CATERING POLICY – 2010 OF INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
              
  
             
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
May, 2012/    Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS 
(2011-12) 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
15 

 
SCR NO.: 164  
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2011-12) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
NEW CATERING POLICY – 2010 OF INDIAN RAILWAYS 
  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.05.2012 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.05.2012 
 
 
 
              
  
             
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
  May, 2012/    Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 

 
CONTENTS 
           
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………            (ii) 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………...          (iv) 
REPORT 
    PART – I 
 
A. Background analysis         1 
 
B. Implementation of New Catering Policy      4 
 
C. Role of IRCTC         6 
 
D. Blueprints for catering units       11 
 
E. Modernization of kitchens        13 
 
F. Packaged drinking water        14 
 
G. Quality control         16 
 
H. Reservation in catering units       16 
 
                                                        
PART-II 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee………………  19
  
 
ANNEXURE 
Catering Policy – 2010          29 
      
PART-III 
 
Minutes of the sittings held on 27.12.2010, 04.07.2011,  
18.07.2011 and 15.05.2012……………………………………………..          53
  
 
 
(i)

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2011-12) 
Shri T. R. Baalu - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3.  Shri Ram Sunder Das  
4.  Smt. Maneka Gandhi  
5.  Shri Pralhad Joshi 
6.  Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
7.  Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
8.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
9.  Shri Anand Prakash Paranjape 
10.  Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
11.  Dr. Padmsinha Bajirao Patil 
12.  Smt. Satabdi Roy 
13.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
14.  Shri Sharief-ud-din `Shariq’ 
15.  Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
16.  Shri Ganesh Singh 
17.  Chaudhary Lal Singh 
18.  Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
19.  Shri Lalji Tandon 
20.  Dr. Girija Vyas         
21.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Shri K.E. Ismail  
23.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
24.  Smt. Kusum Rai  
25.  Shri Ambeth Rajan 
26.  Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
27.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
28.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
29.  Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 
30.  Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
31.    Shri Nandi Yellaiah  
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2011-12), having 
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways on ‘ New Catering 
Policy – 2010 of Indian Railways’. 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) on 27.12.2010, 04.07.2011 and 18.07.2011. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 
15.05.2012. Minutes of the related sittings are given in appendix to the Report.  
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for appearing before the 
Committee and furnishing the material and information which the 
Committee d esired in connection with the examination of the ‘New 
Catering Policy – 2010 of Indian Railways’ .  They would also like to 
place on record their deep sense of appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                T.R. BAALU 
15 May, 2012                                                      Chairman, 
25 Vaisakha , 1934 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Railways 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
PART I 
 
A. BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
 
1. Pursuant to a Cabinet decision, the catering business of Indian Railways was 
being progressively hived off to the Indian Railways Catering and Tourism 
Corporation (IRCTC) through relevant provisions in the Catering Policy of 2005.  
Modifications in the policy were necessitated in the light of the experience g ained 
and how the public perceived the changes since the introduction of this policy.  The 
modifications largely pertained to establishing good governance standards and 
improving the quality of these services, including for providing food and beverage 
services to passengers traveling on trains through mobile catering services and 
operation and management of the static catering contracts dealing with provision of 
food and beverages to passengers traveling on train, on railway premises like 
platforms, concour ses, etc.  The Minister of Railways, during her Railway Budget 
Speech 2009 -10, announced that “All railway zones have been instructed to give 
priority to provision of good quality food, drinking water and toilet facilities and 
ensure cleanliness on trains and stations.  Further, availability of Janata Khana 
should be ensured and we will be introducing national and regional cuisines in our 
catering.  A comprehensive policy including strict monitoring mechanism would be 
developed for achieving these objective s”.  In the light of above, a new Catering 
Policy, 2010 was formulated and issued vide M/O Railways (Railway Board) 
Commercial Circular No. 35/2010 dated 21.07.2010 (Annexure).  The 
objectives/salient features of the Catering Policy, 2010 are as under: 
 
OBJECTIVES OF CATERING POLICY 
 
1. To provide hygienic, good quality affordable food to the traveling public by 
adopting best trade and hospitality industry practices. 
 
2. The policy will have an inclusive approach where from the least advantaged 
passenger to  the relatively affluent will be provided catering services in a socially 
responsible manner. 
 

2 
 
3. It would meet all the social objectives of the Government, including provision 
of reservations as per Government Directives issued from time to time. 
 
2. Informing the Committee about the objectives and salient features of the New 
Catering Policy, 2010, the Chairman, Railway Board, stated as under: 
 
“As you will remember, in the Vision 2020 document which had been 
presented in the hon. Parliament and also in t he Budget Speech of our 
Railway Minister, we had assured that quality of catering would be improved 
by adopting sound and proven business practices; setting up a chain of 
modern base kitchens and branded restaurants at stations and encourage 
innovation in on-board catering. 
 
We found that the old policy which was promulgated in 2005 had led to a 
situation in which there were a huge number of complaints pouring in from 
every corner. We went into them and found that there were certain problems 
in that policy which led to two or three serious problems. The first one related 
to the monopoly catering. We found that the food was being picked up from 
the area where we were not having any control. We also found that the 
monitoring mechanism had left much to be desir ed. In the static units we 
found that there were a huge number of complaints of monopolistic allotment. 
These two problems have been addressed in the new catering policy which 
has come in the year 2010 where we have decided that both the static and 
mobile catering work will be taken over by the zonal railways and the IRCTC 
which had earlier been entrusted with this job would be dealing with the 
upper end, that is, food plazas and food courts and we will allow them to 
concentrate on the tourist activities. W e took this decision because we found 
that railways being a huge network and catering service being provided to the 
passengers at almost every station, it was necessary that the zonal railways 
controlled the monitoring work because we have Stationmasters a t every 
station, we have got staff at every station while we cannot except the IRCTC 
to put their staff at 7000 stations or put a large number of their employees 
who would be then doing only monitoring work and we may not be engaging 
them fully. But our St ationmasters among all other works can very easily 
monitor the performance of the static units at the station. In the same way for 
the mobile units we have a unit for monitoring the working of the licencee 
who is doing the pantry car work. We have put them  under the General 
Manager so that we can concentrate the work zone -wise and improve that. 
We are working on it. The policy is now being implemented. We have created 
more than 5000 posts in the catering department now under the General 
Manager. We are grad ually taking over this work from the IRCTC... Every 
month we are going ahead with the taking over of this work. Wherever 
contract is getting completed or is getting over, that work is being transferred 
to the zonal railway so that we have a better control over that.  
 
I am very happy to tell you that in the last three months we have had a drop 
of 30 per cent in the number of complaints on catering matter. We hope to 

3 
 
bring it down substantially. Once this transfer of work is over, gradually we 
hope that in a nother nine to twelve months it should be possible for us to 
have a system of monitoring as well as allotting static units in such a way that 
there are hardly any complaints. That is what we are aiming at and we hope 
that we will be successful.”  
 
3. The Ministry of Railways informed the Committee in a written reply as under: 
 
“The salient features of the New Catering Policy are as follows: 
 
 Earlier policy sought to treat catering as an independent profit center 
whereas this policy acknowledges catering as a passenger service. 
 
 The policy seeks to bring in improvements in catering by shifting the 
task of monitoring quality of service from IRCTC to the Zonal Railways 
and attempts to leverage Zonal Railways’ vast and elaborate all -India 
network in order to ef fect a thorough supervision and control over 
catering activities. 
 
 Emphasis has been placed to ensure the availability of quality food for 
the not-so-affluent classes of passengers by providing Janata food and 
Jan Ahaar (economy combo -meals) by means of Re freshment Rooms, 
Stand-alone outlets and vending stalls. 
 
 Supervision and monitoring has been strengthened through an 
institutional mechanism to be put in place by the Zonal Railways by 
deploying railway personnel, who would check quality and hygiene and 
take corrective action in a time-bound manner. 
 
 IRCTC shall be responsible for managing the premium and high end 
outlets like Food Plazas, Food Court and Fast Food Units. 
 Regional cuisine is being encouraged and zonal railways are being 
given authority to d esign the menu, recipes and fix tariff for a -la carte 
items. 
 
 The reservation policy and segregation of the Static Units to fulfill the 
social responsibility of the railways towards the underprivileged 
sections of the society as envisaged in the earlier po licy is being 
continued. 
 
 The stringent ceiling limits on the holdings for each category of units 
have been addressed to curb the issue of monopolization. 
 
 Minor Units: An individual company/firm can hold max. 2 at a station 
and a maxm. of 10 units per zone. 
 
 Mobile Units and Base kitchen: A max. of 10% of similar units over IR. 
 

4 
 
 For ensuring the quality of food in mobile units, special emphasis has 
been laid on setting up a grid of modern mega, medium and small base 
kitchens by the Zonal Railways at en route stations. 
 
 The above salient features of the New Catering Policy would go a long 
way to improve the catering services on Indian Railways and shall fulfill 
the aspirations of the passengers.” 
 
 
B. IMPLEMENTATION OF NEW CATERING POLICY 
 
4. Informing the C ommittee about the status of implementation of the New 
Catering Policy, the Ministry of Railways stated in a written reply as under: 
“Almost all the static/mobile catering units earlier with IRCTC have been 
transferred to Railways.  The only exception are those where IRCTC is 
managing the units with the departmental manpower e.g. Jan Ahaars, 
Durontos and a few other static units and also those units which are under 
litigation.  The unit -wise details of the implementation of the New Catering 
Policy are as under: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Item Details Remarks 
1. Mobile 
Catering 
Units 
(Pantry 
cars) 
Out of total 297 pantry car 
services over Indian Railways, 263 
have been taken over. 
The remaining 33 
pantry services are 
being managed 
departmentally by 
IRCTC and one is 
under the litigation. 
2. Jan 
Ahaar 
As on 22.06.2011 there are 49 Jan 
Ahaars operation on Indian 
Railways.  Out of total 32 Jan 
Ahaars managed by IRCTRC, Zonal 
Railways have taken over 5 Jan 
Ahaars and have started 17 Jan 
Ahaars departmentally. 
Zonal Railways are 
in process of 
opening new Jan 
Ahaars for ensuring 
availability of low -
cost regional 
cuisines for the not 
so affluent 
passengers. 
3. Other 
Static 
Units 
Out of 7899 static units for 
transfer from IRCTC to Zonal 
Railways, a total of 7748 units 
have been transf erred.  Only 151 
units remains to be taken over by 
the Zonal Railways. 
Out of remaining 
151 units, IRCTC is 
managing 103 units 
departmentally. 
4. Base 
Kitchens 
Out of total 9 departmental base 
kitchens managed by IRCTC, 4 
have been taken over by the zonal  
railways and 5 are managed by 
IRCTC departmentally. 
 

5 
 
5. Staff 
Position 
5269 (1284 Gr. ‘C’ and 3985 Gr. 
‘D’) posts have been restored to 
the railway catering cadre which 
was in force as on 31.03.2003, as 
to implement the New Catering 
Policy 2010.  So far 1706 staff are 
presently available in catering 
department.  With the available 
catering staff, Zonal Railways has 
started departmental activities 
apart from supervision of licensee 
managed units. 
Filling up of the 
vacancies are in 
process. 
6. Catering 
Monitorin
g System 
Catering Monitoring cell has been 
opened at Zonal Headquarter and 
in divisions for the quick redressal 
of catering related complaints. 
Action is taken on all 
the complaints by 
imposing penalty, 
warning, etc. 
 
 
5. When asked about the exper ience of Railways so far with the New Catering 
Policy, the Ministry of Railways stated as under: 
 
“We are satisfied with the results of the transfer of the catering activities from 
IRCTC to Railways.  This is borne out of the significant reduction in the 
number of complaints against poor quality catering now received vis -à-vis the 
number of complaints received earlier.” 
 
6. The Committee desired to know about the changes that have been made in 
the catering system since the implementation of the New Catering  Policy.  The 
Ministry of Railways informed the Committee in a written reply as under: 
"The major changes made consequent to the implementation of Catering 
Policy are as under: 
 
(7) The position of transfer of catering units as on 22.06.2011 is as under: 
 
Status of Transfer of Units from IRCTC to Zonal Railways (as on 29.06.2011)  
Total No. of Units Taken over by Z Rlys To be taken over by Z Rlys 
P/Car TSV Major 
static 
Minor 
static 
P/Car TSV Major 
static 
Minor 
static 
P/Car TSV Major 
static 
Minor 
static 
297 149 937 6950 263 21 912 6850 34 128 25 100 
 
(ii) Standard Bid Document (SBD) for awarding of catering licences of 
Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto Express and Mail/Express trains has been issued 
to Zonal Railways.  The SBD envisages award of contract on two packet  
tender system.  The first packet is a detailed technical evaluation to shortlist 
only reputed experienced catering units to participate in the financial bid (and 
packet bidding).  New features in the bid document include stringent technical 
eligibility cr iteria based on the highest scores achieved by the bidders on 

6 
 
different parameters have been incorporated.  In the earlier SBD, the 
technical criteria were not properly designed and award of contract was 
primarily focused on the highest bid offered by the licensee. 
 
(iii) Detailed instructions for award of Train Side Vending (TSV) contracts 
by Zonal Railways have been issued on 22.06.2011. 
 
(7) This new TSV guidelines propose meals on order through mobile service 
provider at selected meal pick up points. 
 
b. This policy also proposes the introduction of a -la-carte meals inclusive 
of regional cuisines. 
 
(iv) Take away and TSV are major thrust area for improvement in Catering 
service. 
(v) Emphasis given for low cost popular combo meals through proliferation 
of Janahar outlets. 
 
(vi) Monitoring mechanism developed to monitor quality of service.  
Departmental supervision in areas where private licensees are managing 
catering services introduced in a big way.  Catering Monitoring Cells have 
been set up on Zonal Railways in each division to have effective monitoring of 
catering units as well as their complaint redressal." 
 
 
7. The Committee undertook a study visit to Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Mysore and 
Goa during May, 2011 to assess the impact of implementation of the New  Catering 
Policy.  Broadly, the following suggestions were put forward before the Committee 
by the respective Zonal Railways for improvement in New Catering Policy: 
 
(i) Establishment of ISO certified base kitchens in Railway premises itself 
to ensure timely supply of meals and effective supervision 
(ii) Modernization and mechanization of catering equipment for quality 
catering services 
(iii) Management of catering services by professionals 
(iv) Stringent criteria for selection of catering contractors 
(v) Recruitment of trained/professionally qualified staff 
(vi) Training of catering staff from time to time 
 
 
C. ROLE OF IRCTC 
 
8. As pointed out earlier, in the Catering Policy of 2005, the catering business of 
the Indian Railways was hived off to the IRCTC.  However, the Catering Policy 2010 
involved the transfer of catering business back from IRCTC to Zonal Railways. When 
asked about the shortcomings which were noticed in the functioning of IRCTC which 

7 
 
necessitated this action and whether these shortcomings could not have been 
rectified by IRCTC, the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) informed the Committee 
in a written reply as under: 
 
"Through the provisions in the Catering Policy of 2005, the catering business 
of Indian Railways had been shifted progressively to the Indian Railways 
Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC).  Modification of the policy has 
now been necessitated after the experience gained of catering managed 
under IRCTC and public perception of quality of catering services provided 
under IRCTC's management.  Shortcoming s were earlier noticed in the 
provision of the catering facilities over IR which arose out of the basic 
philosophy being followed by IRCTC for treating catering service more as a 
profit centre and less as a passenger service.  It was perceived by the 
Railways that this philosophy of acknowledging catering as a passenger 
service and not an independent profit centre cannot be implemented by 
IRCTC. 
 
Consequently, the New Catering Policy was formulated by Railways clearly 
legislating the shift in the objectives  of providing catering services from the 
perspective of PASSENGER SERVICE which would not be amenable to IRCTC's 
philosophy of profit centre and the catering services to be now provided to 
passengers through mobile and static units has been brought under t he 
purview of New Catering Policy 2010 which has the element of passenger 
service as its core objective. 
 
The New Catering Policy, 2010 seeks to bring in improvements in catering by 
shifting the task of monitoring quality of service from IRCTC to the Zonal  
Railways through attempts to leverage zonal railways vast and elaborate all 
India network in order to effect a thorough supervision and control over 
catering activities. 
 
The New Catering Policy 2010 has given focus to provide good quality, 
affordable foo d to common passengers; regional cuisines have been 
encouraged. 
 
IRCTC as a PSU would have a profit motive more pronounced in its activities 
as compared to the objectives of a Ministry.  Hence, it was felt that the 
improvement necessary and as required wou ld not have been possible to be 
achieved by IRCTC" 
 
9. In this regard, the Chairman, Railway Board, stated during evidence as under: 
"There have been lot of ups and downs on the catering policy of the Railways.  
The Railways have been acutely aware that catering is a major concern on the 
system and we have been at pains to try and find ways and means to serve a 
very large cross-section of people.  Initially, it was thought that hiving off the 
catering activities to a separate professional body would be able  to address 
these concerns.  So, we did make IRCTC and catering was given to them in 

8 
 
entirety for some time, but when IRCTC was created and because it was a 
PSU, it had its survival at stake which necessitated much greater focus on 
profitability this was a t variance with the requirements of the philosophy of 
catering as far as Indian Railways network is concerned.  The Indian Railways 
network serves the poorest section of our society.  In fact, a large number of 
our passengers are poor and any organization,  which ash profitability as a 
philosophy of survival, cannot address the concerns of service with 
effectiveness.  The IRCTC was initially created with the objective of providing 
high-end catering and tourism facilities and the entire catering facilities we re 
handed over to IRCTC.  Only subsequently with experience it was seen that 
this initiative of diverting the catering services of the entire Indian Railway 
network to IRCTC was perhaps not working as envisaged. 
 
Then it was considered that catering should, at least at the smaller stations as 
well as on -board trains, be taken back by the Indian Railways.  One of the 
reasons why this was done was because the Indian Railways has a very vast 
network spread all over the country.  So, there is a complete connect between 
what is happening on trains or at stations and what the policy -making body at 
the Railway Board does.  Perhaps the IRCTC was unable to address the grass 
root level concerns.  So, as a philosophy, the New Catering Policy was 
considered and after lo t of deliberations, it was promulgated last year with a 
different emphasis and this emphasis was to treat catering as a passenger 
service.  The philosophy itself underwent a change and it was thought that 
the time has come to treat catering as a passenger service.  To this end, it 
was decided that progressively the catering facilities – mobile catering 
facilities on trains as well as static units at the stations – would be taken over 
from the IRCTC.  We were aware that this cannot be done entirely in a very  
short while. 
 
10. When asked whether the Railways had signed any MoU with IRCTC, the 
Chairman, Railway Board, stated as under: 
"The MoUs were signed at several stages with IRCTC from 2005 onwards.  It 
was initially thought – when we formed IRCTC – that IR CTC would 
concentrate on high-end catering and tourism industry, the potential of which 
remained untapped as far as the Railway system was concerned.  So, in the 
initial stages of IRCTC, budget hotels were constructed; tourism trains were 
started; and thos e facilities of the Railways, which perhaps could not be 
addressed by the Railways as an organization, where some kind of market -
savvy policies were necessary and where a different kind of working ethics 
was necessary.  So, it was thought that IRCTC would take over this segment 
and would progress in this.  Subsequently, it was thought that perhaps IRCTC 
could be given the entire catering facilities of the Indian Railways.  This was a 
decision, which was taken progressively in mid-stream, but when catering was 
hived off to the IRCTC by the Indian Railways completely, it was realized that 
a lot of segments of society – who travel by trains – those issues were not 
getting addressed adequately.  It was because the Corporation, as such, was 
not able to harness an inherent strength to cater to the needs of the vast and 
complex network.  There was a slight disconnect.  In fact, disconnect was 

9 
 
experienced between the availability of catering services as IRCTC could 
provide them and the requirements at the grass-root level of the organization.  
Thereafter, a re-thinking was there and it had not gone on for too long, and 
immediately a new catering policy – which would address these concerns, 
without actually taking away the core competency of IRCTC – was considered.  
The core competency of IRCTC would be to continue to concentrate on high -
end tourism; high -end catering facilities, which are very much necessary in 
the market place; and to bring back the catering services for the normal 
passenger to the Railways because th e Railway system in its entirety and its 
vastness was considered to be adequately poised to address those concerns." 
 
 
11. When asked whether the Railway Board had signed an MoU with IRCTC 
before hading over the facilities to them, the Chairman, Railway Bo ard, informed the 
Committee that the MoU was under finalization. 
 
12. When the Committee desired to know whether there was any plan to wind up 
IRCTC, the Chairman, Railway Board, informed the Committee during evidence as 
under: 
"I just wanted to clarify on e or two issues.  There is no plan at present to 
wind up IRCTC.  As I have expressed hitherto that the plan is to let IRCTC 
concentrate on its core competency of high end catering facilities and 
development of tourism which is a major area which is coming up now and 
which requires focused and concentrated attention of an organization like 
IRCTC.  I am confident that with this core competency, IRCTC should grow 
from strength to strength in future.  As far as catering facilities provided to 
the common passengers on the railways is concerned, I would again reiterate 
that the Indian railway network is so vast and we have a 150 year tradition of 
how systems are managed on the railway network, it requires activities right 
up to the grassroots level, that is, right  up to the station level.  Unless you 
have an organization which is connected from the apex level on a day to day 
basis, the common passenger issues in many cases fail to get addressed.  Our 
concern was to address these issues which were being felt as detr imental to 
the common rail passenger who can pay very little for his catering facilities 
and who needs to be provided some catering facility on train.  So, it is with 
this objective that a mild course correction was done in what IRCTC would do 
and what the Indian Railways would do. 
 
Coming on to the second part of your question, I would like to inform the 
august House that after 2010 when the Railways have now begun to 
progressively take over the common catering facilities for the passengers, 
there has been  a 46 per cent reduction in the complaints regarding catering 
on the railway system.  That is because we have a direct connect right up to 
the grassroots level.  If there is an issue to be addressed, it can be 
immediately addressed right from the Chairman,  Railway Board to the Zonal 
Railway, General Manager to the station manager.  It can be addressed very 

10 
 
quickly without any problem.  Therefore, the speed at which the complaint is 
addressed is much quicker whereas we felt that IRCTC perhaps would be able 
to meet its objectives by concentrating on other activities for which also there 
is very great requirement on the system today. 
 
13. When asked whether the problems which were being faced with IRCTC could 
not be sorted out when Member (Traffic) himself was the Chairman of IRCTC, the 
Chairman, Railway Board, stated during evidence as under: 
"I would like to answer this question in a slightly different manner.  The 
Member (Traffic) is definitely the Chairman of the IRCTC.  But IRCTC by virtue 
of being a public sector undertaking could not and perhaps would not be able 
to harness the inherent strength of the vast Indian Railways' administrative 
network because a PSU by its very definition is a core competency situation 
and we felt that core competency has to be concentrated on.  For example, if 
you look at the practical day to day issues, suppose there is a problem of 
some issue about a catering meal on a train, who will address it?  The PSU 
unfortunately cannot be made to work under the railway administrative se t up 
either at the Divisional level or at the Zonal level.  There can only be a hand -
holding situation.  And we found that this hand -holding situation, although it 
was attempted and a lot of effort was made to provide support from the 
Railways, was unfortu nately not found to be very successful because the 
hierarchy which is required to address these issues somehow could not come.  
This is the practical, grassroots level situation which I have explained." 
 
14. When the Committee desired to know the future of  the people working in 
IRCTC, as a result of the trimming of IRCTC, the Chairman, Railway Board, informed 
the Committee during evidence as under: 
"To the first part of your question on the trimming of the organization as you 
mentioned, we are leaving IRCTC  to grow in a certain sector which is 
necessary.  As far as the staffing related issues are concerned, we are in fact 
absorbing a lot of the staff. Most of them are our own staff who had gone 
from the Indian Railways to IRCTC.  So, we are addressing those issues in 
consultation with our staff federations.  A lot of them have come back.  We 
have already restored over five thousand posts which were in existence on the 
Indian Railways on the catering side before it went to IRCTC.  A lot of these 
people have come back.  We have already restored over five thousand posts 
which were in existence on the Indian Railways on the catering side before it 
went to IRCTC.  A lot of these people are coming back to their original posts 
with also proper training.  There is a s ituation of training also.  I am confident 
that as far as the staff related issues, which is the Hon. Member's concern, 
that is being addressed fully and will be addressed fully.  We do not anticipate 
any problem in the staff related issues." 
 

11 
 
15. When asked whether the IRCTC's commercial interests will not be harmed as 
a result of the New Catering Policy, the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
informed the Committee in a written reply as under: 
 
"In the long term perspective the interest of IRCTC would n ot be harmed 
although to an extent in the initial stages of the change there will be a 
temporary setback of loss of revenue.  However, with the new directions of a 
greater emphasis on IRCTC to concentrate on high -end catering from Food 
Plazas, Fast Food Units and Food Courts, etc.  IRCTC will become a financially 
healthy and vibrant organization.  As per Catering Policy 2010, IRCTC would 
continue to be a service provider to the Indian Railways and shall be 
responsible for managing the premium and high end o utlets like Food Plazas, 
Food Courts and Fast Food Units; and institutional catering outside railways.  
IRCTC is also selling a huge humber of tourism products such as Luxuries 
Tourist Trains – Maharaja Express, Buddhists special trains, Bharat Darshan 
trains, Bharat Tirth trains, hill trains, etc. 
 
Further, as per MoU between IRCTC and Indian Railways and article of 
association, IRCTC is taking up the catering units of both government and its 
PSUs and also those of state government units. 
 
Some headway has  been made towards it, such as IRCTC has taken 
over/started the catering units in the following Government offices/PSUs (i) 
Outdoor catering in Ministry of External Affairs, South Block, (ii) Indian 
Institute of Public Administration, NDLS, (iii) Ministry of Finance, North Block, 
(v) Cafeteria in Krishi Bhawan, NDLS (vi) Food court in IIT Delhi (vii) CBI 
headquarter in Lodhi Road (viii) Food Plaza at Pune – Solapur Highway (ix) 
Multi cuisine cafeteria in Cochin.  Hence, scope of work for IRCTC is vast." 
 
 
D. BLUEPRINTS FOR CATERING UNITS 
 
16. The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) had informed the Committee that 
with a view to ensuring that adequate catering facilities were available vis -à-vis that 
there was no congestion on platforms, the scale of cater ing services through static 
units had been legislated in the New Catering Policy, 2010.  Zonal Railways had been 
directed to prepare a blueprint for the catering unit at each station as per the 
maximum static units as per the scale given below: 
 
Category of 
station 
No. of 
maximum 
catering 
units at 
No. of 
maximum 
catering 
units at 
No. of AVMs 
as per 
main/island 
platform 
No. of misc. 
stalls as per 
main/island 
platform 

12 
 
main 
platform 
island 
platform 
A 6 5 5 1 
B 5 4 4 1 
C 5 4 3 1 
D 3 3 2 1 
E 1 1 1 1 
F As per 
requirement 
As per 
requirement 
1 1 
Note: The classification of stations under A, B, C, D, E & F categories is done as 
per yardsticks given below: 
 
(i) A category station: If annual earning is more than 6 crores. 
(ii) B category station: Annual earning is more than 3 to 6 crores. 
(iii) C category station: All suburban stations. 
(iv) D category station: Annual earning between 1 crores to 3 crores. 
(v) E category station: All stations other than A, B, C, D and F category 
stations 
(vi) F category station: All flag/halt stations. 
17. When asked about the salient features of the blueprint, the Chairman, Railway 
Board, informed the Committee during evidence as under: 
"There are seven categories of stations.  Depending on the number of 
stations, each station is categorized.  They are pr ovided with the scale of 
facilities, which are clearly legislated.  These facilities include facilities of 
catering, provision of drinking water, as also other passenger amenities and 
facilities.  It is very clearly legislated and it has been conveyed to t he Zonal 
Railways.  Feedback is being received from Zonal Railways and we are in 
constant touch with them." 
 
18. When asked about the steps taken to ensure the implementation of the 
blueprint at each station, the Chairman, Railway Board, stated during evid ence as 
under: 
"As far as the lower end and less privileged passengers are concerned, the 
Railways has now made a policy of introducing jan ahaar where the cost of 
any item would range between Rs. 5 and Rs. 30 at the maximum and the 
items of food which wou ld be supplied from these jan ahaar  counters would 
be region based, that is, cater to the taste of the people of that area and also 
be cost effective.  So, on that spread of jan ahaar at the stations, we hope to 
cope with the problem of the weaker section s of our society.  Apart from this, 
there is a strong effort to popularize the janata khana, that is, the puri-bhaji.  
These would be monitored and further strengthened. 
 
As far as cleanliness and hygiene at the railway stations are concerned, we 
are attempting in a large number of ways to address these issues.  We have 

13 
 
also introduced on -board hygiene services in a number of trains where the 
cleaning parties would travel on the train itself and would be available for 
cleaning of compartments and coaches.  As far as the stations are concerned, 
we have a clear policy which has been given to the zonal railways on how 
cleaning is to be carried out through contractual and departmental means 
both at station platforms and approaches and also entire concourse area of 
the station.  But as Hon. Member has said we have perhaps not come up to 
the expectations.  We have to come up to the expectations." 
 
 
E. MODERNIZATION OF KITCHENS 
 
19. As per Catering Policy 2010, the Zonal Railways are to set up modern mega, 
medium base kitchens to supply food in bulk or packaged to mobile units as well as 
the static units to provide good quality, hygienic and affordable food to passengers.  
The Railway Board has issued the detailed guidelines for the facilities to be provided 
in the base kitchens which include ISO: 22000 certification.  The salient features of 
the instructions issued in this regard are (i) base kitchens will progressively be ISO 
22000 certified;  (ii) Zonal Railways will set up a grid of mega, medium Base kitchens 
which will be in the premises of the railways so as to reduce the distance of transfer 
of meals from base kitchens to the train;  (iii) A proper pathway connecting base 
kitchens to platform; (iv) for proper training of the departmental catering staff, 
training to be organized through trained personnel from reputed institutes of hotel 
management/catering institutes/food craft institutes; (v) Identify a grid of trains and 
the specific meals (breakfast, lunch, dinner, etc.) to be provided for each train for 
the no minated base kitchens at the station where each train stops at the meal 
timing. 
  
20. According to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), design modules 
incorporating mechanization and state -of-the-art technology will now be formulated 
and issued to zonal railways. 
 
21. A pilot project for setting up a modern and mechanized base kitchen has 
already been initiated by South Central Railway. 
 
22. Briefing the Committee about the concept of base kitchen, the Chairman, 
Railway Board, informed: 

14 
 
"On the food it ems which are available in Jan Ahar outlets, we are hardly 
making any profit. It is on no -profit-no-loss basis. That way, it is a social 
responsibility on us to provide that kind of food. There is a cross -subsidisation 
though we do not openly talk about it . But overall, we should not make 
losses. Such type of food should be made available. 
 
Secondly, you talked of the regional cuisine as to how it can be done area -
wise. We have decided that we will have a grid of base kitchens. There will be 
mega base kitch ens; there will be midi base kitchens depending upon the 
necessity." 
 
23. Elaborating further, the Chairman, Railway Board, stated as under: 
 
"You please appreciate the point here that in Delhi area, I am required to pick 
up nearly two lakh meals a day but  we do not have a base kitchen which can 
supply these meals from one point.  So, we have to provide a world -class 
base kitchen here, and that is what we are aiming at.  But there are places 
where I pick up only 5,000 meals a day.  In those places, there wi ll be smaller 
base kitchens.  We will be able to monitor the hygienic condition and the 
method of cooking, the material being used in a more intense manner if it is 
done at the station.  When a train leaves from Chandigarh for Chennai, by the 
time it reach es Nagpur you will start getting food from the local cuisines 
there. You will get a Puran Poli, you will get Sri Kand from Nagpur.  And the 
moment you go down to Secunderabad or even Cuddappah and Guntakal, you 
will get the local food. The base kitchen wil l be producing those things in the 
train. The demand from the passengers will be taken in the train and 
communicated to the base kitchen so that the food of that variety will be 
lifted.  This is what we are now aiming at in the 2010 Catering Policy.  Once 
the base kitchen grid is fully in place, I think, everybody will get food of his 
choice depending upon the area in which he is traveling." 
 
 
F. PACKAGED DRINKING WATER 
 
24. In its endeavour to meet the growing and varied demands of railway 
passengers, IRCTC had expanded the ambit and gamut of services offered to the 
passengers; one of these is manufacturing and supply of packaged drinking water 
under the brand name of 'Rail Neer'. 
 
25. The need for setting up of the packaged drinking water has arisen out of  the 
large consumption of water on railways and the frequent cases of failure in sample 
checks of various BIS certified brands of packaged drinking water.  To ensure that 
the railway users get safe and quality packaged drinking water, Rail Neer was made 
the exclusive brand to be sold at railway premises and in trains.  Accordingly, IRCTC 
was instructed to set up state -of-the art plants comparable with the best in the 

15 
 
industry.  In the initial phase, IRCTC was instructed to set up initially only two plants 
– one at Nangloi, Delhi, and the other at Danapur, Bihar.  The capacity utilization of 
these plants is 100 per cent. 
 
26. As per the Ministry of Railways, Rail Neer is using processes that guarantee 
safe drinking water, i.e. crystal clear, low in dissolved solids and free from all 
pathogenic bacteria and viruses as well as other harmful contaminants like fluoride, 
arsenic, nitrate and iron and conforming to the BS specifications.  The plants 
conform to European Union Norms and employ an eight -stage purification process, 
the highest employed by any plant in India.  The following eight processes are 
employed: 
1. Activated carbon – Multistage activated carbon 
2. Softner-Process employed for making Rail Neer 
3. Ultra filtration 
4. Reverse Osmosis 
5. Calcite filter 
6. Micron filters 
7. Ultra Violet filters 
8. Ozonation 
 
27.  When asked to state the steps taken to ensure supply of sufficient water in 
trains, the Chairman, Railway Board, briefed the Committee as under: 
"We are aware of this problem. The need of water in trains is very high.  That 
is why, in this Budget we have provided for six more projects to come up 
under PPP for providing drinking water. We are working on it. The standard 
terms of the document are just getting finalised. We will have some more 
places from where we will get Railneer." 
 
28. The Committee pointed out that there were instances where water bottles 
were being supplied in some trains which did not carry any expiry date, on this the 
Chairman, Railway Board, assured the Committee that the matter would be looked 
into. 
 
29. When asked whether any policy had been framed for the quantity of water 
supplied in the trains, the Chairman, Railway Board, stated during evidence as 
under: 

16 
 
"The policy states that two drinking water bottles will be given for journeys 
beyond 20 hou rs and one drinking water bottle will be given for journeys 
below 20 hours free of charge and the second drinking water bottle on 
payment.  That is the system." 
 
G. QUALITY CONTROL 
30. When asked about the frequency of checking the quality of food, the  
Chairman, Railway Board, stated during evidence as under: 
"Till now IRCTC was having Quality Inspectors with them and they were doing 
it. When we are now taking over the mobile catering units, they are being 
monitored by the CCM of the Zonal Railways. There  is a constant checking. 
Thousands of such checks have been done and we are trying to improve it. As 
I told you, my complaints have been reduced by 30 per cent. I am not saying 
that there are zero complaints. Complaints are still quite high. But they are 3 0 
per cent less than what they were last year. We hope to bring it down much 
further." 
 
31. When asked as to who would be responsible for checking the quality once the 
role of the IRCTC was over, the Ministry of Railways informed the Committee that 
the job of checking the quality was delegated to CCM of Zonal Railways.  When the 
Committee desired to know whether CCM was competent to ensure the quality of 
food, the Chairman, Railway Board, stated during evidence as under: 
"CCM will be the overall in -charge for the Zone. But the inspections will be 
done by the catering staff available with him on a daily basis as they will have 
this domain knowledge and the CCM will do the overall monitoring. We will 
monitor as to what kind of food is being provided through th e number of 
complaints that are coming and ourselves when we travel. Food is something 
that when we eat it we know what kind of food is being provided, whether it 
has been cooked properly and whether we are happy with it or not." 
 
32. During the visit of t he Committee to Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Mysore and Goa 
during May, 2011, the Committee were informed by various Zonal Railways that 
stringent action, including warning, imposing penalty, etc. was taken against the 
licencees, if found guilty. 
 
H. RESERVATION IN CATERING UNITS 
33. As per the Catering Policy, 2010, there will be no reservation in contractors for 
major units, including pantry cars.  25% reservations in minor units have been 
provided at 'A', 'B' and 'C' category of stations and 49.5% reservations have been 
provided in all units at 'D', 'E' and 'F' category of stations. 

17 
 
 
34. The break-up of reservation of 25% in minor units at 'A', 'B' and 'C' categories 
is as under: 
S. No. Category Percentage 
1 Scheduled Caste 6% 
2 Scheduled Tribe 4% 
3 People below poverty line 3% 
4 Freedom fighter/women including war widows and 
widows of railway employees, persons who have been 
dislocated/displaced due to their land having been 
taken over by the railways for its own use. 
4% 
5 OBCs 3% 
6 Minorities 3% 
7 Physically challenged persons 2% 
 Total 25% 
 
35. The break-up of reservation of 49.5% of all units at 'D', 'E' and 'F' category of 
stations is as under: 
S. No. Category Percentage 
1 Scheduled Caste 12% 
2 Scheduled Tribe 8% 
3 OBCs 20% 
4 Minorities 9.5% 
 Total 49.5% 
 
The eligibility criteria for reserved units at 'A', 'B' and 'C' categories are as 
under: 
 Reputation/business standing of the applicant 
 
 Turn-over of applicant's business in catering 
 
 Financial standing to mobilize resources to employ the requis ite staff and to 
run the unit 
 
 Previous experience in catering business 
 
 Previous track record/experience of the applicant in railway catering, if any 
 
 Size of the establishment and staff requirement for running the unit duly 
giving details of break -up of each activity, i.e. number of waiters/cooks to be 
employed 
 
 Location of the unit 
 

18 
 
 Weightage should be given to each parameter by the nominated Selection 
Committee in advance, prior to calling of applications. 
 
 The details of weightage to each parameter and  the selection criteria shall be 
declared in the advertisement inviting application for the license. 
 
 The Selection Committee will tabulate, compile and finalise the selection in a 
fair, equitable and transparent manner. 
 
The eligibility criteria for reser ved units at 'D', 'E' and 'F' categories are as 
under: 
 Essential 
 In case of individual/partnership firms, the individual/partners should be 
literate 
 
 In case of individual/partnership firms, the individual/partners should have 
good moral character 
 
 The applicant should be solvent 
 
 The individual/partners and the employees, particularly those handling 
preparation of food, should not be suffering from any infectious disease. 
 
 For reserved categories, relevant certificate from concerned authority as a 
proof of being a member of certain reserved category, should be furnished. 
 
 Desirable 
 
 Previous experience in catering business 
 
 Financial standing to mobilize resources to employ the requisite staff and to 
run the unit 
 
 Previous track record, if any. 
 
36. When asked as to what were the reasons for different reservation for different 
category of stations, the Chairman, Railway Board, stated during evidence as under: 
"This was the decision which has been taken over a period of time since 1990 
when the catering policy was made.  It is a dynamic situation.  So, presently, 
the reservation stands for A, B and C category stations and these figures we 
have presented for your kind information for it was felt that in D, E and F 
category stations more representation would be required because it would be 
easier for the less privileged section of the society to get those." 

19 
 
 
PART II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
 
 The Indian Railways is one of the world's largest rail networks with 
64,460 route kilometres of route length.  As a n ational common carrier 
transporting passengers and goods over its network, the Indian Railways 
has always played a key role in India's social and economic development.  
It is also an affordable means of transportation for millions of passengers.  
During 20 10-11, it carried 7,651 million passengers.  Passenger 
kilometres, which is calculated by multiplying the number of journeys by 
mean kilometric distance was 979 billion during the period.  Passenger 
earnings in 2010 -11 were Rs. 25,705.64 crore.  In such a vast system, 
catering to millions of passengers daily, it is imperative that the Railways 
provide the best catering services to the commuters who extend their 
continued patronage to the Railways. 
 
2. The Committee note that the New Catering Policy, 2010 of  the 
Indian Railways was formulated in the wake of an announcement to this 
effect made by the Minister of Railways during the budget speech of 2009 -
10.  The New Catering Policy, 2010 sought to modify the Indian Railways' 
Catering Policy of 2005 which had b een necessitated in the light of the 
experience gained and the public perception of the policy since it started 
operation.  The modifications pertain to establishing good governance 
standards and improving the quality of catering services for providing foo d 

20 
 
and beverage to passengers travelling on trains and on railway premises 
like platforms, concourses, etc.  The Committee have conducted an in 
depth examination of the 'New Catering Policy, 2010' and reached certain 
conclusions which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
3. The Committee have been informed that the Catering Policy of 2005 
had led to a situation in which there were a large number of complaints 
from different segments.  Some of the problems that were noticed in that 
policy included the issue of monopoly catering and the lack of an effective 
monitoring mechanism.  These major problems are stated to have been 
addressed in the New Catering Policy, 2010 wherein it had been decided 
that both the static and mobile catering work would be take n over by the 
Zonal Railways while the Indian Railways Catering and Tourism 
Corporation (IRCTC) which had earlier been entrusted with this job would 
be dealing with the upper end, i.e. food plazas, food courts and tourist 
activities.  The Committee are of the view that the Catering Policy of 2005 
lacked a professional, futuristic vision for an undertaking of the size of the 
Indian Railways which catered to a huge travelling public daily.  Besides, 
the Catering Policy of 2005 was not planned in a professional and scientific 
manner, necessitating a new Catering Policy in just another five years' 
time.  The Committee fail to understand how it was decided to entrust the 
responsibility of catering services of such a vast railway network to a 
Public Sector Underta king (PSU) which had to work with a commercial 
motive without ascertaining its capability to address the clients' 
requirements in a socially responsible manner.   However, the Committee 

21 
 
are given to understand that the New Catering Policy, 2010 would addre ss 
the problem as the Railways would be able to make use of its available 
personnel at all the railway stations for ensuring effective monitoring of 
catering services.  The Committee appreciate that the new Policy 
acknowledges catering as a passenger servi ce unlike the Policy of 2005 
which sought to treat catering as an independent profit source.  The 
Committee hope that the New Catering Policy, 2010 will be implemented 
efficaciously to benefit the passengers with social responsibility as the 
prime criterion.  
 
4. The Committee note that the reasons which warranted a shift in the 
Policy include the basic philosophy of treating catering services more as a 
profit centre and less as a passenger service and the lack of monitoring of 
quality of service as the IRC TC could not make use of the vast Railway 
network.  However, the Committee agree with the submission of the 
Railways that the core competence of IRCTC should be to continue to 
concentrate on high end tourism and high end catering services which are 
very mu ch necessary.  They, therefore, recommend that the Railways 
should take effective steps to help IRCTC to grow in these directions so 
that the commercial interests of IRCTC are not harmed as a result of the 
implementation of the New Catering Policy. 
5. The Committee are distressed to note that though the New Catering 
Policy of 2010 was issued in July, 2010, it is being implemented at a very 
slow pace.  During their visit to Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Mysore and Goa 
during May, 2011, the Committee observed that th ere were certain 

22 
 
problems being faced by the Zonal Railways in taking over the catering 
services from IRCTC which included shortage of staff, litigation by 
contractors and the lack of specialized manpower with the Railways.  The 
Committee recommend that al l issues should be identified and sorted out 
expeditiously and steps be taken for effective implementation of the Policy 
within a specified time frame.  Further, the Railways should take urgent 
steps for establishment of ISO certified base kitchens in the Railway 
premises itself to ensure timely supply of meals and effective supervision, 
modernization and mechanization of catering equipment, management of 
catering services by professionals, stringent criteria for selection of 
catering contractors, recruitme nt of trained/professionally qualified staff 
and training of catering staff from time to time.  The Committee also 
desire that pantry cars should invariably be provided in all long distance 
trains at the earliest  in all long distance trains which have a ru nning time 
exceeding 16 hours. 
 
6. The Committee have been informed during evidence that the IRCTC 
is absorbing a lot of staff which had been posted on deputation from 
Railways and the Railways are addressing the staff issue in consultation 
with staff fede rations.  The Chairman, Railway Board, had assured the 
Committee that staffing issue would be addressed purposefully.  The 
Committee recommend that as assured during the evidence, there should 
be no trimming of staff presently working with IRCTC as a resul t of the 
implementation of the New Catering Policy.  
 

23 
 
7. With a view to ensuring that adequate catering facilities are 
available to the travelling public, simultaneously ensuring that there is no 
congestion on platforms, the scale of catering services thro ugh static units 
has been legislated in the New Catering Policy, 2010 and the Zonal 
Railways have been directed to prepare a blueprint for the catering unit at 
each station as per the maximum static units.  According to the Railways, 
there are seven catego ries of stations and various facilities such as 
catering, drinking water and other passenger amenities are to be provided 
at various stations in accordance with the blueprint.   The Committee 
desire that the blueprint for the each station should be impleme nted in 
letter and spirit and there should not be any let up in this regard.   They 
further desire that the implementation of the blueprint in respect of each 
station should be regularly and closely monitored at the Board level.    
 
8.  As per the Catering  Policy 2010, Zonal Railways are to set  up modern 
mega and medium base kitchens to supply food in bulk and packaged to 
mobile units as well as static units to provide good quality, hygienic and 
affordable food to passengers.  The Committee have been infor med that 
the Railways have issued detailed guidelines for the facilities to be 
provided in the base kitchens which include ISO:22000 certification, 
setting up a grid of mega and medium base kitchens in Railway premises, 
setting up of proper pathway connect ing base kitchens to platforms, for 
proper training of the departmental catering staff training to be organized 
through trained personnel from reputed  institutes of hotel 
management/catering institutes/food craft institutes and identifying a 

24 
 
grid of train s and the specific needs to be provided for each train for the 
nominated base kitchen at the stations where each train will stop at the 
meal timing.  According to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), the 
design modules incorporating the mechanism and the state -of-the-art 
technology will be formulated and issued to the Zonal Railways.  The 
Committee desire that the formulation of these design modules should be 
completed without any delay.  The Committee are happy to note that a 
pilot project for setting  up a modern and mechanized base kitchen has 
already been initiated by the South Central Railway and recommend that 
all Zonal Railways should follow suit so that the infrastructure related to 
the setting up of modern base kitchens is speedily developed.   
 
9. The New Catering Policy provides for ban on cooking on platforms at 
suburban stations and attempts to progressively reduce cooking on stalls 
and trolleys on the platform except for items which could be prepared 
through electrically operated equipment only.  Further, it stipulates that in 
order to ensure cooking free platforms, Zonal Railways may identify 
suitable space, if available, on railway premises near railway stations for 
setting up kitchens by the licencees of static units as per the terms and 
conditions of extant policy on land/rent.  Though the Committee 
appreciate the concern of the Railways about the fire hazards on platforms 
due to cooking of food, they are apprehensive that such blanket ban on 
cooking may cause considerable inconvenience to  the passengers as well 
as to the licencees.  They feel that either the space for setting up kitchens 
may not be available at most of the railway stations or the licencee may 

25 
 
not be in a position to set up its kitchen.  They, therefore, desire that while 
implementing the Policy, the Railways should carefully examine this 
aspect in order to avoid inconvenience to the passengers as well as to the 
licencees.  Adequate safety measures may be taken by the Railways to 
avoid electrical short-circuits, etc. 
 
10. Though the Committee appreciate the contention of the Railways 
that it is the social responsibility of the Railways to provide food to the 
passengers at affordable prices, they would like to caution the Railways to 
not to compromise with the quality of food as a result thereof.  Indian 
Railways have a vast network covering Kashmir in the north to 
Kanyakumari in the south and upto Bhuj in the west to Agartala in the 
east, with each region having its distinct regional cuisines.  In view of this, 
it is imperativ e on the part of the Railways to ensure the availability of 
regional cuisines depending upon the area.  The Committee hope that the 
New Catering Policy will take care of these concerns.     
 
11. The provision of safe drinking water in trains and at station s is of 
much concern to the Committee.  During their visits to various places, the 
Committee have found that at a majority of stations, normal tap water 
stored in tanks is used for drinking purposes.  The Committee have also 
noted the scarcity of packaged water in some long distance trains.  
Instances of supply of water bottles without labels of their 
manufacturing/expiry dates and even unsealed water bottles have also 
have been brought to the notice of the Committee.  The Committee note 
that with a view to  supplying packaged drinking water in trains and 

26 
 
stations, the IRCTC has set up two plants at Nangloi, Delhi, and at 
Danapur, Bihar.  The Committee have been informed that these plants 
employ an eight -stage purification process to guarantee safe drinking 
water, free from harmful contaminants.   The Committee have been 
further informed that the Railways are working on six more projects for 
providing drinking water and the standard terms of documents are getting 
finalized.  While appreciating the same, the Co mmittee desire that the 
setting up of these projects should be expedited.  The Committee also feel 
that these plants should have capacity to introduce packages/pouches of 
different volumes so that passengers can have wider options.  The 
Committee further recommend that surprise inspections should be carried 
out periodically at the selling points so that the problem of sale of 
unlabelled water bottles is checked.  The Committee also desire that 
provision of RO System should be made mandatory at all the railw ay 
stations in order to ensure supply of safe drinking water to the 
passengers.  
 
12. Quality control of food items and drinking water supplied to the 
travelling public by the Railways is a matter of the utmost concern for the 
Committee.  Quality control i s of paramount importance in any concern 
dealing with food and beverages as it is directly linked with the health and 
safety of the customers.  The Committee have been informed that under 
the New Catering Policy, the Chief Commercial Manager (CCM) will be the 
overall in-charge for the Zonal Railway but the inspections will be done by 
the catering staff available with him on a daily basis and they will have 

27 
 
their domain knowledge.  The Committee are of the considered view that 
the Railways should put in plac e a scientific quality control mechanism.  
The Committee are also of the view that the complaint/grievance 
mechanism should be further strengthened, with every complaint being 
attended to/redressed in a time bound manner.  The Committee also 
recommend that  besides imposing heavy penalties on the defaulting 
contractors, the concept of blacklisting of persistent defaulters should also 
be introduced.   
 
13. The Committee are concerned to note the existence of unauthorized 
vending in trains and at stations.  Th ey strongly feel that unauthorized 
vending not only causes loss of revenue to Railways but also poses a 
health hazard for the passengers.  The Committee urge the Railways to 
urgently work out suitable measures to check unauthorized vending, both 
in moving trains and at stations.   
 
14. The Committee also recommend that hygiene should be of 
paramount importance to the Railways and it should invariably be a part of 
the Catering Policy.  The Committee feel that the cleanliness of the 
coaches is other important  area which require serious attention of 
Railways.   
 
15. The Committee note that the New Catering Policy provides for 
proper management of solid waste.  The Committee hope that the same 
shall be implemented in letter and spirit.  These issues require cont inuous 

28 
 
surveillance of Railways.  Frequent surveys should be conducted and 
feedback taken from passengers. 
 
16. The Committee note that a provision for reservation in award of 
contracts has been made in favour of the underprivileged and 
marginalized sectio ns of society in the New Catering Policy.  They are 
concerned to note that like in the Catering Policy of 2005, no provision for 
reservation has been made for major units, including pantry cars, in the 
New Catering Policy of 2010.  25% reservations in mino r units at A, B and 
C category of stations and 49.5% of reservations have been provided in all 
units at D, E & F category of stations.   The Committee desire that a 
uniform policy of reservation should be followed in all catering units at all 
stations/trains.  They, therefore, recommend that the existing reservation 
policy of the Government of India should be strictly complied with.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                   T.R. BAALU 
15  May, 2012                                                           Chairman, 
25 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Railways 
 

29 
 
ANNEXURE 
CATERING POLICY 2010 
 
PREAMBLE 
 
Pursuant to a Cabinet decision, the Catering business of Indian Railways was 
being  progressively  hived  off  to  the  Indian  Railways  Catering  and  Tourism 
Corporation (IRCTC) through provisions in the Catering Policy of 2005. 
Modification of the policy has now been necessitated after the experience gained 
and public perception since the operation of this policy. The modifications pertain 
to establishing good  governance standards and improving the quality of these 
services for providing food and  beverage services to passengers travelling on 
trains through mobile catering services and  operation and management of the 
static  catering  contracts  dealing  with  provision  of  food   and  beverages  to 
passengers traveling on train, on railway premises like platforms, concourses etc. 
 
1. OBJECTIVES OF CATERING POLICY 
 
1.1 To provide hygienic, good quality affordable food to the traveling public by 
adopting best trade and hospitality industry practices. 
 
1.2 The policy will have an inclusive approach where from the least advantaged 
passenger to  the relatively affluent will be provided catering services in a 
socially responsible manner. 
 
1.3 It  should  meet  all  the  social  objectives  of  the  Government,  including 
provision of reservations as per Government Directives issued from time to 
time. 
 
2. DEFINITIONS: AS ANNEXURE 
 
3. ROLE OF RAILWAY BOARD, ZONAL RAILWAYS AND IRCTC   
 
3.1 Railways shall progressively take over management of all mobile catering 
services including base kitchens and mobile catering through departmental 
catering in a phased manner. 
 
3.2 Railway Board shall determine the menu and tariff for the standard meals, 
breakfast,  tea,  coffee  and  catering  charges  for  meals,  etc.,  which  are 
included in the fare.   Zonal Railways will determine the menu and tariff for 
all other items including a-la-carte items and Jan Ahar outlets. 
 
3.3 IRCTC will be primarily responsible for running of Food Plaza, Food Courts, 
fast food units within the ambit of this policy. 
 
3.3.1  All existing major and minor catering units will be awarded and managed by 
the zonal railways, except Food Plaza, Food Courts, fast food units. All such 
contracts presently  being managed by IRCTC, on expiry of the contract 
period, will be awarded by the  zonal railways. IRCTC will not renew any 
contract required to be handed over to  zonal  railways on expiry of the 
contract. 

30 
 
 
3.3.2  The base kitchens and the mobile catering services will be taken over by 
the zonal  railways in phases. To avoid disruption in services for the time 
being, railways will manage these services through departmental 
supervision by engaging reputed professionals till railways are in a position 
to manage them departmentally. 
 
3.3.3  All existing contracts, which are to be managed by zonal railways and have 
been awarded by IRCTC will be transferred to Zonal Railways in a phased 
manner  to  ensure  smooth  transfer  without  disruption  in  services  to  the 
passengers subject to fulfillment of all legal procedures. The monitoring of 
the static and mobile catering units will henceforth  be done by the zonal 
railways. 
 
3.4 A specialized team of ex-cadre supervisors and officers upto senior scale 
will be formed  which will be filled by incumbents from existing Railway 
cadres having necessary aptitude, through redeployment as per extant rules 
by the zonal railways for monitoring of catering services and will be trained 
by providing in-service training by reputed institutions. 
 
3.4.1  For  provision  of  such  services  departmentally,  trained  personnel  from 
reputed  Institutes  of  Hotel  Management  /Catering  Institutes/Food  Craft 
Institutes,  etc.  may   also  be  involved  to  upgrade  and  modernize  the 
departmental catering services. 
 
3.5 Zonal Railways will be responsible for ensuring that the standards, as laid 
down for different services, are maintained and policy directives issued by 
Railway Board from time to time are strictly complied with.  Zonal Railways 
will institutionalize a mechanism for monitoring the catering services. 
 
3.5.1  Zonal Railways will decide the extent, type and scale of catering services 
required to be provided at each station, on board trains ensuring adequate 
availability of affordable food for common passengers. 
 
3.5.2  Zonal Railways will benchmark, standardize and audit production and food 
processes to improve the quality of mobile catering and base kitchens. 
 
3.6 In view of  the change in roles  of IRCTC and zonal railways, the MoU 
between Ministry of Railways and IRCTC shall be redefined and the revised 
MoU shall be issued. 
 
4 QUALITY ASSURANCE PROGRAMME: 
 
IR  shall  have  the  mandate  to  frame  an  efficient  quality  assurance 
programme to  ensure good quality and hygienic food to the passengers. 
Progressively ISO 22000  Standards & relevant international standards in 
vogue from time to time will be implemented for all major contracts/units. 
 
4.1 Standard Bidding Documents shall be drafted by the Railway Board by 
engaging   suitable  professional  agency.  This  will  be  co-ordinated  and 
supervised by a cross  functional team comprising Executive Directors of 
 

31 
 
T&C, Finance,  Stores,  Health  and  Mechanical  Directorates  of  Railway 
Board.  Domain  knowledge  experts  may  also  be  co-opted  from  reputed 
institutions having  expertise such as Food craft Institutes, Quality Council 
Institute run by the Government. 
 
4.1.1  Special Tender Conditions, wherever required, may be framed by Zonal 
Railways or IRCTC, as the case may be. 
 
4.2 Two  Packet  Systems  of  Tendering  will  be  followed  while  selecting  the 
successful  bidder for award of major contracts and GMUs at A, B and C 
category  stations  Adequate  weightages  shall  be  given  to  the  quality  of 
services offered/conformity of the bid to the laid down standard of quality in 
the bid documents. For this purpose, suitable formulae shall be worked out 
and these along with the bid evaluation criteria/eligibility  criteria shall be 
defined clearly in the SBD document. 
 
4.3 With  a  view  to  ensuring  high  quality  hygiene,  cleanliness  and  use  of 
standard ingredients for food served on trains, the mobile catering units will 
pick up meals from nominated base kitchens. The base kitchens would be 
managed  and  controlled  by  zonal  railways  progressively  in  phases  to 
ensure quality of the food served on trains. 
 
5 SCALE OF CATERING SERVICES THROUGH STATIC UNITS: 
 
5.1 Zonal  Railways  will  prepare  a  blue  print  for  the  catering  units  at  each 
station. Zonal Railways should ensure that adequate facilities are available 
for providing affordable food to passengers before permitting any other type 
of outlets. Jan Ahar outlets should be set up by converting existing available 
Refreshment  Rooms  /  Static  units  into  Jan  Ahars.   Janta  Meals  and 
Economy combo meals with stress on regional cuisines should be served 
and vended from the Jan Ahar outlets 
 
5.2 The desirable scale of catering services to be provided at various stations is 
given as under: 
 
‘A’ Category Stations – Fast food units, Jan Ahar, Food Plaza, Food Courts, 
Refreshment  Rooms, AVMs etc. The number of catering units excluding 
AVMs on the main platform should not be more than 6 and not more than 5 
on island platform. (up to 5 AVMs {if stand alone} on each platform) 
 
‘B’ Category Stations - Refreshment Rooms, Fast Food Units, Jan Ahar 
Outlets, Cell  Kitchens, Snack Bars, AVMs. The number of catering units 
excluding AVMs should not be more than 5 on the main platform and not 
more than 4 on island platforms. (upto 4  AVMs {if stand alone} on each 
platform) 
 
‘C’ Category Stations – Fast Food units, and upto 5 catering units on the 
main  platform  and not more than 4 on island platforms excluding AVMs. 
Since these are suburban stations, tea stalls/fast food units/AVMs should be 
provided liberally. (upto 3 AVMs {if stand alone} on each platform) 
 
 

32 
 
‘D’ Category Stations – Not more than 3 catering units on the main platform 
and not more than 3 units on island platform excluding AVMs (up to 2 AVMs 
{if stand alone} on each platform) 
 
‘E’ Category stations- One each on the main platform and island platform 
including one AVM {if stand alone} on each platform may also be provided. 
 
‘F’ Category stations- AVMs and other units as per requirement. One AVM 
{if stand alone} on each platform). 
 
6 BASE KITCHENS 
 
6.1 Zonal Railways will set up a grid of modern mega, medium and small base 
kitchens to ensure that all mobile catering are serviced through these base 
kitchens  to  improve  quality,  hygiene,  cleanliness  and  use  of  standard 
ingredients for food served on trains. 
 
6.2 The base kitchens would be set up  on railway premises for which the 
existing  base  kitchens  /  cell  kitchens  available  on  platforms  shall  be 
developed.  In  case  of  non-availability  of  existing  base  kitchens  or  Cell 
kitchens, the zonal railways shall take immediate steps for construction of 
the base kitchens as required. 
 
6.3 The base kitchens would be managed through departmental catering by 
zonal railways in phases. During the interim period the base kitchens may 
be  managed  by  zonal  railways  by  engaging  reputed  professionals  for 
creating state-of-the-art base kitchens conforming to international standards 
like ISO-22000. 
 
6.4 With  a  view  to  ensuring  high  quality  hygiene,  cleanliness  and  use  of 
standard   ingredients  for  food  served  on  trains,  henceforth  all  mobile 
catering units will pick  up meals on transfer rate basis (rate as fixed by 
Railway Board) from nominated base kitchens. The base kitchens would be 
railway specified, supervised and controlled to  ensure quality of the food 
served on trains. 
 
6.5 With a view to ensuring efficient services through mobile catering units, the 
base kitchens would cater to a grid of trains for on board service. On the 
proposals submitted by zonal railways, the Railway Board shall accordingly 
decide the number and location of  base kitchens to be set up on zonal 
railways and the grid of trains which would be serviced by them. 
 
6.6 Infrastructure of base kitchens should be designed to create a modern and 
mechanised kitchens with the latest state of art technology. 
 
6.7 The zonal railways will be responsible for ensuring the quality and quantity 
of food, cleanliness and hygiene of the base kitchens so as to conform to 
the standards laid down by Railway Board. Zonal Railways will ensure that 
the laid down standards are  strictly followed and progressively all Base 
Kitchens be ISO 22000 certified. 
 
4 

33 
 
7 INFRASTRUCTURE AT STATIC UNITS: 
 
7.1 There should be no cooking on platforms at suburban stations and for other 
stations there should be attempts to progressively reduce cooking on stalls 
and trolleys on the  platforms, except for items which could be prepared 
through electrically operated equipments only. 
 
7.2 Trolleys/khomchas may be continued on selective basis. However, in order 
to  reduce  congestion,  these  should  be  made  area  specific.  Preference 
should be given towards  providing them at the ends of platforms so that 
General Service unreserved passengers have easy access to them. Such 
trolleys/khomchas must have adequate availability of the low priced Janta 
Khana and food from Jan Ahar outlets. The trolleys/khomchas  should be 
redesigned to make them modern, compact and standardized. Railway 
Board will process the cases for redesigning these trollies. 
 
7.3 Gradually all old catering stalls should be replaced with compact modular 
stalls of  uniform  design to ease congestion on the station platforms and 
circulating area as per the policy guidelines issued by Railway Board. 
 
7.4 Refreshment Rooms/Restaurants/Snack Bars should be self-serviced and 
should  have   computerized  billing  arrangement  and  prominent  display 
arrangements. 
 
7.5 All  systems  and  processes  and  equipment  such  as  deep  freezers,  hot 
cases,  microwave  ovens,  refrigerated  storage  units,  bain-maries  should 
progressively  replace   the  existing  traditional  equipments  and  manual 
methods in static units. 
 
7.6 Superior quality material should be used in fabrication/construction of all 
static  units  to   improve  on  aesthetics,  durability  and  convenience  for 
maintenance. This should be specified in the agreement. 
 
7.7 Decongestion should be ensured. Existing bans as notified from time to time 
will continue subject to further instructions issued from time to time. 
 
7.8 In order to ensure cooking free platforms and availability of clean, hygienic 
and quality  food to the passengers, zonal railways may identify suitable 
space, if available, on railway premises near railway stations for setting up 
kitchens by the licencees of static  units at railway premises on the terms 
and conditions of extant policy on land/rent. 
 
8 DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE 
 
Solid waste management will be a priority area. All static and mobile units 
should  liberally  provide garbage bins  properly  lined  with  garbage bags. 
Garbage thus  collected should be disposed off in the prescribed manner 
which should be incorporated in all agreements and should adhere to extant 
pollution  control  and  environmental  norms.  All  instructions  in  regard  to 
disposal  of  garbage  issued  by  Health,   Mechanical  and  Commercial 
 
 

34 
 
Directorate are to be adhered to by licencees and departmental catering 
units. 
 
9 CATERING BY MOBILE UNITS: 
 
9.1 Mobile catering services shall be provided from suitably designed pantry 
cars and providing equipments with state of art technology. There should be 
progressive  switch  over  from  gas  burner  to  safer  electrically  powered 
equipments. Panels, counters, etc. should be made of stainless steel. 
 
9.2 Zonal Railways will manage mobile catering services through departmental 
management.  During the period of non-availability of departmental staff, 
Railways may award service  contracts to be supervised by departmental 
supervisors for service of meals picked up from nominated base kitchens. 
 
9.3 Ownership of pantry car: In order to maintain effective control over on-board 
services, the Division responsible for the primary maintenance of the train 
would own the rake of the  train and also undertake maintenance of the 
pantry car. For any complaint in this regard the division concerned would be 
accountable. 
 
9.4 As a policy pantry cars should be attached to more and more Premier/ 
Super fast and Mail/Express trains.  Manufacture of pantry cars should be 
progressively increased.  Priority  for  allotment  of pantry  cars  for  various 
Zonal Railways will be as under: 
 
9.4.1  First priority to Duronto and Rajdhani Express trains. 
 
9.4.2  Second priority to long distance premier, superfast trains. 
 
9.4.3  Third priority to mail & express trains with more than 24 hours journey time 
either way. 
 
9.4.4  Fourth  priority,  the  remaining  trains,  preference  to  those  trains  where 
vestibules are provided. 
 
9.5 Pantry cars of Rajdhani Express trains / Duronto trains should be designed 
to ensure that pre-cooked and hygienically packed food are supplied from 
base  kitchens  with  minimum  handling  in  transferring  the  same  to  the 
passengers. Suitable space should  be earmarked in coaches of Rajdhani 
and Duronto trains for stacking and service of  meals and installation of 
catering equipments and trolleys. This will eliminate the usage of vestibules 
and area around the toilets presently being used for this purpose and this 
will  ensure  hygienic  services.  Light  weight  compact  trolleys  (specially 
designed) will be used on Rajdhani/Duronto trains to ensure that food is not 
kept on the floors of the  trains at the time of service. The trolleys would 
provide quick, clean and hygienic services in trains. 
 
9.6 All Shatabdi Express/Duronto trains should have mini pantries equipped 
with modern gadgets such as hot cases, water boiler, bottle cooler etc. in all 
coaches.  There should be no cooking and washing on board. Food should 
 

35 
 
be served in pre-set trays, and service in all the coaches should be through 
trolleys. 
 
9.7 In case of an increase in the frequency of train services and / or extension 
of  trains  the  departmental  unit  already  managing  the  services  should 
manage the services on additional trip(s) and / or on extended portion of the 
run. In case of trains wherein services are managed through engagement of 
professionals/service providers the extension would be subject to revision of 
due charges on pro rata basis. 
 
9.8 Allotment and priority will be decided by the Railway Board 
 
10 CATERING BY TRAIN SIDE VENDING: 
 
Since all trains are not provided with pantry cars, Train Side Vending will be 
provided from a suitable unit of nominated station/stations en route. For this 
purpose,   arrangements   will  be  made  through  static  units  by  either 
segmentation of run or on end to end basis, as practicable. Zonal Railways 
will take over the management of trains through departmental supervision 
and pick up meals from nominated base kitchens and / or major static units 
enroute to ensure quality of meals. 
 
11 AUTOMATIC VENDING MACHINES (AVMs): 
 
11.1 Zonal Railways shall manage through licencees the automatic self vending 
machines which would be provided at stations and would be governed by 
policy guidelines issued  by Railway Board. Automatic Vending Machines 
shall be permitted only in the form of stand-alone self dispensing units.  The 
operations  of  the  AVMs  shall  not  involve  any  manual  interface  i.e.  all 
operations shall be through coin-operated dispenser. 
 
However, in case of AVMs dispensing beverages the same may be installed 
inside the Refreshment Rooms or existing stalls to reduce congestion. 
 
11.2 In  case  of  existing  AVMs  they  would  be  allowed  to  continue  until  the 
currency  of the existing contract. No renewal would be permitted in any of 
the existing contracts. Existing AVM contracts allotted by IRCTC, which are 
in excess of the ceiling limit should be terminated. 
 
12 MILK AND MILK PRODUCT STALLS: 
 
These may also be provided by zonal railways on priority at stations and 
allotment  and   operations  of  these  stalls  are  governed  by  letters  no. 
2004/TGIII/604/04  dated  19.04.2005  &  5.09.05.  However,  since  zonal 
railways  are  managing the catering services instead of IRCTC, therefore, 
the role of IRCTC would be assumed by the zonal railways. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
13 MENU AND TARIFF: 
 
13.1 Menu and Tariff of food items will be fixed as follows: 
 
13.1.1 For  Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto  trains  and  such  other  trains  in  which 
catering charges are inbuilt in the passenger fare, the menu and tariff will be 
fixed by Railway Board. 
 
13.1.2 For controlled segment items (standard meals, beverages and packaged 
drinking  water),  Janta Meals, the menu & tariff will be fixed by Railway 
Board. 
 
13.1.3 Menu, recipes and tariffs for Food Plaza, Food Courts and fast food units 
will be decided and fixed by IRCTC within the ambit of this policy. 
 
13.1.4 Menu and the recipe of the food items served by static including Jan Ahar 
outlets and mobile units on trains other than those mentioned above will be 
decided by Zonal  Railways including a-la-carte items served through the 
units. The tariff will be fixed as per the extant procedure. 
 
13.1.5 Adequate emphasis should be laid on availability of regional cuisine all over 
Indian Railway. 
 
13.2 Board will periodically look into issues of menu and tariff revisions as and 
when required and will consider proposals of Zonal Railways on the subject 
of menu and tariff revisions and will issue necessary directives from time to 
time. 
 
13.3 Commercial advertising will be permitted and should be positively attempted 
on  equipments  and  accessories  which  are  part  of  catering  services,  to 
increase revenue. 
 
14 ALLOTMENT PROCEDURE AND CONTRACT MANAGEMENT: 
 
14.1 Zonal Railways shall have an effective and transparent contract awarding, 
management and monitoring system. 
 
14.1.1 Allotments  of  all  major  units  and  of  General  Minor  Units  at  A,  B  &  C 
category   stations  will  be  done  through  open,  competitive,  two-packet 
tendering system duly  following all the procedures/instructions issued by 
Government of India/Railway Board from time to time. 
 
14.1.2 A  Standard  Bidding  Document  shall  be  prepared  to  make  allotments 
through  process  of  tendering.  The  Standard  Bidding  Document  would 
include eligibility  criteria,  bid  evaluation criteria,  details  of  technical  and 
financial requirements along with general and special conditions of tenders 
and general and special conditions of  contract. Adequate weightage shall 
be given to the quality of services offered/conformity of the bid to the laid 
down standard of quality in the bid documents. For this purpose,  suitable 
formulae shall be worked out and these along with the bid evaluation criteria 
shall be declared clearly in the RFP document. 
 

37 
 
 
14.1.3 These conditions should be framed to ensure transparency, equity and fair 
play in selection of contractors and award of contracts. The SBD would also 
incorporate  provision   to  attract  reputed  players,  eliminate  small  time 
operators and prevent subletting. 
 
14.1.4 Special Tender Conditions, wherever required, may be framed by Zonal 
Railways or  IRCTC, as the case may be. Suitable clauses outlining other 
civil and criminal liabilities of the contractors, either direct or consequential 
will be incorporated in the document. 
 
14.1.5 Due emphasis is to be given to quality and standard of catering services. It 
would lay down clearly the standards of services and quality of services in 
clear, transparent and unambiguous manner for objective and transparent 
assessment/evaluation of bids as also to monitor / evaluate the contractors. 
 
14.1.6 The contract document should clearly define as to what would constitute 
deficiency in service and contain details of quality checks, inspections, etc. 
which the licensee will have to facilitate. 
 
14.1.7 Suitable clauses to deal with defaults and failures in the performance of 
contractors  like  penalties / fines, termination, risk and cost actions, exit 
clauses, etc. should be built in the SBDs and contract documents. 
 
14.1.8 Clauses outlining other civil and criminal liabilities of the contractors, either 
direct or  consequential, in the event of any contractual default and / or 
failure on their part  should also be included in the tender and contract 
documents. 
 
14.2 ALLOTMENT OF SPECIAL MINOR UNITS & GENERAL MINOR UNITS AT 
D, E & F CATEGORY STATIONS 
 
Allotment of  Special  Minor  Units  and  General  Minor  Units  at  D,  E,  F 
category  stations  will  be  made  by  DRMs  by  calling  applications  and 
selecting the licensee based on instructions as given below: - 
 
14.2.1 Divisions will call for applications through press notifications. 
Individuals/partnership firms/companies/Co-operatives can apply. 
Applications shall be invited by calling for the following information and 
allotments shall be based on these criteria:- 
 
14.2.1.1 Allotment for 25% reserved Refreshment Rooms at “B’ & ‘C” category 
stations. 
 
(a) Reputation/business standing of the applicant. 
(b) Turnover  of  applicant’s  business  in  catering  (to  be  supported  by 
Income Tax Return for the last 5 years). 
(c) Financial standing to mobilize resources to employ the requisite staff 
and to run  the unit (to be supported by Certificate for last 5 years 
from  Scheduled   Bank/Audited  Accounts  Certified  by  Chartered 
Accountant). 
 

38 
 
(d) Previous  experience  in  catering  business  (to  be  supported  by 
certificate/letter of experience/allotment from concerned agencies for 
the last 5 years). 
(e) Previous track record/experience of the applicant in railway catering, 
if any (Supported by certificate / letter from concerned railways). 
(f) Size of the establishment and staff required for running the unit duly 
giving details  of break-up of each activity i.e. number of waiters / 
cooks to be employed. 
(g) Location of the unit. 
(h) Domicile  of  the  applicants  with  reference  to  the  location  of  the 
proposed unit (supported with a certificate from the District 
Authorities) 
(i) In case of partnership firms, a certified copy of legal partnership deed 
should be submitted. 
(j) In case of individuals/partnership firms, the individual/partners should 
be literate (supported by relevant school/Education Board certificate). 
(k) In case of individuals/partnership firms, the individual/partners should 
have good  moral character (should be supported by a certificate 
issued by local government authority). 
(l) Individuals/partners of partnership firms and employees of Individual/ 
partnership firm/ Companies should submit the medical certificate on 
allotment to certify that  those handling preparation and service of 
food are not suffering from infectious diseases. 
(m) An  affidavit  by  the  applicant  stating  that  he/she  has  not  been 
convicted in any criminal case and does not have any past criminal 
record. In case of co-operative/partnership firm, there should be an 
affidavit from the head / lead partner that all the members have not 
been  convicted  in  any  criminal  case  and  do  not  have  any  past 
criminal record. 
(n) An affidavit from the applicant/applicants should be submitted stating 
that they or  their firm / co-operative has not been blacklisted by a 
central/state  government   agency  from  participating  in  a  similar 
activity. 
(o) An affidavit from the applicant indicating all information submitted 
above is  authentic and correct. False certificates/information would 
result in termination of contract and banning of business dealing with 
the applicant. 
(p) Any other facts considered relevant by Railways. 
 
Allotment should be made subject to the fulfillment of all the above criteria. 
Weightage  (marks) should be given to each parameter by the nominated 
Selection Committee in advance prior to calling of applications. This details 
of weightage to each parameter and the selection criteria shall be declared 
in  the  advertisement  inviting  applications  for  the  licence.  The  Selection 
Committee  will  tabulate,  compile  and  finalise  the  selection  in   a  fair, 
equitable and transparent manner. 
14.2.1.2 For 25% reserved stalls/trolleys at A, B & C category stations. 
(a)  Reputation/business standing of the applicant. 
 
 

39 
 
(b) Turnover  of  applicant’s  business  in  catering  (to  be  supported  by 
Income Tax Return for the last 5 years). 
(c) Financial standing to mobilize resources to employ the requisite staff 
and to run  the unit (to be supported by Certificate for last 5 years 
from  Scheduled   Bank/Audited  Accounts  Certified  by  Chartered 
Accountant). 
(d) Previous  experience  in  catering  business  (to  be  supported  by 
certificate/letter of experience/allotment from concerned agencies for 
the last 5 years). 
(e) Previous track record/experience of the applicant in railway catering, 
if any (Supported by certificate / letter from concerned railways). 
(f) Size of the establishment and staff required for running the unit duly 
giving details  of break-up of each activity i.e. number of waiters / 
cooks to be employed. 
(g) Location of the unit. 
(h) Domicile  of  the  applicant  with  reference  to  the  location  of  the 
proposed unit (supported with a certificate from the District 
Authorities) 
(i) In case of partnership firms, a certified copy of legal partnership deed 
should be submitted. 
(j) In case of individuals/partnership firms, the individual/partners should 
be literate (supported by relevant school/Education Board certificate). 
(k) In case of individuals/partnership firms, the individual/partners should 
have good  moral character (should be supported by a certificate 
issued by local government authority). 
(l) Individuals/partners of partnership firms and employees of Individual/ 
partnership firm/ Companies should submit the medical certificate on 
allotment to certify that  those handling preparation and service of 
food are not suffering from infectious diseases. 
(m) An  affidavit  by  the  applicant  stating  that  he/she  has  not  been 
convicted in any criminal case and does not have any past criminal 
record. In case of co-operative/partnership firm, there should be an 
affidavit from the head / lead partner that all the members have not 
been  convicted  in  any  criminal  case  and  do  not  have  any  past 
criminal record. 
(n) An affidavit from the applicant/applicants should be submitted stating 
that they or  their firm / co-operative has not been blacklisted by a 
central/state  government   agency  from  participating  in  a  similar 
activity. 
(o) An affidavit from the applicant indicating all information submitted 
above is  authentic and correct. False certificates/information would 
result in termination of contract and banning of business dealing with 
the applicant. 
(p) Any other facts considered relevant by Railways. 
 
Allotment should be made subject to the fulfillment of all the above criteria. 
Weightage  (marks) should be given to each parameter by the nominated 
Selection Committee in advance prior to calling of applications. This details 
of weightage to each parameter and the selection criteria shall be declared 
in  the  advertisement  inviting  applications  for  the  licence.  The  Selection 
 
 

40 
 
Committee  will  tabulate,  compile  and  finalise  the  selection  in  a  fair, 
equitable and transparent manner. 
 
14.2.1.3 For all units at D, E & F category stations. 
 
Essential 
(a) In case of individuals/partnership firms, the individual/partners should 
be literate. 
(b) In case of individuals/partnership firms, the individual/partners should 
have good moral character. 
(c) The applicant should be solvent. 
(d) The individual/partners and the employees, particularly those 
handling  preparation  of  food  should  not  be  suffering  from  any 
infectious disease. 
(e) For reserved categories, relevant certificate from concerned authority 
as a proof of being a member of certain reserved category, should be 
furnished. 
 
Desirable 
(f) Previous experience in catering business. 
(g) Financial standing to mobilize resources to employ the requisite staff 
and to run the unit, and 
(h) Previous track record, if any. 
 
At the time of selection, weightage should be given to each parameter both 
in the ‘essential’ and in the ‘desirable’ category by the Selection Committee. 
Allotment should be made subject to the fulfillment of all the above criteria. 
This details of weightage to each parameter and the selection criteria shall 
be declared in the advertisement inviting  applications for the licence. The 
Selection Committee will tabulate, compile and finalise  the selection in a 
fair, equitable and transparent manner. For reserved category, the 
application should not be rejected if any/all parameters from (f) to (h) are not 
fulfilled by the applicant.  However, selection would be based on evaluation 
of the parameters as mentioned above. The selection should be done in a 
fair, equitable and transparent manner. 
 
14.3 Selection Committee to be nominated by DRM consisting of three junior 
administrative  grade  officers  (divisional  level)  including  one  each  from 
Commercial, Finance and  one from any other department will make the 
selection by scrutinizing the applications and the related papers. Selection 
Committee would tabulate and compile the shortlisted  applicant based on 
the total marks obtained and put up its recommendations for the approval of 
Divisional Railway Manager. 
 
14.4 Before calling the applications through newspapers, division will assess the 
potential  sales  turnover  of  such  units,  which  among  other  things,  will 
depend upon the type and location of unit, category of station, number  of 
passengers dealt with, types and  price of catering items sold and other 
related  criteria. The  minimum  licence  fee  will  be  12%  or  any  other 
percentage commission on annual sales turnover notified from time to time 
 
 

41 
 
S.No. Category %age reservatio 
1. Scheduled Caste 6% 
2. Scheduled Tribes 4% 
3. People below Poverty Line 3% 
4. Freedom Fighters/women including war widows and 
widows of railway employees,  persons who have 
been dislocated/ displaced due to their land having 
been taken over by the railways for its own use 
4% 
5. Other Backward Classes 3% 
6. Minorities * 3% 
7. Physically Challenged Persons 2% 
 Total 25% 
* the term minorities will include the communities namely (i) Muslims, (ii) Christians, 
(iii) Sikhs, (iv) Buddhists, (v) Zoroastrians (Parsis) 
 
expressed in lumpsum amount, which should be clearly indicated in the 
press notification calling for applications. 
 
14.5 Commercial  Department  of  the  divisions  will  maintain  the  record  of 
applications  received  through  Press  Notification  for  various  categories 
separately.  Divisions will verify the credentials of the applicants with regard 
to the eligibility criteria mentioned above and also keep the vacancy position 
with justification for the services. 
 
14.6 In case no application is received against a particular reserved category as 
per break up  specified in revised catering policy (issued by Commercial 
Circular No. 56 of 2005 vide letter No. 2005/TG.III/600/6 dated 21.12.2005), 
the vacancy will be carried forward to the next category in order of the break 
up  of  the  various  categories  mentioned  above.  However,  under  no 
circumstances the total allotment to a particular category should exceed the 
specified percentage reserved for that particular category except in the case 
of  carry forward. The total number of allotments of minor units to the 
various  reserved  categories  should  also  not  exceed  49.5%  of  the  total 
allotments of minor  units made on a particular Division at D, E and F 
category stations and 25% of the total allotments of minor units made on a 
particular Division at A, B and C category  stations. Record of allotments 
based on reservation will be maintained by the concerned division. 
 
15 RESERVATION IN ALLOTMENT: 
 
15.1 RESERVATION IN A, B & C CATEGORIES 
 
15.2 There should be no reservation for major units including pantry cars. 
 
15.3 There should be 25% reservation for minor units in A, B & C categories of 
stations with the following break up. 
 
n 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
15.4 RESERVATION IN D, E & F CATEGORY: 
 
There will be 49.5% reservation for allotment in D, E & F categories of 
stations with following break up. 
 
S.No. Category %age reservation 
1
. 
Scheduled Caste 12% 
2
. 
Scheduled Tribes 8% 
3
. 
Other backward classes 20% 
4
. 
Minorities * 9.5% 
 Total 49.5%** 
*the term minorities will include the communities namely (i) Muslims, (ii) 
Christians, (iii) Sikhs, (iv) Buddhists, (v) Zoroastrians (Parsis) 
** Out of this 49.5%, there will be sub quota of 10% for freedom fighters & 
women including war widows& widows of Railway employees and another sub 
quota  of 2 
% will be for physically challenged people. Within 49.5% of total reservation 
2% sub  quota will  be provided to the persons who have been dislocated/ 
displaced due to their land havi ng been taken over by the railwa ys for its own 
use. The sub quota of 10% for freedom fighters & women including war widows 
& widows  of  Railway  employees;  sub  quota  of  2%  for  physically  &  
mentally challenged people will also apply in the general category of 50.5%. 
 
The issue of reservations is at present sub-judice in the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court. Any allotment/extension in the case of reservations will be subject to 
the final order of the  Hon’ble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No.7513 of 
2005 and analogous case referred to the Constitutional bench. 
 
15.5 For the purpose of reservation, one division will be considered as one unit 
for which a one time station-wise exercise will be done for the whole division 
and reservation  percentage will be progressively achieved as and when 
either  new  units  are  provided  or  old  units  get  vacated  due  to  various 
reasons. 
 
16 TENURE 
 
16.1 TENURE OF MAJOR UNITS & GENERAL MINOR UNITS 
 
16.1.1 Tenure of all major units including food courts, fast food units (except Food 
Plazas, Base Kitchens and AVMs) will be for a period of 5 years. There will 
be no renewals. 
 
16.1.2 Tenure of AVMs will be made for a period of 5 years. There will be no 
renewals as per policy as these are major units. 
 
16.1.3 Allotment of all General Minor Units at A, B & C category stations shall be 
awarded for a  period of 5 years with a provision for renewal after every 
3 years on satisfactory performance and payment of all dues and arrears 
 
 

43 
 
and withdrawal of court cases, if any. Allotment of all General Minor Units at 
D, E & F category stations will be for a period of 5 years with a provision for 
renewal after every 5 years for a further period of 5 years on satisfactory 
performance and payment of all dues and arrears and withdrawal of court 
cases, if any. 
 
16.1.4 Tenure of Food Plaza will be for 9 years with an extension of 3 years on 
satisfactory performance and payment and payment of all dues and arrears 
and withdrawal of court cases, if any. 
 
16.1.5 All efforts must be made to manage the services departmentally at the 
earliest. The Service contracts for on-board services managed by 
departmental supervision would have a tenure for 5 years. 
 
16.2 TENURE OF SPECIAL MINOR UNITS 
 
16.2.1 Special Minor Units at A, B, and C category stations shall be awarded for a 
period  of  5  years  with  a  renewal  after  every  3  years  on  satisfactory 
performance and payment of all dues and arrears and withdrawal of court 
cases, if any. 
 
16.2.2 Special Minor Units at D, E, F category stations shall be awarded for a 
period of 5  years with a provision for renewal after every 5 years for a 
further period of 5 years  on  satisfactory performance and payment of all 
dues  and  arrears  and  withdrawal  of  court  cases,  if  any.  Efforts  must, 
however, be made at the time of renewal to ensure a minimum increase of 
10% over the prevailing license fee. 
 
16.2.3 Licence fee will be reassessed and revised at the time of each renewal. To 
arrive at a realistic figure zonal railways will ensure that a fresh assessment 
of sales  turnover/revenue  is conducted during the peak season and lean 
season of the year  immediately preceding the year of renewal with the 
periodicity of three – three  months  in order to assess the actual sales 
turnover so as to fix the revised licence fee. 
 
16.3 Allotments after expiry of this extended period will be made by calling for 
fresh tenders/  applications as the case may be, and the process will be 
started well in time so that fresh allotments are finalized timely and further 
extension of existing contracts is not necessitated. 
 
17 RENEWAL 
 
Renewal will not be a matter of right. The licencee must apply for renewal 
minimum  6  (six)  months  in  advance  before  the  expiry  of  the  contract. 
Renewal will be based on the following: - 
 
17.1 Satisfactory performance of the licencee during the tenure of the contract. 
An imposition  of  fine/warnings  on  more  than  5  occasions  will  result  in 
rejection of the application for renewal. 
 
 
 
 
 

44 
 
17.2 Payment of all dues/ arrears – No Dues Certificate from the concerned 
authority, must be attached along with the application for renewal. 
 
17.3 The applicant must submit the documents afresh along with the renewal 
application  regarding the details mentioned in para 14.2.1.1, 14.2.1.2 and 
14.2.1.3 and in case of GMUs relevant documents as mentioned in the 
Standard Bid Documents will be required to be submitted afresh along with 
the above mentioned documents. 
 
17.4 The Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs) on catering performance will be 
modified in accordance with this policy. The detailed instructions on ACRs 
will be issued by the Railway Board. ACRs maintained by the Railways for 
the  Licencee  seeking  renewal  shall  be  scruitinised  by  the  Competent 
Authority granting renewal. Based on the ACRs for the period of tenure the 
marks will be allotted to the licencee. A minimum cut off criteria based on 
the grading of the ACRs for grant of renewal must be notified by the zonal 
railways in advance. 
 
17.5 The licence fee shall be revised and reassessed at the time of each renewal 
subject to a minimum increase of 10% of the existing licence fee. 
 
18 FIXATION OF LICENCE FEE 
 
18.1 Minimum licence fees / minimum reserve price (in case of tendered units) 
shall  be  fixed  realistically,  equitably  in  order  to  have  a  fair,  just and 
equitable fixation of  licence fees without adversely affecting the quality of 
service. It shall be based on the following factors (i) category of station, 
(ii)  type of licence, (iii) number of originating passengers, (iv) number of 
trains stopping (day & night), (v) duration of stoppages (vi) location of the 
unit at the station, (vii) approximate licence fees of a similar type of unit at a 
similar category of station in proximity. In case of Static Units on Category 
‘A1’ and ‘A’ stations of Metro cities, and ‘C’ Category stations having high 
purchasing  power, the fixation of minimum licence fee will apart from all 
other  factors take into account the Circle rates notified by the competent 
authority of the  State  Government as fixed from time to time. The zonal 
railways shall evolve a formula based on the above parameters for fixing the 
licence  fees  for  the  units  falling  within  their  jurisdiction.  A  Committee 
comprising three SA Grade officers from  Commercial, Finance and Civil 
Engineering shall be nominated by the General Manager which shall fix the 
formula for each category of stations. The formula so fixed by the  zonal 
railway shall be applicable to the entire zonal railway. Apart from the above 
zonal  railways may include and consider any other factor/s unique to the 
unit/units. 
 
18.2 Minimum licence fee will be fixed as 12% of the estimated annual sales 
turnover  for  static  units,  mobile  units  of  Ordinary  Mail/Express  trains  & 
premium super fast trains  and 15% for Rajdhani/Shatabdi trains/Duronto 
trains  of  the  annual  sales  turnover  based  on  actual  occupancy  figures 
certified by the Train Superintendent. 
 
 
 
 

45 
 
18.3 At the time of renewal of licence, licence fee should be 
enhanced/reassessed based on actual sales turnover of the unit.  Licence 
fee will be reassessed and revised at the time of each renewal subject to a 
minimum of 10%  increase over the prevailing licence fee of the unit. To 
arrive at a realistic figure zonal railways will ensure that a fresh assessment 
of sales turnover/revenue is conducted  during the peak period and lean 
period i.e. with the periodicity of three – three months in order to assess the 
actual sales turnover so as to fix the revised licence fee. Renewal will be 
done for the existing licensees only on withdrawal of court cases by the 
licensees, if any, against the railways and payment of railway dues and 
arrears. 
 
18.4 No operational charges like haulage/maintenance/ detention etc, in case of 
mobile services will be recoverable from the licensees. In the case of static 
units  also  there  will  be  no  separate  charges  payable  towards  rent  for 
building /land, vender’s fee and conservancy charges etc, except electricity 
and water charges, which will be based on actual consumption. 
 
18.5 Minimum licence fee will be fixed by Zonal Railways (CCMs) for all major 
units (except Food Plazas, fast food units and food courts), GMUs at A, B & 
C category stations and  SMUs at A, B, C categories of stations as per 
extant instructions issued by Railway Board.  For GMUs and SMUs at D, E, 
F categories of stations minimum licence fee will be fixed by DRMs as per 
extant instructions issued by Railway Board. 
 
18.6 The licensee will be required to pay all the charges as per the contract 
agreement and all statutory duties/charges/levies, etc. would also be borne 
by the licensee as and when due. However, land license fee for land leased 
to IRCTC will be payable by IRCTC and  revenue sharing will be as per 
Memorandum of Understanding in vogue from time to time between IR and 
IRCTC. 
 
19 CEILING LIMITS ON HOLDING OF CATERING LICENSES: 
 
19.1 Zonal  Railway  shall  maintain  a  data  base  of  the  various  catering 
establishments  to ensure that the under mentioned ceiling on holding of 
catering licenses are complied with.  The data base should be reconciled on 
a regular basis.  As and when a tender is finalized, the information may be 
circulated  to  all  concerned  for  updating  the  data  base.  Railways  shall 
consolidate  and  circulate  a  list  of  all  catering  establishments  as  on  1st 
January of each year to be circulated latest by 31st March of that year. Such 
information should be uploaded regularly to the websites of the Railways. 
 
19.2 MINOR  UNITS:  -  An  individual/firm/company  will  be  allowed  to  hold 
maximum two minor catering units at a station and a maximum of 10 units 
per Zonal Railway. In case of suburban section, ceiling limit of 2 units per 
division would be applicable. 
 
19.3 MAJOR UNITS: - All mobile catering units shall be managed departmentally 
progressively. However, when it is licencee managed catering services the 
ceiling shall be as under: 
 
 

46 
 
19.3.1 Food Plaza, Food Courts and Fast Food Units: An individual/firm/company 
will be allowed to hold maximum two units per division and a maximum 10% 
of all the units over Indian Railways. 
 
19.3.2 Refreshment Rooms:- An individual/firm/company will be allowed to hold 
maximum two units per Division and a maximum 10% of all the units over 
Indian Railway. 
 
19.3.3 Premium  Franchisees  outlets  including  stand-alone  beverage  vending 
machines:- A company will be allowed to hold a maximum 10% of all the 
units over each Railway. 
 
19.3.4 Mobile Units and Base Kitchens:- All mobile units and Base Kitchen shall be 
managed  departmentally  progressively  in  a  phased  manner.  Until  the 
departmentalization  is  completed,  a  licencee  will  be  allowed  to  hold  a 
maximum of 10% of similar category of major units over Indian Railways. 
 
19.4 Modification of the above limits may be done only with prior approval of 
Board. 
 
20 MECHANISM FOR MONITORING OF CATERING SERVICES 
 
20.1 Inspections/Quality checks 
 
20.1.1 Endeavour should be made so that all catering services should be ISO 
certified. The ISO certifications should be checked frequently to ensure that 
those are not outdated. 
 
20.1.2 To  provide  hygienic  and  quality  food  to  the  travelling  passengers  and 
improve the  on-board and static catering  services a strict and effective 
system of monitoring of catering services of must be followed. Monitoring of 
quality should be made through inspections and food quality checks. 
 
20.2 Licencee Managed Units should be monitored for their mechanization and 
modernization  alongwith  their  performance.  Supervision  of  the  services 
should be made constantly.  Zonal Railways should review annually the 
performance  for  licencee  managed  units  as  per  instructions  issued  by 
Railway Board from time to time. 
 
20.3 Departmentally Managed Units shall serve as beacon of excellence and 
define the quality paradigm for the licencee catering units. These units will 
be subject to rigorous monitoring and supervision through routine, surprise 
inspections and checks. 
 
20.4 Zonal railways must ensure that duly trained staff are deputed for running 
these  establishments. Efforts should be made to constantly upgrade the 
skills  of  the  staff  and  modernization  of  units  by  inducting  appropriate 
technology and methods. 
 
20.5 Monitoring of complaints for catering services 
 
 

47 
 
 
20.5.1 A system for complaint redressal for catering services for static and on- 
board services should be brought in place to provide proactive and effective 
complaint  redressal  mechanism.  The  toll  free  number  and  the  website 
created  by  IRCTC  for  the  purpose  of  lodging  of  complaints  would  be 
continued and data of complaints received will be transferred by IRCTC to 
zonal  railways  directly  until  the  time  zonal  railways  set  up  their  own 
mechanism. 
 
20.5.2 A complaint monitoring cell should be set up at zonal railway headquarters 
and divisional  offices wherein all complaints received through complaint 
books, emails, SMS should  be collected and a mechanism be devised to 
acknowledge  the  complaints  /  feedback  within  24  hrs.  Action  taken  on 
complaints should be monitored by the CCM of the zonal railway and DRM 
of  the  divisions  on  a  monthly  periodical  basis.  Complaints  of  repetitive 
nature should be taken up sternly. 
 
20.5.3 Deficiencies in the equipments of the pantry cars etc. should be monitored 
for taking timely action. 
 
20.6 Zonal Railways will conduct passenger satisfaction surveys by means of 
third party audits. 
 
20.7 Zonal  Railways  will  take  corrective  action  for  deficiency  in  services  for 
departmental and mobile services which may include D&AR action against 
the employees of  departmental units and imposition of fines on service 
providers as per the terms and  conditions of the agreement. In case of 
continued failure in performance, Railways will have the right to close down 
any unit. The  event of continued failure may be explicitly defined in the 
tender document/agreement in terms of fine imposed as a percentage of the 
license fee’, number of failures, nature of failures, etc. 
 
20.8 Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs) on performance of the licencees in 
case of  licencee  managed contracts  should  be  m aintained  by railways. 
ACRs will be maintained for each licencee by the Zonal Railways and will 
be duly filled in by the  competent authority every year. Any instance of 
unsatisfactory performance/penalty must be entered in the ACR.  The ACR 
shall be the basis for evaluation of applications  for renewal of license, as 
and where applicable.  Banning and suspension of business with the errant 
contractors shall be strictly enforced following due process. 
 
21 TRANSFER OF LICENSE: 
 
Transfer of license to the spouse/legal heir would be allowed only in the 
event of death of the original licensee.  The license can be transferred in the 
name of spouse/legal heir for the unexpired period of the agreement only, 
with  personal  approval  of  the   Chief  Commercial  Manager/  Divisional 
Railway Manager/MD, IRCTC as the case may be. Nomination of the legal 
heir should be obtained from the license holder at the time of entering into 
contract. The nomination should be only from amongst the family members. 
Renewal of license on transfer to the legal heir may be permitted only in the 
 

48 
 
case of licensees belonging to reserved minor catering units as per existing 
instructions. 
 
22 PARTICIPATION OF STRATEGIC STAKE HOLDERS 
 
Railways will explore the possibility of entering into strategic partnerships 
and seek professional expertise in order to harness the technical knowhow 
within the ambit of this policy i.e. to achieve the objectives of the policy and 
fulfill the role assigned. 
 
23 STAFF REQUIREMENT 
 
Zonal railways  must  endeavor  to  utilize  suitable  manpower  by  way  of 
redeployment  as per extant rules. Services of trained interns of catering 
institutions  may  be  taken  on  specific  term  basis.  Staff  and  officers  as 
required  by  zonal  railways  may  be  drawn  from  existing  railway  cadres 
having necessary aptitude  through redeployment as per extant rules for 
providing and monitoring catering services. Zonal railways may also explore 
possibilities of utilizing services of interns of reputed  catering institutes / 
hotel management institutes / food craft institutes on specific term  basis. 
Zonal Railways shall train staff by providing in-service training by reputed 
institutions. 
 
24 EXCLUSION  OF  GOVERNMENT  EMPLOYEES  AND  THEIR 
DEPENDENTS: 
 
As per extant instructions, no catering /vending license should be awarded 
to any  Government employee or railway servant or any other member of 
his/her family (as  defined in rule no 103 para 17 of the Indian Railway 
Establishment Code – Vol.-I). The existing catering/vending licensees who 
are  coming  under  the  above  category,  should  also  not  be  allowed  to 
continue their license on confirmation of the above position. 
 
25 INCLUSION OF SON/WIFE/DAUGHTER’S NAME IN THE LICENSE: 
 
In case of old age, disability, infirmity, etc. Chief Commercial Manager of 
Zonal Railways/MD, IRCTC, as the case may be, in exceptional cases only, 
may personally consider request of individual licensees for inclusion of the 
names of their son/daughter/wife/husband in their license subject to his/her 
performance being satisfactory and also that no railway dues are pending 
against  the  licensee.  Zonal  railways  or  IRCTC  should  also  ensure  that 
son/daughter/wife/husband, whose name is proposed to be included in the 
license,  does  not  hold  any  other  catering/vending  license  anywhere  on 
Indian Railways. 
 
26 APPLICABILITY OF THE NEW POLICY: 
 
26.1 The revised catering policy will be applicable with immediate effect i.e.  from 
the date of  issue. This policy supersedes all prior policy circulars issued 
from time to time unless specifically referred to in this policy document. 
 
 

49 
 
26.1.1 All existing operational catering licences awarded by IRCTC and transferred 
to Zonal  Railways will be governed by the existing Catering Policy 2005 
upto the validity of their contractual period. 
 
26.1.2 The tenders for which the letters of allotment have been issued, but the 
contracts have not operationalised or the services have never commenced 
upto the date of issue of this policy, will have no force in law. 
 
26.1.3 All existing operational licences awarded and managed by IRCTC would 
henceforth be  transferred to Zonal Railways within a period of three (3) 
months in a phased manner, for their management and monitoring. 
 
26.1.4 This policy will also apply in case of award of fresh licences and licences 
awarded  in  the  event  of  termination,  non-renewal,  vacation  etc.  of  the 
existing licenses. 
 
26.1.5 Zonal  Railways  will  ensure  recovery  of  all  due  licence  fees  from  the 
transferred  contracts.  In  case  of  contracts  under  litigation,  IRCTC  will 
continue to represent on behalf of Zonal Railways for the Court cases where 
IRCTC has been named as Respondent in consultation with zonal railways 
for further disposal. 
 
26.1.6 Zonal  Railways  will  initiate  the  process  of  taking  over  by  departmental 
management  or award of fresh licences under this policy for the existing 
operational  contracts  for  which  the  tenure  has  been  completed  or  the 
performance is unsatisfactory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
DEFINITIONS OF THE TERMS USED IN THE CATERING POLICY 
 
1. A-la-carte Menu: These are diversified popular food items served through 
static units and decided by market/customer, the rates for which are fixed by 
zonal railways. CCMs of the zonal railways will be the competent authority 
to  decide  the  A-  La  –  carte  rates.  Zonal  Railways,  after  taking  into 
consideration the regional tastes and cuisine, will approve such items. 
2. Automatic Vending Machines (AVM): These are automatic vending 
machines for dispensing hygienically packaged eatables, tea/coffee or cold 
drinks. AVM  stalls should not be permitted to sell any other item except 
those to be dispensed through these machines. 
3. Base Kitchen: Base Kitchen is a large cooking and packing facility set up in 
the vicinity of railway premises whether inside or outside Railway premises 
(directly or through a  licensee/sub-licensee) from where food is prepared 
and distributed in trains or to the static units.  There will be no sale of food 
directly to the passengers from a base kitchen. All base kitchens should be 
ISO certified. 
4. Category of station: Stations are categorized on the basis of passenger 
earnings as follows: 
Category ‘A’  (non-suburban stations) Stations having annual passenger 
earning of more than Rs.6 crore. 
Category ‘B’  (non-suburban stations) Stations with annual passenger earning 
Rs.3 crore to Rs.6 crore. 
Category ‘C’ All-suburban stations 
Category ‘D’ Stations with annual passenger earning 
between Rs.1 crore to Rs.3 crore. 
Category ‘E’ All stations other than A, B, C, D & F 
Category ‘F’ All flag/halt stations) 
 
5. Catering Stalls:  These are of three different types of stalls selling catering 
products like  beverages, snacks and other light refreshments. First is the 
tea stall where tea, biscuits and snacks are served. The second type of stall 
is milk bar, which are specially meant for various milk products and the third 
type of stall is juice bar meant for juices and fresh fruits. 
6. Ceiling Limit: It is the upper limit put on holding of major/minor units by a 
company/firm/individual to prevent monopolistic tendencies. 
7. Cell Kitchen: Cell Kitchens are Mini Base Kitchens which supply food to 
other catering units, static/mobile, and at the same time can sell food and 
beverages directly to the passengers. 
8. Earnest Money: It is the amount of money to be deposited along with 
tender  for   consideration  of  tenders. Tenders  submitted  without  the 
prescribed earnest money are liable to will be summarily rejected. 
 
9. Food Courts: It is a cluster of stalls at a nominated place, where food items 
such as branded products/eatables are provided. 
 
10. Fast Food Units: are major units is synonymous to Snack Bar, where 
through  self  service  counters,  fast  food  items  are  sold.  Generally  only 
standing facility is provided. 
11. Food Plaza: is a multi cuisine plaza giving a variety of choice for eating. The 
quality and rates for items of food plazas are market-driven. 
 
 

51 
 
(i) 75% unreserved Refreshment Rooms at ‘B’ & ‘C’ categories stations 
(ii) 75% unreserved stalls and trolleys at A, B & C Category stations 
(iii) 50.5% unreserved stalls, trolleys and Khomchas, etc. at D, E & F 
category stations (to be allotted by DRMs on the basis of applications) 
 
(i) 25% reserved Refreshment Rooms at ‘B’ and ‘C’ category stations 
(ii) 25% reserved  Stalls and Trolleys at A, B & C Category stations 
(iii) 49.5% of reserved stalls, trolleys and Khomchas, etc. at D, E & F 
category stations except AVMs, fast food units and Food Plaza, Food 
Courts 
 
12. Island Platform:  It is the platform between two lines i.e. it serves two lines. 
13. Jan Ahaar: Jan Ahaar meals comprise economy combo meals that may be 
served  and  vended  from  a  Jan  Ahaar  outlet  or  any  major/minor  unit. 
They comprise a variety of regional and local items. The menu and tariff will 
be fixed by zonal railways. 
14. Khomcha: is small vending unit, which is either made of sarkhanda or a tray 
with stand that can be carried on head. 
15. License: is a document issued by either Indian Railways or IRCTC giving 
authorization to the licensee to operate a particular service. This license can 
be for a stipulated period defined for that unit. The license can be issued 
either by calling of applications or through a 2 packet tendering system as 
the case may be. 
16. Licensee: An agency which can be a company or a firm/society/cooperative 
or  an  individual.  The  firm  can  be  a  proprietorship  or  partnership.  The 
licensee is the  person authorized by railway administration or IRCTC to 
carry out the business. 
17. Main Platform: It is the platform adjacent to the concourse and includes the 
main entrance hall. 
18. Major Units: 
• Fast Food Units & Food Plaza, Food Courts at all category of stations 
conforming to ISO standards. 
• Refreshment Rooms at ‘A’ category stations. 
• Mobile catering units. 
• AVMs at all  category of stations 
• Base kitchens 
• Cell Kitchens 
• Train Side Vending 
19. Minor  Units: 
All other units at A, B, C, D, E & F category stations which are not covered 
in major units as above are known as minor units, i.e. : 
• Stalls, Trolleys and Khomchas at all categories of stations excluding Food 
Plaza, Food Courts and Fast food units. 
• Restaurants and Refreshment Rooms at ‘B’& below categories of stations. 
• Minor Units are of two types 
o General Minor Unit (GMU): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
o Special Minor Unit  (SMU): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20. Mobile  Units:  All  catering  services  through  pantry  cars  are  collectively 
known as  mobile units. This includes mini pantry for servicing Shatabdi 
Express trains. 
 
 

52 
 
21. Minimum Sales Turnover of mobile units: Minimum prescribed sales for 
superfast trains is 200 meals and for Mail/ Express trains is 150 meals on 
each occasion of serving breakfast, lunch/dinner on a particular train or all 
services as per train timings. This is the assumed sale for all services as per train 
timings. This is the assumed sale for all mobile units for the purpose of fixation 
of license fee. For Rajdhani/Shatabdi  the sales turnover will be based  on 
actual occupancy figures as certified by Train  superintendents. Sales  
assessment should also take into account the turnover from sale of a- la-carte 
items on trains. 
22. Premium  franchise  outlet:  These  are  product  specific  AVMs  dispensing 
branded products at market-determined price. 
23. Quoted license fee: This is the license fee quoted by a licensee including 
mark up over minimum license fee. 
24. Rajdhani/  Duronto/  Shatabdi  Meals:  For  these  prestigious  trains,  items, 
quality, quantity and rates are fixed by Railway Board. 
25. Refreshment Room:  is a place where besides snacks and a-la-carte items, 
standard meals, standard breakfast and ‘thali meals’ are also served. 
26. Sales Turnover of Static Units: The sales turnover of any static or mobile unit 
is  considered for the purpose of making assessment of volume of business 
and for  fixing  of minimum floor prices. This is assessed on the basis  of 
location of the units,  number of passengers dealt with, type and price of items 
sold, volume of sale from each unit, previous record of sales or  any other 
criteria, This is done by a physical check  by  a committee comprising
 inspectors and supervisors of commercial and finance 
departments  of  Railways  for  a  period  of  3  days,  which  are  randomly 
selected. The data is collected and an objective assessment is made. This 
sales turn over should definitely be reassessed at the time of renewal, if any. 
27. Security  Money:  is  equivalent  to  5%  of  the  assessed  annual  sales  or 
Rs.10,000/-  whichever is higher. At the time of award of contract to a 
licensee, the successful bidder has to deposit the security money.  This is 
forfeited in case of default. 
28. Static Units: All units at the stations including Food Plazas, Food Courts, fast 
food units, refreshment rooms, stalls, trolleys, Jan Ahaar, base kitchen, AVMs, 
etc. are collectively called as static units. 
29. Standard  Menu:  Consists  of  standard  meals,  breakfast,  tea,  coffee, 
packaged  water for which items, quality, quantity, description and rates are 
fixed by Railways and  notified by the railway administration from time to time. 
30. Trains Side Vending(TSV): A large number of trains do not have pantry cars or  
mini  pantries  attached  to  them.  From  the  static  units  of  important 
station/stations,  food  is  supplied  to  the  train  during  meal  time  through 
vendors, who travel on the trains and take orders. 
31. Trolleys are mobile units, which ply on the platforms. The trolley should not be 
parked between the FOB landings and should be 6 to 10ft. away from the 
door of coaches. 
32. Two  packet Tendering consists of Packet-A and packet –B 
In packet-A, technical details received from the licensee are detailed and the  Packet-
B  is  the  financial  offer,  which  is  considered  only  for  those bidders who 
qualify as per short listing based on all the laid down criteria in Packet-A. 

53 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2010-11) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 27th December, 2010 from 1100 hrs. to 
1230 Hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
     PRESENT 
SHRI T.R. BAALU -  CHAIRMAN  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
4. Shri K. Bapiraju 
5. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
6. Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
7. Smt. Sushil Saroj 
8. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
9. Shri Umashankar Singh 
10. Shri Lalji Tandon 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri K.E. Ismail 
12. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
13. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
14. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
15. Shri Ishwar Singh 
16. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 

54 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Sahai  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex-officio 
Principal Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 2. Shri Samar Jha  Financial Commissioner, Railways &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 3. Shri A.P. Mishra  Member Engineering, Railway Board, &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
4. Shri Sanjiv Handa  Member Mechanical, Railway Board, &  
Ex. - officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
5. Shri Sudesh Kumar  Member Electrical, Railway Board &  
      Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 6. Shri V.N. Tripathi  Member Staff, Railway Board, &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) to th e sitting of the Committee.  Thereafter, the 
representatives of the Ministry briefed the Committee on the subject ‘New Catering 
Policy-2010 of Indian Railways’ which has been taken up by the Committee for 
examination.  After the briefing, Members raised ce rtain points for clarification , to 
which the representatives of the Ministry replied. 
 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

55 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2010-11) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 4th July, 2011 from 1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs. 
in Committee Room No. ’D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
      
   PRESENT 
SHRI T.R. BAALU -   CHAIRMAN 
  MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Shri Kameshwar Baitha (Palamu) 
4. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
5. Shri K. Bapiraju 
6. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
7. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
9. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
10. Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
11. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
12. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
13. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
14. Chaudhary Lal Singh 
15. Shri Umashankar Singh 
16. Shri Lalji Tandon 
17. Dr. Girija Vyas 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
18. Shri K.E. Ismail 
19. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
20. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
21. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
22. Shri Ishwar Singh 
23. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
  SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 

56 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
1. Shri Vinay Mittal  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex-officio 
Principal Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 2. Smt. Pompa Babbar  Financial Commissioner, Railways &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 3. Shri A.P. Mishra  Member Engineering, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 4. Shri Sanjiv Handa  Member Mechanical, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 5. Shri Rakesh Tandon  MD/IRCTC 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman congratulated Shri Vinay Mittal on  his appointment as 
Chairman Railway Board and welcomed him and other officials of the Ministry to the sitting 
of the Committee.   
 
3. The Committee  then took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board)  on the subject  ‘New Catering Policy – 2010 of Indian Railways’.  
The representatives of the Ministry replied to various queries raised by the Chairman and 
the members of the Committee on the subject ‘New Catering Policy – 2010 of Indian 
Railways’.  The evidence remained inconclusive.   
 
4. The Committee decided to meet again on 20.07.2011 for taking further 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry on the above-mentioned subject.   
 
5. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

57 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2010-11) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 18th July, 201 1 from 1100 hrs. to 1 300 
hrs. in Committee Room ’D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
         
PRESENT 
SHRI T.R. BAALU -   CHAIRMAN 
  MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Shri Kameshwar Baitha (Palamu) 
4. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
5. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
6. Shri K. Bapiraju 
7. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
8. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
9. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
10. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
11. Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
12. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
13. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
14. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
15. Shri Umashankar Singh 
16. Shri Lalji Tandon 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
17. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
18. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
19. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
20. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
21. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
22. Shri Ishwar Singh 
       
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 

58 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
1. Shri Vinay Mittal  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex-officio 
Principal Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 2. Smt. Pompa Babbar  Financial Commissioner, Railways &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 3. Shri A.P. Mishra  Member Engineering, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 4. Shri Sanjiv Handa  Member Mechanical, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 5. Shri Rakesh Tandon  MD/IRCTC 
 
2. At the outset,  the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
3.    xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
 
4. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx   
 
5. Thereafter, the Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Railways (Railway Board) on the subject ‘New Catering Policy – 2010 of Indian Railways’.  
The represent atives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) gave an electronic 
presentation to the Committee on reservation in catering contracts in Indian Railways. The 
Committee then sought certain clarifications from the representatives of the Railway Board.  
The officers of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) replied to various queries raised by 
the Members.  The evidence was concluded. 
 
6.     A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  
 The Committee then adjourned. 

59 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 15th May, 2012 from 1500 Hrs. to 1615 
Hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
         
PRESENT 
SHRI T.R. BAALU -   CHAIRMAN 
  MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Ram Sunder Das 
3.  Shri K. Bapiraju 
4.  Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
5.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
6.  Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
7.  Dr. Padmsinha Bajirao Patil 
8.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
9.  Shri Sharif-ud-din ‘Shariq’ 
10.  Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
11.  Shri Ganesh Singh 
12.  Chaudhary Lal Singh 
13.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
14.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
15.  Smt. Kusum Rai  
16.  Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
17.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
       
  SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 

60 
 
EPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) *  
 
1.  Shri Vinay Mittal  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex. -officio Secretary 
to the Government of India 
2.  Smt. Vijaya Kanth  Financial Commissioner, Railway Board & Ex. -
officio Secretary to the Government of India 
 
3.  Shri A.P. Mishra  Member Engineering, Railway Board & Ex. -
officio Secretary to the Government of India 
 
4.  Shri Kul Bhushan  Member Electrical, Railway Board & Ex. -officio 
Secretary to the Government of India 
 
5.  Shri Keshav Chandra  Member Mechanical, Railway Board & Ex. -officio 
Secretary to the Government of India 
 
6.  Shri A.K. Vohra  Member Staff, Railway Board & Ex. -officio 
Secretary to the Government of India 
 
7.  Shri K.K. Srivastava  Member Traffic, Railway Board & Ex. -officio 
Secretary to the Government of India 
   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Reports:-  
(i)  Draft Report on ‘New Catering Policy – 2010 of Indian Railways’ 
 
 (ii)  XXX  XXX  XX  XXX 
 
3. The Committee adopted the Report at (i) with some modification as indicated 
at the Annexure and the Report at (ii) without any modification.  
 
4. The Committee, then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report  at (i) in light of 
the factual verification and present/lay both the Reports at (i) and (ii) in both the houses of 
the Parliament. 
 
* Present only during the presentation. 

61 
 
 
5. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)  
made a presentation on plan head -wise physical and financial performance of 
Railways.  The Members raised a number of queries  to which the representatives of 
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) replied.  
 
6. A copy of the Verbatim Report of the sitting has been kept. 
  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
------- 