g   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PASSENGER AMENITIES AND PASSENGER SAFETY  
IN INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
              
  
             
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS 
(2012-13) 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
19 

 
 
SCR NO.: 170  
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2012-13) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PASSENGER AMENITIES AND PASSENGER SAFETY  
IN INDIAN RAILWAYS 
  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.04.2013 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.04.2013 
 
 
 
              
  
             
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
  April, 2013/    Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
Page(s) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………………………………….  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………… (v) 
PART-I 
Chapter I Introductory……………………………………………………………  1 
  Classification of amenities provided at various category of stations… 2 
  Categorization of Stations…………………………………………………  4 
 
Chapter-II Funding of passenger amenities………………………………………  10  
  Sanction of passenger amenity works……………………………….  10 
  Revised norms for ‘D’ category stations…………………………….  11 
  Adarsh Stations………………………………………………………………   11 
  World Class Stations…………………………………………………………  11 
  Multi-Functional Complex…………………………………………………  14 
 
Chapter-III Passenger Reservation System………………………………………….  16 
  Ticketing Staff and Training, etc……………………………………….. 17 
 
Chapter-IV Catering in Stations and on board trains……………………………  19 
 
Chapter-V Provision of drinking water in stations and on board trains  
  & cleanliness……………………………………………………………………  21 
  Watering of coaches…………………………………………….. ……….. 21 
  Cleanliness in trains and stations………………………..…………….  22 
 
Chapter-VI Linen Management…………………………………………………………  25 
 
Chapter-VII Security system over Indian Railways……………………… ………  27 
  Training to RPF………………………………………………………………… 30 
  Integrated Security System………………………………………………  33 
  All India Security Helpline…………………………………………………  35 
  On-board medical facilities………………………………………………… 36 
 
PART-II 
  Recommendations……………………………………………………………… 37 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Appendix I Annexure I,II,III,IV and  V……………………………………………………       51 
Appendix II Minutes of the sittings of the Standing Committee on Railways 
 held on 07.10.2011, 19.10.2011, 08.12.2011 and 05.04.2013……   68 

 
 
 
     
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2012-13) 
Shri T. R. Baalu - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
3. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
4. Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
5. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
6. Shri Bhaskar Rao Patil Khatgonkar 
7. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
8. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
9. Shri Devender Nagpal 
10. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
11. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
12. Shri Rudra Madhab Ray 
13. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
14. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
15. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
16. Shri Ganesh Singh 
17. Shri Lal Ji Tandon 
18. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
19. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
20. Dr. Vivekanand 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Husain Dalwai 
23. Shri Prabhat Jha 
24. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
25. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
26. Shri K. Parasaran 
27. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
28. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
30. Shri Ishwar Singh 
31. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Banani Sarker Joshi  - Senior Committee Assistant 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2012-13), having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Ninteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways on ‘Passenger Amenities and 
Passenger Safety in Indian Railways’. 
 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board) on 07.10.2011, 19.10.2011 and 08.12.2011. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 
05.04.2013. Minutes of the related sittings are given in appendix to the Report.  
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the 
material and information which the Committee desired in connection with the 
examination of the ‘Passenger Amenities and Passenger Safety in Indian Railways’.  They 
would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                            T.R. BAALU 
17  April, 2013                                                                 Chairman, 
27  Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on Railways 

PART-I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
Indian Railways is one of the largest railways systems of the world and functions 
as a vertically integrated organization providing passenger and freight services.  It 
carries approximately 25 million passengers and hauls 2.5 million tones of freight over 
64,410 route kilometers.  The Railways are currently running 19,186 number of trains.  
Given the sheer volume of passenger traffic, it becomes imperative that the Indian 
Railways provide efficient passenger services. 
 
Background 
1.2 In 1952, the Railways, for the very first time issued a set of guidelines with 
regard to passenger amenities.  Two broad categories were defined under passenger 
amenities, viz. „basic amenities‟ and „additional amenities‟.  Basic amenities were those 
which were necessarily required by passengers at any station, big or small, at the time 
of becoming operational and included: 
 Booking arrangements 
 Waiting hall/space 
 Benches 
 Arrangements for lighting 
 Drinking water 
 Platform 
 Urinals and/or latrine 
 Shady trees/platform shelters 
 
1.3 Over and above these basic amenities, „additional facilities‟ were provided at 
various stations as per requirements, which included: 
 Platform shelters 
 Raised platforms 
 Piped water supply 
 Refreshment rooms 
 Vendor stalls 

~ 2 ~ 
 
 FOB (Foot over bridge) 
 Retiring rooms 
 Seating arrangements 
 Lighting, clocks 
 Water coolers, fans 
 Urinals, lavatories, bathrooms, etc. 
 
1.4 In 1995, these guidelines were reviewed for the first time.  Due to certain 
inherent deficiencies and lacunae, the guidelines were revised during 1999, 2003 and 
finally in 2007.  In fact, it is mentioned by the Ministry that providing of passenger 
amenities is an ongoing process.  Currently, facilities/amenities at stations have been 
broadly classified into 3 main categories, namely: 
(a) Minimum Essential Amenities 
(b) Recommended Amenities 
(c) Desirable Amenities 
 
Classification of amenities provided at various category of stations 
1.5 Passenger amenities provided at stations have been classified into the following 
three categories: 
 
Minimum Essential Amenities: 
1.6 When a station is constructed, certain minimum amenities should be provided at 
each category of station and are required to be provided at stations at all times.  The 
details of the Minimum Essential Amenities to be provided at each category of stations 
are given in Annexure-I. 
 
1.7 Amenities like booking facilities, platforms, shelters/shady trees, drinking water 
arrangements, waiting hall/shed, seating arrangements and time table display are 
required to be provided at all „A-1‟ and „A‟ to „E‟ category and halts if train stops at 
night.  High level platforms and FOB are provided at „A-1‟, „A‟ and „C‟ category stations. 
 

~ 3 ~ 
 
 
 
Recommended Amenities 
1.8 After the Minimum Essential Amenities are provided at stations, further 
augmentation to be done based on the volume of passengers handled as per norms, is 
known as Recommended Amenities.  Recommended amenities are the amenities which 
the Railways attempt to provide as per the laid down scale keeping in view the 
availability of funds and relative priority of works.  The recommended amenities are 
based on the category of the stations and also the number of passengers dealt with at 
any time during peak hours, including the inward and outward passengers (excluding 
Mela Traffic).  The Ministry further added that though these norms are recommendatory 
in nature, Railways are making efforts at providing these amenities.  The list of 
Recommended Amenities to be provided at each category of stations has been given at 
Annexure-II. 
 
Desirable Amenities: 
1.9 These amenities are considered desirable to improve customer satisfaction and 
the interface process at stations.  The quantum of desirable amenities provided would 
depend upon the category of station.  These include items like catering and vending 
stalls, adequate parking and circulating area, train indication board, public address 
system, etc. 
 
1.10 Further, it was stated that the provision for desirable amenities need not wait for 
complete provision of the recommended amenities and should be provided based on 
the need and relative importance of the stations.  Details of desirable amenities 
identified for each category of stations are given at Annexure-III. 
 
1.11 When asked about the criteria for providing these amenities, the Ministry have 
stated that while provision of Minimum Essential Amenities is ensured at all the stations 
all the time, the following considerations normally determine the scope and scale of the 
passenger amenities at the stations: 
(i) Class of station; 

~ 4 ~ 
 
(ii) Volume of passengers handled; 
(iii) Special characteristics of the station, such as, those having 
tourist/religious importance, and;  
(iv) Availability of funds. 
 
On-Board Amenities 
1.12 The on-board minimum facilities to be provided to passengers while on board a 
train includes amenities and fittings which would be maintained in proper condition so 
as to give comfortable service.  These include: 
 Lighting and fans 
 Cushioned berths and seats  
 Toilets (except where by design not provided) 
 External fittings such as, reservation chart display plates, destination boards. 
 
1.13 The guidelines also provide that all long distance trains will have 
conductors/coach attendants/Train Superintendents/TTEs to assist the passengers and 
for attending to their complaints and grievances. 
 
1.14 When asked about the major challenges being faced with respect to providing 
minimum passenger amenities, the Ministry have replied that maintenance of amenities 
and prevention of slippages pose the greatest problem, owing primarily to the very high 
footfalls and high intensity usage of the amenities.  The main measures being taken in 
this regard by the Ministry include frequent inspections and consequent remedial action 
to make good the deficiencies noticed during such inspection. 
 
Categorization of Stations: 
1.15 Indian Railways has more than 8000 stations which have been categorized under 
7 categories based on annual earnings from passenger traffic of the stations. 
 
 
 

~ 5 ~ 
 
Category Criteria No. of 
Stations 
A1 Non-suburban stations with annual passenger earnings of Rs. 
50 crore and above. 
58 
A Non-suburban stations with annual passenger earnings 
between Rs. 6 crore and Rs.50 crore. 
284 
B Non-suburban stations with an annual passenger earnings 
between Rs. 6 crore and 50 crore. 
Stations of tourist importance, or an important junction/ 
station, to be decided by GM. 
237 
C All suburban stations. 429 
D Non-suburban stations with passenger earnings between      
Rs.50 lakh and Rs. 3 crore. 
932 
E Non-suburban stations with earnings less than Rs. 50 lakh. 4274 
F Halts 2027 
 TOTAL 8241 
 
1.16 The current system of classification of stations is based on Annual Passenger 
Earnings and is reviewed after every five years.  This system has been working 
satisfactorily.  However, General Managers of Zonal Railways have been empowered to 
classify stations in a higher category (B category) based on tourist, historical, cultural 
and religious importance of the station with a view to providing better amenities.  This 
delegation of power to General Managers has served the need for granting higher 
status, wherever required, to stations owing to their special character on account of 
tourism, culture and administrative importance. 
 
1.17 Though providing of passenger amenities is an ongoing process, the Ministry, in 
reply to a query whether any key areas have been identified, replied that the main 
focus of the Indian Railways for provision of passenger amenities at various stations 
would include: 
 Provision of platforms of adequate length 

~ 6 ~ 
 
 Provision of drinking water facility 
 Cover over platforms 
 Toilets 
 Seating arrangements in the waiting halls as well as at platforms 
 Illumination and fans 
 Information display regarding train time tables, fares, etc. 
 Booking facility, etc. 
 
 
Department-wise classification of Passenger Amenities provided by Railways 
1.18 During the course of oral evidence, the Chairman, Railway Board, informed the 
Committee that passenger amenities are not provided by a single department but by 
multiple departments which have expertise in specific fields like Civil Engineering, 
Electrical Engineering, Telecom, Mechanical Engineering, etc.  Given below are the 
department-wise amenities provided by the Indian Railways: 
(i) Amenities provided by the Civil Engineering Department: 
 Provision of platform/raising height of platform 
 Cover over platform 
 Drinking water facilities 
 Toilets 
 Waiting rooms 
 Foot over bridges and other Civil Engineering works 
(ii) The following amenities are provided by the Electrical Department: 
 Electric lights at stations platforms, station building areas and 
circulating area 
 Lifts and escalators 
 Fans 
 Water coolers, etc. 
(iii) The following amenities are provided by the Telecom Department: 
 Public address system 
 Digital electronic train arrival departure boards 

~ 7 ~ 
 
 Train indicator boards 
(iv) The following amenities are provided by Commercial and IT Departments: 
 Computerized Passenger Reservation System 
 Computerized Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS) 
(v) The following on-board amenities are provided by the Mechanical 
Department: 
 Cushioned seats/berths and toilets and wash basins facilities in 
mainline coaches 
 Mirrors, snack tables, magazine bags, water bottle holders, coat hooks, 
small luggage racks, luggage securing arrangements, etc. in reserved 
coaches. 
 Curtains in aisles/windows and dustbins, etc. in AC coaches 
 Laptop and mobile charging sockets 
 Fans 
 Berth climbing ladders 
 Emergency alarm pull handles 
 Emergency lights 
 Berth indication lights 
 Berth reading lights 
 
1.19 When asked the rationale for having multiple departments for providing 
amenities, the Ministry, in their reply, have stated that Indian Railways has several 
functional departments and each department has technical and professional expertise in 
its functional field.  The overall decision making of Indian Railways is, therefore, an 
outcome of the inter-disciplinary synergy of the specialized departments.  Passenger 
amenities are accordingly provided by the departments concerned in coordination with 
associate departments. 
 
1.20 At the Zonal level, the General Manager controls the functioning of all the 
departments, viz., Traffic Commercial, Civil Engineering, Electrical, Telecommunication 

~ 8 ~ 
 
Departments headed by Principal Heads of the Department (HOD) at the Zonal Level.  
They are assisted by functional HODs and Deputy HODs. 
 
1.21 To a suggestion that a single nodal department for providing amenities would 
smoothen day-to-day functioning as well as avoid duplication, the Ministry have 
submitted that in view of the varied nature of amenities to be provided there is a need 
for specialized departments to handle the provision of specific works. These 
departments work under the overall administrative control of the General Managers at 
the Zonal level.  At the Divisional level, the same administrative control is exercised by 
the Divisional Railway Managers who coordinate and guide the functioning of branches 
of various disciplines.  To a query on whether there was any proposal to bring all the 
passenger amenities under a single nodal department, the Ministry replied in the 
negative. 
 
MONITORING MECHANISM 
1.22 With regard to the query on the system/periodicity of inspection to ensure that 
passenger amenities are provided on a continuous basis rather than as a one-time 
effort, the Ministry have submitted that the Indian Railways have a well-defined system 
of inspections for monitoring the availability and maintenance of passenger amenities.  
Passenger Amenities are intensively inspected at periodical intervals at various levels 
i.e., the station level, the Divisional and the Headquarters level.  Station Masters hold 
daily inspections and weekly/biweekly meetings along with the supervisions of other 
departments to identify deficiencies in passenger amenities and to take remedial action.  
Officers belonging to each tier of the hierarchy inspect stations at prescribed intervals 
with a view to ensuring proper functioning of the stations, including the maintenance of 
passenger amenities.  Apart from the above, Multi-disciplinary Service Improvement 
Groups (SIGs) have been constituted at the Zonal, Divisional and Station level for 
inspecting the stations jointly as per prescribed schedule.  During inspections special 
attention is given to proper functioning of the amenities provided at the stations and 
remedial action is taken on the deficiencies noted during such inspections.  In addition, 

~ 9 ~ 
 
any further augmentation needed in the amenities is also recommended by these 
Groups. 
 
1.23 When asked whether any time frame has been set for providing the minimum 
recommended and desirable amenities, the Ministry have submitted that no timeframe 
has been set for the same.  However, Minimum Essential Amenities have been provided 
on all stations of the Indian Railways.  It has further been elaborated by the Ministry 
that augmentation/enhancement of amenities at stations is a continuous process and 
passenger amenities are upgraded depending on demands and availability of funds.   
 
  

~ 10 ~ 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
 
Funding of passenger amenities: 
2.1 Allotment of funds for provision of various categories of amenities is made under 
the Plan Head „Passenger Amenities‟.  There is no separate allocation for different 
categories within this Plan Head.  The funds are allocated to various works sanctioned 
under this Plan Head based on the relative priority of the works and importance of 
stations. 
 
2.2 Year-wise details regarding financial targets vis-à-vis achievements in respect of 
passenger amenities during the 11th Plan are given as under: 
Year – 11th Plan Original target Revised target Achievement 
(Rs. in crores) 
2007-08 493 634 668 
2008-09 852 731 828 
2009-10 1102 923 906 
2010-11 1302 998 911 
2011-12 1100 763 829 
 
2.3 The Ministry informed that besides the budgetary allotment, numerous 
passenger amenity works are being undertaken under plan heads like traffic facility, 
computerization, gauge conversion, doubling and rolling stock, etc. 
 
Sanction of passenger amenity works: 
2.4 The works costing over Rs. 2.5 crore needs approval of the Parliament and works 
costing between Rs. 2 crore and Rs. 2.5 crore are approved by the Railway Board.  The 
powers of Genreal Managers have been enhanced from Rs.1 crore to Rs.2 crore and 
that of the Divisional Railway Managers from Rs. 30 lakh to Rs. 1 crore. 
  

~ 11 ~ 
 
 
Revised norms for „D‟ category stations: 
2.5 For giving special emphasis to small town Railway Stations, the yardstick for „D‟ 
category station has been reduced from a minimum of Rs. 1 crore per annum to Rs. 50 
lakh per annum in 2007, enabling more stations to be included in „D‟ category making 
them eligible for better passenger amenities.  As a result, 406 stations were upgraded 
from „E‟ category to „D‟ category. 
 
Adarsh Stations 1: 
2.6 The Adarsh station scheme was announced in the Railway Budget 2009-10.  
Under this scheme, 845 stations (including repetitions over previous years) have so far 
been selected for development as Adarsh Stations.  Out of these, 441 stations have 
already been developed.  Out of the remaining, 256 stations have been targeted for 
completion by March 2012 and the remaining 148 stations are planned for completion 
in the next financial year.  36 more stations have been identified for development under 
the Adarsh Station Scheme.  The Ministry have enumerated the thrust areas for 
improvement of stations selected as Adarsh Station at Annexure-IV. 
2.7 When asked about the criteria for selection of a particular station under the 
Adarsh Station Scheme, the Ministry informed that keeping in view the demands for 
upgradation, including those received from Hon‟ble Members of Parliament, selection of 
railway stations as Adarsh Stations is done on the basis of an identified need for 
upgradation of amenities. 
 
WORLD CLASS STATIONS 
2.8 50 stations have been identified for development as world class stations in 
Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) mode by leveraging the real estate potential of land 
around and the air space above the stations without any cost to Railways.  It is planned 
to provide state-of-the-art station building with good architecture and having 
segregation of arrival/departure of passengers, modern amenities like food plazas, 
currency exchange counter, tourist information booth, retail outlets, internet cafes, ATM 
                                                           
1 Position upto 2011-12 

~ 12 ~ 
 
facilities, hotels, car rentals, pre-paid taxi booths, wherever feasible and well illuminated 
circulating area. 
2.9 The implementation of this scheme requires preparation of Master Plan and 
Feasibility Reports first.  As the station development is envisaged in PPP mode, real 
estate development is also to be undertaken to finance the project.  Master Plan and 
feasibility reports for development of New Delhi Station as world class station was 
prepared and submitted to various local authorities for approval.  Master Plan has been 
approved by the authorities concerned with certain conditions which require re-working 
the concept plan because of which the bidding process for selection of concessionaire 
has not been concluded.  Similarly, the approval of the concept plan for Mumbai CST 
station which is a world heritage building requires redefining the buffer zone identified 
by UNESCO.  Railways have approached UNESCO for necessary approvals in this 
regard.  
2.10 Since no station has so far been developed as a world class station, the Ministry 
was asked about the problems being faced in the implementation of this scheme.  The 
Ministry in reply have stated that since this scheme seeks to develop stations by 
leveraging the real estate potential of land around and the air space above the stations, 
such development amidst the city has its over-sensitive issues of traffic congestion, 
additional traffic, change of land use and in-principle approval of local agencies, shifting 
of religious structures, etc.  Further, it was added that local agencies, fearing that traffic 
generated by the associated commercial development required for financing the project 
would choke the already congested arterial roads leading to the stations, were generally 
not very supportive of this scheme.  The issues of preserving heritage of the existing 
station building also have to be addressed in consultation with Heritage Conservation 
Societies at both the local and national levels. 
2.11 About the timeframe decided for completion of this scheme, the Ministry 
informed that no timeframe for completion of work under this scheme has been fixed.  
Besides the status of development of New Delhi Railway Station and the Mumbai CST 
station (information of which has been provided above) appointment of architect and 
technical consultants has been undertaken for Ahmedabad, Anand Vihar, Bijwasan, 
Chandigarh, Chennai, Porbandar, Secunderabad, Sealdah and Surat.  With respect to 

~ 13 ~ 
 
the remaining stations the Ministry have informed that only preliminary studies have 
been undertaken. 
2.12 When asked how the development of world class stations would benefit the 
travelling public, the Ministry have replied that world class stations have been 
envisioned as a Railway Station which will provide state-of-the-art facilities to the 
travelling public suitably adapted to the local conditions.  The architecture of the station 
shall reflect the culture and character of the city where it is located and integrates 
development for a comfortable and efficient passenger experience, ease of movement, 
security and safety, and accessibility in a harmonious and environmentally sustainable 
way, bringing satisfaction and value to the passenger/user.  Various superior amenities 
like grade separated entry and exit for passengers, wider foot-over-bridges, food plaza, 
internet café, currency exchange counters, budget/luxurious hotels (subject to market 
potential) are also envisaged as part of world class stations.  All these amenities and 
facilities at the stations would make the experience of the passengers pleasant and 
comfortable. 
2.13 The Committee were further informed that the approval of various statutory and 
local bodies were needed to be obtained before a station could be developed as a world 
class station.  These are: 
 
(i) Town Planning Office 
(ii) Development Authority 
(iii) Municipal Authority 
(iv) Traffic & Transportation Planning Authority/Management Authority 
(v) Urban Arts Commission 
(vi) Archaeological Survey of India 
(vii) Heritage Committee 
(viii) Public Utility Departments, viz. Water Supply, Sanitation & Electricity Supply, 
Irrigation & Drainage 
(ix) Coastal Area Regulation 
(x) Fire Department 
(xi) Director General of Civil Aviation 

~ 14 ~ 
 
 
MULTI-FUNCTIONAL COMPLEX 
2.14 Indian Railways have taken up the development of Multi-Functional Complexes 
(MFCs) at stations as one of the initiatives towards augmenting passenger amenities.  
These MFCs would have facilities like shopping, food stalls and restaurants, book stalls, 
PCO/STD/ISD/Fax booths, medicine and variety stores, budget hotels, underground 
parking, etc. 
 
2.15 When asked about the criteria for selection of stations for providing MFCs, the 
Committee have been informed that stations are selected on the basis of facilities 
available, facilities required as per projected volume of passenger traffic handled at 
stations and their commercial viability.  The Committee were informed that in 2009-10, 
67 stations were selected for providing MFCs, 93 stations in 2010-11 and 38 stations in 
2011-12 (excluding 7 stations which were repeated over last year). 
 
2.16 Out of the 65 stations selected in 2009-10, 24 MFCs are being developed by 
IRCON, 20 by RITES, 7 by RLDS, 3 MFCs by RVNL and 13 MFCs by Railways.  The 
construction of 17 MFCs have been completed.  Out of the 93 stations announced in 
Budget 2011-11, 84 stations have been assigned to RLDA and the remaining 9 stations 
to various Zonal Railways.  During 2011-12, 38 stations were announced for providing 
MFCs, out of which 29 stations have been assigned to RLDA and the remaining 9 to 
various Zonal Railways.  The total number of MFCs being developed by various agencies 
since 2009 is summarized in the table below: 
Name of Agency No. of MFCs being developed 
Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA) 120 
Various Zonal Railways   30 
IRCON International Limited   24 
RITES Limited    20 
Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL)    02 
TOTAL   196 
 

~ 15 ~ 
 
2.17 Out of the identified 196 MFC‟s, 21 MFCs have been completed so far.  The 
Railways submitted, however, that work on MFCs has been severely affected in view of 
the mandatory requirement of Cabinet approval for all proposals involving licencing and 
leasing of Government Land introduced since March, 2011.  In fact, the Chairman, 
Railway Board, during evidence stated, “we have been stopped by the Government 
from giving any land on lease to anybody.  So, all projects that the Railway had in mind 
have come to a grinding halt for the last six months.”  He further informed that they 
have sent a Cabinet note stating that whatever licensing of land or leasing of land is 
required for taking up core areas of Railway activities, such as catering as well as siding 
activities, laundries and such activities which affect the passengers should be freed 
from this ban.” 
 
2.18 To a query on the manner in which the Railways were likely to benefit from the 
development of MFCs, the Committee were informed that since Railways does not have 
adequate fund and manpower for developing the MFCs, it had been decided (barring 
some MFCs by Zonal Railways) to get the MFCs developed with Private Sector 
participation by evolving a financially viable business model through Railway PSUs and 
Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA).  Under such a scheme, the Railways would be 
able to provide the much needed passenger amenities/facilities in a single complex 
within the station area which would enable the Railways to develop an additional 
sustainable revenue stream. 
  

~ 16 ~ 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
Passenger Reservation System 
3.1 Reservation of accommodation in Indian Railways is done through the Passenger 
Reservation System (PRS) and the Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS). 
3.2 The PRS system provides reserved ticketing from any station to any station on 
Indian Railways and is a fully networked computerized system.  The PRS was started as 
a pilot project in 1985 in New Delhi; currently, the PRS is available in 2800 PRS centers 
and approximately 8900 PRS-cum-UTS-counters.  The Ministry have further stated that 
UTS is being provided at all stations except halt category station. 
3.3 The Rail network is used by millions of people spread across the length and 
breadth of the country and as such, it is important that they have easy access to 
railway tickets.  To this end, the Ministry have stated that they are taking several steps 
to proliferate the PRS and UTS centres.  PRS and PRS-cum-UTS locations are being 
proliferated as per extant policy, the salient of which are enumerated as under: 
1. At least one PRS in every district; 
2. Important tourist or hill stations and pilgrimage centres; 
3. Such Railway Stations, where there is no PRS within a vicinity of 50 Kms; 
4. Thickly populated Metro cities; 
5. PRS centres for armed forces (Ministry of Defence) at remote locations; 
6. Provision of combined UTS-cum-PRS at those stations, where manual 
reservation quota is available and UTS has been introduced.  
 
3.4 The Committee were further informed that apart from the above, PRS facilities 
are being sanctioned at locations recommended by Hon‟ble MPs under the budget 
announcement of one PRS location as per the choice of each MP (station, non-railhead 
and post office) 
3.5 While PRS tickets are available at reservation counters manned by Railway staff, 
these are also made available at non Rail head locations manned by Postal Staff, 
District Administration staff and Defence Staff.  Besides this, e-tickets and i-tickets can 
be purchased by the user from his/her own place.  Unreserved ticketing at Rail Head is 

~ 17 ~ 
 
made through railway staff and through ATVMs and at non-Rail head locations through 
Jansadharan Ticket Booking Sewak System. 
 
3.6 Moreover, the Railways have introduced Automatic Ticket Vending Machine 
(ATVMs) at Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata and Secunderabad and their adjoining 
areas.  So far, 626 ATVMs have been commissioned while a further 682 are under 
procurement/installation.   
 
Ticketing Staff and Training, etc. 
3.7 Since the railway staff at ticket counters is the primary contact for a passenger 
availing of the services of the Railways, the Ministry was questioned about the training 
imparted to these frontline staff.  The Committee were informed that all staff handling 
the counters for issue of tickets through UTS and PRS are imparted technical training.  
Professional training relating to commercial rules is also imparted to the staff at the 
time of induction.  In addition, front line staff are also imparted customer care training 
to deal with passengers in a courteous manner.  This training is conducted at Customer 
Care Institute, Kishanganj, Delhi besides the Zonal Training Centres.  
 
3.8 Regarding the general working hours, the Committee have been informed that 
under PRS, the working hours of reservation counters at most stations are from 0800 
hrs to 1400 hrs and from 1415 hrs to 2000 hrs.  At some of the major stations the 
working hours are extended upto 2200 hrs at nominated counters and the duty roster 
of the staff deployed at these counters is adjusted accordingly.  The Ministry have, 
however, informed that the internet based ticket booking facility of the Indian Railways 
is available round-the-clock except between 2330 hrs and 0030 hrs during which period 
the system is closed for maintenance.   
 
3.9 In reply to the issue of improvement of the infrastructure of the PRS, the 
Ministry have stated that the capacity of the PRS servers have been upgraded to handle 
increased load.  Moreover, additional reservation centres have been opened at Post 
Ofices.  At present, PRS counters are functional at 151 post offices across the country.  

~ 18 ~ 
 
Mobile ticketing vans (under the “Mushkil Asaan Scheme”) are functional at Howrah, 
New Delhi, Jaipur and Vapi.  These vans sell reserved and unreserved tickets at various 
locations in the city.  Passengers can also buy tickets through mobile phones by 
accessing the IRCTC website.  The Ministry have also initiated the setting up of the PRS 
Disaster Recovery Centre at Secunderabad which is due to become functional in about 
three years.   
 
3.10 Besides the PRS, the Ministry is also making efforts at improving the 
infrastructure provided to the ticketing staff.  The staff are provided modern furniture 
suitable for computerized booking counters at both PRS and UTS locations.  The 
Committee have also been informed that funds to the tune of Rs. 6 lakh per PRS and 
Rs. 7 lakh per UTS are sanctioned to provide requisite infrastructure for these locations.    
 
  

~ 19 ~ 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
CATERING IN STATIONS AND ON BOARD TRAINS  
4.1 The Catering Policy 2010 has been introduced w.e.f. 21.07.2010 and has laid 
emphasis on ensuring quality of food served on Railways.  The earlier policy of 2005 
sought to treat catering as an independent profit centre, the 2010 policy seeks to 
acknowledge catering as a passenger service.  The policy has sought to bring 
improvements in catering by shifting the task of monitoring quality of service from 
IRCTC to the Zonal Railways and attempts to leverage Zonal Railways‟ vast and 
elaborate all India network in order to effect a thorough supervision and control over 
catering activities.   
 
4.2 When the Ministry was questioned on the major changes being effected by this 
policy, they informed that the main emphasis has been placed to ensure the availability 
of quality food for the not-so-affluent classes of passengers by providing Janta food and 
low cost regional cuisine (economy combo-meals) by means of Jan Ahaar outlets, 
Refreshment Rooms, stand alone outlets and vending stalls.  Given the vast variety of 
cuisines and culinary preference all over the country, regional cuisine is being 
encouraged and the Zonal Railways have been given the authority to design the menu, 
recipes and fix the tariff of the a-la-carte items within their jurisdiction as per the local 
taste and purchasing power.  The Committee were also informed that a list of 63 a-la-
carte items with their respective prices prepared by a Committee of CCMs has been 
circulated to all Zonal Railways for its early introduction in their Zones.  
 
4.3 As regards the mechanism of providing catering facilities at stations and in trains, 
the Committee have been informed that facilities are provided in the form of various 
catering units, viz. refreshment rooms/Jan Ahaar, Catering Stalls/trolleys, milk bottles, 
fruits and juice stalls, automatic vending machines (AVM), food plaza/food courts and 
fast food units at the Railway stations.  On board trains, catering is provided through 
pantry cars/train side vending in Rajdhani/Shatabdi Express, Duronto Express and other 
Mail/Express trains. 

~ 20 ~ 
 
4.4 As regards catering on board trains, the Ministry have informed that as per the 
new Catering Policy of 2010: 
“The priority for allotment of pantry cars to trains are considered based on 
various factors such as priority of the trains, (First priority to Duronto and 
Rajdhani Express trains, Second priority to long distance premier, superfast 
trains, Third priority to Mail and Express trains with more than 24 hour journey 
time either way and Fourth priority to the remaining trains, preference to those 
trains where vestibules are provided), its commercial justification, availability of 
pantry cars and load limitations, etc.” 
 
  

~ 21 ~ 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
PROVISION OF DRINKING WATER IN STATIONS AND ON BOARD TRAINS & 
CLEANLINESS 
 
5.1 One of the key areas identified by Railways under passenger amenities is 
provision of drinking water facilities.  Since water is a basic necessity, it is imperative 
that safe drinking water be made accessible to all rail passengers irrespective of the 
class of travel.  The Railways have stated that drinking water has been made available 
at all railway stations and during summer season when there is water scarcity and 
existing sources are found to be inadequate to meet the water requirement at stations, 
water supply is made through water tankers.  To ensure that the quality of water 
provided is up to the mark, the Ministry have installed a system of frequent checks by 
performing physical and chemical tests on the water at regular intervals.   
 
5.2 Regarding the provision of drinking water in trains, it was stated that as part of 
the catering services on Railways, all the on board passengers of Rajdhani/Shatabdi and 
Duronto Express trains are provided one litre packaged drinking water on 
complimentary basis and another bottle of packaged drinking water is provided to on 
board passengers for journey beyond 20 hrs.  In other Mail/Express trains, where 
pantry car services or train side vending services is available and also at enroute 
stations, Rail Neer packaged drinking water and other Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
approved packaged drinking water bottles are made available on payment to 
passengers at the rate of Rs. 12 per bottle.  Frequent and surprise checks are 
conducted at regular intervals to check the quality and availability of Rail Neer and 
other BIS approved packaged drinking water on trains and at Railway Stations. 
 
WATERING OF COACHES 
5.3 Railways provide elaborate arrangements for watering of coaches at standing 
stations as well as enroute.  For each of the mail and express trains run by the 
Railways, there is a nominated station where water is to be provided enroute in addition 

~ 22 ~ 
 
to terminals.  Further, it was stated that in case of shortage of water at a particular 
station which has been nominated, watering is shifted to another station.  Adequate 
halts are provided at these stations in a systematic manner to ensure availability of 
water in the toilets/wash basins of coaches throughout the journey. 
 
CLEANLINESS IN TRAINS AND STATIONS 
5.4 The Indian Railways covers over 8000 stations and more than 25 million 
passengers utilize the services of trains and stations.  It is, therefore, imperative that 
high standards of cleanliness, hygiene and sanitation be maintained at all times.  When 
asked about the main initiatives that the Railways was taking to ensure cleanliness, the 
Ministry informed that limited mechanized cleaning attention is provided to identified 
trains and mechanized cleaning at Railway Stations. 
 
5.5 The Ministry have further elaborated on the limited mechanized cleaning process 
provided to identified trains during their scheduled stoppage at nominated enroute 
„Clean Train Stations‟.  The broad details of the general arrangements made are as 
follows: 
(i) Pressurised water cleaning and disinfections of all coach toilets, 
(ii) Cleaning of washbasins, mirrors and shelves in toilet and doorway area, 
(iii) Floor drying and general wiping of all toilet fittings in coaches, 
(iv) Mopping/swabbing of aisle area with disinfecting agent inside coach, 
(v) Spraying of deodorant and anti-mosquito agent in the coaches, 
(vi) Wiping of platform side window glass of the AC coaches, 
(vii) Cleaning of door, vestibule area and footsteps and 
(viii) Disposal of collected waste from all the coaches and underneath the wash 
basins from AC coaches.   
 
 It was added that this mechanized cleaning is being resorted to only on those 
trains which pass through the nominated Clean Train Stations during the period from 
600 hrs. to 2200 hrs. 

~ 23 ~ 
 
5.6 Currently, 29 stations have been covered under the „Clean Station Scheme‟ as 
the scheme requires a compulsory stoppage of minimum 15-20 minutes.  The Ministry 
have added that, however, large numbers of trains passing through these stations are 
being covered for cleanliness. 
 
5.7 The system of On Board House Keeping Services (OBHS) has been envisaged in 
all Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto and important Mail/Express trains for frequent cleaning 
of coach toilets, doorways, aisles and passenger compartments during the run of the 
trains.  So far the scheme is operational in 385 train pairs, out of the 596 identified 
train pairs.  Cleanliness is checked at several levels, starting with the supervisors in-
charge of stations to officers of different departments located at the station, division 
and headquarters. 
 
5.8 When asked about the availability of separate apron areas for the cleaning of 
trains, the Ministry has replied that apron areas for cleaning of trains is not provided at 
all stations, since these are required at stations where turn around maintenance of 
trains is being done.  Normally rakes are cleaned even if apron area is not provided at 
stations.  Terminating and originating trains are being cleaned in the nominated 
coaching depot in the vicinity of the station. 
 
5.9 Regarding the system of toilets and urinals at stations, the Ministry have 
informed that there are comprehensive instructions for provision of passenger amenities 
regarding toilets and urinals at stations.  The details of norms for quantum of minimum 
essential amenities for toilets and urinals at various categories of stations are as under: 
 
Category of 
stations 
A-1 A B C D E F 
No. of urinals 12 10 6 4 4 1 - 
No. of toilets 12 10 6 2 4 1 - 
 

~ 24 ~ 
 
5.10 On the issue of „pay and use‟ toilets at the stations, the Ministry have informed 
that they have been introduced with a view to improving the cleanliness standard of 
toilets at stations.  At present, normal „pay and use‟ toilets have been provided at more 
than 750 stations and Railways are gradually bringing more and more toilets in the 
purview of the „pay and use‟ scheme.  However, the Chairman, during the course of 
evidence, stated that the prevalence of „pay and use‟ toilets in the small and medium 
stations is very limited.  During evidence before the Committee, he opined that 
agencies which run sanitation services are reluctant to come to these stations.  While 
acknowledging this problem, he informed that the Railways have devised a system 
where Station Masters at such stations are given a cash imprest of Rs. 20,000-25,000 
for bigger stations and Rs. 2,500-5,000 for smaller stations for general cleanliness and 
maintenance of toilets.  When asked about the system of monitoring, the Railways have 
informed that regular inspections are carried out to ensure proper cleanliness at toilets.  
Moreover, the Ministry also informed that they have instructions in place, for displaying 
signages for toilets and the rate lists prominently at noticeable locations/entry points 
and also displaying of signboards showing that urinals are free. 
  

~ 25 ~ 
 
CHAPTER - VI 
LINEN MANAGEMENT 
6.1 Supply of linen forms an important amenity in air-conditioned coaches/trains, as 
well as long distance trains.  When asked about the procedure with regard to 
procurement of linen, the Ministry have stated that the management of linen provided 
in a particular train is done by the primary (owning) depot of the respective train.  The 
main items that are provided are bedsheets, pillow covers, blankets and face towels.  
The bedsheets, pillow covers and face towels are washed after every use and blankets 
are washed on a monthly basis..   
 
6.2 With regard to washing of linen, it was informed that washing of linen is being 
done through outsourcing by Railways.  The Committee pointed out that majority of the 
complaints by passengers involves unclean and unhygienic linen supplied on board 
trains.  It was also pointed out that the rates for washing of linen had not been revised 
for a long time and the remuneration for the same was not adequate, adversely 
affecting the washing of linen.  The Chairman, Railway Board, acknowledged that there 
was certainly a concern with linen management.  He further elaborated that with the 
kind of service providers available, they were not being able to get a proper output 
from them.  In light of these problems, Railways have taken the initiative of creating 
their own laundries and have set up a mechanized laundry in Mumbai.  The Ministry 
have further elaborated that in order to improve the quality of washing of linen supplied 
to the passengers in AC coaches of trains, a state-of-the-art, fully mechanized 
departmental laundry was set up in Wadibunder Coaching Depot under the Central 
Railways as a pilot project.  This initiative has led to a marked improvement in the 
standards of cleanliness/hygiene in the linen being supplied to passengers in trains and 
passenger complaints have reduced whenever linen washed in mechanized laundries is 
supplied in trains.  With a view to proliferate this concept, the Chairman added that: 
“...we have made a plan to start similar type of laundries all over the railway 
network because we have realised that we have problem with linen and it cannot 
be outsourced as the service providers do not have the equipment, machinery 
and the facility to do this kind of mass washing activity. In fact, many of our 

~ 26 ~ 
 
officers visited hotels and hospitals where washing of linen is being done in bulk. 
They have done a complete study of how to take care of this problem. We have 
arrived at the conclusion that the only way to address this problem is to harness 
the latest technology for putting up mechanised laundries on our own. I would 
like to inform that one of our tenders in Mumbai is almost ready for a major 
mechanised laundry.” 
 
6.3 Zonal Railways have identified 56 major coaching depot locations for setting up 
of such mechanized laundries.  20 of the identified laundries have already been 
commissioned; 8-10 more are expected to be commissioned during 2013-14. 
 
  

~ 27 ~ 
 
CHAPTER – VII 
 
PASSENGER SAFETY 
 
Security System over Indian Railways 
 
7.1 Presently, the security of Indian Railways is looked after by the Government 
Railway Police, District Police and Railway Protection Force. 
 
7.2 In the beginning, the role and responsibility of RPF was confined to the security 
of railway property.  By an amendment in the RPF Act in 2003, the role and 
responsibilities of RPF were extended to the security of passengers, passenger area and 
matters connected therewith.  Presently, the role and responsibilities of the 3 agencies 
are as under: 
(i) District Police: Security of tracks and bridges and law and order problems 
beyond outer signals of railway stations. 
(ii) Government Railway Police (GRP): Prevention and detection of passenger 
related crime and maintenance of law and order in the station premises and 
in trains.  50% of the cost of Government Railway Police is borne by the 
Railways and the balance is paid by the State Government concerned. 
(iii) Railway Protection Force: Security of railway property, passengers, passenger 
area and matters connected therewith. 
 
7.3 When asked about the rationale of having multiple agencies, the Ministry have 
submitted as under: 
“The history of security system on Indian Railways dates back to the British 
period when the railway system was owned by private companies and concerned 
State Governments provided security to railways, for which private companies 
had to pay.  These companies also employed staff for security duties.  The 
security system of private companies later on became „Watch and Ward 

~ 28 ~ 
 
Department‟.  Railways were nationalized after independence, but the legacy of 
payment for security to States continued. 
 
Railways owned Watch and Ward system also underwent many changes and 
gained strength with the passage of time.  It was reorganized as „Railway 
Security Force‟ in the year 1954 and with the amendments in the RPF Act, it 
became an Armed Force of the Union in the year 1985.  The Force was further 
assigned with the responsibility of protection and security of passenger area and 
passengers in addition to railway property in the year 2003 under the Railways 
Act and the RPF Act. 
 
With a view to put in place a dedicated agency responsible for prevention and 
detection of crime in passenger area, proposal for amendment in the RPF Act has 
already been moved for approval of the Cabinet, with the concurrence of the 
Ministries of Home Affairs and the Law & Justice.  It will enable the RPF to take 
over the duties and responsibilities of the GRP in the passenger area.” 
 
7.4 When questioned whether a single nodal agency would not be more effective in 
handling emergencies due to faster reaction and turnaround time, the Ministry have 
agreed and submitted as under: 
“With a view to put in place a dedicated agency responsible for prevention and 
detection of crime in passenger area, proposal for amendment in the RPF Act has 
already been moved for approval of the Cabinet, with the concurrence of the 
Ministries of Home Affairs and the Law & Justice.  It will enable the RPF to take 
over the duties and responsibilities of the GRP in the passenger area.” As advised 
by the Cabinet Secretariat, comments of States have been solicited on the above 
proposal. 
 
7.5 Regarding the mechanism of coordination between the three agencies, the 
Ministry have replied that: 

~ 29 ~ 
 
“Regular coordination is maintained at Railway Board level, Zonal level, Divisional 
level and post level.  DG/RPF holds frequent meetings with Directors General of 
Police of the State.  High level coordination meetings are held by General 
Managers of Zonal Railways with the GRP Chiefs of the States concerned twice a 
year in general.  Such meetings are also attended by the Principal Head of the 
Department/Head of the Department of Zonal Railways and officers from local 
police. 
 
DRMs with Sr. DSCs/RPF hold quarterly meetings with Superintendents of Police 
of GRP, local police and civil administration to improve the security in the 
Division.  Almost weekly meetings are held by Inspector/RPF with his counter 
parts in GRP and Civil police.  RPF representatives are also part of Multi Agency 
Center/State Multi Agency Centre system for exchange of information with 
Central/State Intelligence Agencies.” 
 
7.6 To the query on the sanctioned and actual strength of the RPF, the Ministry have 
replied that the sanctioned strength is 74,538 whereas the actual is 61,058. 
  
7.7 Since such a large number of vacancies exist in such a critical area as security, 
the Ministry was asked about the steps being taken to fill up the vacancies; they have  
stated: 
“Recruitment process in RPF has already been initiated.  In this respect, nearly 
27.07 lakh applications have been received for 11952 vacancies of Constables 
notified vide Employment Notice No.1/2011 dated 27.02.2011 and 2,27,207 
applications have been received against 511 vacancies of Sub/Inspector notified 
vide Employment Notice No.2/2011 dated 13.04.2011.  Further action is being 
taken to expedite the above process.” 2 
 
                                                           
2 At the time of factual verification, the Ministry has informed that for all 511 vacancies of Sub Inspector all 
recruitment formalities have been completed and preparation of final result is under process.  

~ 30 ~ 
 
7.8 The key measures adopted by the Railways to ensure the safety and security of 
passengers are as under: 
“Maintenance of law and order and prevention/detection of crime in Railways is 
the statutory responsibility of the State Government concerned, which they 
discharge through their GRP.  However, RPF supplements the efforts of GRP by 
deploying their staff for escorting important trains and for access control duties 
at sensitive/important railway stations to prevent crimes in Railways. 
 
1275 trains are escorted by the RPF personnel daily on an average besides 
escorting of 2200 trains by the GRP.  The RPF train escort parties have also been 
directed to educate passengers to secure their luggage and not to accept 
eatables/drinks from unknown passengers.  In addition, regular announcements 
are made at stations to educate passengers. 
 
Railway Protection Force is also providing access control at important stations 
and enforcing provisions of the Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Act and 
the Railways Act.  Regular drives are being conducted against the 
criminals/receivers of stolen Railway property as well as anti-social elements 
from the Railway premises and in running trains. 
 
TRAINING TO RPF 
7.9 Regarding the training being imparted to the RPF, the Ministry have elaborated: 
 “Initial training: 
 
1) Indoor: Law, crime on Railways, psychology, management and GK, working 
of Railways, general organization of RPF, disaster management, visits and 
report writing, use of technology and computer, revision and snap tests 
interaction and sensitization, RPF Mitra Yojna, ethics in policing and 
Rajbhasha and library. 
 

~ 31 ~ 
 
2) Outdoor: Weapon training, field craft and tactics, physical training, U.A.C., 
Yoga, games/gym and learning of driving. 
 
Apart from the above, the following training to RPF personnel in-service is also 
being imparted to the staff. 
 
1. Identification of explosives substances, IEDs bomb detection and its counter 
measures is being imparted. 
 
2. Drugging of passengers in Railways and different detective/preventive steps 
being taken in this regard by security personnel including 3D human portrait 
building photo identity kit and anthropology method. 
 
3. Workshop on untoward incidents and disaster management. 
 
4. On job training was imparted at VSG/SWR Bilaspur/SECR, BSB/DLW/NER, 
Maligaon/NFR & JHS/NCR as to RPF and Railway employees at these places. 
 
5. In addition, training in fire fighting techniques to RPF personnel. 
 
6. Pre-induction course for advanced bomb disposal module is being conducted 
for selected Force personnel who are then sent to NSG for further training. 
 
7. Course on changing face of terrorism and naxalism and its impact on Indian 
Railways. 
 
8. Commando courses.” 
 
7.10 In addition, the following measures are being taken for upgrading and improving 
training to RPF personnel: 

~ 32 ~ 
 
“At present, there are 13 training centres available with RPF for imparting 
training to the RPF/RPSF staff.  Rs. 11 crore have been allocated for 
improvement in infrastructure/training facilities of training centres of RPF at 
Chink Hill (Central), Kharagpur (South Eastern), Nasik Road (Central), Gorakhpur 
(North Eastern), Trichy (Southern), Mokama (East Central) and Bandikui (North 
Western Railway). 
 
Training Centre of RPF is engaged in regular coordination and constant touch 
with other centralized training institutes, State Administrative Training Institutes 
and other Police training organizations for getting better inputs, latest 
methodology like Simulated RPF Environment, Integrated approach through 
module based inputs, case studies, role plays, simulated public order scenarios, 
field visits, lecture demonstration, use of audio visual aids, computers, etc.  Uses 
of films, panel/group/open house discussions, lab work assignment, 
presentations, night exercises etc. are being utilized to improve the standard of 
training. 
 
GRP is a wing of State Police in railway area and functions under the control of 
respective State Governments.  State Governments are responsible for 
upgradation of their police training centres and training of GRP personnel.” 
 
7.11 It has been seen in recent times that Indian Railways has become a soft target 
of extremists and anti-national elements.  Further, the Rail network is also a frequent 
and common target during bandhs, dharna, communal/regional/linguistic violence etc.  
When asked what steps were being taken in order to tackle this problem, the Ministry 
stated as under: 
“Prevention and detection of crime and maintenance of Law & Order in station 
premises and trains is the responsibility of respective State Governments which 
they discharge through Government Railway Police.  To supplement efforts of 
State Governments, various steps have been taken for beefing up of security at 
major railway stations which include escorting of trains, nomination of stations 

~ 33 ~ 
 
for installation of Integrated Security System, procurement of modern security 
related equipment, creation of additional posts, establishment of new RPF 
battalions, setting up of commando training centers, networking of security 
control rooms and setting up of All India Security Helpline, etc.” 
 
 
 
INTEGRATED SECURITY SYSTEM 
7.12 An integrated security system is being implemented to strengthen surveillance 
mechanism over sensitive stations of the Indian Railways.  The system consists of IP 
based CCTV surveillance system, access control, personal and baggage screening 
system and bomb detection and disposal system.  The area to be covered under 
Integrated Security System is Entry/Exit points (i.e. point from where passengers 
enter/exit ticketing area), circulating area, concourse, all platforms, parcel area, PRS, 
yard pit shed, washing line and vehicle entry point.  The system is being implemented 
at an approved cost of Rs. 353 crore over 202 sensitive stations of the country.  
Contract for nominated stations of Southern Railway, South Central Railway, Kolkata 
Metro, Delhi area stations of the Northern Railway, North Western Railway, North East 
Frontier Railway, South West Railway, Central Railway, East Coast Railway, South East 
Coast Railway, West Central Railway has already been awarded by respective zonal 
railways.  Matter is under various stages of tendering process over other zonal railways. 
 
7.13 When asked about the defining features of this scheme, the Ministry have replied 
as under: 
“An integrated Security System has been approved to strengthen surveillance 
mechanism over sensitive and vulnerable stations of the Indian Railways.  
System has been conceptualized as comprising of following components which 
together provide multiple checking of passengers and its baggage from the point 
of entry in the station premises till boarding of train: 
 
i) Internet Protocol Based CCTV System 

~ 34 ~ 
 
ii) Access Control 
iii) Personal & Baggage Screening System 
iv) Bomb Detection and Disposal System 
 
A total of 202 sensitive stations have been nominated for installation of this 
system at an approved budget of Rs. 353 crore. 
 
Area to be covered under Integrated Security System shall be: Entry/Exit points 
circulating area (including parking area etc.), concourse, all platforms (including 
waiting room/cloak room), parcel area, PRS, FOB, Yard Pit Shed, Washing Line, 
Station Limit (Home Signal to Home Signal), vehicle entry point (to record vehicle 
number plate etc.) only.  The concept is to have multiple checking system 
starting from entry to the station premises and continuing till the boarding of the 
train. 
 
CCTV system shall be IP based with video analytics and 30 days‟ recording 
facility.  Video analytics will have crowd management, left over baggage 
detection and intrusion detection features.  Automatic vehicle scanner will be 
provided at entry gates from where vehicles enter into the station premises. 
 
The scanner will be integrated into the Control Room meant for surveillance of 
CCTV system.  For personal screening, hand held metal detectors, door frame 
metal detectors and frisking in suspected cases will be done.  X-ray baggage 
scanner will be provided at every entry point.  Number of entry points will be 
increased depending on volume of traffic and level of alert. 
 
Explosive detection and disposal system has been bifurcated into two parts – 
Explosive detection and explosive disposal.  For explosive detection, sniffer dogs 
and explosive vapour detectors will be used.  Control room shall be a vital 
component of the Integrated Security System.  Training will be an integral 
component of the project.  Execution, specification and acceptance test of access 

~ 35 ~ 
 
control, personal and baggage screening and bomb disposal and detection 
system shall be done by the Chief Security Commissioners/RPF of the zonal 
railways.  Execution, certification and acceptance test of CCTV surveillance 
system shall be done by the Chief Signal and Telecom Engineer of the Zonal 
Railways. 
 
 Eleven Zonal Railways- Southern Railway, South Central Railway, Northern 
Railway (Delhi Area Stations), Kolkata Metro, North Western Railway, 
Northeast Frontier Railway, South Western Railway, Central Railway 
(Mumbai Area Stations), East Coast Railway, Southeast Central Railway 
and West Central Railway, covering 82 railway stations, have awarded 
contract for execution of the work. 
 
 Over the remaining stations of South Eastern Railway, North Central 
Railway, North Eastern Railway, Eastern Railway, East Central Railway, 
Western Railway, Central Railway (Outside Mumbai area stations), 
Northeast Frontier Railway(remaining 8 stations) and Northern Railway 
(Outside Delhi area stations) finalization of tender for awarding the 
contract for implementation of the system is being done.   
 
7.14 Regarding the implementation of this scheme, the Ministry have informed that: 
“Execution of work for installation of Integrated Security System is under 
progress over Southern Railway, South Central Railway, Metro Railway and 
Northern Railway (Delhi area).  North Western Railway, North East Frontier 
Railway, South Western Railway, Central Railway, East Coast Railway, South 
Central Railway, West Central Railway.  Implementation of the scheme over 
other Zonal Railways is under tendering process.” ????? 
 
 
ALL INDIA SECURITY HELPLINE 

~ 36 ~ 
 
7.15 An All India Security Helpline has been proposed by the Railways.  It envisages 
the provision of a unique all India helpline number to railway passengers for round the 
clock security assistance during their journey.  It is being implemented at an approved 
cost of Rs. 5 crore under the works programme.  Regarding the status of 
implementation of this initiative, the Ministry have replied: 
“Northern Railway is the nodal agency for setting up of all India Security 
Helpline.  Detailed estimates to the tune of Rs.4.70 Crore approved and 
convened to Northern Railway for further necessary action.” 
 
ON-BOARD MEDICAL FACILITIES 
7.16 A doctor with a paramedic staff has been provided in the Duronto trains, as a 
Pilot project.  In addition to this, all passenger carrying trains are provided with First Aid 
Boxes and Augmented First Aid Boxes have been provided with the Train 
Superintendents of Rajdhani/Shatabdi Express trains and Guards of nominated trains.  
The front line staff viz., Train Superintendent, Train Conductors, Travelling Train Ticket 
Examiners, etc. are also trained in rendering First Aid.  Trains can also make 
unscheduled halts, if necessary, at the stations, en-route, in emergencies.  The Station 
Masters have details of doctors, clinics and hospitals, both Government and Private in 
the vicinity of the station, so that their services could also be availed, in emergencies. 
 
7.17 Regarding Accident Relief Medical Equipment vans, the Ministry have provided 
the information with regard to the location at Annexure-V. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

~ 37 ~ 
 
Part-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. The Committee note that separate guidelines to govern ‘passenger 
amenities’ were issued by the Railways for the first time in 1952, which 
defined amenities as ‘basic amenities’ and ‘additional amenities’.  
These guidelines were revised for the first time in 1995, which sought 
to expand the scope of the amenities provided.  Subsequently, when 
certain deficiencies were noticed, the guidelines were revised in 1999, 
2003 and 2007.  The Committee further note that on-board minimum 
facilities to be provided to passengers have also been notified by the 
Railways.  The Committee are of the opinion that since passenger 
service is the direct interface of Indian Railways with the passengers, 
passenger amenities should be given a special focus by the Railways.  
The Committee are of the opinion that the aspirations of the travelling 
public have undergone a sea change since the first guidelines on 
passenger amenities were formulated in 1952, with greater 
expectations for better passenger services.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the guidelines for providing passenger amenities should be 
updated and reviewed regularly so that amenities can be upgraded, 
commensurate with the development of latest technologies and 
innovations in hospitality so as to fulfill the increased aspirations of the 
travelling public. 
 
2. The Committee find that certain on-board minimum facilities to be 
provided to passengers have been stipulated by the Railways, which 
include internal fittings, such as lighting, fan, comfortable seats and 
toilets and external fittings like display board, reservation charts, etc.  
The Committee are of the view that amenities both at the station and 
on-board, are of paramount importance and that the Railways should 
take steps to upgrade and augment them regularly. 

~ 38 ~ 
 
3. The Committee understand that passenger amenities have been 
classified into three categories, viz. ‘minimum essential amenities’, 
‘recommended amenities’ and ‘desirable amenities’.  Further, it is noted 
that whereas ‘minimum essential amenities’ are required to be 
provided at all stations at all times, recommended and ‘desirable 
amenities’ are based on the volume of passengers handled, funds 
available and relative priority of works.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that since ‘recommended’ and ‘desirable amenities’ are 
considered suitable for improvement of customer satisfaction and the 
interface at stations, the Railways have to take steps to ensure that the 
‘recommended’ and ‘desirable amenities’ are extended to a larger 
number of stations.  The Committee further recommended that the 
Ministry should ensure through stringent and regular monitoring at all 
levels, that slippages in the amenities provided do not occur. 
 
4. The Committee find that under the extant guidelines, the Railways 
have categorized their entire 8241 stations into 7 categories              
(A1 and A to F) on the basis of passenger earnings, volume of 
passengers handled, relative importance of the station based on its 
geographical/tourist/historical value and the availability of funds.  The 
yardstick for providing amenities is based on the classification of 
stations which is linked to the annual passenger earning.  The 
Committee are of the view that financial earnings should not be the 
sole basis for classification of stations; other factors like historical and 
cultural importance, geographical location, etc. also need to be taken 
into account while deciding on the categorization of a station.  
Similarly, there also exist other categories like industrial hubs, ports, 
agricultural/horticultural production centres, educational/professional 
institutions in remote areas, etc., from where there may be a large 
travelling public.  Such stations should also benefit from increased 
amenities since they are used by a very large number of passengers 

~ 39 ~ 
 
during peak hours or peak seasons.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend a revision of the existing categorization of stations so that 
it is not based solely on the annual passenger earnings. The relative 
importance of the station keeping in view of the aforementioned 
factors may also be duly considered while making such classification.  
The Committee would like to be kept apprised of the steps taken in this 
regard. 
 
5. The Committee are constrained to note that a majority of stations of 
the Indian Railways, i.e., 6301 or 77 per cent of the 8241 stations fall 
in the ‘E’ and ‘F’ category of stations.  This effectively means that they 
receive the least amount of passenger amenities even though they are 
used by a larger number of people.  These stations are generally 
located in rural areas or in remote locations or are halt stations.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that since there are fewer originating 
trains and since stoppages of trains are for very less duration, 
passenger earnings may not be very high at these stations.  As a result, 
these stations are deprived of most of the benefits even though they 
are used by a very large number of passengers.  Taking into account 
the social responsibility of the Railways, the Committee opine that 
reasonable amenities should be provided at all stations.  Hence the 
Committee recommend that at least basic facilities like platform 
shelter, proper seating, toilets, lighting, fans, FOB, waiting hall, water 
coolers, public address system, etc. should be made available at ‘E’ and 
‘F’ grade stations on a priority basis.  They also feel that the Ministry 
should chalk out an action plan to improve/upgrade the amenities at 
these stations in a time bound manner so that maximum number of 
passengers can benefit from them. 
 
6. The Committee note that besides having comprehensive guidelines 
defining the quantum of amenities to be provided at each category of 

~ 40 ~ 
 
stations, the Railways have also identified key areas to concentrate 
their efforts at providing passenger amenities at various stations.  The 
Committee are of the view that if these identified amenities, such as 
platforms of adequate length, drinking water, toilets, seating 
arrangements, lights, fans, information display and booking are 
provided at all stations, it would benefit a larger number of stations, 
irrespective of their categorization.  Therefore, the Committee would 
like to emphasize that the Ministry should ensure that at least the key 
amenities that have been identified by the Railways should be provided 
to each and every station, in a phased manner. 
 
7. The Committee further find that no timeframe has been set for 
providing amenities on various categories of stations.  Though the 
augmentation/enhancement of amenities is a continuous process and 
is dependent on demand and availability of funds, yet there should be a 
timeframe for providing the ‘minimum essential’, ‘recommended’ and 
‘desirable amenities’ at all stations.  The Committee feel that chalking 
out a time frame in this regard would prevent slippages and ensure 
effective enhancement of the amenities provided, besides instilling a 
sense of urgency in those responsible for promoting and executing 
such works. 
 
8. The Committee find that on occasions, certain amenities, whether at 
stations or in trains, are not functional or not provided at all, 
irrespective of the fact that it is a minimum essential amenity.  At the 
same time, passengers are also not aware of the facilities/amenities 
that are actually sanctioned or available at a particular station.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the category of station as well as the 
amenities that are sanctioned and available for that particular station 
should be prominently displayed at the station concerned.  Further, 
contact number of the nodal appellate authority should be prominently 

~ 41 ~ 
 
displayed in the station for redressal of the grievances of the 
passengers.  The Committee are of the firm belief that such an action 
will bring public awareness and galvanize officials into proactively 
providing/maintaining the entitled amenities to the travelling public. 
 
9. The Committee find that passenger amenities are not provided by a 
single department but rather by multiple departments of the Railways.  
The Committee are not fully convinced of the rationale proffered by the 
Railways that since each department has technical and professional 
expertise, it would be better equipped to provide a certain amenity. 
The Committee would like to stress that a single nodal department 
should be entrusted with the task of providing passenger amenities 
both at the   stations and on-board to ensure a faster and more 
efficient delivery mechanism.  Having a nodal department for 
passenger amenities would obviate the need for time consuming inter-
department coordination and also avoid duplication.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should explore avenues 
whereby a separate department may be created at both apex and zonal 
levels to cater specifically to passenger amenities.  The Committee 
would like to be kept apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
10. Further, the Committee find that funds are allocated under the 
plan head of ‘passenger amenities’ and no separate allocation is made 
for different categories of passenger amenities within this head.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that if separate allocations are made for 
each of the categories, fund utilization would be more transparent and 
the progress of passenger amenities would be better monitored.  They, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should set both physical and 
financial targets for each item of passenger amenities instead of 
having a common head. 

~ 42 ~ 
 
11. The Committee have been informed that the Railways have 
formulated a well developed system of monitoring the availability and 
maintenance of passenger amenities.  They have been apprised that 
amenities are periodically and intensively inspected at station, 
divisional and headquarter levels regularly.  The Committee wish to 
emphasize that it is only through effective monitoring that authorities 
can detect deficiencies and slippages and take consequent remedial 
action in a far more efficient and expeditious manner.  They are also of 
the opinion that there should be synergy between each tier of the 
hierarchy to ensure proper functioning at stations and maintenance of 
passenger amenities. 
 
12. The Committee further find that in addition to the above 
monitoring, the Ministry have also set up Multi-Disciplinary Services 
Improvement Groups (SIGs) at the zonal, divisional and station levels 
for inspecting the stations jointly as per prescribed schedule.  The 
mandate of these groups is to give special attention to the proper 
functioning of the amenities provided and prompt remedial action 
taken in regard to the deficiencies noted.  Any further augmentation 
needed in amenities is also recommended by these groups.  The 
Committee appreciate this initiative by the Railways to strengthen the 
monitoring mechanism and urge them to increase the frequency of 
such inspections. 
 
13. The Committee, on their visit to the Allahabad Railway Station 
had found that despite the fact that it was such an important station 
that sees heavy footfalls, yet the condition of the waiting room and 
drinking water areas left much to be desired.  The Committee strongly 
feel that without proper monitoring of the sanctioned amenities, 
slippages are bound to happen and passengers would have to put up 
with sub-standard amenities.  The Committee feel that regular visits of 

~ 43 ~ 
 
senior officers shall keep the authorities at the stations alert to their 
duties and responsibilities. 
 
14. The Committee note with concern that during 2009-10 and  
2010-11, the funds allocated for passenger amenities have not been 
fully utilized by the Railways.  Though the estimates were revised 
downwards from Rs. 1102 cr. to Rs. 923 cr. and from   Rs.1302 cr. to 
Rs.998 cr. during 2009-10 and 2010-11, respectively, yet the actual 
achievement was far lower, at Rs. 906 and Rs. 911 crore, respectively.  
The Committee fail to appreciate the reasons for the same which have 
been stated by the Ministry, i.e, the slower pace of 
replacement/renovation works of passenger amenities by some Zonal 
Railways.  The Committee desire that projects taken up for passenger 
amenities may be given priority and targets/projects identified should 
be completed within the stipulated time period. 
 
15. The Committee note that the scheme of Adarsh Stations was 
started in 2009-10 to focus on the improvement of amenities at 
stations in areas such as ticketing, circulating area, signages,  
adequate lighting, etc.  So far, 845 stations have been selected for 
development as Adarsh Stations.  The Committee, however, find that in 
spite of considerable passage of time, only 441 stations, i.e. only 
around 50 percent of the stations have so far been developed as 
Adarsh Stations. The Committee are very unhappy with this tardy 
progress and emphasise that the very purpose of the scheme gets 
defeated if there are delays in its execution.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the remaining stations should be developed urgently 
to benefit the travelling public. 
 
16. The Committee note that 50 stations have been identified to be 
developed as World Class Stations by resorting to the PPP mode.  The 

~ 44 ~ 
 
intention of this scheme is to harness the real estate potential of land 
around and the air space above the stations without any additional 
cost to the Railways.  The plan envisages the provision of modern 
facilities at stations such as food plazas, currency exchange counter, 
ATM facilities, hotels, car rentals, etc. The Committee, to their utter 
dismay, find that not a single station has so far been developed as a 
World  Class Station.  The reasons forwarded by the Ministry that the 
implementation of this scheme requires preparation of Master Plan and 
Feasibility reports first, as well as approval of several local agencies is 
not acceptable as such aspects should have been factored into the 
scheme during the formulation stage itself.  Extensive and effective 
consultations with all associated agencies at the time of drafting of the 
scheme would have eased the road blocks at the initial stages itself, 
paving the way for faster implementation.  The Committee feel that 
delays in the implementation of the scheme negates the very objective 
and, therefore, urge the Ministry to take up the work in right earnest 
so that both the passengers and the Railways are benefited from this 
otherwise laudable initiative. 
 
17. The Committee are constrained to note that out of the 196 Multi 
Functional Complexes (MFCs) taken up for development only 21 have 
been completed so far.  The Committee are aware that the mandatory 
requirement of Cabinet approval for all long term leasing of 
government land introduced since March 2011 is a constraint, and urge 
the Ministry to apprise the Cabinet of this constraint and the adverse 
effects of such an action on providing enhanced passenger amenities.  
The Committee, at the same time, fail to appreciate the fact that a 
large member of agencies are involved in this scheme and wish to be 
apprised of the reasons for this multiplicity of agencies.   
 

~ 45 ~ 
 
18. The Committee note that ticketing in the Indian Railways is done 
through the Passenger Reservation Ticketing System.  The Committee 
appreciate the fact that given the wide reach of the Indian Railways, 
about 8900 PRS cum UTS-counters are currently in operation. The 
Committee, while commending the initiative of the Ministry to make 
PRS tickets available at non-rail head locations through postal staff, 
district administrative staff and defence staff, suggest that the Ministry 
can also explore making available non-conventional methods such as 
mobile ticketing vehicles etc. to remote/rural locations, etc.  The 
Committee note that while ATVMs would ease the congestion at ticket 
counters, yet only 626 ATVM’s have been commissioned so far and 
these are mostly located in metropolitan centres.  The Committee 
desire that greater number of ATVM’s be procured which should be 
placed at various locations frequented by passengers which would ease 
the rush of passengers at counters.   
 
19. The Committee would also like to stress that reservation of 
tickets on the internet through the IRCTC website is one of the most 
convenient modes of passenger reservation.  However, it is found 
generally that the IRCTC website is very slow and considerable time is 
wasted/consumed in purchasing a ticket through it.  While fully 
acknowledging the fact that the IRCTC website witnesses massive 
traffic which may be the reason for this, they would like to point out 
that internet ticketing is not only convenient for the passengers but 
also helps in decongesting railway counters and eliminates the menace 
of touts.  Therefore, the Committee would like to impress upon the 
Ministry the necessity of upgrading the capacity of the IRCTC 
website/servers to enable it to handle greater traffic with a lesser 
turnaround time.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
steps taken in this direction. 

~ 46 ~ 
 
20. The Committee are glad to note that the Railways sanction a 
total of Rs.6 lakh for PRS and Rs.7 lakh for each UTS location to 
provide requisite infrastructure to them.  The Committee wish to point 
out that the staff manning the Railway counters play a vital role in 
shaping the customer friendly image of the Railways.  Hence, there is 
need for proper training and improving the working conditions to 
ensure that the staff manning these counters have updated 
information and are efficient and courteous in their approach while 
dealing with passengers. 
 
21. The Committee note that as per the New Catering Policy of the 
Indian Railways, emphasis has been laid on ensuring the quality of 
food served on Railways.  The Committee have already presented the 
15th Report on the ‘New Catering Policy 2010 of the Indian Railways’, 
where the subject has been discussed in detail.  The Committee desire 
the Railways to give top priority to the catering facilities. 
 
22. The Committee observe that the many complaints regarding 
passenger amenities relate to the lack of safe drinking water at 
stations and on trains.  Though the Railways have made certain 
arrangements, they are generally not felt to be adequate or well 
maintained.  The Committee during their visit to Allahabad Station, had 
found the drinking water area to be very unhygienic.  At the station, 
bottled water was available but priced very high which may be beyond 
the reach of the ordinary passengers.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should lay special emphasis on making 
clean drinking water available to all category of passengers.  The 
Committee also suggest that sources of water should be placed 
centrally on platforms and proper signages displayed.  Moreover, in 
summer months, arrangements must be made to ensure that cold 
drinking water be made at all stations, irrespective of the category.  

~ 47 ~ 
 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry take special care to ensure 
that the water provided is free from disease causing bacteria, 
contaminants, etc. by way of regular quality checks and providing RO 
Plants, etc. 
 
23. The Indian Railways cover more than 8000 stations and more 
than 1.4 lakh people avail of the services at stations and trains daily.  
Therefore, it is of vital importance that cleanliness, hygiene and 
sanitation be properly maintained at all times and strictly monitored at 
all levels.  The Committee are of the view that cleanliness of stations 
and trains in Indian Railways is far from satisfactory and is a major 
area of concern.  While recognizing the fact that the massive size of the 
Railway network makes it a Herculean task to physically check each 
and every station, the Committee are of the view that the Ministry can 
set up special inspection teams at all levels to carry out 
random/surprise checks at stations and suggest corrective measures 
wherever required.  The Committee would also like to suggest that the 
Railways should also consider involving private agencies who have 
expertise in this field through the PPP initiative.  
 
24. The Committee also note that the Railways, by way of new 
initiatives, have introduced limited mechanized cleaning at ‘Clean Train 
Stations’.  Though the initiative is certainly laudable, yet the 
Committee were distressed to find that only 29 stations have been 
identified as ‘Clean Train Stations’.  The Committee are of the opinion 
that this is an abysmally small number to cater to the large number of 
trains that are being operated on the Railway network.  The Committee 
desire that more stations should be brought into the ambit of    ‘Clean 
Train Stations’ so that trains passing through them can get the benefits 
obtained from mechanized cleaning. 

~ 48 ~ 
 
25. The Committee further note that the Railways have envisaged 
On-Board House Keeping Services (OBHS) in all 
Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto and important mail trains.  They, however, 
find that out of the identified 596 identified pairs of trains, this scheme 
is operational in only 385 pairs of trains.  The Committee desire that 
the Ministry bring more stations and trains under this scheme 
expeditiously. 
 
26. The Committee observe that the response of ‘pay and use’ toilets 
in larger stations has been good.  However, in small and medium 
stations, there have been limited response to them.  The Committee 
would like to suggest to the Ministry to try and involve local agencies 
in running the ‘pay and use’ toilets which may lead to a better 
response.   Further, the Committee desire that the Railways take up in 
right earnest the setting up of environmentally viable/green toilets at 
stations.  They further suggest that toilets should be located at 
convenient locations at the platform with proper signages and are well 
lighted.  Moreover, attendants should always be present in them to 
ensure that proper cleanliness is maintained.  The Committee also 
desire that the Railways should attempt to educate the public about 
the importance of cleanliness and proper sanitation at stations and 
trains, either through publicity or by levying light fines, etc. which act 
as a deterrent to open defecation/urination in and around station 
premises. 
 
27. The Committee laud the initiative of the Ministry in setting up of 
a mechanized laundry in Mumbai under the Central Railways.  
Passenger response to this initiative has also been found to be 
satisfactory.  The Committee recommend that the Railways should set 
up more mechanized laundries in future to phase out the system of 
manual washing of linen.  The Committee would like to be kept 

~ 49 ~ 
 
apprised of the status regarding the establishment of the new 
proposed mechanized laundries. 
 
28. The Committee note that currently the security of the Indian 
Railways is being handled by the Government Railway Police, District 
Police and the Railway Protection Force.  Further, the Committee note 
that in order to consolidate more powers and responsibility with the 
RPF, the Ministry have moved a proposal for amendment in the RPF 
Act, which would enable the RPF to replace the GRP in the passenger 
area.  The Committee feel that this is a positive step as security 
matters should be consolidated and handled by a single agency which 
would result in quicker reaction time in case of emergencies and also 
avoid inter-agency issues. 
 
29. The Committee are, however, distressed to note that a large 
number of vacancies exist in the RPF.  Though the process of 
recruitment of has already been initiated, the Committee feel that in 
the first place, such a large number of vacancies should not have been 
allowed to occur.  The Committee desire that the recruitment process 
of security personnel be expedited, especially in light of the fact that 
they have to undergo extensive and intensive training before being 
made available to the Railways. 
 
30. The Committee observe that the Railways are implementing an 
ambitious integrated security system to strengthen the surveillance 
mechanism over sensitive stations on Railway network.  However, the 
Committee note with concern that it is still under tendering in most 
Zones.  The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing that delays 
nullify the usefulness of schemes/initiatives.  The Committee take a 
strong view of the delays in the expeditious completion of schemes 
involving passenger safety and security and urge the Ministry to 

~ 50 ~ 
 
complete the work related to the integrated security system on a top 
priority basis. The Committee may be apprised of the same. 
 
31. The Committee note that the Indian Railways have proposed to 
develop an all-India security helpline for round the clock assistance to 
passengers during journeys.  The Committee urge the Ministry to 
expedite this process and give wide publicity to increase awareness of 
this number so that the travelling public can use it to their advantage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          T.R. BAALU 
17  April, 2013          Chairman, 
27  Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Railways 
 

 
APPENDIX - I 

 
 
68 
APPENDIX - II 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RAILWAYS (2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 7th October, 2011, from 1100 hrs. to 1245 
Hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
     PRESENT 
 
SHRI T.R. BAALU -  CHAIRMAN  
  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
4. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
5. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
6. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
7. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
8. Shri Sharief-ud-din ‘Shariq’ 
9. Chaudhary Lal Singh 
10. Dr. Girija Vyas 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri K.E. Ismail 
12. Smt. Kusum Rai 
13. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
14. Shri Ishwar Singh 
        SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 

  
 
69 
 
           REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
1. Shri Vinay Mittal  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex-officio 
Principal Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 2. Smt. Pompa Babbar  Financial Commissioner, Railways &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 3. Shri A.P. Mishra  Member Engineering, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 4. Shri Sanjiv Handa  Member Mechanical, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 5. Shri Kul Bhushan  Member Electrical, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 6. Shri A.K. Vohra  Member Staff, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
   
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) to the sitting of the Committee.  Thereafter, the 
representatives of the Ministry briefed the Committee on the subject ‘Passenger 
Amenities and Passenger Safety in Indian Railways’ which has been taken up by the 
Committee for examination.   After the briefing, Members raised certain points for 
clarification to which the representatives of the Ministry replied. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

  
    70 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 19th October, 2011 from 1100 hrs. to 
1240 Hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
     PRESENT 
SHRI T.R. BAALU -  CHAIRMAN  
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Shri K. Bapiraju 
4. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
5. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
6. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
7. Dr. Padmsinha Bajirao Patil 
8. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
9. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
10. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
11. Shri Ganesh Singh 
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
13. Shri Lalji Tandon 
14. Dr. Girija Vyas 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri K.E. Ismail 
16. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
17. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
18. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
19. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
20. Shri Ishwar Singh 
21. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 
22. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
23. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
        SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 

  
 
71 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF NORTHERN RAILWAY 
 
1. Shri S.K.Budhalakoti  General Manager, Northern Railway 
 
 2. Shri Ashwani Lohani  Divisional Railway Manager, Delhi 
   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Northern 
Railway to the sitting of the Committee.  Thereafter, the representatives of the 
Northern Railway made a power-point presentation before the Committee on 
‘Passenger amenities being provided at various Railway Stations in Delhi’.  After the 
presentation, Members raised certain points for clarification to which the 
representatives of Northern Railway replied. 
 
3. The Committee, then decided to undertake a study tour in second week of 
November, 2011 to Thiruvananthapuram, Mumbai, Jodhpur and Jaipur  in connection 
with the examination of the subject selected by the Committee, viz. ‘Passenger 
Amenities and Passenger Safety in Indian Railways. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
   

  
 
72 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 8th December, 2011 from 1600 hrs. to 
1740 Hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
     PRESENT 
SHRI T.R. BAALU -  CHAIRMAN  
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Shri Ram Sunder Das 
4. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
5. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
6. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
7. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
8. Shri Sharief-ud-din ‘Shariq’ 
9. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
10. Shri Ganesh Singh 
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
12. Dr. Girija Vyas 
13. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
14. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
15. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
16. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
17. Shri Ishwar Singh 
18. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 
19. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
         
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 

  
 
73 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 1. Shri Sanjiv Handa  Member Mechanical, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
  
 2. Smt. Dipali Khanna  Financial Commissioner, Railways &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 3. Shri A.P. Mishra  Member Engineering, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 4. Shri Kul Bhushan  Member Electrical, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 5. Shri A.K. Vohra  Member Staff, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 6. Shri K. K. Srivastava  Member Traffic, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
   
2. At the outset, the Chairman apprised the members about the absence of the 
Chairman, Railway Board, from the sitting of the Committee due to some exigencies 
in Railways.  The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways on the subject ‘Passenger Amenities and Passenger Safety in Indian 
Railways’ and other matters relating thereto.    
 
4. During the evidence, the members raised certain points for clarification 
relating to the subject.  The representatives of the Ministry replied to the same. 
 
5. Evidence of the Ministry then concluded. 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
7. The witnesses, then, withdrew. 
  
 The Committee, then, adjourned. 

  
 
74 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RAILWAYS (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 5th April, 2013, at 1100 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
     PRESENT 
 
SHRI T.R. BAALU -  CHAIRMAN  
  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
3.  Shri Pralhad Joshi 
4.  Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
5.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
6.  Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
7.  Shri Rayapati Sambasiiva Rao 
8.  Shri Rudra Madhab Ray 
9.  Smt. Satabdi Roy 
10. Shri Ganesh Singh 
11. Shri Lalji Tandon 
12. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Husain Dalwai 
14. Shri Prabhat Jha 
15. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
16. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
17. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
18. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
19. Shri Ishwar Singh 
20. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
 
        SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Director 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik - Additional Director 

  
 
75 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft 
Reports and adopted the same without any modifications: 
(i) XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX ; 
 
(ii) XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX ; and 
 
(iii) Passenger Amenities and Passenger Safety in Indian Railways. 
 
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports and 
present the same to Parliament. 
 
4. XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 