 
 
3 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2009-10) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 41st Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘Review of Special Railway Safety Fund’] 
 
 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2009/ Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
___________________________________________________ 
 

 
 
 
SCR No.: 141 
THIRD REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2009-10) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 41st Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘Review of Special Railway Safety Fund’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.12.2009 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.12.2009 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2009/ Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
___________________________________________________ 
 
 

 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
            PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….……………….         (iii) 
  
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….…            (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report………………………………………………………              1      
    
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been        7 
accepted by the Government  …………………………. 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee       12 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which         13 
   Replies of the Government  have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….…. 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final    15 
replies of the Government  are still awaited  …………. 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX-I  Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on         16 
Railways held on 19.11.2009 
  
APPENDIX-II  Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the         19 
   Recommendations/observations contained in the  
41st Report (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of Special  
Railway Safety Fund' 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(iii) 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
Shri T. R. Baalu - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2.  Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3.  Shri Kameshwar Baitha (Palamau) 
4.  Shri K. Bapiraju 
5.  Smt. Rajkumari Chauhan 
6 .  Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
7 .  Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
8.  Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
9.  Shri Pralhad Joshi 
10.  Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
11.  Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
12.  Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
13.  Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
14.  Smt. Shatabdi Roy 
15.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
16.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
17.  Shri Gopal Singh Shekawat 
18.  Chaudhary Lal Singh 
19.  Shri Umashankar Singh 
20.  Shri Lalji Tandon 
21.      Dr. Girija Vyas         
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
23.  Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
24.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
25.  Shri Lalit Kishore Chaturvedi 
26.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
27.  Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28.  Shri Ambeth Rajan 
29.  Shri N. Balaganga 
30.  Shri K.E. Ismail 
31.  Shri Abani Roy 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijeet Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri R.S. Negi   - Executive Officer 
 

 
(iv) 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Ra ilways (2009 -10), having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Third Report 
of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Forty -first Report of the Sta nding 
Committee on Railways on ‘Review of Special Railway Safety Fund’. 
 
2. The Forty-first Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 23.12.2008 and it contained 
5 recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways have furnished their Action 
Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations.   
  
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 19.11.2009.  
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contain ed in the Forty -first Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                         T.R. BAALU 
02 December, 2009                                                         Chairman, 
11 Agrahayana, 1931 Saka                Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations and observations contained in the Forty First 
Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2008 -09) on ‘Review of Special 
Railway Safety Fund’.  The Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23.12.2008 and 
laid in Rajya Sabha simultaneously.  
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received fr om the Government in respect of 
all the 5 recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These have 
been broadly categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government –  
 
Para Nos.  1, 3, 4 and 5. 
    
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
 
Nil 
    
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration –  
 
Para No. 2 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are 
still awaited -  
 
Nil    
 
1.3 The Committee desire that replies to the observations/comments 
contained in Chapter I of the Report be furnished to them expeditiously. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations/observations.   
 
 
 

 
(2) 
 
 
 
A. Bridge works 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2) 
 
1.5 The Committee fou nd shortfalls in the achievement of targets in bridge 
works sancti oned for rehabilitation/renewal under SRSF despite the fact that 84 
bridges were dropped out of the sanctioned list of 2370 bridges. There was a 
shortfall of 95 bridges at the end of SRSF. The major shortfalls were: the Eastern 
Railway - 27, Northern and S outh Eastern Railways - 3 each, Western Railway - 36 
and East Central Railway – 17 bridges. As per the Railways, even after the 
rehabilitation of 7 bridges in Eastern Railway and 13 bridges in Western Railway 
during the first 5 months of 2008-09, there is a likely spill over of about 10 bridges in 
East Central Railway, 3 to 4 bridges in Western Railway and 2 bridges in Eastern 
Railway to the next year. By 2009 -10 except the Jubliee and Barakar bridges which 
will take more time, the rest of the bridges will be completely rehabilitated/replaced. 
The Committee were unhappy to note the tardy progress of work at the two major 
bridges to be completed under SRSF , namely the Jubliee and Barakar Bridges. In 
terms of financial achievement also, there was a shortfall i n expenditure of Rs. 
603.38 crore allocated for bridge works. Not convinced with the reasons advanced by 
the Railways, viz. the problem in finalisation of contracts and the problems of floods 
for non -achievement of the targets, the Committee observe d that with meticulous 
planning and visualization, these bottlenecks could have been avoided and the 
shortfalls could have been easily met. The Committee hope d that in future Railways 
would not be found wanting in this regard. They also desire d that Zone-wise details 
about the number of bridges renewed during 2008 -09 out of the spill over bridges as 
well as those which could not be completed during this period be intimated to them. 
 
1.6 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have , inter alia, stated 
as under:- 
 
“Timely completion of Bridge works is given top most priority on Indian 
Railways.  Progress of Bridge works on Indian Railways is monitored at 
various levels including at Railway Board level.  Shortfalls in achievements 
of physical & financial  targets under SRSF have got resulted due to various 
complexities involved in the execution of Bridge works.  Bridge works get 
delayed due to various reasons like non -availability of traffic blocks, bad 
weather conditions, floods, non -availability of const ruction specific steel, 

 
(3) 
 
 
contractual problems & some times extraneous circumstances.  
Further, with growing traffic, the window between trains is coming down, 
putting another handicap for time available for traffic blocks.  However, all 
steps are being take n to ensure expeditious completion of balance SRSF 
Bridge works including Jubilee & Barakar Bridges. The Zone -wise break up 
of balance SRSF Bridge  works  and  achievements made upto December, 
2008 are given as under: 
 
S.No Railway 
Progress of balance SRSF Bridges 
(No. of Bridges) 
 
  Targeted for 
2008-09 
Progress upto 
December, 2008 
Spillover during 
2009-10 
1. Central 1 0 0 
2. Eastern 25 9 2 
3. East Central 17* 1 0 
4. East Coast 2 2 0 
5. Northern 3 1 0 
6. North 
Central 
0 0 0 
7. North 
Eastern 
0 0 0 
8. Northeast 
Frontier 
0 0 0 
9. North 
Western 
0 0 0 
10. Southern 2 0 0 
11. South 
Central 
2 1 0 
12. South 
Eastern 
3 0 0 
13. South East 
Central 
0 0 0 
14. South 
Western 
0 0 0 
15. Western 36 20 0 
16. West Central 2 1 0 
 Total 93 35 2 
 
*  6 no. of Bridges under SRSF proposed by ECR for deletion have been agreed by Railway Board." 
 
1.7 The Committee note with concern that out of a target of 93 bridge 
works under SRSF, only 35 works were completed till December,  2008.  
Though the Railways have cited various reasons for the delay such as the 
non-availability of traffic blocks, floods, non -availability of construction-

 
(4) 
 
 
specific steel and contractual problems, and sometimes 
extraneous circumstances, the Committee feel that most of these factors  
can be anticipated at the planning stage itself , especially in the light of 
past experience in this regard, and corrective measures can be taken 
accordingly.  They, therefore, desire the Railways to apprise the 
Committee of the measures taken in this rega rd.  The Committee would 
also like to be updated about the latest position of bridge works under  
the SRSF. 
 
B. Signalling & Telecommunication  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
1.8 The Committee fou nd that at th e termination of SRSF, there had  been a 
shortfall of 133 complete renewal and 60 casual renewal SRSF works under 
Signalling and Telecommunication components.  The reasons advanced by the 
Railways for the shortfall were  sharp increase in price of metals leading to non 
supply, non finalisation of tenders a nd inadequate number of works contractors 
etc. During the evidence the Committee were informed that now the Railways are 
exploring the possibility of having Signalling Project Management Teams to take 
care of the implementation and inspection parts. The Co mmittee had desired to be 
apprised of the final o utcome in this regard. They felt that Signa lling being the 
most important aspect of Safety should have been given due priority by the 
Ministry of Railways by taking adequate measures including filli ng up of vacancies 
in the Signalling and Telecommunication.  They had desired that details about the 
spill over in the Signalling and Telecommunication works since completed during 
the current financial year be intimated to them. 
 
The Committee had also noted that the Indian Railways still had an age-old 
Signalling system despite the fact that the efficient operation of trains depended 
on Signalling system.  They had desired that this age-old signalling system should 
be replaced by uniform electronic system everywhe re and steps taken in this 
regard be intimated to them. 

 
(5) 
 
 
 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:-   
 
“Railways are exploring the possibility of having Signal Projects 
Management Team to take care of the implementatio n and inspection part 
of the project. In this regard, the feedback from the Zonal Railways are 
being taken.  Based on suggestions/observations from Zonal Railways, a 
complete view will be taken on the subject.  
 
The concern of the C ommittee on the vacancie s in Signal and 
Telecommunication (S&T) is appreciated. Railways are making all out efforts 
to fill up the vacancies in safety category.  Railway Recruitment Boards 
(RRBs) have been issued directives to maintain/provide panel of extra 
candidates in case of  non-joining/medical failure of empanelled candidates. 
Railways have also been instructed to place additional indents on RRBs to 
cover existing as well as anticipated vacancies.  Regular selections are being 
conducted at Zonal and Divisional levels to fill  up the vacancies against 
promotee quota. 
 
Progress of spill over SRSF works are being closely monitored at apex level.  
All Zonal Railways have been impressed upon for expeditious completion of 
the balance quantum. Zone -wise details of S&T Works being und ertaken 
during 2008 -09 are listed in Annexure -I attached in reply to 
Recommendation -1. 
 
A uniform policy decision for Indian Railways has been taken to replace all 
existing overaged/outdated Cabins Operated Signalling System with 
Centrally Operated All El ectrical/ Electronic Interlocking Systems. These 
replacement works have been assigned top priority and are being executed 
progressively. During the year 2008 -09 (upto Dec.’08) overaged signalling 
systems at 275 stations have been replaced with All Electric al/ Electronic 
Interlocking Signalling Systems." 
 
 

 
(6) 
 
 
 
1.10 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Government. 
The Railways have merely repeated their earlier reply  that they are 
exploring the possibility of having Signalling Project Management Teams 
to take care of the implementation of inspection part of the project.   The 
Committee would like to be informed about the time bound programme, 
if any, prepared by the Railways in this re gard.  The Committee desire 
the Railways to complete the work within the targetted time-frame.  
The Committee note that only four z ones have been able to 
complete their S&T works during 2008 -09.  The Committee desire that 
the remaining twelve zones should give greater thrust to complete the 
balance S&T works within t he specified time frame and the Committee 
be informed about the progress made in this regard so far. 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(7) 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
The Committee find that as a sequel to the recommendations of Railway 
Safety Review Committee (Khanna Committee), the Ministry of Railways had 
created a non -lapsable Special Railway Safety Fund (SRSF) in October, 2001 with 
an objective to wipe out the arrears of replacement and r enewals of over - aged 
assets such as track renewals, bridges, rolling stocks and signaling gear etc. within 
a time span of 6 years i.e. by the end of 2006 -07. They further note that the 
Railways have extended the fund currency by one year i.e. upto 2007 -08 taking 
the financial year as the base. The Committee appreciate the creation of the fund 
especially in view of the fact that the arrears in replacement, maintenance of 
assets had been accumulating over the years due to inadequate allotment from 
Depreciation Reserve Fund.  The Committee feel satisfied to note that the Railways 
have done well in most of the areas in achieving the targets set under SRSF works 
due to which the line capacity has improved and the Railways is able to run more 
traffic with heavier axle loads.  Nonetheless, the Committee opine that the periodic 
replacement/renewal of the overaged assets is essential to make the Railway 
system work with more safety. They, therefore, hope that Railways would continue 
to work with renewed vigour in tim ely pulling up the annual arisings of 
replacement/renewals of infrastructure assets within the same year without leaving 
any spill over of such replacement/renewals to the following years. 
The Committee were also informed that the remaining incomplete SRSF  
works are being funded through Depreciation Reserve Fund and Development 
Fund. They hope that adequate steps will be taken by the Railways to allocate 
sufficient funds to the Depreciation Reserve Fund and Development Fund for this 
purpose. They would also  like to be apprised of the Zone -wise SRSF works being 
undertaken by Railways during 2008 -09 through DRF and the corresponding 
amount allocated and achievements made. 
 

 
(8) 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
The Ministry of Railways express its gratitude to the Commi ttee for 
appreciating the efforts put in by the Railways in timely completing SRSF works 
and achieving most of the targets set. The advice of the Committee to work with 
renewed vigour in timely pulling up the annual arisings of replacement/renewal of 
infrastructure assets within the same year without leaving any spill over to the 
following years has been noted with sincerity. 
 
As regards the information regarding zone -wise SRSF works being 
undertaken by the Railways during 2008 -09 through DRF/DF, the corres ponding 
amount allocated and achievements made, it is informed that all such works have 
been included in the Budget document ‘Works, Machinery & Rolling Stock 
Programme, Part -I (Summary)’  giving work -wise details like anticipated cost, 
expenditure incurred to end of 2007-08, outlay proposed for 2008 -09 and balance 
required to complete the work. Copies of this book have already been supplied to 
the Hon’ble Members alongwith Budget 2008 -09 documents.  However, three 
copies of the same are enclosed for ready r eference. The Physical /Financial 
progress of works pertaining to Track Renewal, Bridge works and Signalling & 
Telecommunication  works being undertaken by Railways during 2008 -09, funded 
through DRF/DF has been shown in Annexure-I 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/6  
dated 13.03.2009]  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee find that at the termination of SRSF, there has been a 
shortfall of 133 complete renewal and 60 casual renewal SRSF works under 
Signalling and Telecommunication c omponents.  The reasons advanced by the 
Railways for the shortfall is sharp increase in price of metals leading to non supply, 
non finalisation of tenders and inadequate number of works contractors etc. 
During the evidence the Committee were informed that now the Railways are 
exploring the possibility of having Signalling Project Management Teams to take 
care of the implementation and inspection parts. The Committee would like to be 

 
(9) 
 
 
apprised of the final outcome in this regard. They feel that Signalling bei ng 
the most important aspect of Safety should have been given due priority by the 
Ministry of Railways by taking adequate measures including filling up of vacancies 
in the Signalling and Telecommunication.  They desire that details about the spill 
over in the Signalling and Telecommunication works since completed during the 
current financial year be intimated to them. 
 
The Committee also note that the Indian Railways still have an age -old Signalling 
system despite the fact that the efficient operation of tr ains depends on Signalling 
system.  They desire that this age -old signalling system should be replaced by 
uniform electronic system everywhere and steps taken in this regard be intimated 
to them. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Railways are exploring the possib ility of having Signal Projects 
Management Team to take care of the implementation and inspection part of the 
project. In this regard, the feedback from the Zonal Railways are being taken.  
Based on suggestions/observations from Zonal Railways, a complete view will be 
taken on the subject.  
 
The concern of the committee on the vacancies in Signal and 
Telecommunication (S&T) is appreciated. Railways are making all out efforts to fill 
up the vacancies in safety category.  Railway Recruitment Boards (RRBs) hav e 
been issued directives to maintain/provide panel of extra candidates in case of 
non-joining/medical failure of empanelled candidates. Railways have also been 
instructed to place additional indents on RRBs to cover existing as well as 
anticipated vacancie s.  Regular selections are being conducted at Zonal and 
Divisional levels to fill up the vacancies against promote quota. 
Progress of spill over SRSF works are being closely monitored at apex level.  
All Zonal Railways have been impressed upon for expediti ous completion of the 
balance quantum. Zone-wise details of S&T Works being undertaken during 2008 -
09 are listed in Annexure-I attached in reply to Recommendation -1. 
 

 
(10) 
 
 
       A uniform policy decision for Indian Railways has been taken to 
replace all exist ing overaged/outdated Cabins Operated Signalling System with 
Centrally Operated All Electrical/ Electronic Interlocking Systems. These 
replacement works have been assigned top priority and are being executed 
progressively. During the year 2008-09 (upto Dec.’08) overaged signalling systems 
at 275 stations have been replaced with All Electrical/ Electronic Interlocking 
Signalling Systems. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/6  
dated 13.03.2009]  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
 
The Committee find  that there has been a shortfall of 738 locations in 
Track Circuiting works at the expiry of SRSF as against the target of 5307 
locations. The major shortfall has been in the Eastern Railway, Northern Railway, 
North Central Railway and the East Central Rai lway. The reasons cited by the 
Railways for this shortfall are cable shortage, modeling, technologies and 
availability of Contractors.  However, during the evidence the Committee were 
informed that there are at present 276 track circuiting works now pendin g and to 
overcome problems, Railways have taken a number of steps such as relaxation in 
the financial and technical criterion for contractors, delinking of works from 
modelling, technology adoption etc. and with these steps Railways are hopeful to 
complete all the 276 track circuiting SRSF works during this year.  The Committee 
hope that the Railways will accord due priority to these works as these relate to 
important safety aspects and take all appropriate steps to complete the remaining 
276 works within this year itself.  The Committee expect to be intimated about the 
achievements in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Due priority has been assigned by Railways to complete the Track 
Circuiting works under SRSF.  It has been reemphasized to all Zonal Rai lways that 
the Track Circuiting works to be prioritized and be taken up independent of other 
signalling works.  The progress is being regularly monitored at the highest level.  

 
(11) 
 
 
During current year, 923 track circuits have been commissioned vide SRSF and 
other works, till Dec.08. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/6  
dated 13.03.2009]  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
Six Diesel NG Locos were to be replaced/rehabilitated under SRSF. Out of 
these, two locomotives were proposed to be liquidated by  regular funding 
mechanism after SRSF.  The Committee find that upto 1.4.2008, only two NG 
Locos have been rehabilitated. Due to delayed supply of final drives and 
transmission system by the manufacturers and non -availability of parts due to 
outdated models, the work of rehabilitation of four NG locos has spilled over to 
2008-09 to be funded under DRF. The Committee regret to note that these 
problems were not visualized by the Railways while fixing the targets.  They 
however, expect that the remaining locos  will be rehabilitated/replaced within this 
year itself through allocation from DRF. The Committee desire to be intimated of 
the achievements made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The concern of the Committee for expeditious replacement of 4 nos.  of 
NG locos is appreciated.  The above work has been undertaken under Railway 
Board’s RSP-2008-09. Out of these four NG locomotives manufactured by Central 
Railway, three locos are already dispatched to Northern Railway. The fourth loco 
will be dispatched during Feb.2009. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/6  
dated 13.03.2009]  
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 

 
(12) 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

 
(13) 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 2) 
 
The Committee find shortfalls in the achievement of targets in bridge 
works sanctioned for reh abilitation/renewal under SRSF despite the fact that 84 
bridges were dropped out of the sanctioned list of 2370 bridges. There was a 
shortfall of 95 bridges at the end of SRSF. The major shortfalls were : the Eastern 
Railway - 27, Northern and South Eastern Railways - 3 each, Western Railway - 36 
and East Central Railway – 17 bridges. As per the Railways, even after the 
rehabilitation of 7 bridges in Eastern Railway and 13 bridges in Western Railway 
during the first 5 months of 2008-09, there is a likely spill over of about 10 bridges 
in East Central Railway, 3 to 4 bridges in Western Railway and 2 bridges in Eastern 
Railway to the next year. By 2009-10 except the Jubliee and Barakar bridges which 
will take more time, the rest of the bridges will be complete ly 
rehabilitated/replaced. The Committee are unhappy to note the slow progress of 
work at the two major bridges to be completed under SRSF namely the Jubliee and 
Barakar Bridges. In terms of financial achievement also, there is a shortfall in 
expenditure of Rs. 603.38 crore allocated for bridge works. Not convinced with the 
reasons advanced by the Railways viz. the problem in finalisation of contracts and 
the problems of floods for non-achievement of the targets, the Committee observe 
that with meticulous planning and visualization, these bottlenecks could have been 
avoided and the shortfalls could have been easily met. The Committee hope that in 
future Railways would not be found wanting in this regard. They also desire that 
Zone-wise details about the number of bridges renewed during 2008 -09 out of the 
spill over bridges as well as those which could not be completed during this period 
be intimated to them. 
 
 

 
(14) 
 
 
 
         Reply of the Government 
 
Timely completion of Bridge works is given top most priority on Indian 
Railways.  Progress of Bridge works on Indian Railways is monitored at various 
levels including at Railway Board level.  Shortfalls in achievements of physical & 
financial targets under SRSF have got resulted due to various complexities involved 
in the execution of Bridge works.  Bridge works get delayed due to various reasons 
like non -availability of traffic blocks, bad weather conditions, floods, non -
availability of construction specific steel, contractual problems & some times 
extraneous circumsta nces.  Further, with  growing traffic, the window between 
trains is coming down, putting another handicap for time available for traffic 
blocks.  However, all steps are being taken to ensure expeditious completion of 
balance SRSF Bridge works including Jub ilee & Barakar Bridges. The Zone -wise 
break up  of  balance  SRSF Bridge  works  and  achievements  made upto 
December, 2008 are given as under: 
S.No Railway 
Progress of balance SRSF Bridges 
(No. of Bridges) 
 
  Targeted for 
2008-09 
Progress upto 
December, 2008 
Spillover during 
2009-10 
1. Central 1 0 0 
2. Eastern 25 9 2 
3. East Central 17* 1 0 
4. East Coast 2 2 0 
5. Northern 3 1 0 
6. North Central 0 0 0 
7. North Eastern 0 0 0 
8. Northeast 
Frontier 
0 0 0 
9. North Western 0 0 0 
10. Southern 2 0 0 
11. South Central 2 1 0 
12. South Eastern 3 0 0 
13. South East 
Central 
0 0 0 
14. South Western 0 0 0 
15. Western  36  20 0 
16. West Central 2 1 0 
 Total 93 35 2 
*  6 no. of Bridges under SRSF proposed by ECR for deletion have been agreed by Railway Board. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2008/BC-II/XIV/300/6 dated 13.03.2009]  

 
(15) 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                   
                   T.R. BAALU, 
02 December, 2009                                     Chairman, 
11  Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Railways 

 
(16) 
 
 
 
APPENDIX I  
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2009-10) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 19th November 2009, from 1500 Hrs. 
to 1610 Hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI T.R. BAALU  - CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3. Shri K. Bapiraju 
4. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
5. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
6. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
7. Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
8. Smt. Shatabdi Roy 
9. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
10. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
11. Chaudhary Lal Singh 
12. Shri Umashankar Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
14. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
15. Shri N. Balaganga 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   -  Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 
(17) 
 
 
 
xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx* 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and officials to the 
sitting of the Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee considered the following draft 
Reports and adopted the same: 
 
(i) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
 
(ii)  Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 41 st Report of t he 
Standing Committee on Railways on 'Review of Special Railway 
Safety Fund'. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports and present 
the same to Parliament. 
 
 
4. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  
 
5. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
       

 
(18) 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 41st REPORT        
(14TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘REVIEW OF SPECIAL RAILWAY SAFETY FUND’  
 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations     05 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by  04 
the Government (Vide recommendations/observations) 
Para Nos. 1, 3, 4 and 5 
 
Percentage of total         80% 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not  NIL 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies 
NIL 
 
Percentage of total         NIL 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of  01 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
Para No. 2 
 
Percentage of total            20% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final   NIL 
replies of Government are still awaited  
NIL 
 
Percentage of total            NIL 
 
 
  
  