 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations contained 
in the 12th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘New Railway Recruitment Policy’] 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2012/ Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
 
      
      STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
       (2011-12) 
   FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA  
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
16161
61
11
11
16
15 
16 

 
    SCR NO. 165 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
     STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
 
(2011-12) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations contained 
in the 12th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘New Railway Recruitment Policy’] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.05.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.05.2012 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2012/ Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
  

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
              PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….………………………..    (iii) 
  
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….………                 (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report……………………………………………………………                  1       
   
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been         
accepted by the Government  …………………………..    17   
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee        
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………………     34    
   
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which          
   Replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….….     42      
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final     
replies of the Government  are still awaited  ………….       49     
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX-I  Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on    
Railways held on 15.05.2012…………………………………..    52 
  
APPENDIX-II    
               54 
       
 
(ii) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the  12 th 
Report (1 5th Lok Sa bha) on ‘New Railway Recruitment 
Policy’……………………………………………… 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2011-12) 
Shri T. R. Baalu - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3.  Shri Ram Sunder Das  
4.  Smt. Maneka Gandhi  
5.  Shri Pralhad Joshi 
6.  Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
7.  Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
8.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
9.  Shri Anand Prakash Paranjape 
10.  Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
11.  Dr. Padmsinha Bajirao Patil 
12.  Smt. Satabdi Roy 
13.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
14.  Shri Sharief-ud-din `Shariq’ 
15.  Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
16.  Shri Ganesh Singh 
17.  Chaudhary Lal Singh 
18.  Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
19.  Shri Lalji Tandon 
20.  Dr. Girija Vyas         
21.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri K.E. Ismail  
23.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
24.  Smt. Kusum Rai  
25.  Shri Ambeth Rajan 
26.  Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
27.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
28.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
29.  Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 
30.  Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
31.    Shri Nandi Yellaiah  

 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Geeta Parmar   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing  Committee on Railways (2011 -12), having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Sixteenth Report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in the ir Twelfth Report 
on ‘New Railway Recruitment Policy’. 
 
2. The Twelfth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 30.08.2011 and it 
contained 3 5 recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways have 
furnished Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations.   
  
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 15.05.2012.  
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Stan ding Committee on Railways 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                            T.R. BAALU, 
15   May, 2012                                                              Chairman,                      
25 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)                                  Standing Committee on Railways 

 
1 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
          This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations and observations contained in the Twelfth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways on “New Railway Recruitment Policy”. The Report 
was presented to the Lok Sabha on 30.08.2011. Simultaneously, the Report was 
also laid in the Rajya Sabha. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received fro m the Government on all the 35 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report. These have been broadly 
categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Committee:- 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 14, 21, 23, 24, 25, 27, 31, and 32 
         Total : 16 
         Chapter-II 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:- 
Para Nos. 4, 6, 12, 13, 16, 17, 22, 29, 34 & 35 
         Total :  10 
         Chapter-III 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:- 
Para Nos. 11, 18, 20, 26, 30 and 33      
         Total : 6 
                  Chapter-IV 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies are 
awaited:-  
Para Nos. 15, 19 and 28 
         Total : 3 
         Chapter-V 

 
2 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
recommendations for which interim replies have  been given by the 
Government should be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations/observations. 
Introductory 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1 & 2) 
 
5. The Committee h ad observed that the Railways had fixed no periodicity to 
review their recruitment system.  In 1998 -99, the Railway Board undertook a review 
of the set -up and functioning of the RRBs, when there were widespread allegations 
of irregularities and malpractices against the RRBs and the Railway Board cancelled 
a large number of examinations.  Then, after a long period ten years, in 2009, a 
committee was constituted to review the system of recruitment in RRBs and 
instructions were issued on 28.10.2009 for streaml ining the working of the RRBs.  
The review was again necessitated by many incidents of resentment and 
dissatisfaction amongst the people, coupled with several incidents of disturbances 
during  the  RRB examination at Mumbai on 19.10.2008, incidents of leak age of 
question papers of RRB, Allahabad, on 14.12.2008 and RRB, Ajmer, on 15.02.2009.  
The Committee were not convinced by the submission made by the Ministry that 
based on field experience, whenever considered necessary, the recruitment system 
was review ed and necessary remedial action taken for system improvement and  
recommended that the Ministry of  Railways should review professionally and 
scientifically their recruitment system at fixed intervals of time so as to make it more 
efficient to meet the requirement of staff in the  Indian Railways.  
6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:  
“After the review of the functioning of the RRBs in 1998 -99, another detailed review 
of RRBs was undertaken in 2009.  However, duri ng intervening period, regular 
monitoring of the system was carried out by the Railway Recruitment Control Board 
(RRCB) set up at the level of Ministry of Railways and instructions for system 

 
3 
 
 
improvement were issued from time to time. Further a technical a udit of the system 
for transportation, storage and distribution of question papers has also been 
undertaken and necessary modifications in the system have been introduced. 
To assess, monitor and suggest improvements in the recruitment system, 
conference of Chairmen, all RRBs with the RRCB is conducted at regular intervals.  
Review of the specific aspects of the system is done only when major change in the 
system is warranted.  So far as the suggestion of Standing Committee regarding 
review of recruitment at  fixed intervals is concerned, this has been referred to the 
Committee being constituted for working out the modalities for implementation of 
Standing Committee’s recommendations.” 
  
7. The Committee have been apprised that during the period from 1998 -99 
to 2009, the Railway Recruitment Control Board (RRCB) set up at the level of 
Ministry of Railways carried out regular monitoring of the recruitment system 
and instructions in this regard were issued from time to time. Further, review 
of the specific aspects  of the system is done only when major change in the 
system is warranted. However, in view of the constant allegation of 
malpractices and irregularities against RRBs besides other major drawbacks 
in the previous recruitment policy, the Committee earnestly desire that 
besides regular monitoring of the recruitment system, Ministry of  Railways 
should review professionally and scientifically their recruitment system at 
fixed intervals of time in order to strengthen the recruitment system, and 
making it fault free.   
The Committee further note that the Ministry of Railways have referred 
their suggestion regarding review of recruitment system at fixed intervals to a 
committee being constituted for working out the modalities for implementation 
of their recommendat ions. The Committee would like to be informed of the 
decision taken by the Ministry in this regard.  

 
4 
 
 
New Railway Recruitment Policy 
Recommendation Para No.  9 
8. The Committee had been constrained to note that as on 01.04.2010, there 
were about 1,66,100 va cancies in Group ‘C’ and Group ‘D’ posts and the Ministry 
had not prescribed any fixed timeframe for completion of the recruitment process 
initiated by the RRBs in respect of Group ‘C’ posts and by the Railway Recruitment 
Cells (RRCs) in respect of Group ‘ D’ posts.  The Committee were not convinced by 
the plea taken by the Ministry that the time taken in the recruitment process 
depended on the number of vacancies, number of applicants and different 
steps/stages followed in the recruitment process for partic ular post(s) / categories as 
in their view bottlenecks that hindered a smooth recruitment process should be 
identified.  The Committee had urged the Ministry to urgently review the time taken 
in various stages of recruitment and accordingly take measures t o streamline those 
stages so that the whole process of recruitment could be completed under a 
specified timeframe. They had recommended that the Ministry should fix a certain 
timeframe to complete their recruitment process as staff constraint should not 
impede the efficient functioning of the Indian Railways. 
9. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
Group ‘C’ : 
It is already submitted that examination for various categories of posts is generally 
conducted once in a year based on indents and Railways requirement. In view of the 
recommendation of Standing Committee, it has been decided to set up a Committee 
at Board’s level to suggest annual calendar of  RRB examinations for different 
categories with timeframe keeping in v iew the time taken at various stages of 
recruitment process.  
As regards Committee’s concern on  large number of vacancies, it is submitted that 
in Group ‘ C’ categories, out of a total 40,873 vacancies notified through Centralized 
Employment Notifications  during 2010, written examinations have been conducted 
for about 36,000 vacancies including 31,000 safety category posts like Assistant 
Loco Pilot, Assistant Station Master, Section Engineer/Junior Engineer and 
Technicians.   RRBs have started furnishing P anels for Safety category posts to the 
indenting Railways.  For safety categories, panels for about 11,000 posts have 
already been supplied and balance will be supplied expeditiously.  

 
5 
 
 
Erstwhile Group ‘D’ (Grade Pay Rs.1800) : 
It has been decided to initiate recruitment process annually in Grade Pay `1800 
(erstwhile Group D) as per the following time schedule: 
S.  No. Item Month 
1. Issue of  Notification July 
2. Last date of receipt of application 30th Sept. 
3. Scrutiny of application Jan./Feb. 
4. Issue of call letter for Written Test March/April 
5. Written Test May/June 
6. (PET) Physical Efficiency Test Sept./Oct. 
7. Medical Test//Documents verification Nov./Dec. 
8. Declaration of Final Panel Dec. 
 
10. The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways have decided to set up 
a committee at Railway Board’s level to suggest annual calendar of  RRB 
examinations for different categories with timeframe keeping in view the time 
taken at various stages of recruitment process. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
Recommendation Para No.  10 
11. The Committee had observed that for Group ‘C’ posts, the indents had been 
placed annually by the indenting Railways on the RRBs as per their requirement and 
examinations were cond ucted by all RRBs simultaneously once in a year.  For 
Group ‘D’ posts, extant instructions prescribed the periodicity as two years while 
recruiting the current as well as anticipated vacancies to be accrued over the next 
two years. The Committee had desire d that the periodicity of holding examinations 

 
6 
 
 
for Group ‘C’ posts and for Group ‘D’ posts should be increased, especially keeping 
in mind the large number of vacancies in the Railways and also the time consuming 
process involved in recruitments. 
12. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
Group ‘C’:  
As per the laid down system, indents for Group ‘C’ vacancies in different categories 
are placed annually by the Zonal Railway on RRBs as per their requirement and 
examination are conducted by all RRBs simultaneously once in a year.  Sometimes, 
due to short panel or for certain reasons, vacancies remain unfilled.  Accordingly, 
unfilled vacancies are carried forward by the indenting railway in their next indent 
placed on RRBs.  Efforts are made to conduct examinations expeditiously.                
              However, the suggestion of the Standing Committee for increasing 
periodicity of holding of examinations for Group ‘C’  has been included in the terms 
of reference for the  Committee being constituted in this context for suggesting 
timeframe for expeditious finalization of recruitments. 
Erstwhile Group ‘D’ (Grade Pay Rs.1800) : 
It has been decided to initiate recruitment process annually in Grade Pay `1800 
(erstwhile Group D) as per the following time schedule: 
S.  No. Item Month 
1. Issue of  Notification July 
2. Last date of receipt of application 30th Sept. 
3. Scrutiny of application Jan./Feb. 
4. Issue of call letter for Written Test March/April 
5. Written Test May/June 
6. (PET) Physical Efficiency Test Sept./Oct. 
7. Medical Test//Documents verification Nov./Dec. 
8. Declaration of Final Panel Dec. 
 

 
7 
 
 
13. The Committee have been apprised that their suggestion for 
increasing periodicity of holding of examinations for Gr oup ‘C’  has been 
included in the terms of reference for the committee being constituted at 
Railway Board’s level in this context for suggesting timeframe for expeditious 
finalization of recruitments. The Committee would like to be informed of the 
progress in the matter. 
Recommendation Para No.  11 
14. The Committee had expressed its deep concern that out of the 1,66,100 
vacancies in Group ‘C’ and Group ‘D’ posts on 01.04.2011, no timeframe had been 
fixed for filling up of 85,663 Group ‘D’ posts and the las t date for receiving 
applications was 31 March, 2011.  The Committee failed to understand as to why the 
process of filling up 85, 663 Group ‘D’ posts was started so late when they had been 
lying vacant since 01.04.2010 which reflected poorly on the pace of  the recruitment 
process in the Railways.  The Committee had desired that they should be apprised 
of the  status with regard to the 1,66,100 posts in Group ‘C’ and Group ‘D’ posts 
lying vacant as on 01.4.2010. 
 
15. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
“Group ‘C’:  
Occurrence and filling up of vacancy is a continuous process.  Out of a total 
40,873 vacancies notified through Centralized Employment Notifications during 2010 
for Group ‘C’ categories, written examinations have been conducted for about 
36,000 vacancies including 31,000 safety category posts like Assistant Loco Pilot, 
Assistant Station Master, Section Engineer/Junior Engineer and Technicians.    
RRBs have started furnishing Panels for Safety category posts to  the indenting 
Railways.  For safety categories, panels for about 11,000 posts have already been 
supplied and balance will be supplied expeditiously. 
 
 

 
8 
 
 
Erstwhile Group ‘D’ (Grade Pay Rs. 1800): 
Written Test has been held for recruitment initiated during th e period 2006-08, for 
around 36,900 posts.  Panels are expected to be published by December, 2011.  For 
10,324 posts of Eastern and East Coast Railway, recruitment has been held up 
owing to court cases.  Further, special drive has already been completed fo r 
recruitment of 16,747 ex -servicemen vacancies, out of which around 7500 have 
been appointed so far.  Also, for around 85,000 vacancies in Grade Pay of Rs.1800/-
, notifications were issued in December / January 2010/2011 of which scrutiny of 
applications are underway.” 
16. The Committee are perturbed to note that panels for around 36,900 
Group ‘D’ posts were expected to be published by December, 2011, 
recruitment for which was initiated during the period 2006 -08 - that is, after a 
gap of 3 to 5 years. If t he trend prevails, it will take another 4 to 5 years to fill 
85,663 Group ‘D’ posts, recruitment process for which was initiated in 
December, 2010 as informed by the Ministry during examination of the subject 
‘New Railway Recruitment Policy’. In view of th e large number of vacancies in 
Group ‘D’ posts, the Committee urge the Ministry to urgently take necessary 
action for recruitments in Group ‘D’ posts. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps being taken/proposed to be taken in this regard. 
Substitute Recruitment 
Recommendation Para No. 18 
 
17. The Committee had noted that from 01.04.2007 to 31.03.2010, out of 9847 
substitutes appointed on the different Railway Zones/ PUs, 6183 had been 
regularized.  For the North Western Railway, figures were available upto 31.08.2009, 
where out of 148 substitutes, 13 had been regularized and in the North East Frontier 
Railways, where out of 103, 50 substitutes had been regularized upto 09.02.2011.  

 
9 
 
 
The Committee had desired that they should be informed of the c riteria laid down for 
regularization of the substitutes. 
18. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
“As per the extant instructions a person engaged as substitute in Grade Pay 
Rs.1800 (erstwhile Group D) is eligible for  absorption after he/she attains temporary 
status after continuously working for four months.  He/she is regularized as and 
when screening is conducted by Railways.” 
 
19. The Committee are deeply concerned at the process of regularising of 
the substitutes in Railways. The Committee can understand the exigencies of 
work in Railways leading to appointment of substitutes in emergency 
situations to man those posts which cannot be kept vacant. However, they fail 
to understand how the eligibility period for regularization of substitutes can be 
kept as low as 4 months, since such a short period will not be enough for a 
substitute to get  acquainted  with the job assigned to him. The Committee 
would like the Ministry to review the matter and re -examine the eligibili ty 
period for regularization of substitutes.  
Recommendation Para No. 20 
20. The Committee had observed that the difference between regular recruitment 
and substitute engagement was that the substitutes were being engaged in 
exigencies of work and fell under the General Manager’s discretionary powers which 
was not so in the case of open market recruitment.  Substitutes were engaged by 
way of screening done by a committee whereas regular recruitment was being done 
by specialized recruitment agencies.  Though  qualification for direct recruitment for 
posts in the Grade Pay of Rs. 1800/ -  had been Class 10 th or ITI or equivalent, till 
31.07.2011,  the Railways had been permitted to engage substitutes, viz. fresh 
faces, Course Completed Act Apprentices, legal hei rs of accident victims, etc., even 
with a qualification below the prescribed one.  The substitutes thus appointed were 

 
10 
 
 
not subjected to Physical Efficiency Test (PET) though he/she was subjected to 
medical examination.  On the other hand, for recruitment d one through the open 
market, Physical Efficiency Test for Group ‘D’ is compulsory as a majority of the jobs  
required physical endurance.  The Committee failed to understand how for jobs 
requiring physical endurance, the Physical Efficiency Test could be e xempted in the 
case of substitutes.  The Committee had therefore desired that suitable corrective 
measures should be taken in this regard. 
21. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
“Engagement of substitutes is an emergency power where the norms of engagement 
have been streamlined vide RBE/137/2010 dated 17.9.2010 which stipulates that the 
applications should be screened by a committee of 3 Senior Administrative Grade 
level officers." 
  
22.  The Committee are not satisf ied with the reply of the Ministry that norms  
of engagement of substitutes stipulates that the applications should be 
screened by a committee of 3 Senior Administrative Grade level officers.  
Though the Committee endorse the exemption of physical efficienc y test to 
legal heirs of the accident victims, they do not approve such relaxation in 
fresh cases. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that suitable corrective 
measures should be taken while engaging substitutes in Group ‘D’ posts 
which require physical endurance. If need be,  the norms in this regard may be 
reviewed and urgent corrective measures  taken.  
 
 
 
 

 
11 
 
 
Incidents of irregularities and malpractices in RRBs 
Recommendation Para No. 21 
23.  The Committee had been dismayed to note that there were four cas es of 
leakage of question papers of RRB examinations in the recent past.  First, the 
question paper of RRB examination for the post of Assistant Loco Pilot scheduled to 
be held on 27.04.2008 conducted by RRB/ Bhopal was leaked which was under 
investigation by the Madhya Pradesh Police.  Second, a case of leakage of question 
paper for the examination scheduled for 14.12.2008 for the post of Assistant Loco 
Pilot conducted by RRB/Allahabad was reported, which was under investigation with 
the Allahabad Police, Uttar Pradesh.  Third, a case of leakage of question paper for 
the examination scheduled for 15.02.2009 for the post of Asst. Station Master (ASM) 
conducted by RRB/Ajmer was reported, which was under investigation with the 
Special Operation Group, Rajastha n Police.  The examination was subsequently 
cancelled.  Fourthly, there was leakage of question papers of RRB examinations 
held on 06.06.2010 and 13.06.2010 for the post of Assistant Loco Pilot and Assistant 
Station Master.  The CBI had unearthed a Railway  recruitment scam and arrested 
ten persons, for allegedly running the racket.  Further investigation in the matter was 
stated to be under progress with the CBI.  The Committee had desired to be 
apprised of the progress in each of the above cases. 
24.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have submitted the 
position of each of the four cases as under:- 
 RRB/BHOPAL:- As per information obtained from Sr. S.P./Bhopal, one 
person had been arrested on 02.07.2008 and produced before Hon’ble Court. Efforts 
are being made to arrest other persons involved in this case.  
 RRB/ALLAHABAD:-  As per information obtained from the office of 
DIG/Police, Allahabad, the matter is under trial in the Hon’ble Court of Judicial 
Magistrate-III, Allahabad. 
 RRB/AJMER:-  As per information obtained from the Special Operation 
Group, Rajsthan Police, the challan against 105 accused has been produced in the 
court and is under consideration with Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jaipur.  
 RRB/MUMBAI:- As per information obtained from  the CBI/Hyderabad, 
investigation into the case has been completed and CBI has filed a charge Sheet on 
13.09.2010 against the then Chairman, RRB/Mumbai and 14 others before the 
Hon’ble Court of Special Judge for CBI cases, Hyderabad u/s 120 (B), 409, 418, 420 

 
12 
 
 
& 201 IPC and Section 7, 8 & 13(2) r/w 13 (1) (c) & (d) of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988.  
 
25.    The Committee desire that the Ministry should continue to follow up all 
the four cases of leakage of question papers of RRB examinations   and keep 
them apprised at regular intervals. 
 Compassionate appointments 
Recommendation Para No. 26 
26. The Committee had been apprised that the extant rules provided for giving 
compensation to the dependents of those who had lost their lives in train accidents.   
However, in exceptional circumstances and on humanitarian grounds, jobs had been 
provided by way of engagement of wards/legal heirs of the victims as substitute in 
Group ‘D’ posts only under the General Manager’s discretionary powers.  From 
01.04.2007 to 31.03.2010, a total of 14 persons had  been provided employment on 
the Railways in such circumstances in the wake of train accidents.  The Committee 
had desired that they should be informed of the casualties that had occurred in train 
accidents during the above period and the status with regard to the pending cases in 
which the victims’ families had been assured of employment with the Railways. 
 
27. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have submitted as under:- 
“ Employment to dependants o f victims of train accidents/incidents is provided as a 
humanitarian measure, only in cases where announcement to this affect has been 
made by Hon’ble Minister of Railways.  During the period 01.4.2007 to 31.3.2010, in 
the following cases, announcement to this effect had been made by Hon’ble Minister 
for Railways.  Position of employment given as on 31.7.2011, in these cases, is as 
under: 
 
 

 
13 
 
 
 
S. 
No. 
 
 
 
 
Name of the Accident/ 
Incident 
 
 
 
 
No. of 
death
s 
 
 
 
 
Employme
nts given 
 
 
Application
s 
not 
received/ 
rejected/ 
Unwilling 
etc. 
 
Pendin
g 
Cases 
 
 
 
1. Incidence of  Stampede 
at Mughalsarai Junction 
on 3.10.2007 
15 12 03 0 
2. Incident of run over at 
Danapur/East Central 
Rly. by 2387 UP Jan -
Sadharan Express on 
4.8.2008. 
05 01 04 0 
 
 
 
3. CSTM Terrorist attack, 
Central Rly. on 
26.11.2008. 
52 
 
 
35 13 04 
 
 
 
 Total 72 48 20 04 
 
 
In the same period, i.e. from 01.4.2007 to 31.3.2010, a total of 638 casualties 
have been reported.” 

 
14 
 
 
28.  The Committee are unhappy to learn that e mployment to dependents of 
victims of train a ccidents/incidents is provided as a humanitarian measure, 
only in cases where announcement to this affect has been made by the 
Hon’ble Minister of Railways.  The extant rules provides for giving 
compensation to the dependents of those who have lost their l ives in train 
accidents. The Committee are distressed to note that while there were 638 
casualties  during the period 01.04.2007 to 31.03.2010, only 48 dependents 
were given employment.  The Committee are of the view that the matter of 
employment to depend ents of victims of train accidents/incidents  cannot be 
kept case specific. The Ministry of Railways should, therefore, formulate 
specific guidelines urgently to deal with all such cases. 
29.  The Committee are further informed that in 20 cases applications  were 
either not received or they were rejected or claimant showed unwillingness. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the break-up of the 20 applications 
like how many were not received  and how many were  rejected and also the 
reasons for their rejection. 
Representation of Women employees in Railways 
Recommendation Para No. 30 
30. The Committee were sorry to note that the percentage of women employees 
on the Indian Railways (excluding MTP, Kolkata) as on 31.03.2010 in Group ‘A’, ‘B’, 
‘C’ and ‘D’ was  only 6.79 percent, 5.45 percent, 7.70 percent and 6.20 percent, 
respectively.  The Committee welcomed the step of waiving off the examination fee 
for the women candidates; however, they considered that as inadequate and desired 
that the Ministry should ta ke proactive steps to enable women to be adequately 

 
15 
 
 
represented in the Railways and that concerted efforts should be made to increase 
the percentage of women employees in the Railways. 
 
31. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have submitted as under:- 
“ In order to encourage participation of women in railway jobs, examination fee has 
been waived in case of women candidates while resorting to recruitment of staff from 
open market to Group ‘C’ categories and the posts in Grade Pay Rs.1800 (erstwhile 
Group D) with effect from 8.12 .2010.” 
 
32. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that in 
order to encourage participation of women in railway jobs, examination fee 
has been waived in case of women candidates.  Considering  this step to be 
inadequate, the Committee reiterate that the Ministry should explore various 
ways and means in order to enhance the percentage of women employees in 
the Railways.  
Complaints/Grievances 
Recommendation Para No. 33 
 
33. The Committee had not ed that the Railway Recruitment Control Board had a 
system of lodging of complaints by the applicants relating to recruitment formalities.  
However, they were surprised to note that in spite of several reported issues relating 
to the Railway recruitment, o nly 107 complaints were reported to have been 
received by the Ministry in the last five years.  As submitted, these were of a general 
nature like complaints/representations against rejection of applications by RRBs, 
prescribed educational qualifications fo r various posts, non -selection of candidates, 
non-receipt of call letters, delay in declaration of results by RRBs, re -medical 
examination, etc. those relating to policy issues and those arising out of/against 
unsatisfactory replies by the RRBs.  The Commi ttee felt that the extant mechanism 

 
16 
 
 
in the Ministry for lodging of complaints by applicants had not been adequately 
publicized and therefore the matter needed to be addressed accordingly.  
34. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have submitted as under:- 
“There are 21 RRBs located over Indian Railways.  Generally candidates lodge their 
complaints / grievances to the respective RRB as necessary mechanism has been 
set up at RRBs also.  Some complaints / grievances relating to particular RRB 
received in Board’s office are forwarded to RRB concerned for disposal.  In addition, 
a full -fledged  Public Grievances Directorate has been set up in the Ministry of 
Railways for redressal of public grievances including grievances concerning RRBs. 
Complaints / grievances involving more than one RRB or arising out of 
unsatisfactory replies by RRBs or on policy matters are dealt with at Board’s level.  
This explains the limited number of grievances received by Railway Recruitment 
Control Board.” 
34.  The Com mittee are aware that a full -fledged  Public Grievances 
Directorate has been set up in the Ministry of Railways to redress public 
grievances, including grievances concerning RRBs. However, in view of only 
107 complaints received in the last five years, the  Committee strongly believe 
that there is lack of awareness among the applicants about the existing 
mechanism in the Ministry which in all probability might be the reason for 
such a negligible number of complaints. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
that the existing mechanism for redressal of complaints by the applicants 
should be widely publicized by using the print and electronic media.  
 
 
NEW DELHI; T.R. BAALU 
  
15  May, 2012                         Chairman, 
25 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 

 
17 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para. No. 1) 
The Committee observe that a Service Commission with a Chairman and two 
members was set up for the first time in the hist ory of the Indian Railways in July 
1942 for recruitment of Subordinate Staff on the then North West Railways.  The 
position was reviewed in 1945 and the Service Commissions at Bombay, Calcutta, 
Madras and Lucknow were set up under the Railway Board with the two-fold function 
of recruiting Class III staff and also to tender advice to General Managers for dealing 
with appeals from subordinate staff on disciplinary matters.  Subsequently, more 
Railway Service Commissions were established from time to time to c ater to direct 
recruitment in Group ‘C’ posts.  Further, in January 1985, the Railway Service 
Commissions were renamed as Railway Recruitment Boards (RRBs). 
 In 1998 -99, there were widespread allegations of irregularities and 
malpractices against the RRBs, as a result of which the Railway Board had to cancel 
a large number of examinations.  Subsequently, the Railway Board undertook a 
review of the set -up and functioning of the RRBs.  Then, after a long period of ten 
years, in 2009, a committee was constitut ed to review the system of recruitment in 
RRBs and to suggest measures for expeditious formation of panels.  Based on the 
review, instructions for streamlining the working of the RRBs were issued on 
28.10.2009.  Another review was necessitated by many inci dents of resentment and 
dissatisfaction amongst the people, coupled with several incidents of disturbances 
during the RRB examination at Mumbai on 19.10.2008, incidents of leakage of 
question papers of RRB, Allahabad, on 14.12.2008 and RRB, Ajmer, on 15.02 .2009.  
The Committee are dismayed at the lack of initiative on the part of the Ministry so far 
as review of the recruitment system undertaken by them is concerned.  The reviews 
ought to have been done much earlier with a professional and scientific approach. 
 
 

 
18 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
After the review of the functioning of the RRBs in 1998 -99, another detailed 
review of RRBs was undertaken in 2009.  However, during intervening period, 
regular monitoring of the system was carried out by the Railway Recruitme nt Control 
Board (RRCB) set up at the level of Ministry of Railways and instructions for system 
improvement were issued from time to time. Further a technical audit of the system 
for transportation, storage and distribution of question papers has also been  
undertaken and necessary modifications in the system have been introduced. 
 [Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 7 of  Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Para No.2) 
 The Committee further note that no periodicity has been fixed by the Railways 
to review their recruitment system.  The Committee are unable to accept the 
reasoning advanced by the Ministry that based on field experience, whenever 
considered necessary, th e recruitment system is reviewed and necessary remedial 
action taken for system improvement.  The Committee are at a loss to understand as 
to how and why the Ministry should wait for occurrence of such reprehensible 
incidents in the conduct of Railway exam inations before they undertake a review of 
the recruitment system.  They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Railways 
should review professionally and scientifically their recruitment system at fixed 
intervals of time to make it more efficient to me et the requirement of staff in the 
Indian Railways. 
Reply of the Government 
To assess, monitor and suggest improvements in the recruitment system, 
conference of Chairmen, all RRBs with the RRCB is conducted at regular intervals.  
Review of the specific asp ects of the system is done only when major change in the 
system is warranted.  So far as the suggestion of Standing Committee regarding 

 
19 
 
 
review of recruitment at fixed intervals is concerned, this has been referred to the 
Committee being constituted for wor king out the modalities for implementation of 
Standing Committee’s recommendations. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 7 of  Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Para No.3) 
 New Railway Recruitment Policy 
  The Committee have drawn some satisfaction from the changes incorporated 
in the new Railway Recruitment Policy in order to make the recruitments in the 
Indian Railways fair and transparent.  The examination for a pa rticular post will now 
be held on the same date simultaneously by all RRBs so that a person will appear 
only in one RRB of his / her choice.  The Committee understand that the question 
papers for RRB examinations will be set up in the local languages liste d in the 8 th 
Schedule of the Indian Constitution falling within the jurisdiction of that RRB in 
addition to Hindi, Urdu and English, so that local candidates can have question 
papers in local languages with a view to understanding the questions better.  
Further, examination fee for candidates belonging to women, minorities and 
economically backward classes with family income less than `50,000/ - per annum 
has been waived off.  The Committee feel that these are steps in the right direction 
and should be follo wed along with other innovative measures to make the 
recruitment system in the Railways more professional.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Regular efforts are made for system improvement at RRCB level based on 
outcome of monitoring and the field experience.  As per the recommendations of the 
Standing Committee, a committee of Senior Railway Officers at Board’s level has 

 
20 
 
 
been set up for adoption of on -line submission of applications and operation of 
secure RRB web-sites. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5) 
 
 The Committee observe that out of the 21 RRBs, 10 major RRBs have been 
selected as nodal RRBs for issuing the Central Employment Notification (CEN) for 
particular category(s) on behalf of all participating RRBs.  Each nodal RRB has been 
entrusted with specific categories of posts for compiling vacancy and issuing CENs.  
Receipt of applications and subsequent recruitment activities are done by the 
participating RRBs themselves.  The Committee hope tha t the nodal RRBs selected 
for issuing CEN will be different for conducting examinations in different categories 
of posts as it will not be prudent to burden the same RRBs for all recruitments 
Reply of the Government 
       Nodal RRBs nominated for compilin g vacancies of specific categories and 
issuing Centralized Employment Notifications on behalf of all participating RRBs will 
not be over -burdened, as prior to this system each RRB including nodal RRBs had 
to issue a number of separate notifications for dif ferent categories of vacancies 
individually based on the requirements of feeder Zonal Railway(s).  Further, stages 
of recruitment activities have not been entrusted to Nodal RRBs and every one of 
the 21 RRBs is holding these activities individually.  Thus,  as per the revised 
recruitment system, work of individual RRBs including nodal RRBs has 
comparatively reduced.  Further, some work of RRB examinations like storage, 
distribution and transportation of question papers has been offloaded to ADRM / 
CPO of the concerned Zonal Railway.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
 

 
21 
 
 
Recommendation (para No.7) 
 Recruitment Procedure/Staff position: 
The Committee note that the recruitment to Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ posts in the Indian 
Railways is done through direct recruitment as well as through promotion.  As on 
01.4.2010, 1240 post in Groups ‘A’ and ‘B’ are lying vacant in the Indian Railways.  
Further, in certain Railway Zones, the employees on on -roll strength of Group ‘A’ 
and Group ‘B’ pos ts are more than their sanctioned strength.  In Northern Railway, 
32 employees are more on on -roll strength than the sanctioned strength; in North 
Frontier Railway, 86 employees are more on on -roll strength than the sanctioned 
strength; and in South Easter n Railway, 48 employees are more on on -roll strength 
than the sanctioned strength.  The Committees would like to be apprised of the 
relevant facts in this regard.   
Reply of the Government 
(b): It can be seen that as per the revised figures, there is no excess of on roll 
strength over the sanctioned strength in Group A & B employees in these Railways. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
 
 
(a) The figures submitted to the Standing Committee were provisional and final 
figures received from the Zonal Railways as on 31.03.2010 is as under:-  
Railway Group Sanctioned Strength On Roll Vacancy 
Northern A+B 1662 1557 105 
North East 
Frontier 
A+B 1083 926 157 
South 
Eastern 
A+B 977 912 65 
 

 
22 
 
 
Recommendation (para No.8) 
The Committee further note that vacancies in Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ posts in 
Central Railway, Eastern Railway, North Eastern Railway, Sothern Railway, Western 
Railway and West Coast Railway are on the higher side numbering 141, 183, 156, 
159, 258 and 123, respectively .  The Committee consider it to be a matter of grave 
concern and desire that the process of filling up of the vacancies in Groups ‘A’ and 
‘B’ should be expedited in the best interest of the Indian Railways. 
Reply of the Government 
           (a) Filling up of vacancies is a continuous process.  As regards Group ‘A’, 
the direct recruitment to Group ‘A’ is conducted by the UPSC, separately for the Civil 
Services and the Engineering Services.  Since these are all ‘All India level’ 
examinations, the same is time consuming.  As regards, indents for Group ‘A’, in the 
past, in keeping with the Annual Direct Recruitment Plan of the Department by 
Personnel and Training, reductions were made in the number of Group ‘A’ recruited.  
These restrictions on annual intake ha ve been withdrawn with effect from 
01.04.2009 and the indents placed by Railways on UPSC for filling up Group ‘A’ 
posts have increased from 307 in the year 2007 to 640 in the year 2011.    
  (b) Vacancies in Group ‘B’ are generally filled up by the Ministr y of 
Railways from amongst serving Group ‘C ’employees through a selection process 
which is also time consuming.  Some amount of vacancies would always exist in an 
organization.  However the intention of the Railways is to fill up these vacancies 
expeditiously as per laid down procedure. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (para No.9) 
The Committee find that as on 01.4.2010, there were about 1,66,100 vacancies 
in Group ‘C’ and Group ‘D’ posts, which is not at all a satisfactory position.  They are 
further constrained to note that the Ministry has not prescribed any fixed timeframe 
for completion of the recruitment process initiated by the Railway Recruitment 

 
23 
 
 
Boards (RRBs) in respect of Group ‘C’ posts and by  the Railway Recruitment Cells 
(RRCs) in respect of Group ‘D’ posts.  The plea of the Ministry that the time taken in 
the recruitment process depends on the number of vacancies, number of applicants 
and different steps / stages to be followed in the recrui tment process for particular 
post(s) / categories is hardly convincing.  Needless to say, bottlenecks that hinder a 
smooth recruitment process required to be identified.  The Committee urge the 
Ministry to urgently review the time being taken in various st ages of recruitment and 
wherever required take measures to streamline those stages so that the whole 
process of recruitment is completed expeditiously under a specified timeframe.  Staff 
constraint cannot be allowed to impede the efficient functioning of t he Indian 
Railways.  With this end in view, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
fix a certain timeframe to complete their recruitment process. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Group ‘C’ : 
It is already submitted that examination for various categories  of posts is 
generally conducted once in a year based on indents and Railways requirement. In 
view of the recommendation of Standing Committee, it has been decided to set up a 
Committee at Board’s level to suggest annual calendar of  RRB examinations for 
different categories with timeframe keeping in view the time taken at various stages 
of recruitment process.  
As regards Committee’s concern on  large number of vacancies, it is 
submitted that in Group ‘ C’ categories, out of a total 40,873 vacancies notifi ed 
through Centralized Employment Notifications during 2010, written examinations 
have been conducted for about 36,000 vacancies including 31,000 safety category 
posts like Assistant Loco Pilot, Assistant Station Master, Section Engineer/Junior 
Engineer an d Technicians.   RRBs have started furnishing Panels for Safety 
category posts to the indenting Railways.  For safety categories, panels for about 
11,000 posts have already been supplied and balance will be supplied expeditiously.  
 

 
24 
 
 
Erstwhile Group ‘D’ (Grade Pay Rs.1800) : 
              It has been decided to initiate recruitment process annually in Grade Pay 
`1800 (erstwhile Group D) as per the following time schedule: 
 
S. 
No. 
Item Month 
1. Issue of  Notification July 
2. Last date of receipt of application 30th Sept. 
3. Scrutiny of application Jan./Feb. 
4. Issue of call letter for Written Test March/April 
5. Written Test May/June 
6. (PET) Physical Efficiency Test Sept./Oct. 
7. Medical Test//Documents verification Nov./Dec. 
8. Declaration of Final Panel Dec. 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 10 of  Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (para No.10) 
 
 The Committee note that for Group ‘C’ posts, the indents are  placed annually 
by the indenting Railways on the RRBs as per their requirement and examinations 
are conducted by all RRBs simultaneously once in a year.  For Group ‘D’ posts, 
extant instructions already prescribe the periodicity as two years while recruit ing the 
current as well as anticipated vacancies to be accrued over the next two years. As 

 
25 
 
 
submitted, the periodicity is required to be maintained as per need.  The Committee 
desire that the periodicity of holding examinations for Group ‘C’ posts and for G roup 
‘D’ posts should be increased, especially keeping in mind the large number of 
vacancies in the Railways and also the time consuming process involved in 
recruitments. 
Reply of the Government 
Group ‘C’:  
As per the laid down system, indents for Group ‘C ’ vacancies in different 
categories are placed annually by the Zonal Railway on RRBs as per their 
requirement and examination are conducted by all RRBs simultaneously once in a 
year.  Sometimes, due to short panel or for certain reasons, vacancies remain 
unfulfilled.  Accordingly, unfilled vacancies are carried forward by the indenting 
railway in their next indent placed on RRBs.  Efforts are made to conduct 
examinations expeditiously.  
           However, the suggestion of the Standing Committee for increa sing periodicity 
of holding of examinations for Group ‘C’  has been included in the terms of reference 
for the Committee being constituted in this context for suggesting timeframe for 
expeditious finalization of recruitments.  
Erstwhile Group ‘D’ (Grade Pay Rs. 1800): 
It has been decided to initiate recruitment process annually in Grade Pay 
Rs.1800 (erstwhile Group D) as per the following time schedule: 
S.No. Item                                                                                                                              Month 
1. Issue of  Notification July 
2. Last date of receipt of application 30th Sept. 
3. Scrutiny of application Jan./Feb. 
4. Issue of call letter for Written Test March/April 
5. Written Test May/June 
6. (PET) Physical Efficiency Test Sept./Oct. 

 
26 
 
 
7. Medical Test//Documents verification Nov./Dec. 
8. Declaration of Final Panel Dec. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 13 of  Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
Backlog for SC/ST and other reserved categories: 
  The Committee note with grave concern that as on 01.04.2010, the backlog 
vacancies for SCs, STs, and OBCs were 8304, 10939 and 5336, respectively.  
Special Recruit ment Drive and Special Promotion Drive had been launched under 
the instructions of Department of Personnel and Training (DoP&T) and the 
recruitment process of filling up the backlog vacancies was under way.  The 
Committee are aware that on 14 July, 2011, the Government had given a direction to 
all the Ministries / Departments to fill up the vacant posts for SCs, STs, and OBCs by 
31.03.2012.  In line with that direction, the Committee would like the Ministry to 
ensure that by 31.03.2012, the backlog of vacan cies in respect of SCs, STs and 
OBCs is cleared.  
Reply of the Government 
   The Department of Personnel and Training (DoP&T) vide their Office 
Memorandum dated 26.07.2011 has directed the Ministries/Departments to re -
launch Special Recruitment Drive for f illing up backlog reserved vacancies for SCs, 
STs & OBCs by 31.03.2012.  In this connection, it is stated that this issue is being 
monitored at Apex level in the Ministry of Railways and every possible effort is being 
made to wipe out the remaining backlog  vacancies.  All the Zonal 
Railways/Production Units have already been instructed to complete the recruitment 
process by 31.12.2011. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 

 
27 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.21) 
 Incidents or irregularities and malpractices in RRBs: 
      The Committee note to their dismay that there had been four cases of 
leakage of question papers of RRB examinations in the recent past.  First, the 
question paper of RRB examination for the post of Assistant Loco Pilot  scheduled to 
be held on 27.04.2008 conducted by RRB/ Bhopal was leaked which was under 
investigation by the Madhya Pradesh Police.  Second, a case of leakage of question 
paper for the examination scheduled for 14.12.2008 for the post of Assistant Loco 
Pilot conducted by RRB/Allahabad was reported, which was under investigation with 
the Allahabad Police, Uttar Pradesh.  Third, a case of leakage of question paper for 
the examination scheduled for 15.02.2009 for the post of Asst. Station Master (ASM) 
conducted by RRB/Ajmer was reported, which was under investigation with the 
Special Operation Group, Rajasthan Police.  The examination was subsequently 
cancelled.  Fourthly, there was leakage of question papers of RRB examinations 
held on 06.06.2010 and 13.06.2010 for the post of Assistant Loco Pilot and Assistant 
Station Master.  The CBI had unearthed a Railway recruitment scam and arrested 
ten persons, for allegedly running the racket.  Further investigation in the matter is 
stated to be under progress with the CBI.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the progress in each of the above cases. 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The position of each of the four cases as mentioned above is as under:- 
 RRB/BHOPAL:- As per information obtained from Sr. S.P./Bhopal, one person 
namely Shri Rameshwar Prasad Sahu had been arrested on 02.07.2008 and 
produced before Hon’ble Court. Efforts are being made to arrest other persons 
involved in this case.  
 RRB/ALLAHABAD:-  As per information obtained from the office of DIG/Police, 
Allahabad, the matter is under trial in the Hon’ble Court of Judicial Magistrate -III, 
Allahabad. 

 
28 
 
 
 RRB/AJMER:-  As per information obtained from the Special Operation Group, 
Rajsthan Police, the challan against 105 accused has been produced in the 
court and is under consideration with Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jaipur.  
 RRB/MUMBAI:- As per information obtained from the CBI/Hyderabad, 
investigation into the case has been completed and CBI has filed a charge Sheet 
on 13.09.2010 against Shri S.M.Sharma, the then Chairman, RRB/Mumbai and 14 
others before the Hon’ble Court of Special Judge for CBI cases, Hyderabad u/s 120 
(B), 409, 418, 420 & 201 IPC and Section 7, 8 & 13(2) r/w 13 (1) (c) & (d) of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 25 of  Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Para No.23) 
 
   The Committee note that the Railway Recruitment Boards carried out a 
technical audit of the system  of examination for the first time after receipt of reports 
of leakage of question papers of RRB/Mumbai in the year 2010.  After the technical 
audit was done, necessary changes in the system of printing, transportation, storage 
and distribution of question  papers for examinations have been made and the 
instructions in this regard were issued on 11 August, 2010.  In order to make the 
system foolproof, the Ministry have now diversified the process under which one 
person cannot have total information of printi ng, storage and distribution of question 
papers, as was prevalent in the earlier system.  The Committee strongly feel that 
had such technical audit been done earlier, subsequent incidents of leakage of 
question papers could have been averted. 
Reply of the Government 
  After the leakage of question papers of Assistant Loco Pilot and Assistant 
Station Master, in the written examinations of RRB/Mumbai held on 06.06.2010 and 

 
29 
 
 
13.06.2010 and prima facie involvement of Chairman, RRB/Mumbai, it was felt 
necessary to carry out the technical audit of the system and as a result, system for 
transportation, storage and distribution of question papers was modified in August, 
2010.  Now the question paper is not set by the Chairman of the RRB which is 
conducting the examin ations. Question papers are received from three different 
sources by the officer nominated for the purpose and no one person has a control 
over setting, printing, storage and distribution of question papers. 
 
   Thereafter, written exam for Enquiry-cum-Reservation-Clerk / Goods Guard, 
Commercial Apprentice / Traffic Apprentice, Section Engineers / Junior Engineers 
and Technicians have been held smoothly and successfully as per new 
methodology.   
[[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.24) 
 
Recruitment in RPF/RPSF 
       The Committee note that at present the staff strength of RPF is 61,671, with the 
total sanctioned strength being 69,307, thus leaving 7636 vacancies in all categories 
of posts.  Recalli ng the grievances with regard to the shortage of RPF/RPSF 
personnel of the Western Railway, Central Railway, South Central Railway and 
Southern Railway during their visit to these Zonal Railways in May, 2010, the 
Committee recommend that vacant posts in RP F/RPSF should be filled up on a 
priority basis, specially keeping in view the security scenario in the country.  Further, 
if need be, steps should be taken for the creation of posts in all Railway Zones to 
meet the shortage of the manpower in RPF. 
 
Reply of the Government 
        On a proposal of the Ministry of Railways, the Ministry of Finance had 
sanctioned 5134 additional posts for RPF in March, 2010.  The newly created posts 

 
30 
 
 
were distributed amongst all the Zonal Railways in a proportionate manner.  Th ree 
RPSF Battalions including a Lady Battalion and one Mahila Vahini have been 
created out of the newly sanctioned posts.  Moreover, sanctioned order for 723 
posts for security of Kolkata Metro Rail has also been received from the Ministry of 
Finance and t he formal orders to this effect are being issued by the Ministry of 
Railways.  As on 31.05.2011, the posted strength of RPF is 61058 as against the 
sanctioned strength of 74538 (approx.) leaving 13480 numbers of vacancies on all 
Zonal Railways.  Efforts ar e being made to fill up these vacancies on priority basis.  
An Employment Notice No. 1/2011 dated 27.02.2011 has been issued inviting 
applications from eligible candidates for filling 11952 vacancies of Constable in 
RPF/RPSF.  Similarly, 511 vacancies of S ub-Inspector in RPF/RPSF have been 
advertised vide Employment Notice No. 2/2011 dated 13.04.2011.  These vacancies 
include vacancies of all Zonal Railways taking into account the existing and the 
anticipated vacancies upto 31.12.2012.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.25) 
 
  As apprised, the National Police Mission (NPM) set up in December, 2005 
under the aegis of the Ministry of Home Affairs had prepared a project called Project 
Transparent Recruitment Process or ‘Project TRP’.  The vision of the ‘Project TRP’ 
is to ensure a fair, impartial, transparent, objective, tamperproof, scientific, merit -
based recruitment process so as to induct into the police, individuals best suited for 
their job, who  have earned their way into the police on their own merit and without 
favour of unfair means by using simple but well defined procedures reinforced by 
technology and the use of information technology. 
    The Committee understand that the Project TRP envis ages formation of a 
Recruitment Board in every organization so as to ensure a transparent recruitment 
process in all recruitments in Central Para Military Forces and Indian Reserved 
Battalions.  The Committee note that the proposal to constitute a permanen t RPF 

 
31 
 
 
Recruitment Board as envisaged in Project TRP is still under consideration in the 
Ministry of Railway and nothing concrete has been finalized as yet.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the reasons for the delay in finalizing the proposal for  
the constitution of a permanent RPF Recruitment Board.  They recommend that the 
needful be done at the earliest in this direction to ensure on -board security and 
safety of passengers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The feasibility of implementing National Polic e Mission’s Project Transparent 
Recruitment Process of ‘Project TRP’ under the Ministry of Home Affairs was 
examined vis -à-vis the existing system of recruitment being followed by Railway 
Protection Force within the ambit of RPF Rules, 1987.  It was found that the existing 
system of recruitment where the 16 Zonal Railways/RPF and RPSF divided into four 
recruitment groups is as close to the procedure prescribed by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs as possible within the existing limits.  It was, therefore, decide d in the year 
2010 itself that the recruitment in RPF should be conducted as per existing 
procedure.  Accordingly, employment notices for filling 11952 posts of Constable 
and 511 posts of Sub -Inspector have already been issued.  These manpowers, 
when final ly recruited and deployed in the mainstream would strengthen on -board 
security and safety of passengers. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.27) 
   The Committee are unhappy to note the callous ap proach of the Ministry in 
supplying information to them.  At one place, a representative of the Ministry during 
evidence on 23 November, 2010 submitted that the policy of giving jobs to land 
losers started only this year and that there was no such policy e arlier.  That is why in 
the past, they could not offer any appointment to whosoever had given land to the 
Railways.  Elsewhere, they have stated that the policy to provide employment to 
those whose land was acquired for the purpose of Railway projects came  into 

 
32 
 
 
existence with the issue of instructions dated 01.01.1983.  The Committee desire the 
Ministry to ensure supply of correct information to them in future. 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation is noted for strict compliance. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.31) 
   The Committee are aware that a recent central directive issued by the 
Department of Personnel and Training envisages that all government appointing 
authorities should ensure the presence of women officers in selection committees 
and recruitment boards to see that there is no bias against women during hiring.  
The Committee trust that the Ministry would take suitable steps in this direction, 
wherever warranted. 
Reply of the Government 
         In order to remove subjectivity in selection, viva voce / interview has been 
dispensed with in recruitment from open market and in departmental promotion in all 
categories except in the categories of Law Assistants, Teachers, Physiotherapists,  
Telephone Operators, District Extension Educator, Senior Publicity Inspector in 
which the personality test is a must for assessing the suitability of the candidate.  As 
regards DoPT circular regarding representation of women, the same is being 
considered for circulation.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
 
 
 
 

 
33 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.32) 
Complaints/Grievances 
        The Committee note that there are no provisions in the Ministry for tracking of 
applications by candidat es applying for various categories of posts and for online 
printing of admit cards in the case of non-receipt of the same.  Further, the facility for 
online submission of applications is available with only a few RRBs.  Considering 
these to be the basic re quirements for a smooth and efficient recruitment system, 
the Committee desire that the facility for online submission of applications should be 
extended expeditiously to all RRBs and the facility of online printing of admit cards in 
case of their non -receipt by the applications should be extended at the earliest 
possible. 
Reply of the Government 
 In view of the above recommendation of Standing Committee, it has now 
been decided to set up a Committee at Board’s level to examine the feasibility for 
on-line submission of application forms for RRBs examination and printing of admit 
cards for RRB examinations. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 

 
34 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation (Para. No. 4) 
However, the Committee take a serious view of the fact that up till now, the 
Ministry had conveniently overlooked such a glaring fault in the recruitment process 
in which different RRBs were holding examinations of the same category of posts 
separately on different dates and as a result, the same candidate used to get 
selected at a number of RRBs for a particular post(s).  This had resulted in shortfall 
as one candidate could join at  one place only, leaving vacant his post in the other 
RRB, thus nullifying the efforts made in the recruitment exercise.  Such a short -
sighted approach had resulted in shortage of staff in the Railways on the one hand 
and denial of opportunity to many candidates on the other. 
Reply of the Government 
 It is submitted that the concept of the same day examinations simultaneously 
by all the RRBs for major safety categories like Assistant Loco Pilot, Assistant 
Station Master, Goods Guard, Senior Engineers / Juni or Engineers  as well as also 
for isolated categories was tried earlier in 2004 -05.  However, the same was 
subsequently discontinued for major safety categories due to formation of short 
panels but it was retained for isolated categories. Now on the recomm endation of 
the Review Committee constituted in 2009, the concept has been adopted again and 
extended to all categories of posts. With the new system under Centralized 
Employment Notifications, RRB examinations have been conducted successfully 
yielding positive results.     
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
 

 
35 
 
 
Recommendation (Para. No. 6) 
     The Committee note that as per the new Railway Recruitment Policy, free 
travelling authority is issued to SC/ST candidates for att ending the examination.  
This facility has, however, not been provided to other weaker sections like minorities, 
economically backward classes, women, differently abled and Other Backward 
Class candidates and no such proposal is presently under the conside ration of the 
Ministry.  The Committee recommend that the matter for a similar provision for 
minorities, economically backward classes, women, differently abled and other 
Backward Class candidates may be examined / considered by the Ministry.   
Reply of the Government 
     A number of facilities have recently been extended to other weaker sections 
viz: examination fee for women candidates and candidates belonging to minorities 
and economically backward classes with family income less than `50,000/ - per 
annum has been waived off.  Candidates belonging to Other Backward Classes 
(OBCs) and Physically handicapped are given reservation in recruitment as per 
Government policy. OBC candidates are also given relaxation in prescribed 
minimum qualifying marks. Feasibi lity of extending other facilities like free travelling 
authority will be considered in due course keeping in view the resources position. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Para. No. 12) 
  The Committee are unhappy with the way the Railways address the problem 
of shortage of staff by resorting to alternative methods like re -engagement of retired 
staff on non -safety jobs, managing through leave reserve, etc.  As informed, the 
running staff, after their re cruitment, undergo a training schedule of 18 months and 
are available for actual service in about two years’ time.  In order to cover this 
duration, the Railway Board have granted permission to re -engage retired gangman, 
keyman, gateman, trolleyman and loc o pilots (both electrical and diesel drivers) and 
guards to ensure that operational requirements are attended to, without 

 
36 
 
 
compromising on safety.  The Committee can understand the Railway Board taking 
this decision as a one -time measure or in some unavoida ble circumstances.  
However, the Committee are of the view that these steps cannot be resorted to as 
permanent remedy when the problem of shortage of regular staff is confronted by 
the Railways on a regular basis. 
Reply of the Government: 
   As indicated i n reply to Para 9 & 10, it has now been decided to initiate 
recruitment in Grade Pay `1800 (erstwhile Group ‘D’) every year in July.  The 
recruitment exercise will take care of the current and anticipated vacancies upto next 
1 year i.e. the date when next notification for recruitment will be issued.  Once the 
recruitment cycle is stabilized, there will hardly be any large scale vacancies which 
will require emergency measure of augmenting the work force through re -
engagement of retired staff. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Para. No. 13) 
    The Committee further observe that the posts falling under the running staff 
are Loco Pilot (Mail), Loco Pilot (Passenger)/Motorman, Loco Pilot (Goods), Loco 
Pilot ( Shunting) Gr.I, Loco Pilot (Shunting) Gr.II, Sr. FM -1, Sr. Asstt. Loco Pilot 
(Diesel / Elect), FM-I, Asstt. Loco Pilot (Diesel / Elec.), Sr. Second Fireman, Second 
Fireman, Mail Express Guard, Passenger Guard, Sr. Goods Guard, Goods Guard, 
Sr. Asstt. Guard  / Sr.  Brakeman  and Asstt. Guard / Brakesman.  The Committee 
are not happy with the induction of retired persons in case of non -availability of 
running staff, thus jeopardizing the safety and security of passengers as the nature 
of job of running staff r equire physical endurance.  They would like to suggest this 
practice of engaging retired personnel should be curtailed / discontinued in due 
course and vigorous efforts should be made to recruit proper running staff. 

 
37 
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
As indicated i n reply to Para 9 & 10, it has now been decided to initiate 
recruitment in Grade Pay Rs. 1800 (erstwhile Group ‘D’) every year in July.  The 
recruitment exercise will take care of the current and anticipated vacancies upto next 
1 year i.e. the date when ne xt notification for recruitment will be issued.  Once the 
recruitment cycle is stabilized, there will hardly be any large scale vacancies which 
will require emergency measure of augmenting the work force through re -
engagement of retired staff. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Para. No. 16) 
Substitute Recruitment: 
   The Committee learn that a General Manager in the Indian Railways, at his 
discretion, can appoint substitutes to make up the work of track maintenance and 
station work and shunting operations which need manpower and that this provision 
has been in existence for decades.  The Committee are not convinced by the 
explanation given by the Ministry that when there are so many vacancies, it is 
considered necessary in the interest of safety to have such a provision.  It can only 
be termed as a lack of serious effort and lack of foresight on the part of the Ministry 
of Railways to fill up the existing vacancies.  The Committee firmly believe that such 
adhocism would invite allegations of corruption and nepotism and recommend that 
such discretionary power of the General Manager may be withdrawn.   
Reply of the Government 
    Engagement of Substitutes is a discretionary  power to be exercised by 
General Manager in emergency situations requiring administrative measures to man  
a vacant post when the process of filling up is delayed and the post cannot be kept 
vacant due to exigencies of work otherwise railway’s work may be adversely 
affected.  These powers have been vested in Railways since 1960s as these are 
emergency powers.  However, as per remarks for para 9 & 10 where it has been 

 
38 
 
 
stated that recruitment will be initiated in Grade Pay Rs.1800 (erstwhile Group ‘D’) 
every year. Once the recruitment cycle i s stabilized there will hardly be any large 
vacancies which will require  use of emergency power of engaging substitutes. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Para. No. 17) 
   The Committee conclude that t he Railways have been facing the problem of 
shortage of staff for decades as is evident from the fact that the provision of 
appointment of substitutes has also been prevalent in the Railways for decades.  
This is a poor commentary on the recruitment proces s in the Railways.  As provision 
of recruitment of substitutes has only been made to fill that post which cannot be 
kept vacant due to exigencies of work, the Committee earnestly desire that the 
Ministry should give focused attention to filling up of the v acancies through direct 
recruitment by exploring ways and means to expedite the recruitment process and 
the system of substitute recruitment should eventually be phased out.  The 
Committee desire the Ministry to expeditiously review the matter for provisio n of 
appointment of substitutes at the appropriate level.  
Reply of the Government: 
    Engagement of Substitutes is a discretionary  power to be exercised by 
General Manager in emergency situations requiring administrative measures to man  
a vacant post w hen the process of filling up is delayed and the post cannot be kept 
vacant due to exigencies of work otherwise railway’s work may be adversely 
affected.  These powers have been vested in Railways since 1960s as these are 
emergency powers.  However, as per  remarks for para 9 & 10 where it has been 
stated that recruitment will be initiated in Grade Pay Rs.1800 (erstwhile Group ‘D’) 
every year. Once the recruitment cycle is stabilized there will hardly be any large 
vacancies which will require use of emergency power of engaging substitutes. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 

 
39 
 
 
Recommendation (Para. No. 22) 
 The Committee express their serious concern at the frequent occurrence of 
allegations of irregularities and malpractices  against the RRBs and strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should take effective steps to check the recurrence of 
such incidents.  The Committee would further like to be assured that all those who 
indulge in such malpractices are dealt with very severely. 
 
Reply of theGovernment 
A technical audit of the system of examination has been carried out in August, 
2010 and  significant/substantial changes in the system of transportation, storage 
and distribution of question papers for RRB examinations have been made  in order 
to make the system foolproof. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
   
Recommendation (Para. No. 29) 
     Employment on compassionate grounds is a significant and unique mode of 
employment in the Indian Railways.  Around 9000-10000 posts are filled up in this 
manner annually all over Indian Railways which is much beyond the prescribed limit 
of 5 per cent as imposed by the Department of Personnel and Training (DoP&T).  
About 36000 persons have been employed under th is compassionate ground 
employment between 2005 -06 and 2008 -09.  Of this, about 85 per cent jobs had 
been given to wards of staff who died in harness and the remaining 15 per cent on 
account of retirement on medical grounds when the employees were de -categorised 
for medical reasons.  This especially happens in the case of Gangmen and the 
running staff.  The Committee note that the Railways have not obtained any 
permission from the DoP&T for making compassionate appointment beyond their 
prescribed limit of 5 per cent.  The plea given by the Ministry that no permission had 
been obtained from DoP&T since the Railways are an operational department 
whose working is unique, is not convincing.  The Committee desire that the Railways 

 
40 
 
 
should follow the rules with reg ard to compassionate appointments and place their 
position before the DoP&T to seek formal permission in this regard to avoid any 
complications in future. 
Reply of the Government 
      Railways are essentially an operating department and a labour intensive  
organisation with large employee strength. There are a large number of cases of 
death or medical decategorisation connected to it. The broad policy of 
compassionate ground appointment as enumerated by DoPT is followed by 
Railways with regard to age, quali fications etc except that the maximum limit 
prescribed is not strictly adhered to.  Though formal approval has not been taken, 
DoPT has been kept informed of action taken by the Railways in exceeding the 
prescribed percentage in view of its operational req uirements and need to maintain 
harmonious industrial relations. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Paras. Nos. 34 and 35) 
Sports Quota: 
34. The committee are unhappy to note that during 2007 -08, 2008-09 and 2009-
10, out of 1181 vacancies allotted each year in the sports quota for Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ 
posts, only 586, 509 and 233 vacancies, respectively, have been filled.  The plea 
given by the Ministry that due to non -availability of suitable candidates, it becomes 
difficult for the Railways to utilize their full quota is hardly convincing.  The 
Committee desire that suitable steps should be taken to recruit sports persons and 
that the sports quota should be filled up to the best possible extent. 
 
35. As apprised, there is no separate sports cadre in the Railways and, therefore, 
vacancy position is not maintained for the sports quota.  Since the existing policy for 
recruitment of sports persons on the Indian Railways under the sports quota allotted 
to the Zona l Railways and Production Units and the criteria and procedure for 

 
41 
 
 
selection, etc. is being revised and such a proposal is under consideration, the 
Committee desire that these factors should be taken into account before finalizing 
the new policy. 
 
Reply of the Government (Paras. Nos. 34 and 35) 
         The revised policy guidelines for recruitment of sports persons on Indian 
Railways have been issued on 31.12.2010 (copy at Annexure ‘A’).  In the revised 
policy instructions, suitable measures are taken in o rder to maximum utilization of 
sports quota.  In this regard, time frames have been fixed for conducting trials and 
completing all formalities for recruitment through Talent Scouting.  Similarly, in the 
case of recruitment through Open Advertisement Quota,  target dates for issuing 
notification and completing recruitment process have also been fixed up (copy at 
Annexure ‘B’). 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 

 
42 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that out of the 1,66,100 
vacancies in Group ‘C’ and Group ‘D’ posts on 01.4.2011, no t imeframe has been 
fixed for filling up of 85,663 Group ‘D’ posts; the last date for receiving applications 
for these posts was 31 March, 2011.  The Committee fail to understand as to why 
the process of filling up these posts had been started so late when t hey had been 
lying vacant since 01.04.2010.  This reflects poorly on the pace of the recruitment 
process in the Railways.  Though efforts are stated to have been made to fill up the 
vacancies as early as possible and notifications against most of the vacan cies have 
already been published, much more is required to be done to accelerate the pace of 
the recruitment process.  The Committee would further like to be apprised of the 
present status with regard to the 1,66,100 posts which were lying vacant in Group 
‘C’ and Group ‘D’ posts as on 01.4.2010. 
      
Reply of the Government 
Group ‘C’: 
Occurrence and filling up of vacancy is a continuous process.  Out of a total 
40,873 vacancies notified through Centralized Employment Notifications during 2010 
for Group ‘C’  categories, written examinations have been conducted for about 
36,000 vacancies including 31,000 safety category posts like Assistant Loco Pilot, 
Assistant Station Master, Section Engineer/Junior Engineer and Technicians.    
RRBs have started furnishing P anels for Safety category posts to the indenting 
Railways.  For safety categories, panels for about 11,000 posts have already been 
supplied and balance will be supplied expeditiously. 

 
43 
 
 
             
             [Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 16 of  Chapter I)  
            
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
    The Committee note that from 01.04.2007 to 31.03.2010, out of 9847 
substitutes appointed on the different Railway zones/ PUs, 6183 have been 
regularized.  For the North Western Railway, figures are available upto 31.08.2009, 
where out of 148 substitutes, 13 have been regularized and in the North East 
Frontier Railways, where out of 103, 50 substitutes have been regularized upto 
09.02.2011.  The Committee may be informed of the criteria laid down for 
regularization of the substitutes. 
Reply of the Government 
     As per the extant instructions a person engaged as substitute in Grade Pay 
Rs.1800 (erstwhile Group D) is eligible for absorption after he/she attains temporary 
status after continuously working for four months.  He/she is r egularized as and 
when screening is conducted by Railways. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
Erstwhile Group ‘D’ (Grade Pay Rs. 1800): 
           Written Test has been held for recruitment initiated during the period 2006-08, 
for around 36,900 posts.  Panels are expected to be published by December, 2011.  
For 10,324 posts of Eastern and East Coast Railway, recruitment has been held up 
owing to court cases.  Further, special drive has already been completed for 
recruitment of 16,747 ex -servicemen vacancies, out of which around 7500 have 
been appointed so far.  Also, for around 85,000 vacancies in Grade Pay of Rs.1800/-
, notifications were issued in December / January 2 010/2011 of which scrutiny of 
applications are underway. 

 
44 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 19 of  Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Para No.20) 
      The Committee note that the difference between a regular recruitment and 
substitute engagement is that the substitutes are engaged in exigencies of work and 
fall under the General Manager’s discretionary powers which is not so in case of 
open market recruitment.  Su bstitutes are engaged by way of screening done by a 
committee whereas regular recruitment is done by specialized recruitment agencies.  
Though qualification for direct recruitment for posts in Grade Pay of Rs. 1800/ - is 
Class 10th or ITI or equivalent, til l 31.07.2011,  the Railways have been permitted to 
engage substitutes, viz. fresh faces, Course Completed Act Apprentices, legal heirs 
of accident victims, etc., even with a qualification below the prescribed one.  The 
substitute thus appointed is not subj ected to Physical Efficiency Test though he/she 
is subjected to medical examination.  On the other hand, for recruitment done 
through the open market, Physical Efficiency Test (PET) for Group ‘D’ is compulsory 
as a majority of the jobs is stated to be thos e involving physical endurance.  The 
Committee fail to understand how for jobs requiring physical endurance, Physical 
Efficiency Test can be exempted in the case of substitutes.  The Committee desire 
that suitable corrective measures should be taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Engagement of substitutes is an emergency power where the norms of 
engagement have been streamlined vide RBE/137/2010 dated 17.9.2010 which 
stipulates that the applications should be screened by a committee of 3 Senior 
Administrative Grade level officers.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 22 of  Chapter I)  

 
45 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.26) 
Compassionate appointments 
 The Committe e have been apprised that the extant rules provided for giving 
compensation to the dependents of those who have lost their lives in train accidents.  
However, in exceptional circumstances and on humanitarian grounds, jobs have 
been provided by way of engag ement of wards/legal heirs of the victims as 
substitute in Group ‘D’ posts only under the General Manager’s discretionary 
powers.  From 01.04.2007 to 31.03.2010, a total of 14 persons have been provided 
employment on the Railways in such circumstances in t he wake of train accidents.  
The Committee desire to be informed of the casualties that had occurred in train 
accidents during the above period and the status with regard to the pending cases in 
which the victims’ families have been assured of employment with the Railways. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  Employment to dependants of victims of train accidents/incidents is provided 
as a humanitarian measure, only in cases where announcement to this affect has 
been made by Hon’ble Minister of Railways.  During the period 01.4.2007 to 
31.3.2010, in the following cases, announcement to this effect had been made by 
Hon’ble Minister for Railways.  Position of employment given as on 31.7.2011, in 
these cases, is as under: 
 
S. 
No. 
 
Name of the Accident/ 
Incident 
 
 
No. of 
deaths 
 
 
Employ-
ments 
given 
 
Applications 
not received/ 
rejected/ 
Unwilling etc. 
Pending 
Cases 
1. Incidence of  Stampede at 
Mughalsarai Junction on 
3.10.2007 
15 12 03  
0 
2. Incident of run over at 
Danapur/East Central Rly. by 
2387 UP Jan -Sadharan 
Express on 4.8.2008. 
05 01 04 0 
 
 

 
46 
 
 
3. CSTM Terrorist attack, 
Central Rly. on 26.11.2008. 
52 35 13 04 
 Total 72 48 20 04 
 
In the same period, i.e. from 01.4.2007 to 31.3.2010, a total of 638 casualties 
have been reported. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 28 & 29 of  Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Para No.30) 
 
Representation of Women employees in Railways 
        The Committee are unhappy to note that the percentage o f women employees 
on the Indian Railways (excluding MTP, Kolkata) as on 31.03.2010 in Group ‘A’, ‘B’, 
‘C’ and ‘D’ is only 6.79 percent, 5.45 percent, 7.70 percent and 6.20 percent, 
respectively.  Though waiving off the examination fee for the women candida tes is a 
welcome step in order to encourage participation of women candidates in the 
Railway recruitment process, it cannot be termed as adequate.  The Committee 
desire that the Ministry may take proactive steps to enable women to be adequately 
represented in the Railways and that concerted efforts should be made to increase 
the percentage of women employees in the Railways. 
 
Reply of the Government 
    In order to encourage participation of women in railway jobs, examination fee 
has been waived in case of women candidates while resorting to recruitment of staff 
from open market to Group ‘C’ categories and the posts in Grade Pay Rs.1800 

 
47 
 
 
(erstwhile Group D) with effect from 8.12 .2010. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 32 of  Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Para No.33) 
 
The Committee find that that there is a system of lodging of complaints by the 
applications relating to recruitment formalities with the Railway Rec ruitment Control 
Board, for redresal.  However, they are surprised to note that in spite of several 
reported issues relating to the Railway recruitment, only 107 complaints were 
received by the Ministry in the last five years.  The Complaints are of a gene ral 
nature like complaints/representations against rejection of applications by RRBs, 
prescribed educational qualifications for various posts, non -selection of candidates, 
non- receipt of call letters, delay in declaration of results by RRBs, re -medical 
examination, etc. those relating to policy issues and those arising out of/against 
unsatisfactory replies by the RRBs.  The Committee feel that the extant mechanism 
in the Ministry for lodging of complaints by applicants has not been adequately 
publicized and therefore the matter need to be addressed accordingly.  
Reply of the Government 
There are 21 RRBs located over Indian Railways.  Generally candidates 
lodge their complaints / grievances to the respective RRB as necessary mechanism 
has been set up at RRBs  also.  Some complaints / grievances relating to particular 
RRB received in Board’s office are forwarded to RRB concerned for disposal.  In 
addition, a full-fledged  Public Grievances Directorate has been set up in the Ministry 
of Railways for redressal of  public grievances including grievances concerning 
RRBs. 
 

 
48 
 
 
Complaints / grievances involving more than one RRB or arising out of 
unsatisfactory replies by RRBs or on policy matters are dealt with at Board’s level.  
This explains the limited number of grieva nces received by Railway Recruitment 
Control Board. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 35 of  Chapter I)  
 
 
 

 
49 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.15) 
 
The Committee note that the post -wise information in this regard is not 
available in the Ministry of Railways as the Railways find it difficult to collect such 
information and com pile them in the Railway Board office as many categories of 
posts are available in Zonal Railways and Production Units in all the Groups, viz. 
Group A, B, C and D.  The Committee do not consider it a convincing reply as in the 
absence of such data, the Min istry would not have the exact figures of backlog 
vacancies of SCs / STs / OBCs for different categories of posts.  The Committee 
desire the Ministry to act immediately in this direction and inform the Committee of 
the same within six months. 
Reply of the Government 
As desired by the Committee, information is being collected from Zonal 
Railways/Production Units and will be submitted to the Committee immediately after 
compilation.  Collection and compilation of this huge data from Divisions & Sub -
divisions by Zonal Railways/Production Units will requires time as there are around 
one lac rosters maintained in Railways for different grades in various posts. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.19) 
    The Committee note to their dismay that the position pertaining to the 
number of substitutes whose services have been regularized is not maintained in the 
Ministry since recruitment/engagement of Group ‘D’ posts is done by the Zonal 
Railways; cadre for Grou p ‘D’ is also maintained by the Zonal Railways, with the 
details being called for only as and when required.  Railway administrations, while 

 
50 
 
 
engaging substitutes, have been directed to keep the intake of SC/ST/OBC against 
each individual category in variou s Departments not below the prescribed 
percentage of reservation in favour of these communities and the shortfall, if any, be 
made good by resorting to direct recruitment in each category.  As informed, the 
figures for SCs/STs/OBCs substitutes engaged cate gory-wise during the last three 
years are being obtained from the Railway establishments.  The Committee may be 
apprised of the same. 
Reply of the Government 
    Information is being collected from the field units and will be furnished 
shortly. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 

 
51 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.28) 
   The Committee note that during the period 01.04.2007 to 31.01.2010, a total 
of 478 employment has been given on the East Central Railway and Northern 
Railway only in Group ‘D’ category in lieu of land acquired.  The Committee are 
dismayed to find that the Ministry does not have the detailed data with regard to 
employment given since 01.01.1983 in such cases.  The Committee would like to be 
informed of the reasons for such lapse on the part of the Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
    As the appointment under the category is delegated to General Managers in 
the zonal Railways /Production Units, the information is maintained by the railway 
establishments in the field. The information is called for by the Ministry as and when 
required. Information as to how many jobs have been given since 1983 is being 
obtained separately and will be furnished shortly. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2011/BC-II/XV/300/2,  
Dated 29.11.2011] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; T.R. BAALU 
  
15  May, 2012                         Chairman, 
25 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
                             

 
52 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 15th May, 2012 from 1 500 Hrs. to 1615 Hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
        PRESENT 
SHRI T.R. BAALU -   CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Ram Sunder Das 
3.  Shri K. Bapiraju 
4.  Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
5.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
6.  Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
7.  Dr. Padmsinha Bajirao Patil 
8.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
9.  Shri Sharif-ud-din ‘Shariq’ 
10.  Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
11.  Shri Ganesh Singh 
12.  Chaudhary Lal Singh 
13.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
14.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
15.  Smt. Kusum Rai  
16.  Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
17.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
       
  SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 
 
 

 
53 
 
 
 xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Reports:-  
 (i)  xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
 (ii)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in their 1 2th Report on 
‘New Railway Recruitment Policy’  
 
3. The Committee adopted the Report at (i) with some modification as indicated at the 
Annexure and the Report at (ii) without any modification.  
 
4. The Committee, then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report at (i) in light of 
the factual verification and present/lay both the Reports at (i) and (ii) in both the houses of 
the Parliament. 
 
5. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
6. A copy of the Verbatim Report of the sitting has been kept. 
  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

 
54 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 12TH REPORT         
(15TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘NEW RAILWAY RECRUITMENT POLICY’  
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 35 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the  Government –  
Para Nos.  1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 14, 21, 23, 24, 2 5, 27, 31 
and 32   
 
16 
 Percentage of total   
 
45.71% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
Para Nos.  4, 6, 12, 13, 16, 17, 22, 29, 34 and 35       
 
10 
 Percentage of total   
 
28.57% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration –  
Para Nos.  11, 18, 20, 26, 30 and 33        
 
6 
 Percentage of total   
 
17.14% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited -      
Para Nos. 15, 19 and 28 
3 
 Percentage of total 
 
8.57 
 
 
        
 
  