 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
 
10 
(2010-11) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 8th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Protection 
and Security of Railway Property and Passengers’] 
 
 
 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
June, 2011/ Jyaistha, 1933 (Saka) 

TENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  
(2010-11) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 8th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Protection 
and Security of Railway Property and Passengers’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.08.2011  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.08.2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
     June, 2011/ Jyaistha, 1933 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SCR NO. 157 
 
 
 CONTENTS  
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….…………………………. (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….……….. (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………………… 1 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 14 
 
 accepted by the Government   ……………………………  
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 34 
 
 do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
 
 replies……………………………………………………………….  
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 44 
 
 Replies of the Government   have not been accepted  
 
 by the Committee and which require reiteration ….….  
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
 
     replies of the Government   are still awaited   ……….           52 
 
 APPENDICES  
 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on  
 
 Railways held on 10.05.2011 53 
 
II 
 
 
Analysis   of   Action   Taken   by   the Government   
on   the Recommendations/Observations     contained     
in     the 8th   Report      (15th   Lok   Sabha)   on   
‘Protection and Security of Railway Property and 
Passengers’ …………………  
 
 
 
  
 
 56 
 
 (ii)  
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2010-11) 
 
Shri T. R. Baalu     - Chairman  
MEMBERS  
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3.  Shri Kameshwar Baitha (Palamu) 
4.  Smt. Rajkumari Chauhan 
5.  Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
6 .  Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
7 .  Shri Pralhad Joshi 
8.  Shri. Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
9.  Dr. Nirmal Khatri  
10.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
11.  Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
12.  Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
13.  Shri Rudra Madhab Ray 
14.  Smt. Satabdi Roy 
15.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
16.  Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
17.  Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
18.  Chaudhary Lal Singh 
19.  Shri Uma Shankar Singh 
20.  Shri Lalji Tandon 
21.  Dr. Girija Vyas         
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri K.E. Ismail 
23.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
24.  Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
25.  Smt. Kusum Rai 
26.  Shri Ambeth Rajan 
27.  Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
28.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
29.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
30.  Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 
31. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar - Director 
  (iii)  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2010 -11), having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Tenth 
Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways on ‘Protection and Security of Railway Property and 
Passengers’. 
 
 
 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 27.08.2010 and it  contained 
24 Recommendations/Observations. The Ministry of Railways have furnished their 
Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations. 
 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 10.05.2011.  
 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; T.R. BAALU 
 June, 2011 Chairman, 
 Jyaistha, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations and observations contained in the Eighth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (2009 -10) on „Protection and Security of Railway 
Property and Passengers. ‟ The Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 
27.08.2010.  Simultaneously, the Report was also laid in the Rajya Sabha.  
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have b een received from the Government on all the 24 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These have been broadly 
categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the  
Government –  
Para Nos.  1, 3, 4, 5, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 23   
                           Total : 13 
Chapter-II 
    
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies –  
Para Nos.  6, 7, 8, 15, 17, 21, 22, 24       
            Total : 8  
Chapter-III 
    
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration –  
Para Nos.  2, 9, 10        
 Total : 3 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are 
still awaited -             
                                                                              NIL
                  Chapter-V
    
 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by Government on some 
of their recommendations/observations.   
A. Safety and Security of Railway Property and Passengers 
Recommendation   (Para No. 1) 
 
1.4 The Committee fully understands the onerous responsibilities that lie with the 
Indian Railways. It has, among other things, the mammoth task in its hand of 
providing protection and security to Railway property and passengers. This becomes 
all the more important in the context of the huge Railway network that we have in the 
country, the number of passenger traveling on the Indian Railway System daily, the 
property, including land, and other infrastructure which are in the custody of the 
Railways, etc. The safety and security of both passengers and Railway property 
should be of paramount conce rn for the Railways. While the Railways have 
undertaken various measures to protect both property and passengers, it is 
observed that much more needs to be done proactively by the Railways to 
adequately safeguard the traveling public and preserving propert y that belongs to 
the Railways. Remarkable advancements in communication technologies can be 
optimally utilized by the Railways to facilitate this process. What is important is that 
the Railways should take concrete steps, urgently, to integrate various pr ocesses so 
as to ensure that safety of passengers and property in an effective manner. The 
Committee‟s recommendations are intended to help the Indian Railways to 
discharge their duties to the nation in a more professional manner. 
1.5 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
“In the Rail Budget 2010 -11, setting up of an All India RPF Help Line has 
been sanctioned at an estimated cost of Rs. 5 Crore. With the setting up of 
this Help-Line, a unique All India Help Line number  will be provided to railway 
passengers for round the clock security assistance.”   
 
 

3 
 
1.6 The Committee are concerned to note that the advancement s in 
Communication technology , as recommended by them , do not find proper 
place in the operation s of Railways. The Committee are appalled to note that 
the Unique All India Helpline number for round -the-clock security assistance 
of the passengers as stated in the Budget 2010-11 has not yet been put in 
place. The Committee hope that the Railways would i nitiate necessary steps 
for setting up such helpline number as early as possible. 
 
B. The Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Amendment Bill, 2008 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2) 
 
1.7 While examining the Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Amendment 
Bill, 2008, the Committee had found that Section 2 of the Railway Property (Unlawful 
Possession) Act, 1966 defines „ railway property as „goods‟, „money‟, or „valuable 
security‟ or „animal‟, belonging to, or in the charge or possession of a Railway 
administration. The Committee was informed that the Railway Property (Unlawful 
Possession) Act, 1966 does not include immovable property. The Committee was of 
the opinion that there is some ambiguity in the definition of „Railway Property; in the 
Act which is req uired to be rectified. They, therefore, recommended to the 
Government to bring a comprehensive Bill before Parliament widening the definition 
of „property‟ in the Act, giving more powers to the Railway Protection Force relating 
to the security and property  of passengers as well, and devising a better 
coordination mechanism among the State Police, the Government Railway Police 
and the Railway Protection Force.  
 
1.8 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
“After due deliberations with the Ministry of Law & Justice, it has been noted 
that inclusion of land within the purview of the RP (UP) Act is not a feasible 
option as this Act deals with criminal offences and the Inquiry officer 
exercises the same powers and is subject to the same provisions as the 

4 
 
officer in charge of a police station may exercise and is subject to under the 
Code of Criminal Procedure while investigating a Cognizable case.  
The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act deal s 
with the unauthorized occupants of all Central Government Ministries lands. 
The Estate Officer, nominated under the provisions of Section 3 of this Act, is 
a Senior Railway Officer who is vested with all the powers of ordering 
eviction, issuing notice, d emolition, sealing unauthorized construction etc. 
provided by the Act including the powers vested in a Civil Court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure for matters specified in Section 8 of the Act.  
Therefore, the existing system is a better option in which clear powers 
are vested in the Estate officer, who is a senior level serving Railway officer, 
to deal with illegal occupation of Railway land.”  
         
1.9  The Committee do not agree with the reply of the Ministry that inclusion 
of land within the purvi ew of the RP (UP) Act is not a feasible option. The 
Committee reiterate their recommendation of widening the definition of 
property in the Act, giving more powers to the Railway Protection Force 
relating to the security and property of passengers as well a nd devising a 
better coordination mechanism among the State Police, the Government 
Railway Police and the Railway Protection Force.    
 
C. Installation of Integrated Security System and frisking of passengers. 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
1.10 The Railway network and property are often threatened by anti -social and 
anti-national elements, terrorists, etc. The Committee found that 195 stations in the 
Indian Railway network have been identified as sensitive stations. An integrated 
security system has been approved and included in the „Works Programme 2009-10‟ 
at an estimated cost of Rs. 344.31 crore. While conducting on -the-spot study tours 

5 
 
of some of these stations, the Committee was dismayed to find that the said 
integrated security system has no t been effectively put in place. Except for and odd 
baggage scanner, door frame metal detectors and the presence of a handful of RPF 
personnel in the stations, the Committee did not find any noticeable change in the 
way the security system functions. Most of the equipment like hand held metal 
detectors, door frame metal detectors (DFMD) And x -Ray baggage scanners were 
not in operation or where they were functioning, the personnel manning the 
scanners were not equipped to properly scan the luggage. In some p laces, the 
DFMD was not at all functioning. The Committee did not find a single hand held 
metal detector in most of the stations they visited; even at those stations where they 
were in use, the same was operated in a casual manner, without any 
professionalism warranted for a serious operation. The same was noted in the case 
of door frame metal detectors as well. In most of the stations, the metal detectors 
were installed in the middle of the door, thus letting the passengers enter the station 
from the sides , without going through the door frame metal detectors. No RPF 
personnel was seen to be manning the metal detectors. Wherever RPF personnel 
were operating the DFMD, they too failed to stop any passenger and frisk him/her so 
as to find whether he/she was ca rrying any contraband or fire arms or lethal 
weapons which could threaten the safety of passengers and Railway property. 
However, the Committee was happy to note that the use of closed circuit television 
(CCTV) was being handled in a professional manner, thereby building up confidence 
in the minds of the traveling public. 
 
1.11 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
“An integrated security system is being installed to strengthen surveillance 
mechanism over 202 sensitive and vulnerable stations of the Indian Railways 
at an estimated cost of Rs. 353 crore. The system consists of following four 
broad areas- 
(i) IP based CCTV surveillance system 
(ii) Access control 
(iii) Personal and baggage screening system 

6 
 
(iv) Bomb Detection and Disposal System 
 
Instructions have been issued to the zonal railways to get the system 
installed expeditiously. Tendering process has been initiated in all the zonal 
railways. After completion of tender formalities, the system installation will 
commence.  
Training will  be an integral part of the system. Zonal Railways have 
been advised to ensure that Service provider imparts adequate training to the 
RPF personnel.   
(b)    At present Baggage scanners are available at few stations. After the 
installation of the Integrate d Security System, the scanners will become 
available at nominated stations.  Guidelines have already been issued to 
zonal railways for provision of adequate training to the RPF personnel 
handling such scanners and pasting of stickers on the luggage alread y 
scanned through such baggage scanners.   
(c)  Recently 5134 additional RPF posts have been created. Once 
recruitment is done, zonal railways will be in a position to provide more staff 
for manning the security related equipment.  
(d)  Induction of modern  security related equipment is under way.  In the 
year 2008 -09, Special allocation of Rs. 67.09 crore was made for 
procurement of security related equipment identified by a Committee set up 
for the purpose.  Adequate numbers of DFMDs and HHMDs will be avai lable 
with the zonal railways, once procurement of these equipment is completed.  
Considering the volume of passenger traffic handled at different Railway 
stations, it would not be humanly possible to frisk each and every passenger.  
Basic purpose of insta lling DFMDs, HHMDs and X -ray baggage scanners is 
to select passengers by profiling for physical frisking and checking of their 
luggage   The frequency of such checks are increased based on inputs 
received from Central/State Intelligence Agencies.” 
 

7 
 
1.12 The Committee are dismayed to note slow pace of progress in the 
installation of the integrated security system. Keeping in view the recent 
terrorist attacks and the vulnerability of passengers, Railways need to 
expedite the procurement of DFMDs and HHMDs and the installation of the 
integrated security system without putting the life of the travelling public  at 
risk. The Committee are further dismayed at the reply of the Railways that 
considering the volume of passenger traffic handled at different stations , it 
would not be humanly possible to frisk each and every passenger. The 
Railways should examine expeditiously how best appropriate mechanism can 
be put in place to facilitate the process of frisking passengers so that their 
safety and security can be ensured.   
 
 
 D. Anti collision Device 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
1.13 The Committee was deeply concerned at the regularity with which rail 
accident were happening, leading to loss of many innocent lives, besides loss of 
invaluable property. The Committee particularly noted with distress that there were 
several incidents of collisions of trains in the recent past. The Committee are fully 
aware of the importance of the need to install Anti Collision Device (ACD) in train so 
as to prevent such incidents in th e future. In this context, the Committee felt that the 
pace of installing the ACD is still unsatisfactory for various reasons. The Committee, 
while appreciating the efforts of the Konkan Railway in installing ACDs, direct that 
the Railway Board should come out with a concrete strategy within six months in this 
regard after examining all issues involved and studying the best practices available. 
In the interim, the Committees direct the Railway Board to apprise the Committee, 
every two months, of the progress made in this regard without fail. 
 

8 
 
1.14 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
 “Cause-Wise Failure Analysis 
(i) The Failure of other than Railway staff constitutes to be the major 
cause of accidents. In the current year the number of cases of sabotage has 
increased as compared to last year.  
 
(ii) There has been a continuous reduction in number of accidents 
attributed to failure of Railway Staff. There has been reduction in failure of 
equipment being the cause of accidents as seen in the table below. 
Causes of 
Accident 
2001-
2002 
2002-
2003 
2003-
2004 
2004-
2005 
2005-
2006 
2006-
2007 
2007-
2008 
2008-
2009* 
2009-
2010* 
             April  -                        
July 
2009* 
April  -                      
July 
2010* 
Failure of 
Railway staff 249 186 161 119 120 85 87 76 68  20 16 
Failure of 
other than 
Railway staff 
103 108 107 78 86 84 81 75 76  18 17 
Failure of 
equipment   24 18 18 14 8 9 9   1  1   
Sabotage 14 10 18 4 5 8 7 13 11  4 5 
Combination 
of factors   2 2 1   1 0 4 1  1   
Incidental 20 15 17 16 11 7 8 5 3  2   
Could not be 
established 
conclusively 
5 2 2 2 3 1 2 4 2  2   
Under 
Investigation        1          4 
Grand Total 415 351 325 234 234 195 194 177 162  48 42 
             
(b) The Anti Collision Device (ACD) developed by Konkan Railway 
Corporation Limited (KRCL) has been in service trial as pilot project on 
Northeast Frontier Railway (NFR) since July/2006. Based on experience on 
NFR, specifications of ACD have had to be revised to improve efficacy, 
reliability and availability of ACD. The improved version of ACD to revised 
specifications is to be put in service trials on three zones viz -Southern, South 

9 
 
Central & South Western Railways, covering 1600 Route kilometers that 
include electrified multiple line & automatic signaling sections. The proving of 
the equipment for electrified multiple line automatic signaling section is 
expected to be completed by October 2010 in a nominated section of 
Southern Railway.  
 
Further proliferation of ACD on Indian Railway will be planned, based 
on performance evaluation of equipment with improved specifications on 
Southern,  South Central & South Western Railways.”  
    
1.15 Considering the number of accidents and consequent loss of life and 
property, the i nstallation of Anti Collision D evice acquires paramount 
importance. The Railways should come out with a comprehensive plan in this 
regard and complete the process in a time-bound manner. Further, as stated 
by the Railways in their reply, most of the accidents in the Indian Railways are 
attributed to the failure of the Railway Staff. This clearly warrants the need for 
training and refresher courses for its staff. The Committee stress that training 
should be a continuous proces s and the same may be imparted to staff 
manning sensitive/important areas.   The Committee further reiterated that the 
recruitment of the Safety Category Staff should be done expeditiously.  
 
E. Unmanned Railway Crossings 
 
Recommendation (Para No.10) 
 
1.16 Unmanned level crossings are another problem area for the Indian Railways, 
and one of the major causes of accidents. In spite of various measures taken by the 
Indian Railways, level crossing accidents have continued to occur, that too 
frequently. The Comm ittee, during their interaction with the Central railway, found 
that on a trial basis, the Central Railway authorities have painted the unmanned 

10 
 
railway crossing in certain areas with bright colours so that the person trying to cross 
the unmanned crossing is able to judge the speed of the incoming train. This 
initiative of the Central Railway has borne results and led to a drastic cut-down of the 
accident rate in the heavily populated areas. The Committee, while appreciating the 
initiative of the Central Ra ilway, recommend to the Indian Railways to take similar 
steps in other zones also so that accidents at unmanned crossing may be checked, 
without any exorbitant expenditure. The Committee further direct that efforts should 
be made by the Railway Board to co nvert all unmanned crossings into manned level 
crossings in a time bound manner. RUBs/ROBs should be constructed at unmanned 
level crossings expeditiously, more so, in rural areas, to prevent accidents. If need 
be, more budgetary allocation should be made for these purpose every year. 
1.17 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:-   
“The innovative step taken by Central Railway is appreciable but quantitative 
results regarding its success are not yet available. As such, pr oliferation of 
the given scheme for all over Indian Railways is not considered necessary at 
this stage.  
      The second part of recommendation is regarding elimination of 
unmanned level crossings in Indian Railways. In this regard, it is stated that 
Indian Railways have decided to eliminate all unmanned level crossings (LCs) 
in next five years as part of Indian Railway Vision 2020. Multi -pronged 
strategies have been adopted to achieve this end. While some of the LCs 
would be closed by merging them with th e nearby LC by constructing 
connecting roads, other LCs would be provided with Road under bridge 
(RUB) or Limited Hieight subway (LHS) and also by manning of qualifying 
unmanned LCs.  
    The position, as it obtains over Indian Railways with respect to 
various steps being undertaken for eliminating the unmanned level crossings, 
has been indicated in the ensuing table.  
 
 

11 
 
Action Plan for elimination of unmanned level Crossing 
gates in five years (2010-15)  
Nos. of level 
crossings to 
be eliminated 
Construction of Normal Height Subway  35 
Construction of Limited Height Subway 1526 
Construction of Road Over Bridge  210 
Construction of diversion road to another level crossings, 
ROB, RUB etc.  
986 
Closure of one unmanned LC by manning nearby 
unmanned level crossings  
412 
Closure of unmanned level crossings having low Train 
Vehicle Units  
1860 
Closure by manning of unmanned level crossing  6792 
Total nos. of LCs planned for elimination in five years 
above by scheme.  
11821 
 
* Note: Unmanned level crossing of narrow gauge, rail bus routes, meter 
gauge, cattle and canal crossings have not been planned due to low train 
vehicle units and low speed of trains.  
Budgetary allocation of Rs. 1700 crores has been made during the year 2010-
11 and in future also required amount shall be allocated so as to ensure that 
road safety works i.e., manning and construction of ROB/RUB does not suffer 
for want of fund.” 
 
 
1.18 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Railways that the 
painting of the unmanned railway crossing in certain areas with bright colours 
as is done by the Central Railway is not considered necessary at this stage. 
The Committee reiterate its recommendation of taking similar steps by the 
other Zones in order to cu t down the rate of accidents.  As regard s the 
elimination of unmanned level crossings in the next five years as a part of the 
Indian Railway Vision 2020, the Committee would like to be apprised of the 
status every year in this regard.  However, the Railways should give the 
utmost priority in providing for the manning of all the unmanned Railway 
crossings in a time-bound manner.   
 

12 
 
 
F. Mock Drills and display boards 
 
Recommendation (Para No.11) 
 
1.19 The Committee was informed that various railway zones conduct mock drills 
on regular intervals to check the preparedness of their staff and officials, ancillary 
organizations like hospital authorities, fire brigade, etc. While appreciating the 
initiative of the Indian Railways, the Committee are of the view t hat during such 
mock drills, the Railways should invariably involve the general public and sensitize 
them as well, so that they become aware as to how to conduct themselves in any 
untoward situation. Besides, the local administration, NGOs, civil society 
organization etc. should be fully involved in the mock drills so that ordinary citizens 
get fully aware of the importance of safe practices during crisis situations. Further, a 
display board should be prominently placed in every railway station on which all  
important telephone numbers should be available in case of any emergency, 
including that of senior Railway and local administration, hospitals in the nearby 
vicinity of the railway station, etc. The said hospitals should also be instructed to be 
fully equipped to meet any eventuality. 
 
1.20 In their action taken reply the Ministry of Railways has stated as under:- 
“Instructions already exists for provision of boards displaying important 
telephone numbers including that of Senior Railway and Local Administr ative 
Officials, Hospitals in the nearby vicinity of Railway Station, etc. However, the 
same have been reiterated to the Zonal Railways to ensure display of such 
boards at a prominent location with important telephone numbers, information 
etc”. 
 
1.21   The Committee find that the instruction already exist s for provision of 
boards displaying important telephone numbers , including that of senior 
Railway and local administrative officials and Hospitals in the vicinity of the 
Railway Station. They feel that mere issuance of the direction to the Zonal 

13 
 
Railways will not fetch the desired results. They, the refore, desire that the 
details of ground level implementation by each Zonal Railway of the direction 
issued by the Ministry be placed before them at the earliest. 
 
G. Utilization of Railway assets and visit of senior members of the Railway 
Board to the related areas. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.23) 
 
1.22    While visiting the Diesel Loco Shed and Central Workshop at Tiruchirappalli , 
the Committee noted with concern that there was no full utilization of the assets of 
the Workshop. It was felt that senior members of the Railway Board do not visit the 
premises regularly. The Committee, therefore, direct the Railway Board to have a 
far-sighted policy not only to enhance the capacity of the Workshop but also to fully 
utilize the assets. Moreover, regular visits should be made by senior members of the 
Railway Board which would keep the authorities at the Loco Shed Workshop alert to 
their d uties and responsibilities. The Committee desire that the Railway Board 
should apprise the Committee periodically of such visits conducted by senior officers 
of the Railway Board and follow-up action taken in respect of the visits/findings. 
1.23 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
“Visits by Members of Railway Board are made to the workshop. Member 
Mechanical had last visited GOC diesel shed and workshop on 22.10.2009.” 
 
1.24  In their reply , the Railways have informed that the Member, 
Mechanical, had last visited the GOC diesel shed and workshop on 22.10.2009. 
The Committee desire that such visits should be more frequent and regular so 
as to keep the authorities on their toes and to get first  hand experience / 
information of the problems faced at the workshops/production units , 
including problems faced by the staff.  

14 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para. No. 1) 
 
The Committee fully understands the onerous responsibilities that lie with the 
Indian Railways. It has, among other things, the mammoth task in its hand of 
providing protection and security to Railway property and passengers. This becomes 
all the more important in the context of the huge Railway network that we have in the 
country, the number of passenger traveling on the Indian Railway System daily, the 
property, including land, and other infrastructure which are in the custody of the 
Railways, etc. The safety  and security of both passengers and Railway property 
should be of paramount concern for the Railways. While the Railways have 
undertaken various measures to protect both property and passengers, it is 
observed that much more needs to be done proactively b y the Railways to 
adequately safeguard the traveling public and preserving property that belongs to 
the Railways. Remarkable advancements in communication technologies can be 
optimally utilized by the Railways to facilitate this process. What is important is that 
the Railways should take concrete steps, urgently, to integrate various processes so 
as to ensure that safety of passengers and property in an effective manner. The 
Committee‟s recommendations are intended to help the Indian Railways to 
discharge their duties to the nation in a more professional manner. 
Reply of the Government 
At present security over Indian Railways is taken care of by following three agencies: 
(1) District Police: 
(i)     Security of tracks and bridges over Indian Railways 
(ii)     Law and order problems beyond outer signals of railway stations. 
(2)      Government Railway Police (GRP): Maintained by the respective State 
Governments as a wing of the State Police exclusively for prevention and detection 
of crime and maintenance of law a nd order in station premises/circulating areas and 

15 
 
trains. 50% of the cost of GRPs is borne by the Railways and the balance is paid by 
the State Government concerned.  
 
(3)       Railway Protection Force (RPF): RPF is an Armed Force under Ministry of 
Railways which primarily deals with the protection of railway property. Since the year 
2003, security of passengers and passenger area has also been entrusted to RPF.  
  
On the part of Railways, security has been ide ntified as one of the priority areas for 
improvement and upgradation . With a view to utilize advancements in 
communication technologies optimally, Railways have initiated installation of an 
Integrated Security System at an estimated cost of Rs. 353 Cr over  202 vulnerable 
stations of the country. Above System consists of Internet Protocol (IP) based 
CCTV, Access Control, Personal & Baggage Screening System and Bomb Detection 
& Disposal. System integration is an important aspect of the above scheme which 
will enhance round the clock surveillance in station premises and circulating area. 
 In the Rail Budget 2010-11, setting up of an All India RPF Help Line has been 
sanctioned at an estimated cost of Rs. 5 Crore. With the setting up of this Help -Line, 
a unique All India Help Line number will be provided to railway passengers for round 
the clock security assistance.  Another important initiative is n etworking of Security 
Control Rooms at Divisions, Zones and Railway Board and RPF Posts at an 
estimated cost of Rs.4.41 Crore. It will ensure faster dissemination of data/feedback/ 
complaints leading  to improved response to passengers and ensure better crime 
control. 
 All out efforts are being made in coordination/liaison with State 
Police/GRP/Civil Authorities and Central Intelligence Agencies to provide adequate 
security in trains/station premises. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee please see recommendation para no. 1.6 of 
Chapter I) 
 

16 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3) 
 
      The Railway network and property are often threatened by anti -social and 
anti-national elements, terrorists, etc. The Committee found that 195 stations in the 
Indian Railway network have been identified as sensitive stations. An integrated 
security system has been approved and included in the „Works Programme 2009-10‟ 
at an estimated cost of Rs. 344.31 crore. While conducting on -the-spot study tours 
of some of these stations, the Committee was dismayed to find that the said 
integrated security system h as not been effectively put in place. Except for and odd 
baggage scanner, door frame metal detectors and the presence of a handful of RPF 
personnel in the stations, the Committee did not find any noticeable change in the 
way the security system functions. Most of the equipment like hand held metal 
detectors, door frame metal detectors (DFMD) And x -Ray baggage scanners were 
not in operation or where they were functioning, the personnel manning the 
scanners were not equipped to properly scan the luggage. In s ome places, the 
DFMD was not at all functioning. The Committee did not find a single hand held 
metal detector in most of the stations they visited; even at those stations where they 
were in use, the same was operated in a casual manner, without any 
professionalism warranted for a serious operation. The same was noted in the case 
of door frame metal detectors as well. In most of the stations, the metal detectors 
were installed in the middle of the door, thus letting the passengers enter the station 
from the sides, without going through the door frame metal detectors. No RPF 
personnel was seen to be manning the metal detectors. Wherever RPF personnel 
were operating the DFMD, they too failed to stop any passenger and frisk him/her so 
as to find whether he/she w as carrying any contraband or fire arms or lethal 
weapons which could threaten the safety of passengers and Railway property. 
However, the Committee was happy to note that the use of closed circuit television 
(CCTV) was being handled in a professional manner, thereby building up confidence 
in the minds of the traveling public.  
 
 

17 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4) 
 
 The Committee noted that X -Ray baggage machines were being installed by 
the Indian Railways with much publicity. In most of the cases, baggage scanners 
have been simply indented and the Committee was informed that it would take some 
time to install the sam e. The Committee recommends that a proper time frame 
should be laid for installation of scanners. The Committee also noted that baggage 
scanners failed to serve the purpose even where they were in operation. Baggages 
were scanned in a non -serious manner an d the personnel manning the scanner 
were unable to decipher from the monitor as to whether any weaponry or explosive 
was being smuggled into the Railway Station premises. In one particular station, the 
Committee directed an RPF personnel to place his pisto l in a baggage and make it 
pass through the baggage scanner. The RPF personnel who was monitoring the 
scanner failed to notice the handgun. The Committee also found that there was no 
provision for putting any sticker in the scanned luggage to enable the RPF personnel 
to identify such scanned luggage.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.5) 
 
         The Committee, therefore, recommends that the RPF personnel who 
man such sensitive equipment should be urgently given intensive training. They 
should be well-versed in handling the equipment, patiently and proficiently. The staff 
should not only be vigilant but also have a professional approach considering the 
fact that the safety and security of passengers and Railway property are involved. All 
scanned luggage should be p roperly secured with fluorescent sticker which can be 
seen from a distance to indicate that a particular piece of luggage has already been 
scanned/cleared. Baggages which have not been scanned/cleared should be re -
routed through the scanner. The Railway St ation authorities should ensure that 
baggage scanners are spread out in two to three entry points so that the passengers 
entering the station are not put to any inconvenience which can be caused if there is 
only one entry point. To safeguard the safety of railway property and passengers, 

18 
 
the Railway authorities must ensure that all items of luggage entering the Railway 
platforms are properly scanned.  
Reply of the Government (Para 3, 4 & 5) 
(a)       An integrated security system is being installed to strengthen surveillance 
mechanism over 202 sensitive and vulnerable stations of the Indian Railways at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 353 crore. The system consists of following four broad areas- 
(i) IP based CCTV surveillance system 
(ii) Access control 
(iii) Personal and baggage screening system 
(iv) Bomb Detection and Disposal System 
 
     Instructions have been issued to the zonal railways to get the system 
installed expeditiously. Tendering process has been initiated in all the zonal 
railways. After completion of tender formalities, the system installation will 
commence.  
       Training will be an integral part of the system. Zonal Railways have been 
advised to ensure that Service provider imparts adequate training to the RPF 
personnel.   
(b)    At present Baggage scanners are available at few stations. After the installation 
of the Integrated Security System, the scanners will become available at nominated 
stations.  Guidelines have already been issued to zonal railways for provision of 
adequate training to the RPF personnel handling such scanners and pasting of 
stickers on the luggage already scanned through such baggage scanners.   
(c)          Recently 5134 additional RPF posts have been created. Once 
recruitment is done, zonal railways will be in a position to provide more staff for 
manning the security related equipment.  
(d)        Induction of modern security related equipment is under way.  In the year 
2008-09, Special allocation of Rs. 67.09 crore was made for procurement of security 
related equipment identified by a Committee set up for the purpose.  Adequate 
numbers of DFMDs and H HMDs will be available with the zonal railways, once 

19 
 
procurement of these equipment is completed.  Considering the volume of 
passenger traffic handled at different Railway stations, it would not be humanly 
possible to frisk each and every passenger.  Basic  purpose of installing DFMDs, 
HHMDs and X -ray baggage scanners is to select passengers by profiling for 
physical frisking and checking of their luggage   The frequency of such checks are 
increased based on inputs received from Central/State Intelligence Agencies.   
                         [Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee please see recommendation para no. 1. 12 of 
Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.11) 
 
       The Committee was informed that various railway zones conduct mock 
drills on regular intervals to check the preparedness of their staff and officials, 
ancillary organizations like hospital authorities, fire brigade, etc. While appreciating 
the initiative of the Indian Railways, the Committee are of the view that during such 
mock drills, the Railways should invariably involve the general public and sensitize 
them as well, so that they become aware as to how to conduct themselves in any 
untoward situati on. Besides, the local administration, NGOs, civil society 
organization etc. should be fully involved in the mock drills so that ordinary citizens 
get fully aware of the importance of safe practices during crisis situations. Further, a 
display board should  be prominently placed in every railway station on which all 
important telephone numbers should be available in case of any emergency, 
including that of senior Railway and local administration, hospitals in the nearby 
vicinity of the railway station, etc. The said hospitals should also be instructed to be 
fully equipped to meet any eventuality.  
 
 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
 There are two types of drills. Once in two months a drill is conducted where 
ARMV/ART condition and alertness and skills of breakdown st aff and other officials 
nominated for attending accidents is tested. Here Railway Officials and Local 
administration is involved. Besides, frequent Mock drills (last year 180) are 
organized by NDMA where Railway officials, local administration, NGOs, Civil  
society organization etc. also take part. In a recent meeting with NDMA and NDRF 
officials on 26.7.10 it was decided that NDMA will also conduct mock drills in 
Railway premises also where all stakeholders will be involved.  
       As far as security prepa redness is concerned, Mock Drills are being 
conducted at regular intervals both at zonal and divisional levels by the Security 
Departments.  
       Instructions already exists for provision of boards displaying important 
telephone numbers including that of  Senior Railway and Local Administrative 
Officials, Hospitals in the nearby vicinity of Railway Station, etc. However, the same 
have been reiterated to the Zonal Railways to ensure display of such boards at a 
prominent location with important telephone numbers, information etc.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee please see recommendation para no. 1.21 of 
Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (para No.12) 
 
 As regards positioning of Accident Relief Medical Vans and Accident Relief 
Trains (ARME & ART), the Committee was concerned at the slow response of the 
vans in times of accidents/emergencies. The Committee found that it takes 
approximately 3 to 4 hours for  the vans to reach the site of the accident. The 
Railways reply more on local assistances thereby robbing the victims of immediate 
succor during the „golden hour‟. The Committee recommend that ways and means 

21 
 
should be found to ensure that the Relief Vans a re at site within 2 hours. If need be, 
more vans with all requisite medical facilities should be spread over various 
locations and dedicated teams of workers should be available 24 hours, 365 days, 
ready to be at the place of an accident within short notic e. Simultaneously, the 
Railways should be able to mobilize relief, rescue and medical assistance locally in 
an expeditious manner pending arrival of ARMEs and ARTs. As mentioned earlier in 
the Report, display panels should prominently enumerate disaster ma nagement 
instructions/guidelines at every station. In this context, the Committee recommend 
that the Committee should be apprised of the resources available, Zone -wise, for 
disaster management. The Committee further recommend that the Indian Railways 
“Train At A Glance” which gives out the times table should also carry a section 
incorporating disaster management guidelines as applicable to the Railways. 
Needless to emphasize, disaster management should be given top priority in the 
Railway system so that all crisis situations can be properly tackled.  
Reply of the Government 
           ARTs and ARMVs are placed at the nominated stations, keeping in mind, 
availability of infrastructure availability of skilled man power for manning, etc. with 
the end objective to reach the accident site within minimum time. Therefore, it may 
practically not be possible to keep ARTs and ARMVs at very short distances. 
However, with the promulgation of a Disaster Management Act 2005 it has become 
a duty of the resource owners to as sist the affected party at the time of crisis. All 
NDMA guidelines have been included in the Divisional/HQ/Indian Railway DM plans 
and copy of DM Plans have been given to all stake holders. So in Golden Hour it is 
planned that local administration, local h ospitals, public and local resources will be 
utilized to provide relief in minimum time. Disaster management plans and accident 
manuals are already available on Zonal Railways website. However, a list of 
ART/ARMV is being provided as per Annexure-A.  
       The Committee‟s suggestion for incorporating a section of disaster 
Management guidelines as applicable to the Railways in Indian Railways time table 
“Train at a Glance” has been noted.  

22 
 
          The „golden hour‟ is envisaged in the HLC Report on Disast er 
Management is elaborated a “The concept of golden hours is an ideal one which can 
not be achieved in any disaster/accident unless it occurs in the vicinity of the railway 
disaster management infrastructure/city/civil/armed forces establishment with 
adequate medical infrastructure”. The committee has also sated that “To ensure that 
IR‟s organized disaster management system is designed that the victims are 
retrieved within the golden hour, it would require ARMVs/ARTs to be based at each 
and every station. However, the Committee believes that increasing number of 
ARMVs/ARTs indiscriminately to reduce the beat or to increase number of relief and 
rescue equipment without any maintenance support would not achieve the objective 
further. ARMVs not properly suppor t by medical/para medical staff who cannot be 
positioned throughout the length of railway track will be useless for rescue and relief 
operations”.  
          In accordance with above, the HLC had emphasized on the local 
support for the golden hour. In this direction all the Divisions/units have gathered the 
details of local resources available and have also made formal/informal 
arrangements with them to get the support of the victims for immediate succor 
during the golden hour. It is also submitted that wit h the economic boom in the 
country, medical infrastructure even in small towns has become adequate in the 
form of small nursing homes, ambulances etc. Therefore, support of local resources 
is the key during the golden hour and system has been set up by Saf ety 
Organization of Railway, to harness its full potential.  
        Nonetheless, Railways are working towards speeding up the arrival of its 
ARTs/ARMVs to the site of accident by way of making these trains self propelled, 
increasing their speed and consta ntly reviewing their locations and numbers. 
Further, arrangements of air support have also been put in place in coordination with 
State Governments/Arms. But even the air support has a minimum lead time to 
reach the site coupled with the shortage of air fields and landing spaces.  
  

23 
 


24 
 
 


25 
 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 


26 
 
Recommendation No.13 
 
       The Committee recommend that more fire arm simulators should be 
provided to train the officers for accuracy. At present only 9 such simulators are 
available to the RPF. The Committee further recommend that at least 4 simulators in 
each of the 12 zona l RPF training centers and the Jagjivan Ram RPF Academy, 
Lucknow, should be immediately provided.  
Reply of the Government 
  
Concerned zonal railways have been advised to initiate proposal for acquisition of 
fire arms simulators at RPF training centers & JR RPF Academy, Lucknow. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
The Committee would also like to recommend to the Indian Railways to study the 
feasibility of launching their own „intelligence wing‟ as part of the RPF. With the 
increasing number of incidence of sabotage, the home grown intelligence wing may 
be immense help to the Indian Railways to address specific issues.  
Reply of the Government 
Intelligence Branch comprising 2 Wings namely (i) Crime Intelligence and (ii) 
Special Intelligence came into existence in RPF after RPF Rules 1959 were notified 
in the Gazette in September 1959. Main function of the Special Intelligence Branch 
was to collect timely information of political / subversive nature, activities of labour 
unions, their meetings, processions and demonstrations on the Railways. 
 
After notification of RPF Rules, 1987, some modification were made and an 
independent wing called Special Wing was created, which functions at both 
divisional and zonal level. This wing collects information about the activities of Trade 

27 
 
Unions, besides gathering intelligence affect ing the security and functioning of 
Railways. 
However, in view of recent spurt in terrorist / maoist activities over Railways, 
revamping of Intelligence Wing is under process.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.16) 
 
 The Committee have found to their dismay that the Railways do not have their 
own fire fighting brigade. The Committee were informed that the local fire fighting 
brigade authorities provide necessary help in case of any acciden t. The Committee 
was of the opinion that in the eventuality of any fire hazard at any Railway station, it 
will take some time for the local fire brigade to reach the station, cutting through 
traffic jams which are very common near the entrance of railway s tations, thereby 
losing much precious time. If the Railways have their own fire brigade stationed 
within the precincts of the railway station, they will be able to reach immediately to 
take appropriate action. As such, the Committee feel that it may be use ful for 
Railway authorities to have their own fire brigade to meet any eventuality.  
 
Reply of the Government 
      Railways fire fighting units were available with RPF department in the Divisional 
Headquarters as also at some major stations till the year 1999. The Railways had to 
develop and have such units earlier as a number of Districts in some of the States 
did not have such units or had a very primitive fire fighting equipment.  
       The Railways network is spread far and wide. Having a fire fighting 
equipment at only a few locations cannot satisfy the requirement of Railway 
infrastructure across the country. The fire fighting equipment can be required, as it is 
often brought into use, to tackle POL and other dangerous Goods transported by 

28 
 
Railway in wagons. These may catch fire en-route at inhabited areas from where the 
Railways have to make available the f ire fighting equipment from the nearest 
location which invariably will be the civil fire fighting equipment.  
       Over the years the State Governments had progressed and have 
modernized their fire fighting equipment as available in almost all the major Districts, 
or at the major towns/cities. Moreover, the Railways fire Brigade, if provided, will be 
located far away from the site in most cases as compared to the Civil Districts which 
are closer to each other as compared to Divisions of the Railways.  
   Hence there appears no need to duplicate the infrastructure on the Indian 
Railways which is already available in the Civil side with the State Governments in 
view of the position explained above.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.18) 
 
      The Committee are of the opinion that not enough is being done for senior 
citizens, women passengers, differently abled passengers and sick passengers. The 
Committee noted that the Bangalore Railway Station provides battery operated 
trolley for senior citizens. The Committee recommend that all the major stations in 
the metropolitan cities should invariably have 4 battery operated trolley each to ferry 
senior citizens as well as sick and differently abled pass engers. For sick 
passengers, efforts should be made to provide special diet for them as is being done 
by the Konkan Railways. Women passenger coaches should have RPF personnel 
manning the same. As far as the differently abled passengers are concerned, the 
Railways should study the facilities provided to them in developed countries and 
adapt them to make their journey more comfortable. Accessibility infrastructure 
should be developed for their benefit which should enable access not merely to the 
station/platform but also to the train. If there are stairs in a station, lifts should be 
available so as to facilitate easy movement with wheelchairs. The Railways should 

29 
 
consider expeditiously innovatively designed coached for the benefit of differently 
abled passen gers which may be introduced starting with the major stations in the 
metropolitan cities.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways have so far manufactured about 2100 specially designed 
non-ACSLRD/SRD coaches having a compartment and toilet adapted to the needs 
of the wheel chair borne/disabled persons. The current holding of such coaches is 
sufficient to have at least  one such coach in almost all Mail/Express trains and also 
in select passenger train. Fully air conditioned Garib Rath trains have been provided 
with AC disabled friendly compartment & toilet in the power cars. Facilities for 
physical disabled (including s enior citizen) persons are planned to be provided in 
two Phases viz. Short Term and Long Term Facilities.  
      Short Term Facilities include, provision of standard ramp, earmarking at 
least one parking lot, provision of non -slippery walkway from parking lot to building, 
provision of signages of appropriate visibility, provision of at least one drinking water 
tap suitable for use by a disabled person, provision of at least one toilet on the 
ground floor and “May I Help You” Booth. In the first instance sho rt term facilities are 
considered to be provided at “A -1 and “A” category stations and are being extended 
to B category stations. Works in this regard are planned  
to be completed by March, 2011. Long Term Facilities include provision of facilities 
for int er platform transfer and engraving of edges of platforms. After provision of 
short term facilities at these stations, long term facilities are planned to be taken up 
progressively beginning at A-1 and A category stations.  
       Instructions already exist  with the Zonal Railways to provide Battery 
Operated Vehicles for carrying differently abled and old age passengers. This facility 
is being provided through Commercial Publicity route by the private parties with no 
charge to be levied either from the passe ngers or from the railways. However, Zonal 
Railways have been advised to examine the feasibility for providing at least 4 such 

30 
 
vehicles at all major stations in the metropolitan cities and initiate further necessary 
action as found feasible.  
The suggestio n of the Committee for special diet for sick passengers is noted. 
Presently, diabetic menu is being made available to the passenger on HWH -
Rajdhani and HWH-Duranto train. Zonal Railway have been advised to take suitable 
action to include the special diet i n the a -la-carte items as mentioned in the diet 
menu. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.19) 
 
      For the safety of passengers, and to check incidence of drug -laced food 
related cases, the Railway authorities should be more vigilant and make extra efforts 
to educate the passengers. More awareness campaigns should be launched through 
various mediums, to apprise the passengers of the perils of accepting eatables from 
strangers.  
Reply of the Government 
 
   Various measures are being taken by RPF to create awareness amongst the 
passengers about the menace of „Drugging‟ and to tackle it in running trains and 
Railway stations:- 
1. RPF personnel are distributing pamphlets, making announcement through 
loud hailers and P.A. System at all important Railway stations and inside the 
coaches of the affected trains. 
2.  Projection of slides in cinema halls and announcement in FM Radio 
Channels have also been started in some Zonal Railways. 
3.  Army H.Qrs. have also been requested to educate their personnel against 
the menace. 

31 
 
4.   „Nukkad Nataks‟ are being staged by RPF personnel at affected stations, 
circulating area of stations and other places to create awareness amongst 
passengers and general public. 
5.          Teams of RPF have been formed at Zonal level in Railways to conduct 
surprise checks to apprehend the drug peddlers in trains and stations. 
6.          Photographs of drug offenders have been displayed in the Rouges 
Gallery of RPF Posts and GRP Thanas  at important stations to facilitate public to 
identify the culprits. 
 [Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.20) 
 After having a series of discussions with the Members of the Railway Board, 
visits t o various Zonal Railways and interacting with the respective General 
Managers, the Committee felt that the Railways require immediate decentralization 
of power to enable the Railways to perform more efficiently and effectively. As per 
the present scheme of  things, a majority of the decisions are taken at the Railway 
Board level. More power is required to be entrusted to the General Managers at the 
zonal level to enable them to execute jobs in a time -bound manner. It will also give 
them the much required flexibility in discharging their duties. As the matter stands at 
present, it appears that the General Managers have to look up to the Railway Board 
housed in New Delhi for approval of even routine transfer/postings. The Committee 
observed that several important decisions get tangled in red-tapism, leading to delay 
in taking expeditious decisions for the smooth working of projects. Decentralization, 
which is the order of the day in most of the public sector undertakings, needs to be 
introduced in the working of  the Indian Railways in a substantial way. As such, the 
Railway Board needs to have a re-look at the present state of affairs.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
 

32 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Administrative reforms is an ongoing process and necessary steps have been 
initiated by railways towards this direction.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.23) 
 While visiting the Diesel Loco Sh ed and Central Workshop at Tiruchirappalli, 
the Committee noted with concern that there was no full utilization of the assets of 
the Workshop. It was felt that senior members of the Railway Board do not visit the 
premises regularly. The Committee, therefor e, direct the Railway Board to have a 
far-sighted policy not only to enhance the capacity of the Workshop but also to fully 
utilize the assets. Moreover, regular visits should be made by senior members of the 
Railway Board which would keep the authorities at the Loco Shed Workshop alert to 
their duties and responsibilities. The Committee desire that the Railway Board 
should apprise the Committee periodically of such visits conducted by senior officers 
of the Railway Board and follow-up action taken in respect of the visits/findings.  
Reply of the Government 
          At present, diesel loco shed/GOC is holding 82 locomotives. With induction of 
EMD locos over Indian Railways in a phased manner, it has been planned to home 
new generation EMD locomotives at die sel shed/GOC in addition to its present fleet. 
A work for creation of infrastructure facilities to maintain these locos at GOC shed 
has also been sanctioned in Works Programme 2010-11 at a cost of Rs. 10 Cr.  
 As far as Golden Rock workshop is concerned, t he workshop is engaged in 
Periodic Overhaul (POH) of coaches, Diesel locomotives, manufacturing of wagons 
and other activities like overhauling of steam cranes, engine block reclamation and 
cylinder liner plating. Adequate workload in the form of POH diese l locomotives and 
coaches in addition to wagon manufacturing has been allocated to Golden Rock 
workshop to ensure optimum utilization of its capacity. During 2010 -11, POH target 

33 
 
of 8784 Non-AC coaches, 2160 AC coaches and 82 ddl. locomotives has been given 
to the workshop. In addition a target for manufacturing 960 wagons has also been 
given to the workshop during 2010 -11. A workshop modernization project has been 
sanctioned in 2007-08 at a total cost of Rs. 90 Crores to realign the capacities as per 
the future requirements. After completion of modernization, the annual POH capacity 
of AC coaches will increase from 1440 to 2880 and wagon manufacturing from 560 
to 1000. 
 Visits by Members of Railway Board are made to the workshop. Member 
Mechanical had last visited GOC diesel shed and workshop on 22.10.2009.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee please see recommendation para no. 1.24 of 
Chapter I) 
  

34 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation (Para. No. 6) 
 
       The Committee was deeply concerned that bullet -proof jackets, helmets, 
poly-carbonated lathis, shields, binoculars, fluorescent tapes, dragon search lights, 
etc., are still under procurement. The Committee observed that for instance, under 
the Western Railways, while there are more than 800 railway station, only 300 bullet-
proof jackets are made available to the security personnel. Such insufficient and 
inadequate provisions can seriously undermine safety and security of both 
passengers and Railway property.  
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
        The Committee reiterate that all requisite security related equipment 
should be procured within a specific time frame, without compromising on the quality 
of the product. The quality of the bullet-proof jackets and helmets should comply with 
the strictest international norms to meet any eventuality. It should offer confidence 
and a sense of security to the Railway Protection Force personnel who are using the 
same. The Committee found that RPF/RPSF personnel are al ready provided with 
sophisticated modern weapons like pistols, carbine INSAS rifles, SLR and LMG, but 
only a handful of AK-47 rifles were available to the force. On enquiry, the Committee 
was apprised that indent for procuring 3,000 AK -47 rifles had been p laced with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, which is pending. The Committee took a serious note of the 
matter and took evidence of officials of the Home Ministry. The Committee was 
informed that by the end of July, 2010 orders for procuring the weapons would be 
placed. The Committee wants that there should be no delay whatsoever in such 
matters, failing which the safety and security of passengers and property would be in 
seriously imperiled and compromised.  

35 
 
Reply of the Government (Para 6 & 7) 
(a)         Procurement of modern security related equipment under Norms 
Committee Report (at the cost of Rs. 67. 09 crore) is under process and Zonal 
Railways have been directed to complete the process at the earliest.  Norms for all 
the above modern equipment including Bullet Proof Jackets and Helmets, have been 
fixed by the Norms Committee.   
(b)        To ensure high quality of Bullet Proof Jacket and Helmets, Ministry of 
Home Affairs has been requested to include requirement of Railway Protection 
Force for BP Jacket and Helmet along with the requirement of other CPMFs for 
which procurement is being done by the MHA. 
(c)        Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) is the nodal Ministry for procurement of 
Arms & Ammunition for CPMFs. MHA has conveyed sanction of 6000 AK 47 Rif les 
to RPF and demanded advance payment. Advance payment has been made to the 
MHA. Supply is expected in near future.  These will be distributed to field units of 
RPF & RPSF. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
 
 The issue of up gradation of technology for signaling system presently in 
vogue in the Indian Railways is also a matter of worry for the Committee. The 
Committee was seriously concerned at the slow pace of modernization/up gradation 
of the signaling system. The Committee, while on an inspection visit to the Indian 
Railway Institute of Signal Engineering and Telecommunication (IRISET) 
Secunderabad, had recommended that the faculty of the Institute should be sent 
abroad for refresher cours es to enable them to understand the latest technology 
available there so that the Indian Railways can also consider infusing such 
technology in our system. This would give a fillip to the Railways in upgrading their 
signaling system.  

36 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
(a)         Modernization of Signaling system on Indian Railways is being done 
progressively as per the available resources. The modernization in signaling 
includes provision of electrical/electronic interlocking in replacement of over aged 
multi-cabin mechanical signals, block proving axle counters (BPAC) for automatic 
checking of clearance of block sections. Light Emitting Diodes (LED) signals in 
replacement of outdated filament type signals, data loggers for preventive 
maintenance, Automatic b lock signaling, Train Management systems (TMS) for 
efficient control & management of trains operation, and on Board protective system 
such as Train Protection Warning System (TPWS) to prevent loco pilot Signal 
passing at dander, Anti Collision Device (ACD)  for train collision prevention. 
Electrical/Electronic at 4530 stations, Data loggers at 3740 stations ABS 2027 Route 
Kilometers, TMS at divisions TPWS at 50 Route Kilometers. Anti Collision Device 
(ACD) developed by Konkan Railway Corporation (KRCL) has b een in service trials 
as pilot project on 1736 route kilometers on North east Frontier Railway (NFR). 
Improved version of ACD to revised specification is now to be developed by KRCL.  
(b)         Keeping in view recommendations of the Standing Committee on  the 
need to depute our faculty at IRISET for training abroad to expose them to the latest 
technology there, Training Directorate have approached 8 such Institutes abroad on 
28th July 2010 for arranging training of the IRISET faculty there as well as for l ending 
their faculty for sharing their knowledge and expertise with Indian Counterparts.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
Recommendation (Para No.15) 
 
The Committee was informed that there is a vacancy of 7135 personnel in 
RPF and efforts are being made to fill up the vacancies. The Committee was further 
informed that the Railway Board had proposed the creation of 21,000 posts out of 
which only 5000 posts have been approved by the Government of India and they will 
be apportioned to various Zones of Railway by the Railway Board. The recruitment 
is centralized. The Committee noted with concern that keeping in view the vast area 
of operation of the Railways,  5000 posts may be inadequate. Therefore, the 
Committee direct the Railway Board to take up the matter with the Government of 
India once again for creation of at least 15,000 additional posts. Keeping in view the 
present security scenario, adequate securit y personnel may be recruited at the 
earliest to man railway property and passengers. The Committee also feel that the 
Railway Board should create new posts after all the vacant posts have been filled 
up. Moreover, intensive training should be imparted to n ewly recruited RPF 
personnel and refresher courses may be introduced for officers/staff of RPF at 
regular intervals. Inadequate training is one of the major causes that can lead to 
inadequate protection and security of Railway property. The Committee were 
informed that recruitment and transfers/postings were made on a centralized basis 
and conducted from the Railway Board Headquarters. In order to have flexible 
approach, the Committee recommend that the General Manager should be given 
adequate powers not on ly to recruit at zonal levels but also initiate transfers and 
postings on „need basis‟.  
Reply of the Government 
With a view to speed up recruitment in RPF, it is under consideration for setting up a 
Central Recruitment Board on the recommendation of MHA. Till the Central 
Recruitment Board is formally established, a Central Recruitment Cell has been 
constituted for taking up the recruitment in RPF. Meanwhile, the recruitment is 
already in progress on North Frontier Railway and South Central Railway.  
Intensive Training of new Recruits : The RPF Training Centers are already 
conducting 9 months initial training of newly recruits. Besides, the newly appointed 

38 
 
constables and Sub Inspectors (after their initial training) are being sent to 
commando training in phases. Besides, RPF officers and staff are subjected to 
refresher courses from time to time at the RPF Training Centers and other training 
Centers of other prestigious organizations.  
    The Zonal Chief Security Officers are already working under administrative control 
of the General Managers. Under the general supervision of the General Managers, 
the Chief Security Commissioners exercise their powers of recruitment, transfers 
and postings presently. However, on the recommendations of Ministry of Home 
Affairs for setting up of a central recruitment Board, a proposal has been moved for 
setting up Central Recruitment Board for speeding recruitment in RPF. 
 
 [Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.17) 
 
 The Committee found that the Indian Railways are still not above provide 
foolproof security to passengers traveling on trains. Dacoity/robbery on running 
trains is a regular feature. The Committee noted that such incidents not only erode 
the faith of pa ssengers on the working of the Indian Railways, but put a question 
mark on the whole security system. The Committee, therefore, direct that the 
Railways should ensure that adequate numbers of RPF personnel, properly armed, 
should be located in trains which  pass through sensitive areas. The local 
policeshould also be alerted to meet any eventuality. Moreover, the Railway Board 
should come out with a mechanism to facilitate lodging of FIR in a moving train, in 
case of theft dacoity, etc., without putting the passengers into any inconvenience by 
forcing them to terminate their journey. The redressal of grievance of the aggrieved 
party should be foremost in the minds of the Railway Board. The Committee direct 
that the Railway Board should apprise the Committee u rgently of action taken in this 
regard.  
 

39 
 
Reply of the Government 
            „Policing on Railways‟ is a State subject and prevention of crime, registration 
of cases and their investigation and maintenance of law and order in Railway 
premises as well as on trains are the statutory responsibility of the State 
Governments concerned which they discharge through the Government Railway 
Police (GRP) and Civil Police. Consequent upon the amendment in RPF Act 1957 in 
the year 2003, RPF have been entrusted with the additional responsibility of security 
of passengers and passenger  area without giving any legal power to prosecute the 
offenders involved in criminal offences like dacoity/ robbery/ theft of passengers‟ 
belongings/ drugging and other crimes against passengers. Further, the strength of 
RPF has not been augmented to shoul der the additional responsibility of providing 
security to passengers and passenger area as well as manifold increase in the trains 
/ Railway traffic. 
RPF is providing escorts in 1275 important trains daily on an average from the 
existing strength. RPF is in need of 25000 additional manpower to provide escorts in 
all passenger trains and man the access control at the Railway stations to prevent 
passenger offences. 5134 posts in RPF have been sanctioned in 2010 for which 
recruitment is under process.  
To ensure better security of passengers, a Comprehensive Bill has been drafted to 
empower RPF officers, of and above the rank of Sub -Inspector, to deal with IPC 
offences. This Bill has been approved by the Ministry of Law & Justice. Concurrence 
of the Ministry of Home Affairs is awaited.  
Public awareness against crime like drugging of passengers is done through regular 
announcements at stations and in trains. 
Lodging of FIR in trains: 
FIR forms are made available with the Train Guard, TTE and Train Escort partie s in 
trains. It is also mentioned in the Railway Time Tables that the victim passenger in 
case of any eventuality need not break his journey to lodge a complaint and instead 
hand over his complaint filled in the prescribed form to the Coach Attendant/ 

40 
 
Conductor/ RPF/GRP train escort party/ Station Master, who in turn will hand over 
the same to the nearest GRP for registration.   
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.21) 
 
 The Committee found that in adequate training is one of the major causes 
which leads to compromising on the protection and security of Railway property and 
passengers. The Committee feel that most of the staff receive only routine training, 
and that too in a limited manner. Not much emphasis is given on refresher and 
advanced level training programmes. It seems that by trial and error method, the 
staff gets accustomed to the job entrusted to them. With the introduction of new 
equipment and gadgets in day to day operations, training is  a must at the ground 
level to handle the system in the proper manner. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that officers and staff should be provided intensive training at regular 
intervals followed by refresher courses. Wherever needed, officers should be  sent 
abroad for training and trained personnel from abroad should be brought for capacity 
building of officers in various Divisions of the Indian Railways. The officers and staff 
should be made to undergo tests at the end of the training programmes to see  the 
level of their participation/ involvement.  
 
Reply of the Government 
           The Indian Railway is continuously  evolving methods for development of 
manpower and it has been the endavour of the railways to increase the existing skill 
of the work fo rce, with a view to make them competitive in order to withstand 
competition from other modes of transport and adopt the fast changes in the 
systems and processes . Some of the steps taken in this direction are as under:- 

41 
 
(i)            A comprehensive training needs analysis is being done in respect of all 
categories of staff through a series of meeting with the principals, filed offices and 
Federations. 
 
(ii)  Training Modules for Induction, Refresher, Promotional and Specialized 
courses are reviewed after every 3-4 years. 
 
(iii)   Special emphasis is being given in training for some of the safety categories 
which include competency based training. 
 
(iv) Special emphasis is given through adopting training methodology such as on 
the job traini ng, simulator training, multi -media interactive packages on the PC as 
well as computer based tutorials etc. 
 
 
 The staff on completion of training undergoes tests to assess the learning.  
 As part of the Training Plan for officers of Indian Railways, each officer has to 
undergo training at fixed intervals in CTIs, reputed Institutes within India like IIMs / 
IITs and also abroad. As per this Training Plan, each officer is to be deputed for 
training to a reputed Institute outside Railways within India every f ive years and 
abroad every 10 year . Inputs from faculty of reputed Institutes/ Universities/ 
Business Schools abroad are also being provided to our officers through tie ups with 
ISB at present. With a view to building capacity  of our CTIs and knowledge b uilding 
of our officers and staff on regular basis, some reputed Training Institutes abroad 
have been approached to send their  faculty to CTIs of Indian Railways for sharing of 
knowledge and expertise with their counterparts in Railways. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.22) 
     The Committee noted that the Loco Pilots work under very stressful 
conditions. Breath analyzer tests of the Loco Pilots should be conducted at regular 

42 
 
intervals to ensure that when they are on duty, they are in their fittest mental and 
physical capabilities. To reduce the physical and mental stress of Loco Pilots, they 
should be given adequate rest between duty shifts and comfortable accommodation 
should be provided to them. Periodic medical check -up should be done on all Loco 
Pilots with special emphasis on physical fitness, eye test, etc.  
Reply of the Government 
            Board have already approved the alcohol policy on drunkenness in order to 
make it more effective for controlling drunkenness amongst staff. The policy 
emphasizes that the running staff viz driver, Asstt. Driver shall undergo breathalyzer 
test b oth at the time of signing on and signing off. Loco Inspectors/Officers have 
been authorized to conduct the surprise checks using portable breathalyzers also.  
  Adequate rest in given to running staff. A lot of stress is being given to the 
maintenance of running rooms/crew lobbies as they directly contribute to the safety 
in train operation. Though the improvement is a continuous ongoing process, 
however, considering the fact that resting facilities for crew has an important bearing 
on their productivity a nd train safety, a shield has been instituted at Board‟s level to 
foster healthy competition amongst running rooms and to ensure their upgradation. 
 Railways have been directed to adhere to the stipulations of providing 
periodical medical examination, refr esher course and safety camps to all of the 
safety category staff. Railways are maintaining the details of staff 
due/overdue/attending Periodical Medical Examination, Refresher Course or Safety 
Camp. Details of staff attending the above courses are readily  available with  the 
dfcontrolling supervisors. As per Railway Board instructions, staff on diesel traction 
belonging to safety category and if overdue for Periodical Medical examination, 
Refresher Course or Safety Camp is not permitted to continue his dut y until he 
undergoes the stipulated Exam/Training.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
 

43 
 
Recommendation No.24 
 The Committee find that every year, during the Budget Speech, a number of 
new trains are introduced in a rout ine manner. Yet, no efforts are being made to 
ensure that tracks are renewed to face the excess load. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that before new trains are announced, proper scientific study should be 
conducted by the Railways to assess the capaci ty of the system to sustain such 
excess load. The Committee would like to reiterate that track renewals should be 
given top priority by the Indian Railways.  
Reply of the Government 
           The trains announced in the Railway Budget is the sequel of the  detailed 
deliberations taken at various levels - first at Division level, then at the Zonal level 
and finally at the National level in the Inter -Railway Time Table Co -ordination 
Conference (IRTTC) which is held annually and which is attended by all the Zon al 
railways.  
             Before incorporating trains for inclusion in the Railway Budget, consent of all 
concerned departments is taken and inter -alia the important factors enumerated 
below are taken into consideration: 
a) Availability of demand 
b) Availability of path 
c) Availability of maintenance infrastructure and line capacity 
d) Availability of resources 
e) Availability of Rolling Stock 
f) Manpower requirement 
g) Impact on freight traffic 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
 
 

44 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
       While examining the Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Am endment 
Bill, 2008, the Committee had found that Section 2 of the Railway Property (Unlawful 
Possession) Act, 1966 defines „ railway property as „goods‟, „money‟, or „valuable 
security‟ or „animal‟, belonging to, or in the charge or possession of a Railway  
administration. The Committee was informed that the Railway Property (Unlawful 
Possession) Act, 1966 does not include immovable property. The Committee was of 
the opinion that there is some ambiguity in the definition of „Railway Property; in the 
Act whic h is required to be rectified. They, therefore, recommended to the 
Government to bring a comprehensive Bill before Parliament widening the definition 
of „property‟ in the Act, giving more powers to the Railway Protection Force relating 
to the security and property of passengers as well, and devising a better 
coordination mechanism among the State Police, the Government Railway Police 
and the Railway Protection Force.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  After due deliberations with the Ministry of Law & Justice, it  has been noted that 
inclusion of land within the purview of the RP (UP) Act is not a feasible option as this 
Act deals with criminal offences and the Inquiry officer exercises the same powers 
and is subject to the same provisions as the officer incharge o f a police station may 
exercise and is subject to under the Code of Criminal Procedure while investigating 
a Cognizable case.  
     The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act deals with 
the unauthorized occupants of all Central Government  Ministries lands. The Estate 

45 
 
Officer, nominated under the provisions of Section 3 of this Act, is a Senior Railway 
Officer who is vested with all the powers of ordering eviction, issuing notice, 
demolition, sealing unauthorized construction etc. provided by the Act including the 
powers vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure for matters 
specified in Section 8 of the Act.  
       Therefore, the existing system is a better option in which clear powers are 
vested in the Estate officer, who is a senior level serving Railway officer, to deal with 
illegal occupation of Railway land.  
         It may be noted that Hon‟ble Minister for Railways has already 
mentioned in her speech of Rail Budget 2010 -11 that “…Railways will bring a 
comprehensive bill for providing security to our passengers”.  
        Accordingly a comprehensive Bill has been drafted which proposes 
amendment in the RPF Act and empowers RPF officers, of and above the rank of 
Sub-Inspector, to deal with offences (including offences re lated to person and 
property of passengers) within passenger area.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee please see recommendation para no. 1. 9 of 
Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
1.13 The Committee was deeply concerned at the regularity with which rail 
accident were happening, leading to loss of many innocent lives, besides loss of 
invaluable property. The Committee particularly noted with distress that there were 
several incidents of collisions of trains in the recent past. The Committee are fully 
aware of the importance of the need to install Anti Collision Device (ACD) in train so 
as to prevent such incidents in the future. In this context, the Committee felt that the 
pace of installing the ACD is still unsatisfactory for various reasons. The Committee, 
while appreciating the efforts of the Konkan Railway in installing ACDs, direct that 

46 
 
the Railway Board should come out with a concrete strategy within six months in this 
regard after examining all issues involved and studying the best practices available. 
In the interim, the Committees direct the Railway Board to apprise the Committee, 
every two months, of the progress made in this regard without fail. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
(a) Safety Performance on Indian Railways 
 
1.1 Safety Performance in the past.  
 
(i) There has been a continuous reduction in the number of train accidents 
over last 9 years as may be seen in the table below: 
Consequential train accidents since 2001-2002 to 2010-2011  Current period 
Type of 
Accident 
2001-
2002 
2002-
2003 
2003-
2004 
2004-
2005 
2005-
2006 
2006-
2007 
2007-
2008 
2008-   
2009* 
2009-   
2010* 
 April -                        
July 2009* 
April  -                      
July 2010* 
Collision 30 16 9 13 9 8 8 13 9  2 2 
Derailments 280 218 202 138 131 96 100 85 80  26 22 
Manned Level 
Crossing Gate 
Accidents 
8 14 9 5 10 7 12 7 5  2 1 
Fire in Train 9 14 14 10 15 4 5 3 2  2 1 
Miscellaneous 8 7 5 3 4 8 4 7 4      
Total 335 269 239 169 169 123 129 115 100  32 26 
Note : Above figures do not include incidents of trespassing by road vehicles at unmanned level crossings 
which are as follows 
Type of 
Accident 
2001-
2002 
2002-
2003 
2003-
2004 
2004-
2005 
2005-
2006 
2006-
2007 
2007-
2008 
2008-   
2009* 
2009-   
2010* 
 April  -                        
July 2009* 
April  -                      
July 2010* 
Unmanned 
Level 
Crossing 
Gate 
Accidents 
80 82 86 65 65 72 65 62 62  16 16 
(ii)       Reduction in accidents could be achieved by the concerted efforts of IR 
for timely replacement of the over -aged assets, Adoption of suitable technologi es 

47 
 
for upgradation and maintenance of Track, Rolling Stock, Signalling & Interlocking 
systems, Safety Devices, Inspections at regular intervals to educate the staff for 
observance of safe practices. 
1.2 Cause-Wise Failure Analysis 
(iii) The Failure of other than Railway staff constitutes to be the major cause of 
accidents. In the current year the number of cases of sabotage has increased as 
compared to last year.  
 
(iv) There has been a continuous reduction in number of accidents attributed to  
failure of Railway Staff. There has been reduction in failure of equipment being the 
cause of accidents as seen in the table below. 
Causes of Accident 2001-
2002 
2002-
2003 
2003-
2004 
2004-
2005 
2005-
2006 
2006-
2007 
2007-
2008 
2008-
2009* 
2009-
2010* 
 April  -                        
July 
2009* 
April  -                      
July 
2010* 
Failure of Railway staff 249 186 161 119 120 85 87 76 68  20 16 
Failure of other than 
Railway staff 103 108 107 78 86 84 81 75 76  18 17 
Failure of equipment   24 18 18 14 8 9 9   1  1   
Sabotage 14 10 18 4 5 8 7 13 11  4 5 
Combination of factors   2 2 1   1 0 4 1  1   
Incidental 20 15 17 16 11 7 8 5 3  2   
Could not be established 
conclusively 5 2 2 2 3 1 2 4 2  2   
Under Investigation        1          4 
Grand Total 415 351 325 234 234 195 194 177 162  48 42 
* provisional              
1.3 Casualties in Accidents 
(i)    The number of casualties in train accidents is essentially fortuitous and 
not strictly susceptible to comparison.  It is the number of accidents and its 
relationship with traffic volume which is more relevant.  However, the number of  
 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 April  -   July 
2010                

48 
 
casualties in train accidents since 2005-06 is given as under: 
 
 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 April  -  July 2010 
Killed (in UMLC) 120 146 148 129 161 45 
Injured (in UMLC) 124 156 144 142 147 54 
1.4        Sabotage Cases in the Last 5 Years  
(i)        While the number of train accidents have shown a declining trend over the 
years, the number of deaths, in the recent past, have increased, mainly due to acts of 
sabotage.  For instance, in the past four months, 217 persons lost their lives in tr ain 
accidents of which 2 deaths were attributable to negligence on the part of the 
Railways.   
 (ii)   A major chunk of rest of deaths was due to one incident of sabotage of 
Jnaneshwari Express in Kharagpur Division on 28.05.2010 in which 150 persons lost 
their lives.   
(iii)      Further, 64 persons lost their lives in the collision involving Vananchal Express and 
Uttar Banga Express at Sainithia Station on 19.07.2010, the cause of which is under 
investigation.  
 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 April  -  July 2009                       April  -    July 2010                  
Persons killed 195 62 43 80 64 9 217 
Killed in Sabotage 
cases Nil Nil Nil Nil 02 Nil 151 
Killed in other than 
Sabotage 195 62 43 80 62 9 
66 
(Sainthia 64) 
  
(b) The Anti Collision Device (ACD) developed by Konkan Railway Corporation Limited 
(KRCL) has been in service trial as pilot project on Northeast Frontier Railway (NFR) 
since July/2006. Based on experience on NFR, specifications of ACD have had to be 
revised to improve efficacy, reliability and availability of ACD. The improved version of 
Killed (excluding UMLC) 195 62 43 80 64 217 
Injured (excluding UMLC) 503 246 268 302 238 290 

49 
 
ACD to revised specifications is to be put in service trials on three zones viz -Southern, 
South Central & South Western Railways, covering 1600 Route kilometers that include 
electrified multiple line & automatic signaling sections. The proving of the equipment for 
electrified multiple line automatic signaling section is expected to be completed by 
October 2010 in a nominated section of Southern Railway.  
 
 Further proliferatio n of ACD on Indian Railway will be planned, based on 
performance evaluation of equipment with improved specifications on Southern,  South 
Central & South Western Railways.  
 (For Comments of the Committee please see recommendation para no. 1. 15 of 
Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.10) 
 
    Unmanned level crossings are another problem area for the Indian 
Railways, and one of the major causes of accidents. In spite of various measures 
taken by the Indian Railways, level crossing accidents have c ontinued to occur, that 
too frequently. The Committee, during their interaction with the Central railway, 
found that on a trial basis, the Central Railway authorities have painted the 
unmanned railway crossing in certain areas with bright colours so that t he person 
trying to cross the unmanned crossing is able to judge the speed of the incoming 
train. This initiative of the Central Railway has borne results and led to a drastic cut -
down of the accident rate in the heavily populated areas. The Committee, whi le 
appreciating the initiative of the Central Railway, recommend to the Indian Railways 
to take similar steps in other zones also so that accidents at unmanned crossing 
may be checked, without any exorbitant expenditure. The Committee further direct 
that efforts should be made by the Railway Board to convert all unmanned crossings 
into manned level crossings in a time bound manner. RUBs/ROBs should be 
constructed at unmanned level crossings expeditiously, more so, in rural areas, to 
prevent accidents. If ne ed be, more budgetary allocation should be made for these 
purpose every year.  

50 
 
Reply of the Government 
Accidents at Unmanned Level Crossings are caused mainly due to 
trespassing by road vehicles across these on Railway tracks. Railways have the 
„Right of W ay‟ across unmanned level crossings. The road vehicle drivers are duty 
bound under Section 131 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, to “get down from the 
Vehicle, walk up to the crossing to ensure that no train is approaching from either 
side before crossing t he unmanned level crossing” Thus, the primary cause of the 
accidents at unmanned level crossings is negligence by road vehicle users.  
The numbers of consequential train accidents at Unmanned Level Crossings 
on Indian Railways were 82 in 2002 -03, 86 in 200 3-04, 65 in 2004 -05, 65 in 2005 -
06, 72 in 2006-07, 65 in 2007-08, 62 in 2008-09 and 62 in 2009 -10. Thus they have 
shown a declining trend. The Corporate Safety Plan of the Indian Railways had 
estimated to bring the level crossing accidents (Manned & Unmann ed) upto 90 by 
2012-13. This estimated target had already been achieved in 2004 -05 itself, and in 
the subsequent years, has further been surpassed.  
Presently, the unmanned level crossings are provided with speed breakers 
and road sign boards on either side of the level crossings to warn road users of any 
approaching trains. Warning sign -boards are also provided alongside of railway 
track, at the appro ach of such unmanned level crossings so that the train driver 
starts whistling to warn the road users of the approaching trains. The innovative step 
taken by Central Railway is appreciable but quantitative results regarding its success 
are not yet availabl e. As such, proliferation of the given scheme for all over Indian 
Railways is not considered necessary at this stage.  
      The second part of recommendation is regarding elimination of unmanned 
level crossings in Indian Railways. In this regard, it is st ated that Indian Railways 
have decided to eliminate all unmanned level crossings (LCs) in next five years as 
part of Indian Railway Vision 2020. Multi -pronged strategies have been adopted to 
achieve this end. While some of the LCs would be closed by mergin g them with the 
nearby LC by constructing connecting roads, other LCs would be provided with 
Road under bridge (RUB) or Limited Hieight subway (LHS) and also by manning of 
qualifying unmanned LCs.  

51 
 
       The position, as it obtains over Indian Railways wi th respect to various 
steps being undertaken for eliminating the unmanned level crossings, has been 
indicated in the ensuing table.  
Action Plan for elimination of unmanned level Crossing gates in 
five years (2010-15)  
Nos. of level 
crossings to 
be eliminated 
Construction of Normal Height Subway  35 
Construction of Limited Height Subway 1526 
Construction of Road Over Bridge  210 
Construction of diversion road to another level crossings, ROB, 
RUB etc.  
986 
Closure of one unmanned LC by manning nearby unmanned level 
crossings  
412 
Closure of unmanned level crossings having low Train Vehicle 
Units  
1860 
Closure by manning of unmanned level crossing  6792 
Total nos. of LCs planned for elimination in five years above by 
scheme.  
11821 
 
* Note: Unmanned level crossing of narrow gauge, rail bus routes, meter gauge, 
cattle and canal crossings have not been planned due to low train vehicle units and 
low speed of trains.  
Budgetary allocation of Rs. 1700 crores has been made during the year 2010-
11 and in future also required amount shall be allocated so as to ensure that road 
safety works i.e., manning and construction of ROB/RUB does not suffer for want of 
fund.  
     Hence the second part of recommendation of the Committee is full 
accepted. 
 [Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2010/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 01.12.2010] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee please see recommendation para no. 1.18 of 
Chapter I) 
 
 
 

52 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
                             
  

53 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
        MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2010-11) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 10th May, 2011 from 1100 hrs. to 1330 h rs. in 
Committee Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
        PRESENT 
SHRI T.R. BAALU -   CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
3.      Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
4. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
5. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
6. Shri Somabhai G. Koli Patel 
7. Shri Rudramadhab Ray 
8. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
9. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
10. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
11. Chaudhary Lal Singh 
12. Shri Umashankar Singh 
13. Shri Lalji Tandon 
14. Dr. Girija Vyas 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Om Prakash Mathur 
16.      Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
17. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
18. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
19. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
       
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Director 
  

54 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)* 
 
1. Shri Vivek Sahai  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex-officio 
Principal Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 2. Smt. Pompa Babbar  Financial Commissioner, Railways &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 3. Shri A.P. Mishra  Member Engineering, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 4. Shri Sanjiv Handa  Member Mechanical, Railway Board, &  
      Ex-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
5. Shri Sudesh Kumar  Member Electrical, Railway Board &  
      Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 6. Shri V.N. Tripathi  Member Staff, Railway Board, &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF NORTHERN RAILWAYS* 
1. Shri S.K. Budhalakoti General Manager, Northern Railway 
* Present only during the briefing on the status of N ew Line Project in Jammu and 
‘Financial and Accounting Management and Financial Performance of Indian 
Railways – Zone-wise’.  
    
2. Since Hon’ble Chairman, Standing Committee on Railways, was delayed, he 
authorized Shri Nandi Yellaiah to conduct the business of the meeting till the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Standing Committee on Railways, arrived.   
 
3. The Committee then considered the draft report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the 8th Report of the Committee 
(15th LS) on ‘Protection & Security of Railway Property & Passengers’ and adopted the 
same with some modification.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to 
finalize the Action Taken Report and present the same to the House.   
 
 

55 
 
Briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on 
the status of New Line Project in Jammu 
 
 
4. xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx 
 
Briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) in 
connection with the examination of the subject ‘Financial and Accounting 
Management and Financial Performance of Indian Railways - Zone-wise’. 
 
5. xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

56 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 8TH REPORT (15TH LOK 
SABHA) ON ‘PROTECTION AND SECURITY OF RAILWAY PROPERTY AND PASSENGERS’  
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 24 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the  Government –  
Para Nos.  1, 3, 4, 5, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 23   
 
13 
 Percentage of total   
 
54% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies –  
Para Nos.  6, 7, 8, 15, 17, 21, 22, 24       
 
8 
 Percentage of total   
 
33% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration –  
Para Nos.  2, 9, 10        
 
3 
 Percentage of total   
 
13% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited -      
NIL 
 Percentage of total 
 
NIL 
 
 
     ---- 
 
 
  