 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the Ninteenth Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  
on “Passenger Amenities and Passenger Safety in Indian Railways”] 
 
 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
                                      February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
      
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2013-14) 
   FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA  
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 24 

 
 
      SCR NO. 186 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2013-14) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the Ninteenth Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  
on “Passenger Amenities and Passenger Safety in Indian Railways”] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.02.2014 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.02.2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
              PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….………………………..              (iii) 
  
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….………                 (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report……………………………………………………………                  1    
   
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been                
accepted by the Government  …………………………..    12   
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee             
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government 
replies……………………………………………………………     31     
   
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which          
   replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….….      35        
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final     
replies of the Government  are still awaited  ………….        43  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX-I  Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on    
Railways held on 12.02.2014…………………………………     46 
  
 
APPENDIX-II    
 
 
48            
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government o n the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the  
Ninteenth Report (1 5th Lok Sa bha) on “Passenger 
Amenities and Passenger Safety in Indian 
Railways”…………………. 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2013-14) 
 
Shri T. R. Baalu - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
3. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome  
4. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
5. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
6. Shri Bhaskar Rao Patil Khatgonkar 
7. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
8. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
9. Shri Devender Nagpal 
10. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
11. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
12. Shri Rudra Madhab Ray 
13. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
14. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
15. * Vacant 
16. Shri Ganesh Singh 
17. Shri Lal Ji Tandon 
18. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
19. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
20. Dr. Vivekanand 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Husain Dalwai 
23. Shri Prabhat Jha 
24. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
25. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
26. Shri K. Parasaran 
27. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
28. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
30. Shri Ishwar Singh 
31. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
 
Constituted vide LS Bulletin No.5635 dated: 04.09.2013 
 
* Yashodhara Raje Scindia ceased to be a Member vide Lok Sabha Bulletin 
Part II No.5977 dated 19.12.2013. 
 
 (iii)

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Banani Sarker Joshi  - Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2013-14), having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Twenty Fourth Report of the Committee on action taken by the Government 
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Ninteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways on  “Passenger Amenities and Passenger Safety 
in Indian Railways”. 
 
2. The Ninteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 22.04.2013 and 
it contained 31 recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways have 
furnished their action taken replies in respect of  all the 
recommendations/observations.   
  
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Action Taken Report at 
their sitting held on 12.02.2014.  
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/ observations contained in the Ninteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                             T.R. BAALU, 
12 February, 2014                                                             Chairman, 
23 Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Railways 
   
 
 
 
 
 
      (v) 

 
 
1 
 
  CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
          This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations and observations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways  (2012-13) on 
“Passenger Amenities and Passenger Safety in Indian Railways ”. The Report 
was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.04.2013.  
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government on all the 31 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report. These have been 
broadly categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 15, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27 and 28 
              Total :  16 
              Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:- 
Para Nos.  2, 6, 12, 13 and 25            Total :  5 
            Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:- 
Para Nos. 9, 10, 14, 17, 24, 29, 30 and 31         Total : 08
                  Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies are 
awaited:-  
Para Nos.  16 and 19             Total : 2 
             Chapter-V 
 

 
 
2 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of th e recommendations/observations accepted by 
the Government.  In cases where it is not possible for the Ministry to 
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, 
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons thereof.  
The C ommittee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
recommendations/observations contained in Chapter -I and final 
replies in respect of recommendations/observations contained in 
Chapter V of this Report should be furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations/observations. 
    
  A Categorization of Stations 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 4 and 5) 
 
5.      The Committee found that under the extant guidelines, the Railways have 
categorized their entire 8241 stations into 7 categories (A1 and A to F) on the 
basis of passenger earnings, volume of passengers handled, relative importance 
of the station based on its geographical/tourist/historical value and the availability 
of funds. The yardstick for providing amenities is based on the classification of 
stations which is linked to the annual passenger earning. The Committee were of 
the view that financial earnings should not be the sole basis for classification of 
stations; other factors like historical and cultural importance, geographical 
location, etc. also need to be taken into account while deciding on the 
categorization of a station. Similarly, there also exist other categories  like 
industrial hubs, ports, agricultural/horticultural production centres, 
educational/professional institutions in remote areas, etc., from where there may 

 
 
3 
 
be a large travelling public. Such stations should also benefit from increased 
amenities since they are used by a very large number of passengers during peak 
hours or peak seasons. The Committee, therefore, recommended a revision of the 
existing categorization of stations so that it is not based solely on the annual 
passenger earnings. The relative im portance of the station keeping in view of the 
aforementioned factors may also be duly considered while making such 
classification. The Committee like d to be kept apprised of the steps taken in this 
regard. 
 
6.     The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken notes, have stated as 
under:  
      “ While the general categorization of stations is based on passenger 
earnings, Indian Railways take into account the nature of traffic at the 
station for its categor ization. For example, stations with large volume of 
suburban traffic are categorized as “C” category stations irrespective of 
their earnings. This is to provide amenities which are suitable for handling 
large numbers of passengers belonging to the intra -urban and suburban 
segments who essentially commute from their place of residence to their 
place of work. Further, General Managers have been empowered to 
categorise stations of Tourist importance and large junction stations as “B” 
category stations so that amenities commensurate with the importance of 
the station are provided irrespective of the earnings of such stations. 
Based on a review, Indian Railways have categorized 8495 stations in 7 
categories on the basis of passenger earnings, the volume of passen gers 
handled, etc. For provision of passenger amenities at stations, earnings is 
not the sole criteria. Passenger amenities like recommended amenities at 
stations are provided on the basis of actual volume of passenger handled 
at those stations. In additio n, the stations belonging to various categories 
are also identified for up gradation under the Adarsh station scheme to 
provide upgraded passenger amenities.”     
 

 
 
4 
 
 
7.              The Committee were constrained to note that a majority of stations 
of the Indian Railways, i.e., 6301 or 77 per cent of the 8241 stations fall in the 
„E‟ and „F‟ category of stations. This effectively mean t that they receive d the 
least amount of passenger amenities even tho ugh they are used by a larger 
number of people. These stations are generally located in rural areas or in 
remote locations or are halt stations. The Committee were of the opinion that 
since there are fewer originating trains and since stoppages of trains a re for 
very less duration, passenger earnings may not be very high at these stations. 
As a result, these stations are deprived of most of the benefits even though 
they are used by a very large number of passengers. Taking into account the 
social responsibi lity of the Railways, the Committee opine d that reasonable 
amenities should be provided at all stations. Hence the Committee recommend 
that at least basic facilities like platform shelter, proper seating, toilets, lighting, 
fans, FOB, waiting hall, water c oolers, public address system, etc. should be 
made available at „E‟ and „F‟ grade stations on a priority basis. They also felt that 
the Ministry should chalk out an action plan to improve/upgrade the amenities 
at these stations in a time bound manner so th at maximum number of 
passengers can benefit from them. 
 
8.     The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken notes, have stated as 
under:  
      “Though the earnings from „E‟ & „F‟ category stations is not substantial, 
all minimum essential amenities hav e already been provided at all „E‟ and 
„F‟ category of stations. Amenities such as booking facility, drinking water 
arrangements, waiting hall, seating arrangements, platform shelter, 
urinals, latrines, rail level platform, lighting, fans, time table display & clock 
are provided at „E‟ category stations. Amenities such as booking facility, 
drinking water arrangements, waiting hall, shady trees, rail level platform, 
time table display & clock are provided at „F‟ category stations. In addition, 

 
 
5 
 
some of the “E ” category stations have been identified for up gradation 
under the Adarsh station scheme.”  
 
9. The Committee find that all 8241 stations across the Indian 
Railways network have been provided with the minimum essential 
amenities.  Further , the Ministry had also informed that General 
Managers have been empowered to categorize stations of tourist 
importance and large junction station as „B‟ category stations so that 
amenities commensurate with the importance of the stations are 
provided irrespective of ear nings of such stations.  In addition, the 
stations belonging to various categories are also upgraded under the 
Adarsh station scheme to provide upgraded passenger amenities.   The 
Committee are happy to note that the Ministry is making serious efforts 
to upgrade passenger amenities at stations.  The Committee are of the 
firm belief that provision of better amenities at station, irrespective of 
their categorization should be accorded lighest priority since passenger 
traffic is the visible face of the Indian Railways and shapes public 
opinion regarding the performance of the Railways.  The Committee 
urge the Ministry to ensure that provision of amenities should not be a 
one time effort but rather a continuous process where the amenity once 
provided is also maintained though rigorous and regular inspections.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
6 
 
B. Creation of a Separate Department specifically to cater to 
 Passenger Amenities 
 
 Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
10. The Committee found that passenger amenities were not provided by a 
single department but rather by multiple departments of the Railways. The 
Committee were not fully convinced of the rationale proffered by the Railways 
that since each department has technical and professional expertise, it would 
be better equipped to provide a certain amenity. The Committee like d to stress 
that a single nodal department should be entrusted with the task of providing 
passenger amenities both at the stations and on -board to ensure a faster and 
more efficient delivery mecha nism. Having a nodal department for passenger 
amenities would obviate the need for time consuming inter -department 
coordination and also avoid duplication. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the Ministry should explore avenues whereby a separate 
department may be created at both apex and zonal levels to cater specifically to 
passenger amenities. The Committee like d to be kept apprised of the action 
taken in this regard. 
 
11.     The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken notes, have stated as 
under:  
“The range of passenger amenities made available at the stations and 
on board is extensive and intrinsically involves the role of Civil 
Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Telecom and Commercial branches 
of the Railway system. Further, on board ser vices are provided by the 
Mechanical Engineering, Electrical Engineering and the Commercial 
branches.   Each wing of the Railway organization has the requisite 
technical and professional capability for providing and sustaining 
specific passenger amenities and services. However, within the multi -
disciplinary Railway system the Divisional Railway Manager/Additional 
Divisional Railway Manager perform the nodal role of coordinating the 

 
 
7 
 
output from various branches for ensuring the quality and scale of 
amenities prescribed.  At the Zonal Railway level, the General 
Manager/Additional General Manager are responsible for bringing out 
the synergy from the cross -functional teams at the headquarters level. 
The inter -departmental coordination at the divisions and the 
headquarters are ensured by the General Managers and Divisional 
Railway Managers respectively.”  
 
12. The Committee are not satisfied with the premise of the Ministry 
that each wing of the Railway organization has the requisite technical 
and professional capability for providing and sustaining specific 
passenger amenities and services and that there was no requirement 
for a separate department for passe nger amenities.  The Committee 
strongly feel that a single nodal department, solely entrusted with the 
task of providing passenger amenities would be able to give focussed 
attention to this crucial aspect of Railways.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that  a separate department, unburdened with other 
responsibilities, will be better equipped to concentrate the immen se 
and myriad demands of providing passenger amenities.  The 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the 
Ministry to consider it in the right earnest and restructure the system 
to steamline the duties/responsibilities.   
 
 
 

 
 
8 
 
C. Separate Allocation for Different Passenger Amenities 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
13. The Committee found that funds were allocated under the plan head of 
„passenger amenities‟ and no separate allocation was made for different 
categories of passenger amenities within this head. The Committee were of the 
opinion that if separate allocations were made for each of the categorie s, fund 
utilization would be more transparent and the progress of passenger amenities 
would be better monitored. They, therefore, recommend ed that the Ministry 
should set both physical and financial targets for each item of passenger 
amenities instead of having a common head. 
 
 
14. The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken notes, stated as under:  
 
“Funds allotment for various categories / works of passenger amenities are 
done keeping in view the requirement, progress of work and inter -se-
priority of works.  Progress (physical & financial) of various works under 
passenger amenities are monitored at va rious levels in Railways.  
However, the suggestion has been noted.  
 
 
15. The Committee are not happy with the reply of the Government.  
The Committee had found that there was no separate allocation for 
each component of passenger amenities and funds well allocated 
under the broad head of „passenger amenities‟.  The Committee feel 
that bundling of all services under a single head would result in 
opacity as neither individual targets can be set , nor progress could be 
monitored.  Moreover, the funds allocated to a scheme may get 
diverted to populist schemes rather than those requiring greater 

 
 
9 
 
/urgent attention.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation that the Ministry should have separate heads for 
each item of passenger amenities to facilitate better utilization and 
effective monitoring.    
 
D. Non Utilization of funds allocated for Passenger Amenities 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
16. The Committee noted with concern that during 2009 -10 and 2010-11, the 
funds allocated for passenger amenities have not been fully utilized by the 
Railways. Though the estimates were revised downwards from Rs.1102 cr. to 
Rs.923 cr. and from Rs.1302 cr. to Rs.998 cr. during 20 09-10 and 2010 -11, 
respectively, yet the actual achievement was far lower, at Rs.906 and    Rs.911 
crore, respectively. The Committee fail ed to appreciate the reasons for the 
same which have been stated by the Ministry, i.e, the slower pace of 
replacement/renovation works of passenger amenities by some Zonal Railways. 
The Committee desired that projects taken up for passenger amenities may be 
given priority and targets/projects identified should be completed within the 
stipulated time period. 
 
 
17. The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken notes, have stated as under: 
“ The Committee‟s recommendation has been noted”. 
 
18. The Co mmittee are extremely distressed with the comments 
furnished by the Ministry on such an important aspect as utilization of 
funds for passenger amenities.  The Committee are disappointed  that 
on being reminded that allocations made for passenger amenities 
shoulde be utilized fully and within  the stipulated time period, the 

 
 
10 
 
Ministry has provided a non -commital reply.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should give a specific 
reply to their recommendations and the instant single line replies  
such as “T he Committee‟s recommendation have been noted ” should 
be avoided in future. 
E. Vacancies in Railway Protection Force (RPF) 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
19. The Committee were, distressed to note that a large number of vacancies 
exist in the RPF. Though the process of recruitment of has already been 
initiated, the Committee felt that in the first place, such a large number of 
vacancies should not have been allowed to occur. The  Committee desired that 
the recruitment process of security personnel be expedited, especially in light of 
the fact that they have to undergo extensive and intensive training before being 
made available to the Railways. 
 
20. The Ministry of Railways in their action taken note have stated as under: 
 
“All recruitment formalities have been completed for filling up 511 
vacancies of Sub Inspectors in Railway Protection Force and preparation of 
final result is under process. 
 
   11952 vacancies for Constables had already been notified in 2011. A 
decision has been taken to enhance the vacancies by 5135. These post 
notification vacancies have been arisen due to retirement, death and 
creation of new posts etc. and total vacancies of constable enhanced to 
17087. Written examination for filling up of these vacancies of constables 
is going to be held on 16th, 23rd, and 30th June 2013 in 15 cities all over 
the country.”    
 

 
 
11 
 
21. The Committee note that the Ministry has conducted a series of 
examinations for filling up v acancies in the Railway Protection F orm 
(RPF).  The Committee wish   to remind the Ministry that they need to 
augment their efforts at recruit ing since there is a long ti me gap 
between recruitment and  personnel actually being made available to 
the Railways since there is requirement for extensive and technical 
training.  The Committee suggest that the Ministry can explore 
options such as enabling deputations of security personnel from other 
similar forces as a temporary measure.  At the same time, recruitment 
procedures need to be steamlined and expedited and all the vacancies 
are needed to be filled up in a given time frame.  The Committee 
would like to be informed about the action taken in this regard 
expeditiously.  
 

 
 
12 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED           
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that separate guidelines to govern „passenger amenities‟ 
were issued by the Railways for the first time in 1952, which defined amenities as 
„basic amenities‟ and „additional amenities‟. These guidelines were revised for the 
first time in  1995, which sought to expand the scope of the amenities provided. 
Subsequently, when certain deficiencies were noticed, the guidelines were revised 
in 1999, 2003 and 2007. The Committee further note that on -board minimum 
facilities to be provided to passe ngers have also been notified by the Railways. 
The Committee are of the opinion that since passenger service is the direct 
interface of Indian Railways with the passengers, passenger amenities should be 
given a special focus by the Railways. The Committee are of the opinion that the 
aspirations of the travelling public have undergone a sea change since the first 
guidelines on passenger amenities were formulated in 1952, with greater 
expectations for better passenger services. The Committee, therefore, desir e that 
the guidelines for providing passenger amenities should be updated and reviewed 
regularly so that amenities can be upgraded, commensurate with the development 
of latest technologies and innovations in hospitality so as to fulfill the increased 
aspirations of the travelling public. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Passenger amenities at stations are provided in accordance with 
comprehensive guidelines issued to Zonal Railways which specify the level of 
amenities to be provided at each category of stations.  Upgradation of passenger 
amenities at stations is a continu ous process and the norms for provision of 
passenger amenities at various categories of stations which includes Minimum 

 
 
13 
 
Essential Amenities, Recommended Amenities and Desirable Amenities are 
reviewed periodically. After a thorough review by a Committee of Executive 
Directors in 2011 -2012, Railway Board issued revised guidelines in September 
2012 after taking into account the technological developments, growth in 
passenger traffic and the requirements / expectations of the travellers within the 
overall finan cial context of Indian Railways.  Accordingly, Zonal Railways have 
been advised to upgrade the amenities at stations. In addition, identification of 
stations has also been done for development under the Adarsh station Scheme. 
Adarsh station Scheme prescrib es conforming to ethnic ethos, quick entry and 
exit of passengers, smooth entry from the civil road to station premises, better 
signage, wider foot-over-bridges, etc.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
          The Committee understand that passenger amenities have been 
classified into three categories, viz. „minimum essential amenities‟, „recommended 
amenities‟ and „desirable amenities‟. Further, it is noted that whereas „minimum 
essential amenities‟ a re required to be provided at all stations at all times, 
recommended and „desirable amenities‟ are based on the volume of passengers 
handled, funds available and relative priority of works. The Committee are of the 
opinion that since „recommended‟ and „des irable amenities‟ are considered 
suitable for improvement of customer satisfaction and the interface at stations, 
the Railways have to take steps to ensure that the „recommended‟ and „desirable 
amenities‟ are extended to a larger number of stations. The Co mmittee further 
recommended that the Ministry should ensure thorough stringent and regular 
monitoring at all levels, that slippages in the amenities provided do not occur. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Detailed instructions to Zonal Railways on the provision recommended 
scale of amenities and „desirable‟ amenities are already in place. Minimum 

 
 
14 
 
Essential Amenities are provided at all stations but the scale and quantity of 
amenities such as taps, benches, platform shelter, etc., commensurate with the 
actual peak passenger traffic dealt at the station are provided as per the norms of 
recommended scale of amenities. Hence, the provision of actual quantity of 
amenities is based on the traffic as per prescribed  norms. Further, in order to 
enhance the customer satisfaction and interface process at the station desirable 
amenities for different category of stations are also provided.  Amenities at the 
stations are regularly upgraded as volume of traffic and earning  increases. As per 
the latest categorization based on the earnings of 2011 -12 254 stations have 
already been recategorized to higher categories and therefore upgraded passenger 
amenities shall be provided according to their classification. In addition, the  
stations for further identified under the Adarsh Station Scheme for provision of 
upgraded passenger amenities including recommended and desirable amenities. 
 
  A well defined system of inspections for monitoring passenger amenities 
is already in place on Indian Railways. Officers belonging to each tier of the 
hierarchy inspect stations at prescribed intervals with a view to ensuring proper 
functioning of the sta tions at periodical intervals at various levels i.e., the station 
level, the Divisional and the Headquarters level.  Apart from the above, Multi -
disciplinary Service Improvement Groups (SIGs) have been constituted at the 
Zonal, Divisional and Station Level  for inspecting the stations jointly as per 
prescribed schedule. During inspections special attention is given to proper 
functioning of the amenities provided at the stations and remedial action is taken 
on the deficiencies noted during the inspections. Th e efforts of various 
departments in this regard are synergized at DRM and General Manager Levels. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
         The Committee find that under the extant guidelines, the Railways 
have categorized their entire 8241 stations into 7 ca tegories (A1 and A to F) on 
the basis of passenger earnings, volume of passengers handled, relative 
importance of the station based on its geographical/tourist/historical value and 

 
 
15 
 
the availability of funds. The yardstick for providing amenities is based o n the 
classification of stations which is linked to the annual passenger earning. The 
Committee are of the view that financial earnings should not be the sole basis for 
classification of stations; other factors like historical and cultural importance, 
geographical location, etc. also need to be taken into account while deciding on 
the categorization of a station. Similarly, there also exist other categories like 
industrial hubs, ports, agricultural/horticultural production centres, 
educational/professional institutions in remote areas, etc., from where there may 
be a large travelling public. Such stations should also benefit from increased 
amenities since they are used by a very large number of passengers during peak 
hours or peak seasons. The Committee, the refore, recommends a revision of the 
existing categorization of stations so that it is not based solely on the annual 
passenger earnings. The relative importance of the station keeping in view of the 
aforementioned factors may also be duly considered while  making such 
classification. The Committee would like to be kept apprised of the steps taken in 
this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
        While the general categorization of stations is based on passenger 
earnings, Indian Railways take into account the nature of traffic at the station for 
its categorization. For example, stations with large volume of suburban traffic are 
categorized as “C” category stations irrespective of their earnings. This is to 
provide amenities which are suitable for handling lar ge numbers of passengers 
belonging to the intra -urban and suburban segments who essentially commute 
from their place of residence to their place of work. Further, General Managers 
have been empowered to categories stations of Tourist importance and large 
junction stations as “B” category stations so that amenities commensurate with 
the importance of the station are provided irrespective of the earnings of such 
stations. Based on a review, Indian Railways have categorized 8495 stations in 7 
categories on the  basis of passenger earnings, the volume of passengers 
handled, etc. For provision of passenger amenities at stations, earnings is not the 

 
 
16 
 
sole criteria. Passenger amenities like recommended amenities at stations are 
provided on the basis of actual volume of passenger handled at those stations. In 
addition, the stations belonging to various categories are also identified for up 
gradation under the Adarsh station scheme to provide upgraded passenger 
amenities.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see recommendation at Para No. 9 of Chapter I 
 
  Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
         The Committee are constrained to note that a majority of stations of 
the Indian Railways, i.e., 6301 or 77 per cent of the 8241 stations fall in the „E‟ 
and „F‟ category of stations. This effectively means that they receive the least 
amount of passenger amenities even though they are used by a larger number of 
people. These stations are generally located in rural areas or in remote locations 
or are halt stations. The Committee are of the opinion that since there are fewer 
originating trains and sin ce stoppages of trains are for very less duration, 
passenger earnings may not be very high at these stations. As a result, these 
stations are deprived of most of the benefits even though they are used by a 
very large number of passengers. Taking into accou nt the social responsibility of 
the Railways, the Committee opine that reasonable amenities should be provided 
at all stations. Hence the Committee recommend that at least basic facilities like 
platform shelter, proper seating, toilets, lighting, fans, FOB , waiting hall, water 
coolers, public address system, etc. should be made available at „E‟ and „F‟ grade 
stations on a priority basis. They also feel that the Ministry should chalk out an 
action plan to improve/upgrade the amenities at these stations in a time bound 
manner so that maximum number of passengers can benefit from them. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
    Though the earnings from „E‟ & „F‟ category stations is not substantial, all 
minimum essential amenities have already been provided at all „E‟ and „F‟ 

 
 
17 
 
category of stations. Amenities such as booking facility, drinking water 
arrangements, waiting hall, seating arrangements, platform she lter, urinals, 
latrines, rail level platform, lighting, fans, time table display & clock are provided 
at „E‟ category stations. Amenities such as booking facility, drinking water 
arrangements, waiting hall, shady trees, rail level platform, time table disp lay & 
clock are provided at „F‟ category stations. In addition, some of the “E” category 
stations have been identified for up gradation under the Adarsh station scheme. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see recommendation at Para No. 9 of Chapter I 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
The Committee further find that no timeframe has been set for providing 
amenities on various categories of stations. Though the augmentation / 
enhancement of amenities is a continuous process and is dependent on demand 
and availability of funds, yet there should be a timeframe for providing the 
„minimum essential‟, „recommended‟ and „desirable amenities‟ at all stations. The 
Committee feel that chalking out a time frame in this regard would prevent 
slippages and ensure effec tive enhancement of the amenities provided, besides 
instilling a sense of urgency in those responsible for promoting and executing 
such works. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Category of stations has been revised w.e.f. 1.4.2013 based on the annual 
Passenger earnings of the station for the year 2011 -12, thereby requiring to 
revise the Minimum Essential Amenities (MEA) and enhancement / augmentation 
of amenities at these station s.  While the provision of Minimum Essential 
Amenities (MEA) as per revised category of stations is targeted by 31.03.2016, 
provision of the „desirable‟ and „recommended‟ amenities as per revised category 
of the station in a limited timeframe is not feasible, due to limitation of funds and 

 
 
18 
 
inter-se priority of works.  However, the recommendation of the Committee is 
noted and Indian Railways would strive to provide the required amenities at the 
earliest, subject to availability of funds. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
       The Committee find that on occasions, certain amenities, whether at 
stations or in trains, are not functional or not provided at all, irrespective of the 
fact that it is a minimum essential amenity. At the same time, passengers are 
also not aware of the facilities/amenities that are actually sanctioned or available 
at a particular station. The Committee, therefore, desire that the category of 
station as well as the amenities that are sanctioned and available for that 
particular station shou ld be prominently displayed at the station concerned. 
Further, contact number of the nodal appellate authority should be prominently 
displayed in the station for redressal of the grievances of the passengers. The 
Committee are of the firm belief that such an action will bring public awareness 
and galvanize officials into proactively providing/maintaining the entitled 
amenities to the travelling public. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
          The present comprehensive instructions already prescribe that at 
each station, a list shall be displayed in the station manager/station master‟s 
room showing the quantum of minimum essential amenities required to be 
provided for that category of stations as per guidelines, vis -à-vis the amenities 
actually available.   Zonal Railways have also been instructed under the 
guidelines that the details of other amenities available at the station should also 
be displayed.  Indian Railways has well organized public grievance Redressal 
machinery for ensuring prompt action on any compla int relating to inadequacy of 
passenger amenities at the stations. The Additional Divisional Railway Manager is 
the nodal officer at the Divisional level who can be approached for Redressal of 
grievances relating to that division. The number and name of th e person to 

 
 
19 
 
whom the grievance can be addressed are displayed at the stations as well as in 
the Zonal Railway time-table. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
          The Committee have been informed that the Railways have 
formulated a well developed system of monitoring the availability and 
maintenance of passenger amenities. They have been apprised that amenities 
are periodically and intensively inspected at  station, divisional and headquarter 
levels regularly. The Committee wish to emphasize that it is only through 
effective monitoring that authorities can detect deficiencies and slippages and 
take consequent remedial action in a far more efficient and exped itious manner. 
They are also of the opinion that there should be synergy between each tier of 
the hierarchy to ensure proper functioning at stations and maintenance of 
passenger amenities. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
   To begin with, Zonal Railways underta ke a survey to confirm the 
availability of minimum essential amenities all stations as per their category and 
provide the amenities as per the prescribed scale. For the purpose of sustaining 
the amenities, a well defined system of inspections for monitorin g passenger 
amenities is already in place on Indian Railways.  Officers belonging to each tier 
of the hierarchy inspect stations at prescribed intervals with a view to ensuring 
proper functioning of the stations at periodical intervals at various levels i. e., the 
station level, the Divisional and the Headquarters level.  Apart from the above, 
Multi-disciplinary Service Improvement Groups (SIGs) have been constituted at 
the Zonal, Divisional and Station Level for inspecting the stations jointly as per 
prescribed schedule. During inspections special attention is given to proper 
functioning of the amenities provided at the stations and remedial action is taken 
on the deficiencies noted during the inspections. The efforts of various 

 
 
20 
 
departments in this regard ar e synergized at DRM and General Manager levels. 
The results of the SIG inspections are monitored at the Railway Board level 
periodically in order to ensure that remedial action is taken promptly on the 
deficiencies noted during the inspections.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
The Committee note that the scheme of Adarsh Stations was started in 
2009-10 to focus on the improvement of amenities at stations in areas such as 
ticketing, circulating area, signages, adequate lighting, etc. So far, 845 stations 
have been selected for development as Adarsh Stations. The Committee, 
however, find that in spite of considerable passage of time, only 441 stations, i.e. 
only around 50 percent of the stations have so far been developed as Adarsh 
Stations. The Committee are v ery unhappy with this tardy progress and 
emphasise that the very purpose of the scheme gets defeated if there are delays 
in its execution. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the remaining 
stations should be developed urgently to benefit the traveling public. 
 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
        980 railway stations have been identified up to 2012 -13 for 
development under „Adarsh‟ station scheme. Against this, 732 stations have been 
developed so far under this scheme.  Stations development under this scheme is 
a continuous process and is subject t o availability of funds. Zonal Railways have 
been asked to make all out efforts to achieve the targets.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.18) 
 
   The Committee note that ticketing in the Indian Railways is done through 
Passenger Reservation Ticketing System.  The Committee appreciate the fact that 
given the wide reach of the Indian Railways, about 8900 PRS cum UTS counters 
are currently in operat ion.  The Committee, while commending the initiative of 

 
 
21 
 
the Ministry to make PRS tickets available at non -rail head locations through 
postal staff, district administrative staff and defence staff, suggests that the 
ministry can also explore making availabl e non -conventional methods such as 
mobile ticketing vehicles etc. to remote/rural locations, etc.  The Committee note 
that while ATVMs would ease the congestion at ticket counters, yet only 626 
ATVMs have been commissioned so far and these are mostly locat ed in 
metropolitan centres.  The Committee desire that greater number of ATVMs be 
procured which should be placed at various locations frequented by passengers 
which would ease the rush of passengers at counters. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As a pilot proje ct, two mobile vans were introduced, one each at Kolkata 
and New Delhi. Further 25 mobile ticketing vans for issue of PRS tickets at a cost 
of Rs.55.27 lakh have been sanctioned.  Out of these, three mobile vans have 
been commissioned at Vapi, Jaipur & Anand. 
 
 811 ATVMs have been installed and commissioned and further approx. 90 
ATVMs are under process of installation.  1400 more are under procurement.  
Further it is planned to procure 3600 ATVMs. 
 
Recommendation Para No. 20) 
  
         The Committee are glad to note that the Railways sanction a total of 
Rs.6 lakh for PRS and Rs.7 lakh for each UTS location to provide requisite 
infrastructure to them. The Committee wish to point out that the staff manning 
the Railway counters pla y a vital role in shaping the customer friendly image of 
the Railways. Hence, there is need for proper training and improving the working 
conditions to ensure that the staff manning these counters have updated 
information and are efficient and courteous in  their approach while dealing with 
passengers. 
 
 

 
 
22 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
          A system of training to the staff manning the counters on Indian 
Railways already exists and the staffs are sent for formal training on 
recruitment/appointment. Further, on  promotion to the next level, they are 
provided with refresher courses. Refresher courses are also arranged whenever 
need arises for such training. In addition to the usual training courses, the 
frontline staff of Indian Railways are also provided with cus tomer care training 
which was being imparted at Customer Care Institute, Delhi Kishanganj by hiring 
an appropriate consultant. It has now been decided that this training should 
henceforth be imparted at New Delhi, Howrah, Mumbai and Secunderabad. 
Accordingly, Northern, Eastern, Central and South Central Railways were 
nominated for imparting customer care training at these locations. While Central 
Railway has already initiated training, the other railways are under process of 
hiring of consultants through te nder process. The recommendation of the 
Committee has been communicated to all the Zonal Railways so that the requisite 
training is ensured in the Zonal Training Centers also. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.21) 
 
 The Committee note that as per New Catering Poli cy of the Indian 
Railways, emphasis has been laid on ensuring the quality of food served on 
Railways. The Committee have already presented the 15th Report on the „New 
Catering Policy 2010 of the Indian Railways”, where the subject has been 
discussed in detail. The Committee desire the Railways to give top priority to the 
catering facilities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is a continuous endeavor of the Indian Railways to provide good quality 
hygienic food to Railway passengers. Accordingly, a new catering policy, 2010 
has been introduced on 21.07.2010 with a mandate for effective quality 

 
 
23 
 
assurance programme, wherein ISO  22000 standards are to be progressively 
implemented for major contracts/units. The instructions already exist to use good 
quality raw material and branded products to ensure quality and hygiene of the 
food served to the travelling passengers. Supervision and monitoring have been 
strengthened through a mechanism put in place by deploying railway personnel, 
who check quality and hygiene and take corrective action in time bound manner. 
A centralized catering services monitoring cell has been set up in Board‟s  office 
having a toll free number 1800 -111-321 for prompt redressal of the passenger 
grievance related to the catering activities for real time assistance to travelling 
public.  Since the opening of catering complaint monitoring cell 498 complaints 
(till 30.04.2013) have been received and among them 473 complaints have been 
disposed off. Further, on the same pattern, catering monitoring cells have been 
set up at zonal and divisional level for daily monitoring of the catering activities. 
Continuous monitoring through all these is being ensured. If any irregularity is 
found punitive actions like imposition of fine, warning, suitably advised and 
termination of contract etc are taken by the railways according to the gravity of 
offence/ irregularity. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
The Committee observe that the many complaints regarding passenger 
amenities relate to the lack of safe drinking water at stations and on trains. 
Though the Railways have made certain arrangements, they are generally not felt 
to be adequate or well maintained. The Committee during their visit to Allahabad 
Station, had found the drinking water area to be very unhygienic. At the station, 
bottled water was available but priced very high which may be beyond the reach 
of the ordinary passeng ers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should lay special emphasis on making clean drinking water available to 
all category of passengers. The Committee also suggest that sources of water 

 
 
24 
 
should be placed centrally on platforms and proper signages displayed. Moreover, 
in summer months, arrangements must be made to ensure that cold drinking 
water be made at all stations, irrespective of the category. The Committee also 
desire that the Ministry take special care to ensure that the water provided is free 
from disease causing bacteria, contaminants, etc. by way of regular quality 
checks and providing RO Plants, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
           Indian Railways has been trying its best to provide packaged drinking 
water bottles (Rail Neer and other shortlisted packaged drinking water duly 
approved by Bureau of Indian Standards) at affordable prices to the travelling 
passengers on trains and at stations. However due to some unavoidable conditions 
such as increase in cost of raw materials, electricity, fuel, transportation manpower 
etc. the price of the packaged drinking water has been increased to Rs. 15/ - per 
bottle (1 litre). In additio n to this, in order to provide packaged drinking water to 
the passengers at affordable prices 500 ml bottles priced Rs.10 each are been 
produced at Nangloi plant. However CCM/NCR has been instructed to take 
necessary action to check overcharging of Package  Drinking Water (PDW) at 
Allahabad station. 
 
Drinking water has been made available at all railway stations on Indian 
Railways. During summer season, where there is a water scarcity and existing 
sources are found inadequate to meet the water requirement at  stations, water 
supply is obtained through tankers.  Water is suitably treated, as per requirement, 
to make it fit for drinking purpose.  Placing the source of water centrally may 
deprive a large number of on board passengers of this essential amenity as they 
may not avail of this facility during short duration of halt of trains at the stations.  
Therefore, instructions exist for placing drinking water facility at locations most 
convenient to passengers. 
As per the extant policy guidelines of Railway Board , water coolers are 
provided on those stations which deal with an average 1000 passengers or more 

 
 
25 
 
(inward and outward) per day.  Water coolers have accordingly been provided.  
Further, there are 22 water coolers at 10 platforms of Allahabad Junction Railwa y 
station and all these water coolers are in working condition.  
            The Health and Malaria Inspector carries out periodic Residual 
Chlorine and bacteriological tests. If any deficiency is found, then Engineering 
Department is informed. For testing Residual Chlorine, the Health and Malaria 
Inspectors are equipped with chloroscopes. For bacteriological fitness, the samples 
are sent to laboratories. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.23) 
 
           The Indian Railways cover more than 8000 stations and more than 
1.4 lakh people avail of the services at stations and trains daily. Therefore, it is of 
vital importance that cleanliness, hygiene and sanitation be properly maintained 
at all times and strictly monitored at all levels. The Committee are of the view 
that cleanliness of stations and trains in Indian Railways is far fro m satisfactory 
and is a major area of concern. While recongnzing the fact that the massive size 
of the Railway network makes it a Heruclean task to physically check each and 
every station, the Committee are of the view that the Ministry can set up special 
inspection teams at all levels to carry out random/surprise checks at stations and 
suggest corrective measures wherever required. The Committee would also like 
to suggest that the Railways should also consider involving private agencies who 
have expertise in this field through the PPP initiative. 
 
   
Reply of the Government 
 
Cleanliness is a continuous process and all out efforts are being made to 
ensure a satisfactory level of sanitation at stations.   Moreover, the varied clientele 
at railway stations, the social mores and civic sense of the users and environment 
in the city where the station is located together result in the conditions prevailing 
at the railway stations. With a view to improve the standard of cleanliness in 

 
 
26 
 
Railway premises,  a number of initiatives have been taken which include 
introduction of mechanized cl eaning, provision of washable aprons, provision of 
„Pay & Use‟ toilets, special drives etc.  Contracts are given for supply of machines 
like scrubbers, high pressure jet cleaners, mops, etc.  Periodic contracts for rag 
picking and garbage disposal are also  awarded.  Besides this, there is a long 
established system of conducting inspections by various officials at the railway 
stations to monitor cleanliness.  These inspections range from the level of 
supervisors to senior officers.  The purpose of inspection s is not only to ensure 
regular cleanliness but also to identify weak areas and take remedial measures. 
Various railways also undertake drives from time to time.  However, the 
recommendation of the committee has also been forwarded to zonal railways to 
take necessary action. 
 
         To improve upon the cleanliness and hygiene in the trains including 
coaches and toilets has been a high priority area for Indian Railways. Railways 
have taken a number of steps to improve cleanliness standards in coaches.   
 
(i) Intensive mechanized cleaning of coaches in the coaching depots, through 
professional agencies, is being carried out. Heavy duty machines such as high 
pressure jet cleaners, floor scrubbers, vacuum suction cleaners etc. are deployed 
for the purpose. Thi s has already been implemented in 95 coaching depots on 
different Zonal Railways. This mechanized cleaning is continuously being expanded 
to cover more number of coaches and in the near future more coaching depots are 
planned for implementation of this scheme. 
(ii) On Board House Keeping Scheme (OBHS): On Board House Keeping 
Scheme (OBHS) has been prescribed in all Rajdhani, Shatabdi, Duronto & other 
important long distance Mail/Express trains for frequent cleaning of coach toilets, 
doorways, aisles & passe nger compartments during the run of the trains. This 
scheme has been implemented on about 385 pairs of trains. More trains are 
planned for coverage under this scheme. 
(iii) Clean Train Stations scheme: Clean Train Stations scheme has been 
prescribed for li mited mechanized cleaning attention to identified trains during 

 
 
27 
 
their scheduled stoppages enroute at nominated “Clean Train Stations” with focus 
on cleaning and disinfecting of toilets, doorways and aisles. 32 CTS are functional 
across Indian Railways. 8 n ew CTS have recently been nominated by Railway 
Board at Shoranur & Chennai in SR, Raigada in ECoR, Raipur in SECR, Malda Town 
in ER, Lucknow Jn. in NER and Renugunta & Secunderabad in SCR in compliance 
to Budget commitment by Hon‟ble MR. 
           Besides, regular checks/inspections are also carried out at various 
level to monitor the level of cleanliness in coaches. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
           The Committee observe that the response of „pay and use‟ toilets in 
larger stations has been good. However, in small and medium stations, there 
have been limited response to them. The Committee would like to suggest to the 
Ministry to try and in volve local agencies in running the „pay and use‟ toilets 
which may lead to a better response.  The Railways take up in right earnest the 
setting up of environmentally viable/green toilets at stations.  Toilets should be 
located at convenient locations at the platform with proper signages and are well 
lighted.  Moreover, attendants should always be present in them to ensure that 
proper cleanliness is maintained.  Railways should attempt to educate the public 
about the importance of cleanliness and proper sa nitation at stations either 
through publicity or by levying light fines, etc. which act as a deterrent to open 
defecation/urination in and around station premises. 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
           The toilets at railway stations are not only used by the bonafide 
passengers but also by a large number of outsiders who get access to the railway 
stations and yards owing to the open nature of railway system. More and more 
toilets at railways stations including that of small & medium station are brought 
under the purview of „Pay & Use‟ toilets. At present, more than 850 stations are 

 
 
28 
 
provided with normal „Pay & Use‟ toilets and more than 30 stations are provided 
with Deluxe „Pay & Use‟ toilets on Indian Railways.  Any lack in proper 
maintenance and cleanlines s of „Pay & Use toilets is taken up seriously and 
punitive action is taken against the contractor accordingly.  Cleanliness 
awareness campaigns are also launched for education of the rail users to ensure 
a satisfactory level of cleanliness at railway stations. Rules under the Railways Act 
1989 has been duly framed vide Gazette Notification dated 26.11.2012 to 
penalize the persons affecting cleanliness & hygiene at Railway premises.  
However, the recommendation of the committee has also been forwarded to 
zonal railways to take appropriate action. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.27) 
 
           The Committee laud the initiative of the Ministry in setting up of a 
mechanized laundry in Mumbai under the Central Railways. Passenger response 
to this initiative has also be en found to be satisfactory. The Committee 
recommend that the Railways should set up more mechanized laundries in future 
to phase out the system of manual washing of linen. The Committee would like 
to be kept apprised of the status regarding the establishm ent of the new 
proposed mechanized laundries. 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
   To improve upon the quality of washing of linen supplied to the 
passengers in trains, Indian Railways have identified 64 major coaching depots 
locations for setting up of mechanized laundries on railway land. 20 such 
laundries have been commissioned so far. Action is underway for commissioning 
laundries at other identified coaching depots/locations. 8 -10 mechanised 
laundries are planned to be set up in current year. 
 
 
 

 
 
29 
 
Recommendation (Para No.28) 
 
 The Committee note that currently the security of the In dian Railways is 
being handled by the Government Railway Police, District Police and the Railway 
Protection Force. Further, the Committee note that in order to consolidate more 
powers and responsibility with the RPF, the Ministry have moved a proposal for 
amendment in the RPF Act, which would enable the RPF to replace the GRP in 
the passenger area. The Committee feel that this is a positive step as security 
matters should be consolidated and handled by a single agency which would 
result in quicker reaction time in case of emergencies and also avoid inter-agency 
issues.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
   At present, a three tier security system comprising of District Police, 
Government Railway Police (GRP) &  Railway Protection Force is prevailing over 
railways as under- 
 
District Police: Security of tracks, bridges and tunnels over Indian Railways. 
 
(ii) Government Railway Police (GRP): A wing of State Police responsible for 
prevention and detection of crime and maintenance of law and order in station 
premises and trains. 50% of the cost of Government Railway Police is borne by the 
Railways and the balance is paid by the State Government concerned.  
 
(iii) Railway Protection Force (RPF): Protection and security of Railway 
property, passengers and passenger area and matters connected therewith. RPF 
functions under Ministry of Railways. 
  
 As per provisions of the Railway Protection Force Act 1957 (23 of 1957) 
(RPF Act), the security of passengers and pass engers area is the responsibility of 
RPF. However, requisite legal powers are not available with the Railway Protection 

 
 
30 
 
Force (RPF) to deal with passengers related offences. It has become a major 
hindrance in effective functioning of RPF. 
  
Standing Commit tee on Railways in their Fifth Report presented during 
examination of RP (UP) Amendment Bill recommended for “giving more powers to 
the Railway Protection Force relating to the security and Property of passengers as 
well.” In the budget speech 2010 -11, the  then Hon‟ble MR pronounced that 
“Railways will bring a comprehensive bill for providing security  
 
to our passengers” and in budget speech 2011 -12 it was conveyed to the 
parliament that “A comprehensive bill has been drafted to empower RPF to deal 
with pa ssenger related offences and it is likely to be placed before parliament 
soon.” 
    
    It has, therefore, been proposed to amend the RPF Act to empower RPF 
to deal with passenger offences. It will lead to a 2-tier security system on Railways 
– RPF and District Police – from presently prevailing 3-tier security system of RPF, 
Government Railway Police (GRP) and District Police. RPF will have legal powers 
within passenger area. Beyond passenger area, State Government will continue to 
ensure security on Railw ays. It will also be in larger public interest being a 
passenger friendly and cost effective measure as there will be no jurisdictional 
problems and duplicity of resources. Railways pay 50% cost of GRP. Savings from 
expenditure incurred by railways on GRP will be utilized for strengthening of RPF. 
  
  The proposal to amend the RPF Act to empower the RPF to deal with 
passenger related offences in the passenger area has been concurred and 
approved by the Ministries of Home Affairs and the Law & Justice. As ad vised by 
the cabinet Secretariat, comments of States have been solicited on the above 
proposal. Comments have been received from 19 States and comments are 
awaited from remaining States. On receipt of the same, comments of States will 
be incorporated in the Cabinet Note and remitted for consideration of the cabinet.    

 
 
31 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2) 
 
 The Committee find that certain on-board minimum facilities to be 
provided to passengers have been stipulated by the Railways, which include 
internal fittings, such as lighting, fan, comfortable seats and toilets and external 
fittings like display board, reservation charts, etc. The Comm ittee are of the view 
that amenities both at the station and on -board, are of paramount importance 
and that the Railways should take steps to upgrade and augment them regularly. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Passenger amenities at station are provided in acc ordance with 
comprehensive guidelines issued to Zonal Railways which specifies the level of 
amenities to be provided at each category of stations. On the recommendation of 
the Committee of Executive Directors to review the norms for provision of 
passenger amenities at stations, detail instructions have been issued to Zonal 
Railways in September, 2012 which interalia includes revised category of stations, 
provision of adequate number of water taps, water coolers, solar energy 
technology for improved lighting , platform shelters, escalators/elevators, ramp, 
standard signage, washable aprons, Foot Over Bridge at crossing stations, coin -
operated ticket vending machines and passenger -operated touch screen enquiry 
terminals. Further, up gradation of Passenger Ameni ties is also undertaken 
through the scheme of Adarsh Stations which is based on the identified need for 
upgradation of passenger amenities at the identified stations. 
  

 
 
32 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
 
 The Committee note that besides having comprehensive guid elines 
defining the quantum of amenities to be provided at each category of stations, 
the Railways have also identified key areas to concentrate their efforts at 
providing passenger amenities at various stations. The Committee are of the view 
that if these identified amenities, such as platforms of adequate length, drinking 
water, toilets, seating arrangements, lights, fans, information display and booking 
are provided at all stations, it would benefit a larger number of stations, 
irrespective of their cate gorization. Therefore, the Committee would like to 
emphasize that the Ministry should ensure that at least the key amenities that 
have been identified by the Railways should be provided to each and every 
station, in a phased manner. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
            The existing policy guidelines for provision of passenger amenities at 
stations provides for the following key amenities which are termed as minimum 
essential amenities at all stations - Booking facility, drinking water facility, waiting 
hall, platform shelter, platforms of prescribed height, lighting, time table display 
and clock at all categories of stations. Further, seating arrangements 
urinals/toilets and fans are also provided at all stations except the contractor 
operated halt  stations.  Instructions have been issued to Zonal Railways to 
ensure the availability of minimum essential amenities as per the revised scale 
prescribed in September, 2012.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.12) 
 
          The Committee further find that in addition to the above monitoring, 
the Ministry have also set up Multi -Disciplinary Services Improvement Groups 

 
 
33 
 
(SIGs) at the zonal, divisional and station levels for inspecting the stations jointly 
as per prescribed sched ule. The mandate of these groups is to give special 
attention to the proper functioning of the amenities provided and prompt remedial 
action taken in regard to the deficiencies noted. Any further augmentation needed 
in amenities is also recommended by thes e groups. The Committee appreciates 
this initiative by the Railways to strengthen the monitoring mechanism and urge 
them to increase the frequency of such inspections. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
        The suggestion has been noted and the SIG inspection schedule shall 
be reviewed based on the recommendation of the Committee. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
The Committee, on their visit to the Allahabad Railway Station had found 
that despite the fact that it was such an important station that sees heavy 
footfalls, yet the condition of the waiting room and drinking water areas left much 
to be desired. The Committee strongly feel that without proper monitoring of the 
sanctioned amenities, slippages are bound to happen and passengers would have 
to put up wit h sub-standard amenities. The Committee feel that regular visits of 
senior officers shall keep the authorities at the stations alert to their duties and 
responsibilities. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Based on the observations noted during the visit of the Standing 
Committee on Railways to Allahabad in May, 2012, North Central Railway has 
taken necessary action on various items such as improvement of cleanliness of the 
station, provision of adequate num ber of dustbins, improvement to the ladies 

 
 
34 
 
waiting room, improvement to the toilets in the waiting room, action to eliminate 
water-logging in the waiting hall, provision of fly catchers, etc. Further, North 
Central Railway has been advised to ensure regula r inspections of the station so 
that the officials at the station are alert in discharging their duties and 
responsibilities.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.25) 
  
        The Committee further note that the Railways have envisaged On -
Board House Keeping Services (OBHS) in all Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto and 
important mail trains. They, however, find that out of the identified 596 identified 
pairs of trains, this schem e is operational in only 385 pairs of trains. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry bring more stations and trains under this 
scheme expeditiously. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
           On Board House Keeping Scheme (OBHS): On Board House Keeping 
Scheme (OBHS) has been prescribed in all Rajdhani, Shatabdi, Duronto & other 
important long distance Mail/Express trains for frequent cleaning of coach toilets, 
doorways, aisles & passenger compartments during the run of the trains. This 
scheme has been implemente d on about 385 pairs of trains. Around 200 more 
trains are planned for coverage under this scheme. 
 
            OBHS is being provided on identified Mail/Express trains satisfying 
laid down parameters such as journey time/period, coach type etc. Zonal Rail ways 
identify additional trains for provision of OBHS scheme, as per requirements which 
is an ongoing process.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
35 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.9) 
 
      The Committee finds that passenger amenities are not provided by a 
single department but rather by mul tiple departments of the Railways. The 
Committee is not fully convinced of the rationale proffered by the Railways that 
since each department has technical and professional expertise, it would be 
better equipped to provide a certain amenity. The Committee would like to stress 
that a single nodal department should be entrusted with the task of providing 
passenger amenities both at the stations and on -board to ensure a faster and 
more efficient delivery mechanism. Having a nodal department for passenger 
amenities would obviate the need for time consuming inter -department 
coordination and also avoid duplication. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry should explore avenues whereby a separate department may be 
created at both apex and zonal levels to cater specifically to passenger amenities. 
The Committee would like to be kept apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
           The range of passenger amenities made available at the stations 
and on board is extensive and intrinsically involves the role of Civil Engineering, 
Electrical Engineering, Telecom and Commercial branches of the Railway system. 
Further, on board services are provided by the Mechanical Engineering, Electrical 
Engineering and the Commercial branches.   Each wing of the Railway 
organization has the requisite technical and professional capability for providing 
and sustaining specific passenger ameniti es and services. However, within the 
multi-disciplinary Railway system the Divisional Railway Manager/Additional 
Divisional Railway Manager perform the nodal role of coordinating the output 

 
 
36 
 
from various branches for ensuring the quality and scale of amenit ies prescribed.  
At the Zonal Railway level, the General Manager/Additional General Manager are 
responsible for bringing out the synergy from the cross -functional teams at the 
headquarters level. The inter -departmental coordination at the divisions and the  
headquarters are ensured by the General Managers and Divisional Railway 
Managers respectively. 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see recommendation at Para No. 12 of Chapter I 
 
Recommendation (Para No.10) 
 
    Further, the Committee find that funds are allocated under the plan head 
of „passenger amenities‟ and no separate allocation is made for different 
categories of passenger amenities within this head. The Committee are of the 
opinion that if separate all ocations are made for each of the categories, fund 
utilization would be more transparent and the progress of passenger amenities 
would be better monitored. They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
set both physical and financial targets for each  item of passenger amenities 
instead of having a common head. 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Funds allotment for various categories / works of passenger amenities are 
done keeping in view the requirement, progress of work and inter -se-priority of 
works.  Progress (physical & financial) of various works under passenger 
amenities are monitored at va rious levels in Railways.  However, the suggestion 
has been noted.  
Comments of the Committee 
Please see recommendation at Para No. 15 of Chapter I 
 
 

 
 
37 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
The Committee note with concern that during 2009 -10 and 2010 -11, the 
funds allocated for passenger amenities have not been fully utilized by the 
Railways. Though the estimates were revised downwards from Rs.1102 cr. to 
Rs.923 cr. and from Rs.1302 cr. to Rs.998 cr. during 2009 -10 and 2010 -11, 
respectively, yet the actual achieveme nt was far lower, at Rs.906 and    Rs.911 
crore, respectively. The Committee fail to appreciate the reasons for the same 
which have been stated by the Ministry, i.e, the slower pace of 
replacement/renovation works of passenger amenities by some Zonal Railw ays. 
The Committee desire that projects taken up for passenger amenities may be 
given priority and targets/projects identified should be completed within the 
stipulated time period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
     The Committee‟s recommendation has been noted.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see recommendation at Para No. 18 of Chapter I 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 
    The Committee are constrained to note that out of the 196 Multi 
Functional Complexes (MFCs) taken up for development only 21 have been 
completed so far. The Committee are aware that the mandatory requirement of 
Cabinet approval for all long term leasing  of government land introduced since 
March 2011 is a constraint, and urge the Ministry to apprise the Cabinet of this 
constraint and the adverse effects of such an action on providing enhanced 
passenger amenities. The Committee, at the same time, fail to a ppreciate the fact 
that a large member of agencies are involved in this scheme and wish to be 
apprised of the reasons for this multiplicity of agencies. 
 

 
 
38 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
     To Kick start the work of Multi Functional Complexes (MFCs) announced 
in Railway Budget 2009 -10, a few MFCs were assigned to M/s RITES & RVNL and 
Zonal Railways in addition to M/s IRCON & RLDA, who as per Budget 
pronouncement were required to develop MFCs. Subsequently, major assignment 
of the construction of MFCs has been entrusted to RLDA only. 
 
    Cabinet Secretariat vide their F.No. 511/2/1/2010 -Cab.III dt. 30.07.2012 
have given relaxation for development and use of Railway land by RLDA as per 
provision of Railway Amendment Act,2005 and the Rules framed there under and 
in accordance with the pr evalent policies and guidelines of the Railway Ministry 
and the Government. Accordingly RLDA has started bidding process for 
development of MFCs. So far 41 MFC buildings have been completed by IRCON & 
Zonal Railways and they have also started process for leasing for their operation.     
    
Recommendation (Para No.24) 
 
           The Committee also noted that the Railways, by way of new initiatives, 
have introduced limited mechanized cleaning at „Clean Train Stations‟. Though the 
initiative is certainly laudable, yet the Committee were distressed to find that only 29 
stations have been identified as „Clean Train Stations‟. The Committee are of the 
opinion that this is an abysmally small number to cater to the large number of trains 
that are being operated on the Railway network. The Committee desire that more 
stations sho uld be brought into the ambit of „Clean Train Stations‟ so that trains 
passing through them can get the benefits obtained from mechanized cleaning. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
     Clean Train Stations scheme has been prescribed for limited 
mechanized cleaning attention to identified trains during their scheduled stoppages 
enroute at nominated “Clean Train Stations” with focus on cleaning and disinfecting 

 
 
39 
 
of toilets, doorways and aisles. 32 CTS are functional across Indian Railways. 8 more 
CTS have been nominated by Railway Board in July 2013. 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
 The Committee are, however, distressed to note that a large number of 
vacancies exist in the RPF. Though t he process of recruitment of has already been 
initiated, the Committee feel that in the first place, such a large number of vacancies 
should not have been allowed to occur. The Committee desire that the recruitment 
process of security personnel be expedite d, especially in light of the fact that they 
have to undergo extensive and intensive training before being made available to the 
Railways. 
Reply of the Government 
 
   All recruitment formalities have been completed for filling up 511 vacancies of 
Sub Inspectors in Railway Protection Force and preparation of final result is under 
process. 
 
   11952 vacancies for Constables had already been notified in 2011. A decision  
has been taken to enhance the vacancies by 5135. These post notification vacancies 
have been arisen due to retirement, death and creation of new posts etc. and total 
vacancies of constable enhanced to 17087. Written examination for filling up of these 
vacancies of constables is going to be held on 16th, 23rd, and 30th June 2013 in 15 
cities all over the country.  
Comments of the Committee 
Please see recommendation at Para No. 21 of Chapter I 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Railways are implementing an ambitious 
integrated security system to strengthen the surveillance mechanism over sensitive 
stations on Railway network. However, the Committee note with concern that it is still 

 
 
40 
 
under tendering in most Zones. The Committee have repeatedly been emphasizing 
that delays nullify the usefulness of schemes/initiatives. The Committee take a strong 
view of the delays in the expeditious completion of schemes involving passenger 
safety and security and urg e the Ministry to complete the work related to the 
integrated security system on a top priority basis. The Committee may be apprised of 
the same.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
     Integrated Security System (ISS) is being implemented to strengthen 
surveillance mechanism over 202 sensitive stations of the Indian railways. Above 
System is being implemented at an estimated cost of Rs. 353crore. The system 
consists of following broad areas-  
 
 Internet Protocol Based CCTV SYSTEM  
 ACCESS CONTROL  
 PERSONAL & BAGGAGE SCREENING SYSTEM 
 EXPLOSIVE DETECTION & DISPOSAL SYSTEM 
 
      Area to be covered under ISS include Entry/ Exit, Circulating area, 
concourse, platforms, parcel area, washing line, vehicle entry etc. The concept is 
to have multiple checking starting from entry to the station premises and 
continuing till the boarding of the train. CCTV system shall be internet protocol 
based with video analytics and automatic vehicle scanner are  being provided at 
entry gates from where vehicles enter into the station premises.  
 
     Above System will become functional at 82 stations over 11 zonal 
railways in near future as installation is under progress. List of these stations is at 
Annexure A. 
 

 
 
41 
 
 Tendering is under process for implementation of the System at remaining 
zones. Constant monitoring is being done to ensure that speedy implementation of 
the System by the zonal railways. 
Annexure A  
 
Zone  Stations  
Northeast 
Frontier 
Railway 
Katihar, Kisanganj, New Jalpaiguri, Siliguri, Guwahati, 
Lumbding, Dimapur, Dibrugarh   
Southern 
Railway 
Chennai Cnetral, Basin Bridge, Chennai Egmore, Chennai 
Beach, Mamblam, Tambaram, Tiruvallur, Trichy, Madurai, 
Calicut, Mangalore (PGT), Trivandrum, Mangalore (TVC), 
Coimbatore   
South Western 
Railway  
Jaipur, Jodhpur, Ajmer, Bikaner 
South Central 
Railway  
Hyderabad, Secundrabad and Tirupati 
Metro Kolkata 23 Stations 
Central Railway Mumbai CST, Dadar, Kulra, Lokmanya Tilak Terminus, Thane, 
Kalyan, Pune and Miraj   
Northern 
Railway  
New Delhi, Delhi Main, Hazrat Nijamuddin, Shahadra, Tilak 
Bridge, Sarai Rohilla, Delhi Cantt, Shivazi Bridge, Anand Vihar, 
Ghaziabad    
East Coast 
Railway 
Bhubhneshwar, Cuttak, Puri, Vishakhapattnam 
West Central  
Railway 
Itarsi, Bhopal 
South East 
Railway 
Bilaspur, Raipur, Gondia 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
42 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 
 The Committee note that the Indian Railways have proposed to develop 
an all-India security helpline for round the clock assistance to passengers during 
journeys. The Committee urge the Ministry to expedite this process and give wide 
publicity to increase a wareness of this number so that the travelling public can 
use it to their advantage.       
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
     Setting up of an “All India Security Help -Line” is under process to 
provide a unique Help -Line Number to railway passengers for rou nd the clock 
security related assistance during the journey. This service shall be made 
available through a unique four digit toll free phone number. Northern railway is 
the nodal zone for implementation of the work and CRIS is the implementing 
agency. 
 
    Space has been allotted for setting up of call center at 6th Bn, RPSF 
Campus, Daya Basti. Detailed estimates to the tune of Rs. 4.77 Crore have 
already been approved. Vide Ministry of Telecommunications & IT letter no. 16 -
3/2013-AS-III, dated 02.05.2013,  1322 number has been allocated by DOT as 
Security Help-Line No.    Efforts are on for early setting up of Security Help -Line.  
Detailed estimates to the tune of Rs.4.77 Cr for implementation of the project 
have been approved by Board Finance and approval has already been conveyed 
to GM/NR. 
 

 
 
43 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee note that 50 stations have been identified to be developed 
as World Class Stations by resorting to the PPP mode.  The intention of this 
scheme is to harness the real estate potential of land around and the air space 
above the stations without any additional cost to the Railways.  The plan 
envisages the provision of modern facili ties at stations such as food plazas, 
currency exchange counter, ATM facilities, hotels, car rentals, etc.  The 
Committee, to their utter dismay, find that not a single station has so far been 
developed as a World Class Station.  The reasons forwarded by t he Ministry that 
the implementation of this scheme requires preparation of Master Plan and 
Feasibility reports first, as well as approval of several local agencies is not 
acceptable as such aspects should have been factored into the scheme during the 
formulation stage itself.  Extensive and effective consultations with all associated 
agencies at the time of drafting of the scheme would have eased the road blocks 
at the initial stages itself,  paving the way for faster implementation.  The 
Committee feel that delays in the implementation of the scheme negates the very 
objective and, therefore, urge the Ministry to take up the work in right earnest so 
that both the passengers and the Railways are benefited from this otherwise 
laudable initiative. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
         Railways have been making sincere efforts in the direction of 
development of world class stations. However, not much headway could be made 
so far, due to various unavoidable reasons. It is a fact that before such a major 
project is undertaken, det ailed feasibility studies have to be undertaken w.r.t 

 
 
44 
 
traffic projections, local bye -laws, feasibility of executing the work under running 
traffic etc. Apart from Railways own approval of the plans which calls for a careful 
and thorough examination at various levels, clearances have to be obtained from 
local authorities e.g. Municipal corporations/Development Authorities w.r.t 
change of land use, Floor Space Index, need for integrating the development 
with other modes of transport, capacity of approach road s to handle additional 
traffic etc. All of this requires extensive, time -consuming discussions/meetings 
and formal bids for Development Contract can only be invited after at least in -
principle approvals are in place. 
 
 
             For instance in the case  of New Delhi, discussions regarding the 
feasibility of implementing the Master plan went on with local authorities (e.g. 
UTTIPEC) for years, and in the case of Mumbai CST, which is a World Heritage 
Site, the scheme could not be finalised so far for want o f Heritage clearances 
from UNESCO, and increased FSI and change of land use from Government. 
  
           However, with a view to expedite the process of developing world 
class stations, Railways have, in 2012, set up a separate focussed organisation 
named Indian Railway Stations Development Corporation Ltd. (IRSDC). Set up as 
a Joint Venture between IRCON & RLDA, IRSDC has been initially entrusted with 
5 of the 50 stations viz. Bijwasan (Delhi), Habibganj (Bhopal), Anand Vihar 
(Delhi), Chandigarh and Shiva ji Nagar (Pune). Strict time lines have been drawn 
up for the various stages of planning and execution including Consultancy 
Contracts. Development Contracts for these five stations are targeted for award 
during the year subject to various approvals.  IRSD C shall endeavour to develop 
the stations by utilizing the commercial potential of land and air space around the 
stations. IRSDC has recently awarded all consultancy contracts for the 5 stations 
and studies are in progress.  In the Railway budget 13 -14, a target of Rs 1000 cr 
has been fixed for IRSDC. 
 

 
 
45 
 
     Notwithstanding the above, provision of modern facilities is being 
carried out at many of these stations every year, including provision of Multi -
functional complexes, ATMs, food plazas, etc as an ongoing exercise. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
           The Committee would also like to stress that reservation of tickets on 
the internet through the IRCTC website is one of the most convenient modes of 
passenger reservation.  However, it is found generally that the IRCTC website is 
very slow and c onsiderable time is wasted/consumed in purchasing a ticket 
through it.  While fully acknowledging the fact that the IRCTC website witnesses 
massive traffic which may be the reason for this, they would like to point out that 
internet ticketing is not only c onvenient for the passengers but also helps in 
decongesting railway counters and eliminates the menace of touts.  Therefore, the 
Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry the necessity of upgrading the 
capacity of the IRCTC website/servers to enabl e it to handle greater traffic with a 
lesser turnaround time.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the steps 
taken in this direction. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
           Upgradation of e -ticketing capacity is a continuous process to fulfill 
the increasing demand for e -tickets.   The highest ever booking of more than 5 
lakh e-tickets in a day has been achieved recently.  In the past year IRCTC has 
upgraded its in ternet bandwidth as well as installed high capacity servers with 
upgradation of hardware and software infrastructure further upgradation of 
hardware and software is in process and is expected to be completed in the 
current financial year.   
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                             T.R. BAALU, 
  February, 2014                                                          Chairman, 
  Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                  Standing Committee on Railways 

 
 
46 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  ON 
RAILWAYS (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 12th February, 201 4 from 1 000 hrs. to   
1030  hrs. in Committee Room „C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
      
PRESENT 
 
SHRI T.R. BAALU             -  CHAIRMAN  
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
3. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
4. Shri Bhaskar Rao Patil Khatgonkar 
5. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
6. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
7. Dr. Vivekanand 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Husain Dalwai 
9. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
10. Shri K. Parasaran 
11. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
12. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
13. Shri Ishwar Singh 
        SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Additional Director 
2. Smt. Geeta Parmar   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 
 
47 
 
2. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports:    
 
 (i)  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
 (ii) Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/  observations 
contained in the 20th Report of the Standing  Committee on Railways 
(15th Lok Sabha) on "Demands for  Grants  2013-14 of the 
Ministry of Railways" 
 
 The Committee adopted the draft Report at (i) with minor modifications as shown 
in Annexure and the draft Report at (ii) without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report at (i) in the 
light of factual verification received from the Ministry of Railways and present/lay the 
Reports to both the Houses of Parliament.   
 
 The Committee, then, adjourned. 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
48 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 19TH REPORT        
(15TH LOK SABHA) ON “PASSENGER AMENITIES AND PASSENGER SAFETY 
IN INDIAN RAILWAYS” 
 
 
  Total number of Recommendations/Observations    31 
 
(i)  Recommendations/1observations which have been accepted by                              
 the Government:         16 
 
Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 15, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27 and 28 
Percentage of total                           52 % 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire                 
 to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:     5 
 
 Para Nos. 2, 6, 12, 13 and 25 
 Percentage of total         16 % 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 5 the  
 Government  have not been accepted by the Committee and which               
 require reiteration        8 
 
 Para Nos. 9, 10, 14, 17, 24, 29, 30 and 31 
 Percentage of total            25 % 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of          
  Government  are still awaited       2 
  
 Para Nos. 16 and 19  
 Percentage of total                    6 % 