 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
 
18 
(2012-13) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 15th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘New 
Catering Policy - 2010 of Indian Railways’] 
 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
   NEW DELHI 
 
   April, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)

EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
   STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  
  (2012-13) 
 
     FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
   MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS      
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the 15th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘New Catering 
Policy -2010 of Indian Railways’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.04.2013  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.04.2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
     April, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SCR NO.   169  
 
 
 CONTENTS  
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….…………………………. (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….……….. (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………………… 1 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been 13 
 
 accepted by the Government   ……………………………  
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 23 
 
 do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
 
 replies……………………………………………………………….  
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 26 
 
 Replies of the Government   have not been accepted  
 
 by the Committee and which require reiteration ….….  
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
 
     replies of the Government   are still awaited   ……….            33 
 
 APPENDICES  
 
I Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on  
 
 Railways held on 05.04.2013………… 34  
II 
 
 
Analysis   of   Action   Taken   by   the Government   
on   the Recommendations/Observations     contained     
in     the 15th   Report      (15 th   Lok   Sabha)   on   
‘New Catering Policy – 2010 of Indian 
Railways’……………  
 
 
 
  
 
 36  
      (ii)  
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2012-13) 
 
Shri T. R. Baalu - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
3. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
4. Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
5. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
6. Shri Bhaskar Rao Patil Khatgonkar 
7. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
8. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
9. Shri Devender Nagpal 
10. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
11. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
12. Shri Rudra Madhab Ray 
13. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
14. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
15. Smt. Yashodhara Raje Scindia 
16. Shri Ganesh Singh 
17. Shri Lal Ji Tandon 
18. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
19. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
20. Dr. Vivekanand 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Husain Dalwai 
23. Shri Prabhat Jha 
24. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
25. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
26. Shri K. Parasaran 
27. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
28. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
30. Shri Ishwar Singh 
31. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
 
 (iii) 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Abhijit Kumar - Director 
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik           - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Swati Parwal         - Committee Officer 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
  
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Railways (2012 -13), having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Eighteenth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways on ‘New Catering Policy – 2010 of Indian Railways’. 
 
 
2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 2 1.05.2012 and it 
contained 16  Recommendations/Observations. The Ministry of Railways have 
furnished their Action Taken Replies in respect of  all the 
recommendations/observations. 
 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at 
their sitting held on 05.04.2013.  
 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; T.R. BAALU 
17 April, 2013 Chairman, 
27 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
          This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations and observations contained in the Fifteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways on “New Catering Policy-2010 of Indian Railways”.  
The Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 25.04.2012. Simultaneously, the 
Report was also laid in the Rajya Sabha. 
 2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government on all the 16 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These have been broadly 
categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 13 and 15 
         Total : 9 
         Chapter-II 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Commi ttee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:- 
Para Nos. 7 and 16 
         Total :  2 
         Chapter-III 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and whic h require 
reiteration:- 
Para Nos. 5, 10, 11, 12 and 14       
        Total : 5 
                  Chapter-IV 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies are 
awaited:-  
Para Nos. Nil 
         Total : Nil 
         Chapter-V 
 

2 
 
3. The Com mittee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations/observations. 
I. Implementation of New Catering Policy 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
4.  The Committee were distressed to note that though the New Catering Policy 
of 2010 was issued in July, 2010, it was being implemented at a very slow pace. 
During their visit to Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Mysore and Goa during May, 2011, the 
Committee observed that there were certain problems being faced by the Zonal 
Railways in taking over the catering services from IRCTC  which include shortage of 
staff litigation by contractors and the lack of sp ecialized manpower with t he 
Railways. The Committee recommend ed that all issues should be identified and 
sorted out expeditiously and steps be taken for effective implementation of the Policy 
within a specified time frame.  Further, the Railways should take urgent steps for 
establishment of ISO certified base kitchens in the Railway premises itself to ensure 
timely supply of meals and effective s upervision, modernization and mechanization 
of catering equipment, management of catering service by professional, stringent 
criteria for selection of catering contractors, recruitment of trained/professionally 
qualified staff and training of catering staf f from time to time. The Committees also 
desired that pantry cars should invariably be provided in all long distance trains at 
the earliest in all long distance trains which have a running time exceeding 16 hours. 
5.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
 “Instructions have been issued vide Board‟s letter no. E(NG)I -
2003/IR/10 dated 28.12.10 to restore the catering cadre as existed  on 
31.03.2003 at the time of transfer of catering activities along with staff to IRCTC 
which  is approximately 5269 posts including 1284 Group C and 3985 Group D.  
As a result of this all catering staff at present, there are total 1959 (Group C 736 
and Group D 1223) catering staff available in the catering Department over IR. 
Further 188 IRC TC absorbee erstwhile Railways catering staff have exercised 
their option to come back railways catering department. In this regard after 

3 
 
approval of Board/MR and concurrence of DoP P&W instruction are under 
issue in consultation with federation.    
         
 Emphasis has been laid on setting up of modern base Kitchen to 
ensure quality, hygiene and proper logistics. Further, Zonal railways have 
been instructed to identify the locations to set up base kitchens to ensure that 
all mobile units are serviced by these base kitchens.  Presently, 14 base 
kitchens are in operation inside the railways premises, out of them 8 are 
being run departmentally and 6 are licensee managed. Further, there are 135 
base kitchens located outside railway premises which are being ma naged by 
the private licensees. 
           
Catering Policy 2010 stipulates that catering services are to be managed 
departmentally by the Railways duly imparting in -service training to the staff. In 
this regard Board has issued instructions in this regard and zonal railways are 
to take action accordingly.  
 
As per new Catering Policy 2010, the demands for attachment of pantry 
cars to the trains are considered based on various factors such as priority of the 
train, (first priority to Duronto/Rajdhani then Su per fast Mail/Express trains then 
the trains running more than 24 hours either way) its commercial justification 
and availability of pantry cars and load limitation in the trains etc. In cases 
where trains are not provided with a Pantry Car, the catering s ervices are 
provided through Train Side Vending (TSV) or through static catering units at 
en-route stations.” 
 
6.  The Committee  are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry of 
Railways. The reply does not mention the specific problems faced by the zonal 
railways in taking over catering services from the IRCTC . Besides, the present 
status of taking over of catering services from IRCTC has not been furnished 
to the Committee. The Committee, therefore, desire that specific hurdles faced 

4 
 
by the zonal railw ays in the implementation of the New Catering Policy and 
steps being taken for its expedious implementation be informed to the 
Committee. The Committee would also like to be regularly informed of the 
progress made in the matter. The Committee further desire that in trains where 
provision of pantry cars is not feasible, steps should be taken for providing 
fresh food items to the passengers. 
II.  Setting up of Base Kitchens 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
 
7.  As per the Catering Policy 2010, Zonal Railways were to set up modern, 
mega and medium base kitchens to supply food in bulk and packaged to mobile 
units as well as static units to provide good quality, hygienic and affordable food to 
passengers. The Committee ha d been informed that the Railways had issued 
detailed guideline for the facilities to be provided in the base kitchens which 
included ISO-22000 certification, setting up a grid of mega and medium base 
kitchens in Railway premises, setting up of proper pathway connecting base 
kitchens to platforms, for proper training of the departmental catering staff training 
to be organized through trained personnel from reputed institutions of hotel  
management/catering institutes/food craft institutes and identifying a grid of trains 
and the specific needs to be pro vided for each trains for the  nominated base 
kitchen at the stations where each train will stop at the meal timing. According  to 
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), the design modules incorporating the 
mechanism and the state -of-the –art technology will be formulated and issued to 
the Zonal Railways.  The Committee desire d that the formulation of these design 
modules should be completed without any delay. The Committee were happy to 
note that a pilot project for setting up a modern and mechanized base  kitchen had 
already been initiated by the South Central railway and recommend that all Zonal 
Railways should follow suit so that the infrastructure related to the setting up of 
modern base kitchens is speedily developed. 

5 
 
 
8.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
         “Emphasis has been laid on setting up of modern base Kitchen to ensure 
quality, hygiene and proper logistics. Further, Zonal railways have been 
instructed to identify the locations to set up base kitc hens to ensure that all 
mobile units are ser viced by these base kitchens.  Presently, 14 base kitchens 
are in operation inside the railways premises, out of them 8 are being run 
departmentally and 6 are licensee managed. Further, there are 135 base 
kitchens located outside railway premises which are being managed by the 
private licensees.” 
9.  The Committee  have been apprised that the zonal railways have been 
entrusted with the task of identifying the location for setting up base kitchens. 
However, the Commi ttee are highly disappointed to learn that only 14 base 
kitchens are in operation inside the railway premises. The Committee would 
like to be informed by the Ministry about the details of the number and 
location of base kitchens to be set up in various zonal railways and the grid of 
trains that would be serviced by them. According to the Ministry, there are 135 
base kitchens located outside railway premises which are being managed by 
private licensees. The Committee would like to be informed about the 
upgradation of these existing base kitchens to international standards and 
about the proposal to bring them under zonal railways ’ management. The 
Committee urge the Ministry to undertake the establishment of base kitchens 
on a prioroity basis. 
 
 
 

6 
 
III.  Ban on cooking at Platforms 
(Recommendation Para No.9) 
10.  The New Catering Policy provides for ban on cooking on platforms at 
suburban stations and attempts to progressively reduce cooking on stalls and 
trolleys on the platform except for items which could be pr epared through electrically 
operated equipment only. Further, it stipulates that in order to insure cooking free 
platforms, Zonal Railways may identify suitable space, if available, on railway 
premises near railway stations for setting up kitchens by the l icensees of static units 
as per the terms and conditions of extant policy on land/rent. Though the Committee 
appreciated the concern of the Railways about the fire hazards on platforms due to 
cooking of food, they were apprehensive that such blanket ban on  cooking might 
cause considerable inconvenience to the passengers as well as to the licencees. 
They felt that either the space for setting up kitchens may not be available at most of 
the railway stations or the licensee may not be in a position to set up i ts kitchen. 
They, therefore, desire d that while implementing the Policy, the Railways should 
carefully examine this aspect in order to avoid inconvenience to the passengers as 
well as to the licensees. Adequate safety measures may be taken by the Railways to 
avoid electrical short-circuits, etc. 
11.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
“Para 7.1 of Catering Policy clearly provides for „attempts to progressively 
reduce cooking on stalls and trolleys on platforms‟ 
      The way forward to achieve cooking free stalls/trolleys is defined in para 7.8 
– i.e. by identification of suitable space on railways premises.  
       
A large number of references from various fora including Railways have 
been received by this Ministry r egarding allowing cooking on the platforms. The 
matter has been reviewed by the Board and Instructions already exist in which 
Zonal Railway have already been suggested to take certain steps for following 
two modes of cooking (i) Electrical induction Cookin g (ii) Cooking through LPG 
gas subject  to fulfillment of the  certain requirements.” 

7 
 
12.  The Committee  are happy to note tha t the zonal railways have been 
instructed to take steps for following two modes of cooking , viz., electrical 
induction cooking and  cooking through LPG , subject to fulfilment of certain 
requirements. The Committee desire the Railways to ensure the 
implementation of the same and to ensure that no inconvenience is caused to 
the passengers at the railway stations on this account. 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
13. Though the Committee appreciated the contention of the Railways that it was 
the social responsibility of the Railways to provide food to the passengers at 
affordable prices, they would like to caution the railways to not to compr omise with 
the quality of food as a result thereof, Indian Railways have a vast network covering 
Kashmir in the north to Kanyakumari in the south and upto Bhuj in the west to 
Agartala in the east, with each region having its distinct regional cuisines. In view of 
this, it is imperative on the part of the Railways to ensure  the availability of regional 
cuisines depending upon the area. The Committee hope that the New Catering 
Policy will take care of these concerns. 
14.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
“As per the new catering Policy 2010, Zonal Railways are empowered to 
decide the menu of the a -la –carte items including the regional cuisines of the 
local area. A list of 63 a -la-carte items including seasonal region al cuisines 
prepared by a committee of CCMs (catg.)  has already been circulated for its 
implementation in the zonal railways. Inclusion of regional cuisines is an on -
going process”. 
15.  The Committee  are dissatisfied to note that the Ministry has not 
considered their recommendation in toto. The reply is silent with respect to 
ensuring the quality of food. The Committee would like to reiterate that the 

8 
 
Ministry must assure that the best quality of food is provided to  the 
passengers.  
IV.  Provision of Safe-Drinking water in trains and at stations 
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
 
16.  The provision of safe drinking water in trains and at stations is of much 
concern to the Committee.  During their visits to various places, the Committee have 
found that at a majo rity of stations normal tap water stored in tanks is used for 
drinking purposes.  The Committee have also noted the scarcity of packaged water 
in some long distance trains.  Instances of supply of water bottles without labels of 
their manufacturing/expiry dates and even unsealed water bottles have also have 
been brought to the notice of the Committee.  The Committee note that with a view 
to supplying packaged drinking water in trains and stations, the IRCTC has set up 
two plants at Nangloi, Delhi, and at Da napur, Bihar.  The Committee have been 
informed that these plants employ an eight -stage purification process to guarantee 
safe drinking water, free from harmful contaminants. The Committee have been 
further informed that the Railways are working on six mor e projects for providing 
drinking water and the standard terms of documents are getting finalized.  While 
appreciating the same,  the Committee desire that the setting up of these projects 
should be expe dited. The Committee also feel that these plants shoul d have 
capacity to introduce package/pouches of different volumes so that passengers can 
have wider options.   The Committee further recommend that surprise inspections 
should be carried out periodically at the selling points so that the problem of sale of 
unlabelled water bottles is checked.  The Committee also desire that provision of RO 
System should be made mandatory at all the railway station in order to ensure 
supply of safe drinking water to the passengers. 
17.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
“Adequate drinking water facilities of quality standards as per 
prescribed norms have been provided at railways stations on Indian Railways. 
Treated potable water is supplied through taps on Railway platforms for 

9 
 
drinking purpose. The same water is used for coach water filling which is 
stored in tanks in coaches for supply to toilets.  
With a view to provide free quality drinking water round the clock 
through Reverse Osmosis(RO) process at railways stations, instructions  have 
been issued to the zonal railways to allow private parties to install and 
operate such machines through commercial publicity route. Presently, 21 
such machines are being operated on Railways. 
IRCTC had initially set up two packaged drinking water pla nts at 
Nangoli (Delhi) and Danapur (Bihar) for production of 1000 ml packaged 
drinking water bottle. Recently IRCTC has just setup a plant at Palur in 
Tamilnadu which has started functioning and setting up plant at Ambernath in 
Maharashtra is under process . Further, the work of setting up six packaged 
drinking water bottling plant (PDW) at Mal, Nasik, Farakka, Amethi, Ambala 
and Trivandrum has been entrusted to IRCTC on PPP basis. 
           As per Policy wherever Rail Neer is not adequately available BIS 
(Bureau of Indian Standard) approved packaged drinking water having 
requisite laid down standards are shortlisted by Zonal railways and permitted 
for sale in the train and railway premises. The sale of Packaged Drinking 
Water bottles by non -reputed private companies not permitted.  Surprise 
inspections have been carried out by the Zonal railways, at all levels and 
action like imposition of fine etc. is taken if any contractor is found to be 
selling non-approved brand of packaged drinking water.” 
18.  The Committee have been apprised by the Ministry that treated potable 
water is supplied through taps on railway platforms for drinking purpose s and 
that zonal railways have been instructed to allow private parties to install and 
operate RO system through commerci al publicity route.  However, only 21 
such machines are in operation which is quite inadequate, keeping in view the 
vast railway network . More RO machines should be installed/operated on a 
war footing.    The Committee further note that the suggestion of introducing 

10 
 
drinking water pouches/packages of different volumes by these plants has not 
been addressed by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the all 
the concerns raised by the Committee  be appropriately considered by the 
Ministry and a t ime-frame may be put in place  for the convenience of the 
passengers. 
V.  Proper supervision of Quality of food 
(Recommendation Para No. 12) 
 
19.  Quality control of food items and drinking water supplied to the travelling 
public by the Railways is a matter  of the utmost concern for the Committee.  Quality 
control is of paramount importance in any concern dealing with food and beverages 
as it is directly linked with the health and safety of the customers.  The Committee 
had been informed that under the New C atering Policy, the Chief Commercial 
Manager (CCM) will be the overall in -charge for the Zonal Railway but the 
inspections will be done by the catering staff available with him on a daily basis and 
they will have their domain knowledge.  The Committee were of the considered view 
that the Railways should put in place a scientific quality control mechanism.  The 
Committee were also of the view that the complaint/grievance mechanism should be 
further strengthened, with every complaint being attended to/redress ed in a time 
bound manner.  The Committee also recommend ed that besides imposing heavy 
penalties on the defaulting contractors, the concept of blacklisting of persistent 
defaulter should also be introduced. 
20.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
            “Supervision and monitoring has been strengthened through an institutional 
mechanism put in place by the  zonal railways by deploying railway personnel, who 
check quality and hygiene and take corrective action in  a time bound manner.  An 
SAG level officer has been nominated as CCM/Catering over each zonal railway for 
effectively carrying out the implementation of the policy.  Zonal railways have set up 

11 
 
a daily monitoring mechanism through Catering Monitoring Cell at HQ and Divisional 
level working round the clock. Since the introduction of the new Catering Policy 
2010, about 49924 inspections have been carried out by the Zonal railways at all 
levels, as a result complaints have come down by about 41.1 % as compared  to the 
corresponding period of last year.  No. of complaints reported regarding stale 
/inferior quality of food and other deficiencies  during last one year i.e. Mar‟11 to 
Feb,12 and action taken thereon are as follows: -  No. of complaints  related to 
catering services - 3348, Fine - 727, Warned -748, Suitably Advised -  874, Not 
substantiated -  225, D&AR action -124, Any other -222, and action Pending in 428 
cases.” 
21.  The Committee note with satisfaction that an institutional quality control 
and compla int redressal mechanism has  been put in place  and that the 
complaints are being promptly attended to . However, the Committee feel that 
stringent measures should be taken against persistent defaulting contractors.  
VI.  Cleanliness and Hygiene  
(Recommendation Para No. 14) 
22.  The Committee had recommended that hygiene should be of paramount 
importance to the Railways and it should invariably be a part of the Catering Policy.  
The Committee fel t that the cleanliness of the coaches is other important area 
which require serious attention of Railways. 
23.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
 “Indian Railways endeavor to improve upon the standards of 
cleanliness and hygiene in the trains. Proper maintenance of coaches and  
toilets is ensured during primary maintenance as well as secondary 
maintenance/terminal attention of the trains.  
  
         For further improving upon the standards of cleanliness in coaches, 
schemes like Intensive mechanized cleaning of coaches, On Boar d House -
Keeping Services (OBHS)  during the run of the trains and cleaning attention 

12 
 
to trains during their stoppage at “ Clean Train Stations ” etc. have also been 
launched by Indian Railways.  However, instructions are reiterated form time 
to time to the ra ilways to give adequate attention towards cleanliness of 
coach and toilets of the trains.” 
24.  The Committee  are not satisfied with the reply of the Government . 
Concrete measures taken /proposed by the railways for maintaining 
cleanliness and hygeine at th e Railway stations have not been spelt out in the 
reply. The Committee, therefore, stress that hygiene must be considered as an 
inalienable part of the catering system and the Committee must be apprised of 
the concrete measures taken in this regard. 
---

13 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para. Nos. 1, 2 & 3) 
 
  
1.     The Indian Railways is one of the world’s largest rail networks with 
64,460 route kilometers of rout length. As a national co mmon carrier 
transporting passengers and goods over its network, the Indian Railways has 
always played a key role in India’s social and economic development. It is also 
an affordable means of transportation for millions of passengers. During 2010 -
11, it ca rried 7,651 million passengers. Passenger kilometers, which is 
calculated by multiplying the number of journeys by mean kilometric distance 
was 979 billion during the period. Passenger earnings in 2010 -11 ere Rs. 
25,705.64 crore. In such a vast system, cat ering to millions of passengers 
daily, it is imperative that the railways provide the best catering services to the 
commuters who extend their continued patronage to the Railways. 
 
2.      The Committee noted that the New Catering Policy 2010 of the Indian  
Railways was formulated in the wake of an announcement to this effect made 
by the Minister of railways during the Budget speech of 2009 -10. The New 
Catering Policy, 2010 sought to modify the Indian Railways catering policy of 
2005 which had been necessita ted in the light of the experience gained and 
the public perception of the policy since it started operation. The 
modifications pertain to establishing good governance standards and 
improving the quality of catering services for providing food and beverage   to 
the passengers travelling on trains and on railway premises like platforms, 
concourses etc.  The Committee have conducted an in depth examination of 
the New Catering Policy, 2010 and reached certain conclusions which are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 

14 
 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Catering Policy of 2005 had 
led to a situation in which there were a large number of complaints from 
different segments. Some of the problems that were noticed in that policy 
included the issue of monopoly catering and the lack of an effective 
monitoring mechanism. These major problems are stated to have been 
addressed in the New catering Policy, 2010 wherein it had been decided that 
both the static and mobile catering work wou ld be taken over by the Zonal 
Railway while the Indian Railways Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) 
which had earlier been entrusted with this job would be dealing with the upper 
end, i.e. food plazas, food courts and tourist activities. The Committee  are of 
the view that the Catering Policy of 2005 lacked a professional, futuristic 
vision for an undertaking of size of the Indian railways which catered to a huge 
travelling public daily. Besides, the Catering Policy of 2005 was not planned in 
a professi onal and scientific manner, necessitating a new Catering Policy in 
just another five years time. The Committee fail to understand how it was 
decided to entrust the responsibility of catering services of such a vast 
railway network to a Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) which has to work with a 
commercial motive without ascertaining its capability to address the clients 
requirements in a socially responsible manner.  However, the Committee are 
given to understand that the New Catering Policy, 2010 would addres s the 
problem of the railways would be able to make use of its available personnel 
of all the railway stations for ensuring effective monitoring of catering 
services. The Committee appreciate that the new Policy acknowledges 
catering as a passenger service unlike the Policy of 2005 which sought to treat 
catering as an independent profit source. The Committee hope that the New 
Catering Policy, 2010, will be implemented efficaciously to benefit the 
passengers with social responsibility as the prime criterion. 
 
 
 

15 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Improvement in catering services is a ongoing process. A new catering policy, 
2010 has been introduced with a view to bring perceptible improvement in catering 
services.   There is a paradigm shift in the new policy with regard  to the whole 
approach towards railway catering. Whereas earlier policy sought to treat Catering 
as an independent profit centre, this policy acknowledges catering as a passenger 
service.  The policy has sought to bring improvements in catering by shifting  the task 
of monitoring quality of service from IRCTC to the Zonal Railways and attempts to 
leverage Zonal Railways‟ vast and elaborate all -India network in order to effect a 
thorough supervision and control over catering activities.  Emphasis has been 
placed to ensure the availability of quality food for the not -so-affluent classes of 
passengers by providing Janata food and low cost regional cuisine (economy 
combo-meals) by means of Jan Ahaar outlets, Refreshment Rooms, Stand alone 
outlets and the vending stalls. Given the vast variety of cuisines and culinary 
preferences all over the country, regional cuisine is being encouraged and the zonal 
railways has been given the authority to design the menu, recipes and fix tariff of the 
a-la carte items within their jurisdiction as per the local taste and purchasing power.  
 
A list of 63 a-la-carte items including seasonal regional cuisines prepared by a 
committee of CCMs has been circulated for its implementation in the zonal railways.  
 
          A Standard Bid D ocument for award of contracts for mobile units has been 
issued on 28 -06-2011 and SBD for award for General Minor Units (GMU) has been 
issued on 05.07.2012 to make allotments through process of tendering. The 
Standard Bid Document envisages eligibility criteria, bid evaluation criteria, details of 
technical and financial requirements along with general and special conditions of 
contract. Adequate weightage has been given to the quality of services in the bid 
documents.   Detailed instructions on Train Side Vending Policy (TSV) has been 
issued on 16.6.2011 to provide good quality, hygienic and affordable food through 
train side vending to passengers travelling in those trains, which have no pantry car 
facility. 

16 
 
       
Supervision and monitoring has been stren gthened through an institutional 
mechanism put in place by the  zonal railways by deploying railway personnel, who 
check quality and hygiene and take corrective action in a time bound manner.  An 
SAG level officer has been nominated as CCM/Catering over ea ch zonal railway for 
effectively carrying out the implementation of the policy.  Zonal railways have set up 
a daily monitoring mechanism through Catering Monitoring Cell at HQ and Divisional 
level working round the clock. Since the introduction of the new Catering Policy 
2010, about 49,924 inspections have been carried out by the Zonal railways, at all 
levels. As a result of this overall %age reduction in complaints has come to 41.1% in 
comparison to last year.                  
 [Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4) 
  
    The Committee note that the reasons which warranted a shift in the Policy 
include the basic philosophy of treating catering services more as a profit 
centre and less as a passenger service and the lack of monitoring of quality of 
service as the IRCTC could not make use of the vast railway network. 
However, the Committee agree with the submission of the Railways that the 
core competence of IRCTC should be to continue to concentrate  on high end 
tourism and high and catering services which are very much necessary. They,  
therefore, recommend that the Railways should take effective steps to help 
IRCTC to grow in these directions to that the commercial interests of IRCTC 
are not harmed as a result of the  implementation of New Catering Policy. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
As per Catering Policy 2010 , IRCTC would continue to be a service provider 
to the Indian Railways and shall be responsible for managing the premium and high 

17 
 
end outlets li ke Food Plazas, Food Courts and Fast Food Units; and institutional 
catering outside railways. . IRCTC is also selling a huge number of tourism products 
such as Luxuries Tourist Trains – Maharaja Express, Buddhists special trains, 
Bharat Darshan trains, Bha rat Tirth trains, hill railways etc. In the long term 
perspective the interest of IRCTC would not be harmed although to an extent in the 
initial stages of the change there will be a temporary setback of loss of revenue. 
However, with the new directions of a greater emphasis on IRCTC to concentrate on 
high-end catering from Food Plazas, Fast Food Units and Food Courts, etc. IRCTC 
will become a financially healthy and vibrant organization.  
      
 IRCTC had initially set up two packaged drinking water plants at Nangoli 
(Delhi) and Danapur (Bihar) for production of 1000 ml packaged drinking water 
bottle. Recently IRCTC has just setup a plant at Palur in Tamilnadu which has 
started functioning and setting up plant at Ambernath in Maharashtra is under 
process. Fu rther, the work of setting up six packaged drinking water bottling plant 
(PDW) at Mal, Nasik, Farakka, Amethi, Ambala and Trivandrum has also been 
entrusted to IRCTC on PPP basis. Further as per MOU between IRCTC and Indian 
Railways and article of associat ion, IRCTC is taking up the catering units of both 
government and its PSU‟s and also those of State government units.  
 
Some headway has been made towards it, Such as IRCTC‟s has taken 
over/started the catering units in the following Government offices/ PSUs (i) Out door 
catering in Ministry of External affairs, South Block, (ii) Indian institute of Public 
administration NDLS , (iii) Ministry of Finance , North Block (iv) Cafeteria in Krishi 
Bhawan , NDLS (v) Food Court in IIT Delhi, (vi) CBI head quarter L odhi Road(vii) 
Food Plaza at Pune –Solapur Highway, (viii) Multi cuisine cafeteria in Cochin.  
Hence scope of work for IRCTC is vast. 
 
  As per announcement of Hon‟ble MR in Budget Speech 2012 -13, IRCTC will 
go ahead for setting up of executive lounges at some important stations. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 

18 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
 
The Committee have been informed during evidence that the IRCTC’s 
absorbing a lot of staff which had been posted on deputation from Railways 
and the Railways are addressing the staff issue in consultation with staff 
federations. The Chairman, Railway Board had assured the Committee that 
staffing issue would be addressed purposefully.  The Committee recommend 
that as assured during the e vidence, there should be no trimming of staff 
presently working with IRCTC as a result of the implementation of New 
Catering Policy   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
    It has been stated by IRCTC that no trimming of staff presently working with 
IRCTC as a resu lt of implementation of New Catering Policy,2010 is being 
contemplated. It is also stated that no exercise in this regard has been undertaken 
by IRCTC. In the past contracts of some Manpower engaged on contractual basis 
for specific jobs were not renewed on the expiry of the contract period. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
 
 As per the Catering Policy 2010, Zonal Railways are to set up modern, 
mega and medium base kitchens to supply food in bulk and packaged to 
mobile units as well as static units to provide good quality, hygienic and 
affordable food to passengers. The Committee have been informed that the 
Railways  have issued detailed guideline for the facilities to be provided in the 
base kitchens which include ISO -22000 certification, setting up a grid of mega 
and medium base kitchens in Railway premises, setting up of proper pathway 
connecting base kitchens to platforms, for proper training of the departmental 

19 
 
catering staff training to b e organized through trained personnel from reputed 
institutions of hotel  management/catering institutes/food craft institutes and 
identifying a grid of trains and the specific needs to be provided for each 
trains for the  nominated base kitchen at the sta tions where each train will 
stop at the meal timing. According the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), 
the design modules incorporating the mechanism and the state -of-the –art 
technology will be formulated and issued to the Zonal Railways.  The 
Committee desire that the formulation of these design modules should be 
completed without any delay. The Committee are happy to note that a pilot 
project for setting up a modern and mechanized base kitchen has already 
been initiated by the South Central railway and recommend that all Zonal 
Railways should follow suit so that the infrastructure related to the setting up 
of modern base kitchens is speedily developed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
         Emphasis has been laid on setting up of modern base Kitchen to ensur e 
quality, hygiene and proper logistics. Further, Zonal railways have been instructed to 
identify the locations to set up base kitchens to ensure that all mobile units are 
serviced by these base kitchens.    Presently, 14 base kitchens are in operation 
inside the railways premises, out of them 8 are being run departmentally and 6 are 
licensee managed. Further, there are 135 base kitchens located outside railway 
premises which are being managed by the private licensees. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 9 of  Chapter I)  
 
 
 

20 
 
Recommendation (para No.9) 
 
The New Catering Policy provides for ban on cooking on platforms at 
suburban stations and attempts to progressi vely reduce cooking on stalls and 
trolleys on the platform except for items which could be prepared through 
electrically operated equipment only. Further, it stipulates that in order to 
insure cooking free platforms, Zonal Railways may identify suitable sp ace, if 
available, on railway premises near railway stations for setting up kitchens by 
the licensees of static units as per the terms and conditions of extant policy 
on land/rent. Though the Committee appreciate the concern of the Railways 
about the fire hazards on platforms due to cooking of food, they are 
apprehensive that such blanket ban on cooking may cause considerable 
inconvenience to the passengers as well as to the licencees. They feel that 
either the space for setting up kitchens may not be avail able at most of the 
railway stations or the licensee may not be in a position to set up its kitchen.  
They, therefore, desire that while implementing the Policy, the Railways 
should carefully examine this aspect in order to avoid inconvenience to the 
passengers as well as to the licensees. Adequate safety measures may be 
taken by the Railways to avoid electrical short-circuits, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Para 7.1 of Catering Policy clearly provides for “attempts to progressively 
reduce cooking on stalls and trolleys on platforms” 
       
The way forward to achieve cooking free stalls/trolleys is defined in para 7.8 – 
i.e. by identification of suitable space on railways premises.  
       
  A large number of references from various fora including Railways h ave been 
received by this Ministry regarding allowing cooking on the platforms. The matter 
has been reviewed by the Board and Instructions already exist in which Zonal 

21 
 
Railway have already been suggested to take certain steps for following two modes 
of cooking (i) Electrical induction Cooking (ii) Cooking through LPG gas subject  to 
fulfillment of the  certain requirements. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 12 of  Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (para No.13) 
The Committee are concerned to note the existence of unauthorized 
vending in trains and a stations.  They strongly feel that unauthorized vending 
not only causes loss of revenue to Railways but also poses a health hazard for 
the passengers.   The Committee urge the Railways to urgently work out 
suitable measures to check unauthorized vending, both in moving trains and 
at stations. 
Reply of the Government 
 
         As per the policy of the railways, persons with valid permits only are allowed to 
vend on the platform and those who do not possess valid permits are dealt under the 
relevant sections of the Railways Act. Permits are issued only within the ambit of the 
policy of the administration.  
  
Regular drives by RPF, Commercial are being conducted against unauthorized 
vendors. The persons apprehended are prosecuted under section 144 of the 
Railways Act. As many as 1,49,954 unauthorized vendors were apprehended and 
prosecuted and fine of Rs 5,51,98,508/- was realized during the year 2011. 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 
 
 

22 
 
Recommendation (para No.15) 
 
 The Committee note that the New Catering Policy provides for proper 
management of solid waste.   The Committee hope that the sam e shall be 
implemented in letter and spirit.  These issues require continuous surveillance 
of Railways.  Frequent surveys should be conducted and feedback taken from 
passengers. 
Reply of the Government  
 
        In the new Catering Policy, para 8 specifica lly mention about the disposal of 
garbage. With the transfer of Catering units from IRCTC to the zonal Railways and 
introduction of more number of trains, the disposal of waste material has become a 
strategic issue for ensuring cleanliness on railway premi ses. In this regard 
instructions have been circulated to all zonal railways to encourage eco -friendly 
packaging material for service of food and beverages at stations and on trains. A 
detailed procedure for collection and disposal of waste arising out of p antry car 
services and static units is circulated to all zonal railways vide Board‟s letter No. 
2009/TG-III/600/25 (Coml. Cir. 45/2011) dated 13.09.2011. Railways are instructed 
to arrange frequent inspections at various levels and ensure that Board‟s inst ructions 
are rigidly adhered to.  
        
   Zonal Railway have been instructed to obtain feedback from traveling 
passengers on the level of catering services provided. For 
Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto trains, monthly feedback and for other Mail/Express 
trains and major static units, a quarterly feedback needs to be taken. Feedback from 
the passenger are required to be scrutinized by the zonal Railways accordingly the 
complaints of repetitive nature need to be taken up sternly.   
                                           [Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 
 

23 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation (Para. No. 7) 
With a view to ensuring that adequate catering facilities are available to 
the travelling public, simultaneously ensuring that there is no congestion on 
platforms, the scale of catering services through static units has been 
legislated in the New Catering Policy 2010 an d the Zonal Railways have been 
directed to prepare a blueprint for the catering unit at each station as per the 
maximum static units. According to the Railways, there are seven categories 
of stations and various facilities such as catering, drinking water and other 
passenger amenities are to be provided at various station in accordance with 
the blueprint.  The Committee desire that the blueprint for the each station 
should be implemented in letter and spirit and there should not be any let up 
in this regard.  They further desire that the implementation of the blueprint in 
respect of each station should be regularly and closely monitored at the Board 
level. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
       As per para 3.5.1 of the New Catering Policy 2010, zonal Railways decide the 
extent, type and scale of catering services required to be provided at each station, 
on-board trains so as to ensure adequate availability of affordable food for common 
passengers. Further, para 5.1 of the Catering Policy. 2010 provides that the zonal  
Railways will prepare a Blue Print for the catering units at each stations so as to 
ensure adequate facilities are available before permitting any other type of outlet.                
             

24 
 
In this regard, instructions already exist to zonal railwa y to prepare a master 
plan (Blue Print) of the catering services to be provided at railways stations on each 
Division based on requirement and as per scale provided in Catering Plicy, 2010 
Accordingly Zonal Railways has prepared the blueprint for each cate gory of stations 
as per scale given in new Catering Policy, 2010.     
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Para. No. 16) 
 
The Committee note that a provision for reservation in award of 
contracts has been made in favour of the underprivileged and marginalized 
sections of society in the New Catering Policy.  They are concerned to note 
that like in the Catering Policy of 2005, no provision for reservation has been 
made for major units, including pantry cars, in the New Catering Policy of 
2010.  25% reservations in minor units at A, B and C category of stations and 
49.5% of reservations have been provided in all units at D, E & F category of 
stations.  The Committee desire that a uniform policy of reservation s hould be 
followed in all catering units at all stations/trains.  They, therefore, recommend 
that the existing reservation policy of the Government of India should be 
strictly complied with. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
           There is no Constitutional provision to make reservations for the SC/ST in the 
matter other than services/appointment.  Article 15(4) stipulates that “Nothing shall 
prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointment or 
posts in favour of any backward class of citizen, which in the opinion of the state is 
not adequately represented in the services under the state.” It is in the broader 
sense, that nothing shall prevent the state from making any special provision for the 
advancement of any socially and educati onally backward classes of citizens or for 
the SCs and STs.   In view of above and in order to up lift the socially and 
economically backward people of the society, Indian Railways has already made 

25 
 
25% reservation at A, B & C category of railway station in  minor catering units and 
49.5% reservation at D, E & F category of railway station for allotment of various 
static minor catering stalls to such persons.  Further, to set up a major catering units 
over the railways a huge amount of investment and commerci al expertise in the 
business is required.    Hence, in order to invite a wider competition amongst the 
bidding contractors and also to provide better catering services to the travelling 
public, reservation in the major catering units has not been provided.   The Catering 
Policy 2010 has not made any changes in the reservation as given in the Catering 
Policy 2005, which was deliberated many times by the Parliamentary Committee.  
Moreover, reservations in these sectors are not the mandate of the 
Constitution.  Non- reservation in the major units and only 25% of reservation in 
minor catering units of A, B and C category stations is a conscious decision of the 
Railway Board which is in the general interest of the traveling public. 
 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 The Committee are distressed to note that though the New Catering 
Policy of 2010 was issued in July, 2010, it is being implemented at a very slow 
pace. During their visit to Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Mysore and Goa during 
May, 2011, the Committee observed that there were ce rtain problems being 
faced by the Zonal Railways in taking over the catering services from IRCTC  
which include shortage of staff litigation by contractors and the lack of 
specialized manpower with The Railways.  The Committee recommend that all 
issues shoul d be identified and sorted out expeditiously and steps be taken 
for effective implementation of the Policy within a specified time frame.  
Further, the Railways should take urgent steps for establishment of ISO 
certified base kitchens in the Railway premise s itself to ensure timely supply 
of meals and effective supervision, modernization and mechanization of 
catering equipment, management of catering service by professional, 
stringent criteria for selection of catering contractors, recruitment of 
trained/professionally qualified staff and training of catering staff from time to 
time. the Committees so desire that pantry cars should invariably be provided 
in all long distance trains at the earliest in all long distance trains which have 
a running time exceeding 16 hours. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
           Instructions have been issued vide Board‟s letter no. E(NG)I -2003/IR/10 
dated 28.12.10 to restore the catering cadre as existed  on 31.03.2003 at the 
time of transfer of catering activities along with staff to IRCTC which  is 

27 
 
approximately 5269 posts including 1284 Group C and 3985 Group D.  As a 
result of this all catering staff at present, there are total 1959 (Group C 736 and 
Group D 1223) catering staff available in the catering Department over IR. 
Further 188 IRCTC absorbee erstwhile Railways catering staff have exercised 
their option to come back railways catering department. In this regard after 
approval of Board/MR and concurrence of DoP P&W instruction are under issue 
in consultation with federation.    
         Emphasis has been laid on setting up of modern base Kitchen to ensure 
quality, hygiene and proper logistics. Further, Zonal railways have been 
instructed to identify the locations to set up base kitchens to ensure that all 
mobile units are serviced by these base kitchens.  Presently, 14 base  
 
 
kitchens are in operation inside the railways premises, out of them 8 are being 
run departmentally and 6 are licensee managed. Further, there are 135 base 
kitchens located outside railway premises which a re being managed by the 
private licensees. 
           
Catering Policy 2010 stipulates that catering services are to be managed 
departmentally by the Railways duly imparting in -service training to the staff. In 
this regard Board has issued instructions in t his regard and zonal railways are to 
take action accordingly.  
 
As per new Catering Policy 2010, the demands for attachment of pantry cars to the 
trains are considered based on various factors such as priority of the train, (first 
priority to Duronto/Rajdh ani then Super fast Mail/Express trains then the trains 
running more than 24 hours either way) its commercial justification and availability of 
pantry cars and load limitation in the trains etc. In cases where trains are not 
provided with a Pantry Car, the  catering services are provided through Train Side 
Vending (TSV) or through static catering units at en-route stations.   
            
   
                                                  [Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  

28 
 
                                                                                                        Dated 24.08.2012] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 6 of  Chapter I)  
        
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
    Though the Committee appre ciate the contention of the 
Railways that it is the social responsibility of the Railways to provide 
food to the passengers at affordable prices, they would like to caution 
the railways to not to compromise with the quality of food as a result 
thereof, Ind ian Railways have a vast network covering Kashmir in the 
north to Kanyakumari in the south and upto Bhuj in the west to Agartala 
in the east, with each region having its distinct regional cuisines. In 
view of this, it is imperative on the part of the Railw ays to ensure  the 
availability of regional cuisines depending upon the area. The 
Committee hope that the New Catering Policy will take care of these 
concerns. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the new catering Policy 2010, Zonal Railways are empowered to de cide 
the menu of the a -la –carte items including the regional cuisines of the local area. A 
list of 63 a -la-carte items including seasonal regional cuisines prepared by a 
committee of CCMs (catg.)  has already been circulated for its implementation in the 
zonal railways. Inclusion of regional cuisines is an on-going process. 
[[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 159 of  Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Para No.11) 

29 
 
The provision of safe drinking water in trains and at stations is 
of much concern to the Committee.  During their visits to various 
places, the Committee have found that at a majority of stations normal 
tap water stored in tanks is used for drinking purposes .  The 
Committee have also noted the scarcity of packaged water in some 
long distance trains.  Instances of supply of water bottles without 
labels of their manufacturing/expiry dates and even unsealed water 
bottles have also have been brought to the notice  of the Committee.  
The Committee note that with a view to supplying packaged drinking 
water in trains and stations, the IRCTC has set up two plants at 
Nangloi, Delhi, and at Danapur, Bihar.  The Committee have been 
informed that these plants employ an eig ht-stage purification process 
to guarantee safe drinking water, free from harmful contaminants. The 
Committee have been further informed that the Railways are working 
on six more projects for providing drinking water and the standard 
terms of documents are  getting finalized.  While appreciating the 
same, the Committee desire that the setting up of these projects 
should be expected. The Committee also feel that these plants should 
have capacity to introduce package/pouches of different volumes so 
that passen gers can have wider options.   The Committee further 
recommend that surprise inspections should be carried out 
periodically at the selling points so that the problem of sale of 
unlabelled water bottles is checked.  The Committee also desire that 
provision of RO System should be made mandatory at all the railway 
station in order to ensure supply of safe drinking water to the 
passengers. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
Adequate drinking water facilities of quality standards as per 
prescribed norms have been provide d at railways stations on Indian 
Railways. Treated potable water is supplied through taps on Railway 
platforms for drinking purpose. The same water is used for coach water 
filling which is stored in tanks in coaches for supply to toilets.  
 
With a view to provide free quality drinking water round the clock 
through Reverse Osmosis(RO) process at railways stations, instructions 

30 
 
have been issued to the zonal railways to allow private parties to install and 
operate such machines through commercial publicity rou te. Presently, 21 
such machines are being operated on Railways. 
IRCTC had initially set up two packaged drinking water plants at Nangoli 
(Delhi) and Danapur (Bihar) for production of 1000 ml packaged drinking water 
bottle. Recently IRCTC has just setup a p lant at Palur in Tamilnadu which has 
started functioning and setting up plant at Ambernath in Maharashtra is under 
process. Further, the work of setting up six packaged drinking water bottling 
plant (PDW) at Mal, Nasik, Farakka, Amethi, Ambala and Trivandr um has been 
entrusted to IRCTC on PPP basis. 
 
           As per Policy wherever Rail Neer is not adequately available BIS 
(Bureau of Indian Standard) approved packaged drinking water having requisite laid 
down standards are shortlisted by Zonal railways an d permitted for sale in the train 
and railway premises. The sale of Packaged Drinking Water bottles by non -reputed 
private companies not permitted.  Surprise inspections have been carried out by the 
Zonal railways, at all levels and action like imposition of fine etc. is taken if any 
contractor is found to be selling non-approved brand of packaged drinking water.  
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no.18 of  Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Para No.12) 
Quality control of food items and drinking water supplied to the 
travelling public by the Railways is a matter of the utmost concern for the 
Committee.  Quality control is of paramount importance in any concern 
dealing with food and beverages as it is directly linked with the health and 
safety of the customers.  The Committee have been informed that under 
the New Catering Policy, the Chief Commercial Manager (CCM) will be the 
overall in-charge for the Zonal Railway but the inspections will be done by 
the catering staff available with him on a daily basis and they will have 

31 
 
their domain knowledge.   The Committee are of the considered view that 
the Railways should put in place a scientific quality control mechanism.  
The Com mittee are also of the view that the complaint/grievance 
mechanism should be further strengthened, with every complaint being 
attended to/redressed in a time bound manner.  The Committee also 
recommend that besides imposing heavy penalties on the defaultin g 
contractors, the concept of blacklisting of persistent defaulter should also 
be introduced. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
            Supervision and monitoring has been strengthened through an 
institutional mechanism put in place by the  zonal railways by d eploying railway 
personnel, who check quality and hygiene and take corrective action in a time bound 
manner.  An SAG level officer has been nominated as CCM/Catering over each 
zonal railway for effectively carrying out the implementation of the policy.  Zo nal 
railways have set up a daily monitoring mechanism through Catering Monitoring Cell 
at HQ and Divisional level working round the clock. Since the introduction of the new 
Catering Policy 2010, about 49924 inspections have been carried out by the Zonal 
railways at all levels, as a result complaints have come down by about 41.1 % as 
compared to the corresponding period of last year.  No. of complaints reported 
regarding stale /inferior quality of food and other deficiencies  during last one year 
i.e. Mar‟11 to Feb,12 and action taken thereon are as follows: -  No. of complaints  
related to catering services- 3348, Fine - 727, Warned -748, Suitably Advised -  874, 
Not substantiated -  225, D&AR action -124, Any other -222, and action Pending in 
428 cases. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 21 of  Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Para No.14) 
 

32 
 
The Committee also recommend that hygiene should be of paramount 
importance to  the Railways and it should invariably be a part of the 
Catering Policy.  The Committee feel that the cleanliness of the 
coaches is other important area which require serious attention of 
Railways. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  
         Indian Railways endea vor to improve upon the standards of 
cleanliness and hygiene in the trains. Proper maintenance of coaches and 
toilets is ensured during primary maintenance as well as secondary 
maintenance/terminal attention of the trains.  
  
         For further improving  upon the standards of cleanliness in coaches, schemes 
like Intensive mechanized cleaning of coaches, On Board House -Keeping Services 
(OBHS) during the run of the trains and cleaning attention to trains during their 
stoppage at “Clean Train Stations” etc. have also been launched by Indian Railways.  
However, instructions are reiterated form time to time to the railways to give 
adequate attention towards cleanliness of coach and toilets of the trains. 
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2012/BC-II/XV/300/3,  
Dated 24.08.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 24 of  Chapter I)  
 
 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
--- NIL --- 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; T.R. BAALU 
 April, 2013 Chairman, 
 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
                             

34 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RAILWAYS (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 5 th April, 2013, at 1100 hrs. in Commit tee 
Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
     PRESENT 
 
SHRI T.R. BAALU -  CHAIRMAN  
  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
3. Shri Pralhad Joshi 
4. Dr. Nirmal Khatri 
5. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
6. Shri Anand Prakash Paranjpe 
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiiva Rao 
8. Shri Rudra Madhab Ray 
9. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
10. Shri Ganesh Singh 
11. Shri Lalji Tandon 
12. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Husain Dalwai 
14. Shri Prabhat Jha 
15. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
16. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
17. Shri Tarini Kanta Roy 
18. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
19. Shri Ishwar Singh 
20. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
 
        SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Director 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik - Additional Director 

35 
 
**             **                **               ** 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft 
Reports and adopted the same without any modifications: 
(i) **             **                **               ** 
 
(ii) Action t aken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
of the Committee contained in their 15th Report on ‘ New Catering Policy - 
2010 of Indian Railways’; and 
 
(iii) **          **              **                 ** 
 
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports and 
present the same to Parliament. 
 
4.  **            **              **               ** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

36 
 
APPENDIX-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 15TH REPORT         
(15TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘NEW CATERING POLICY – 2010 OF INDIAN RAILWAYS’  
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 16 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the  Government –  
Para Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 13 and 15   
 
 
9 
 Percentage of total   
 
56.25% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies –  
Para Nos.  7 and 16       
 
 
2 
 Percentage of total   
 
12.50% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration –  
Para Nos.  5, 10, 11, 12 and 33        
 
 
 
5 
 Percentage of total   
 
31.25% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited -      
Para Nos. Nil 
 
Nil 
  
Percentage of total 
 
 
0 
 
 
        
 