TWENTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
NEW RAILWAY CATERING POLICY , 2017
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.08.2018
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  07.08.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/ Shravana, 1940 ( Saka)


S.C.R. No. 218
Price : ` 125.00
© 2018 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2016-17) ............................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2017-18) ............................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (vii)
PART I
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory ................................................. 1
A. Background Analysis.................................... 1
B. Catering Policy , 2005 .................................. 2
C. Catering Policy , 2010 .................................. 3
D. New Catering Policy , 2017 ........................... 6
E. Organisational Structure of Catering Services ... 15
CHAPTER II Catering Units............................................... 16
A. Transition of Catering Units ......................... 16
B. Upgradation of Base Kitchens ....................... 18
C. Catering Units: Allotment, Procedure &
   Management ............................................. 19
D. Menu and T ariff......................................... 23
E. Unauthorized Vending ................................. 25
CHAPTER III New Initiatives .............................................. 28
A. E-catering ................................................ 28
B. Self Help Groups ....................................... 33
C. Ready to Eat Meals .................................... 33
CHAPTER IV Monitoring and Redressal ................................. 36
PART II
Recommendations/Observations ......................... 39
ANNEXURE
Catering Policy, 2017 ...................................... 56
APPENDICES
Minutes of the sittings of the Standing Committee on
Railways held on 31.05.2017, 04.08.2017, 07.12.2017,
21.12.2017 and 02.08.2018 .............................. 81
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2016-17)
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .K. Kunhalikutty*
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
4. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
5. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav #
6. Shri Sudheer Gupta
7. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
8. Shri Ramesh Kaushik
9. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
11. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
12. Shri A.T . Nana Patil
13. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
14. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
15. Shri Lakhanlal Sahu
16. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shanker
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ganesh Singh
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
20. Shri Narasimham Thota
21. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar
(iii)
@ Constituted w.e.f. 01.09.2016 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 4105 dated 15.09.2016.
* Shri E. Ahmed passed away on 01.02.2017 [Ref.: Lok Sabha Sectt. Notification No. 24/
4(1)/2017/T(B) dated 01.02.2017]. Shri P .K. Kunhalikutty was nominated w.e.f. 19.07.2017
(Ref.: Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 5526 dated 19.07.2017).
# Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav was nominated in place of Shri Gaurav Gogoi vide
Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 5163 dated 28.03.2017.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.K. Antony
23. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev
24. Shri Shwait Malik
25. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
26. Shri Mukut Mithi
27. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
28. Shri T . Rathinavel
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
30. Shri Alok Tiwari
31. Shri Motilal Vora

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2017-18)@
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
3. Shri Sudheer Gupta
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
5. Dr. Ramshankar Katheria
6. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
7. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
8. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
9. Shri P .K. Kunhalikutty
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
11. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
12. Shri A.T . Nana Patil
13. Sadhvi Savitri Bai Phule
14. Shri Vijaya Kumar S.R.
15. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
16. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
17. Shri Rajeev Satav
18. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
19. Shri Ganesh Singh
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
21. Vacant**
@ Constituted w.e.f. 01.09.2017 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 5837 dated 26.09.2017.
**Shri Mekapati Rajamohan Reddy resigned w.e.f. 20.06.2018 vide Bulletin Part II No. 6904
dated 21.06.2018.
(v)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.K. Antony
23. Shri Shwait Malik
24. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
25. Shri Mukut Mithi
26. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
27. Shri T . Rathinavel
28. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh*
29. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya
30. Shri Motilal Vora
31. Ms. Saroj Pandey
#
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav — Deputy Secretary
(vi)
* Shri Bashistha Narain Singh retired w.e.f. 02.04.2018 vide Committee Branch-I note
dated 16.01.2018 and re-nominated w.e.f. 02.06.2018 vide Bulletin Part II no. 6894 dated
07.06.2018.
# Ms. Saroj Pandey was nominated w.e.f. 02.06.2018 vide Bulletin Part II no. 6894 dated
07.06.2018 in place of Shri Darshan Singh Yadav who retired w.e.f. 02.04.2018 vide
Committee Branch-I note dated 16.01.2018.

(vii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2017-18) having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their
behalf, present this Twenty-First Report on ‘New Railway Catering
Policy 2017 ’.
2. This Report is based on facts and figures submitted by the
Ministry of Railways and the depositions made by the representatives
of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) before the Committee on
31.05.2017, 04.08.2017, 07.12.2017 and 21.12.2017. The Committee
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 02.08.2018.
Minutes of the related sittings are given in the Appendix to the Report.
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for appearing before the
Committee and furnishing the information that the Committee desired
in connection with the examination of the New Railway Catering Policy
2017. They would also like to place on record their appreciation for
the assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat
attached to the Committee.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Part-II of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY ,
02 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

PART I
REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
A. BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
1.1 Indian Railways is one of the largest rail network of the world
and functions as a vertically integrated organization providing passenger
and freight services. It carries approximately 23 million passengers per
day with 13313 passenger trains and hauls 1,000 million tons of freight
by 9212 freight trains over 67,368 route kilometers. The Railways have
8495 Railway Stations all over the network which have been categorized
into seven categories viz. A1, A, B, C, D, E, and F based on the annual
earnings from passenger traffic at the stations.
1.2 Keeping in view the huge and voluminous flow of travelling
passengers, Railway needs the services of a well managed catering and
vending system for supply of tasty and wholesome food at reasonable
prices to passengers. In such a vast network, it becomes imperative on
the part of Indian Railways to facilitate best, qualitative and hygienic
catering services to millions of travelling people on 24x7 basis who
extend their continued patronage to it. Therefore, Railways need proper
policy and planning with regard to the catering services. In Indian
Railways, catering services are managed through Licensees and IRCTC.
1.3 Departmental catering was introduced in Indian Railways in
1955-56 on a ‘No Profit, No Loss ’ basis at selected important stations
and in certain train services so as to set the standard and service as
a model. Due to recurring losses, Railway Board decided (1968) to
adopt economy measures which inter alia  included handing over the
units running with recurring losses to contractors and run the
departmental units on a nominal profit of three to four per cent which
was to be ploughed back for effecting improvement in the services.
1.4 Catering Policy in Indian Railways has been frequent changing
over the years in principles and guidelines governing it. Prior to the
year 2000, the catering services were managed through departmental
operations and through licensing of catering services. During 1999,

2
IRCTC was set up as an extended arm of Indian railways under the
Companies Act and from 2002 onwards, catering service was given to
it. First Catering Policy was introduced in 2000 which was revised in
2005 and again in 2010.
1.5 The Ministry of Railways, in their written replies, briefed the
objectives behind setting up of IRCTC as under:
“In 1999, in order to commercialize and corporatize Railways ’
Catering and Tourism related activities, IRCTC was incorporated as
an extended arm of the Indian Railways. IRCTC was mandated to
upgrade, professionalize and manage the catering and hospitality
services on Indian Railway. Keeping in view the objective of the
Cabinet for setting up of IRCTC, the catering activities of Railways
were hived off to IRCTC during 2000-03 on ‘as is where is ’ basis
along with the staff in the Catering Department of Indian Railways.
Catering Policy, 2004 and 2005 was issued which also mandated
IRCTC to manage catering services on Indian Railways. Till issuance
of Catering Policy, 2010, major portion of management of catering
services on Indian Railways was with IRCTC. ”
1.6 Stating the reasons for implementation of a new Catering
Policy, 2010, the Ministry informed the Committee as under:
“However , White Paper on Indian Railways presented in Parliament
in 2009, observed no substantial and visible improvement in catering
services as IRCTC focused on revenue generation and catering
services continued to be operated by the same set of licensees.
Based on the above observation, a new catering policy 2010 was
formulated and notified on 21.07.2010 wherein the task of managing
catering services was shifted from IRCTC to the Zonal Railways.
Nevertheless, IRCTC continued to manage premium and high end
outlets like Food Plazas, Food Courts and Fast Food Units. ”
B. CATERING POLICY, 2005
1.7 IRCTC will follow the overall policy guidelines with reference
to class of stations, definitions of major and minor units, reduction in
congestion, provision of pantry car , transfer of license, exclusion and
inclusion of clause, tendering system, application system, tariff,
reservation policy, renewal, tenure, ceiling limit on holding of catering
units, mutually agreed model agreement, arbitration etc. contained in
the policy guidelines or amended/reviewed from time to time by Ministry
of Railways. It is advised that as and when the catering services are

3
taken over by IRCTC, the functions relating to catering hitherto
performed by the Zonal Railways would be performed by IRCTC:
(i) All new allotments of catering contracts are to be done by
IRCTC. However , contracts at ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ category stations
will continue to be controlled and awarded by Railways till
IRCTC is equipped to take over these units.
(ii) R eduction/relocation of existing stalls in order to ease
congestion on platforms. A standing committee of three
divisional officers should conduct a detailed review of
catering/vending facilities at all stations and take systematic
steps to decongest the platforms as per a master plan for
each station.
(iii) No catering/vending units should be taken up for
departmental management and only catering licenses will
be awarded in future.
(iv) IRCTC/Railway should review from time to time, the
performance of departmental units.
(v) Railways will not make any fresh recruitment in catering
department except in the categories specified by Board.
(vi) Nominal land license fee for land leased to IRCTC, if any,
will be payable by IRCTC and revenue sharing will be as per
Memorandum of Understanding in vogue between Indian
Railways and IRCTC.
(vii) IRCTC will allow the authorised Railway and other officials
to inspect and take notice of complaints and to impose
fines and make suggestions.
C. CATERING POLICY, 2010
1.8 There is a paradigm shift in the new Policy with regard to the
whole approach towards railway catering. Whereas earlier policy sought
to treat catering as an independent profit centre, this policy
acknowledges catering as a passenger service:
(i) The proposed policy seeks to bring improvements in catering
by shifting the task of monitoring quality of service from
IRCTC to the Zonal Railways and attempts to leverage Zonal
Railways’ vast and elaborate all India network in order to
effect a thorough supervision and control over catering
activities.

4
(ii) Emphasis has been placed to ensure the availability of quality
food for the not-so-affluent classes of passengers by providing
Janata Food and Jan Aahaar (economy combo meals) by
means of Refreshment Rooms, stand alone outlets and the
vending stalls.
(iii) Quality initiatives for effecting improvements in mobile
catering, an all-India grid of base kitchens is being planned.
These kitchens will be state-of-the-art incorporating the
best technology available and will be constructed within
the railway premises so as to ensure a better supervision
and smooth logistics.
(iv) Supervision and monitoring has been strengthened through
an institutional mechanism to be put in place by the Zonal
Railways by deploying railway personnel, who would check
quality and hygiene and take corrective action in a time
bound manner. Standard Bid Document will be redesigned
with weightage to quality parameters.
(v) IRCTC would continue to be a service provider to the Indian
Railways and shall be responsible for managing the premium
and high end outlets like Food Plazas, Food Courts and Fast
Food Units and institutional catering outside railways.
(vi) Given the vast variety of cuisines and culinary preferences
all over the country, regional cuisine is being encouraged
and the zonal railways are being the authority to design the
menu, recipes and fix tariff of the a-la carte items within
their jurisdiction as per the local tastes and purchasing
power.
(vii) The methodology of fixation of the License fee has been
revised by adopting rational parameters.
(viii) The issue of monopolization of contracts has been addressed
by having stringent ceiling limits on holdings for each
category of units.
(ix) Given the social responsibility of the Railways and its
obligations towards the under-privileged and the needy
sections of the society, reservation policy as envisaged earlier,
is being continued.
1.9 As per the Catering Policy of 2005, catering business of Indian
Railways was progressively hived off to Indian Railway Catering and
Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) with a commitment to bring down the
losses of departmental catering units to zero and to improve the

5
quality. As IRCTC was not able to turn around these catering units and
there were many complaints regarding catering services, Railway Board
decided to take back catering services from IRCTC and formulated a
Catering Policy, 2010 with the objective of providing hygienic, good
quality affordable food to the travelling public. In 2010, the Policy was
revised and Indian Railways decided to take back the management of
all catering units except Food Plazas, Food Courts and Fast Food Units
from IRCTC and manage them departmentally.
1.10 As the quality of catering services was not enhanced as
expected, Railway Board has formulated a New Catering Policy, 2017
which has been issued on 27 February, 2017 ( Vide Commercial No. 20
of 2017—Annexure). In this regard, Hon ’ble Minister of Railways during
Rail Budget 2016-17 had also announced that:
“......IRCTC would begin to manage catering services in a phased
manner. IRCTC would unbundle catering services by creating a
distinction primarily between food preparation and food distribution.
....Adding 10 more IRCTC operated, mechanized, sophisticated base
kitchens to ensure fresh and hygienic supply of food on trains. ”
1.11 The Ministry of Railways have furnished the historical
background of New Catering Policy, 2017 as under:
(i) “Sreedharan Committee constituted in November , 2014
suggested tangible changes in catering business for proper
system and procedures and handing over catering to IRCTC.
(ii) Bibek Debroy Committee constituted in September , 2014 for
‘Mobilization of Resources for Major Railway Projects and
Restructuring of Railway Ministry and Railway Board ’,
suggested introduction of e-catering.
(iii) In-house committee of CCMs constituted in October , 2015 to
work out the modalities of transfer of catering services to
IRCTC.
(iv) V arious committee reports revealed-for noticeable
improvement in catering services, catering policy needed to
be revised.
(v) Unless the quality of food at source where it is prepared is
controlled, quality of food onboard will not change.
(vi) With comprehensive view of the existing catering services
and various insights and inputs received, framing of New
Catering Policy was announced in the Railway Budget, 2016.

6
(vii) Draft of the New Policy kept in the public domain for
feedback from multiple stakeholders  viz.  customers, zonal
railways, service providers etc. ”
D. NEW CATERING POLICY, 2017
1.12 The Ministry in their written replies has furnished the salient
features of New Catering Policy, 2017 as under:
(i) IRCTC to manage catering service on all mobile units. Pantry
car contracts awarded by zonal railway to be re-assigned to
IRCTC.
(ii) Meals for all mobile units to be picked up from the nominated
kitchens owned, operated and managed by IRCTC.
(iii) IRCTC not to outrightly outsource or issue licenses for
provision of catering services to private licensees. IRCTC to
retain the ownership and be fully accountable for all the
issues pertaining to setting up and operation of the Base
Kitchens and quality of food.
(iv) IRCTC to engage service providers from hospitality industry
for service of food in trains.
(v) Kitchen structures/land/space to be handed over by Zonal
Railways to IRCTC for a period of 10 years extendable for
another period of 5 years, on a token license fee.
(vi) IRCTC to be responsible for management of Food Plazas,
Food Courts, Fast Food Units within the ambit of this policy.
(vii) The setting up/development/refurbishment of new or existing
Base Kitchens/Kitchen units to be undertaken by IRCTC.
These kitchens are to be owned, operated and managed by
IRCTC. IRCTC shall develop different types of kitchens
keeping in view supply of food and usage assessed.
(viii) IRCTC shall develop the business model for the kitchens so
that they can expand and enhance the service. IRCTC shall
prepare a detailed concession agreement for setting up/
development of the kitchens.
(ix) IRCTC to involve/empanel Self Help Groups for providing
catering related services.
(x) Zonal Railway to manage static unit (catering stall/milk
stalls/trolleys etc.) except base kitchens and kitchen units
to be handed over to IRCTC at A1 and A class stations.

7
(xi) Provision of perpetual renewal has been done away with.
Now it has been envisaged that tenure of all static units
(except kitchen units and Food Plaza) shall be 5 years only.
Tenure of Food Plaza shall be for a period of 9 years.
(xii) Allotments of General Minor Units at all category stations
to be done through open, competitive, two-packet tendering
system from the eligible bidders by divisions.
(xiii) For the first time, it has been envisaged that allotment of
Special Minor Units (reserved category) at all category
stations will be done by Divisions through open tendering
system within the similar reserved category. The technical
eligibility criterion has been simplified.
(xiv) 33% sub quota for women in allotment of each category of
minor catering units at all category of stations to be
provided.
1.13 Transfer of catering services through mobile catering units,
base kitchens, cell kitchens, refreshment rooms at A1 and A category
of stations, food plazas, food courts, train side vending, jan aahaars
to IRCTC. All other catering units like refreshment rooms at B and
below category stations, Automatic Vending Machines, Milk Stalls,
trolleys shall remain with Zonal Railways.
1.14 Food preparation and food distribution has been delinked.
Food will be cooked in kitchens operated and maintained by IRCTC.
IRCTC is permitted to engage service providers from hospitality industry
for serving food in trains:
(i) IRCTC will develop/refurbish new or existing kitchen units.
These kitchens are expected to be modern, mechanized and
quality ensured through a valid ISO Certification. IRCTC shall
retain the ownership and shall be fully accountable for all
the issues pertaining to setting up and operation of the
base kitchens and quality of food.
(ii) The old catering stalls will be replaced gradually with the
compact modular stalls of superior quality material. The
menu and tariff of catering units (other than Food Plazas
etc.) will be fixed by IRCTC in consultation with the Zonal
Railways/Railway Board. Rates for meals in the trains served
by the IRCTC will be fixed by the Railway Board.
(iii) Officials of Railway Board, Zonal Railways and Divisions shall
be authorized to inspect the kitchen units/mobile catering
units and taking penal action for the deficiencies noticed in
catering services.

8
(iv) Criteria for license fee has been retained at 12 per cent of
turnover. The fixation of license fee has to be done by
Zonal Railways. The formula for fixing the license fee is to
be devised by each Zonal Railway. Revised criteria for ceiling
of catering units allotted to private contracts has also been
prescribed.
1.15 On being asked about the reasons for re-entrusting of catering
services from to IRCTC, the Chairman, Railway Board in his oral
evidence, deposed as under:
“This decision to give catering back to IRCTC has seen two flip
flops. In 2005, we decided that everything should be done by
IRCTC and in 2010, we said that everything should come out of
IRCTC and by the time they are getting established, then we said
that everything should go back to them. These flip flops also
affect the end product. Now the latest policy is quite a well
thought out policy. It talks about manufacture of food, distribution
of food etc. It has restored the work of catering back to IRCTC
where it should rightfully be, because this body was developed for
this purpose. In the near future, we can see a lot of improvement
in the quality of catering in the Indian Railways. ”
1.16 When enquired whether IRCTC is in a position to take over
the onus of catering services in New Catering Policy, 2017 which was
taken back in 2010, the Chairman, Railway Board submitted that:
“Basically we feel that IRCTC is in a position to handle this work
better. We are also strengthening the system of our base kitchens
because the cooked food will be picked up from the base kitchens.
If they provide quality food, I think a lot of complaints on the
quality of food that is being served in the trains will be taken care
of.”
1.17 In this regard, the Ministry, in a written reply, submitted as
follows:
“The condition of catering over Indian Railways however did not
improve. Two Committees namely ‘Debroy Committee on Railways ’
and ‘Sreedharan Committee on Railways ’ were constituted to study
inter alia  Catering Services over Indian Railways. The Debroy
Committee felt, inter alia, that the decision in 2010 to switch
back to departmental catering from IRCTC was perhaps a restrictive
step.”

9
1.18 Further, the representative of the Ministry of Railways (Railway
Board) during oral evidence before the Committee elaborated that the
Sreedharan Committee—a one member Committee having vast
experience—was appointed by the Minister of Railways, which in its
report submitted that “all catering related services should be restored
back to IRCTC. The Committee inter alia recommended repeal of
Railway Catering Policy, 2010 and handing back of on board/station
catering and allied roles back to IRCTC in line with the Cabinet decision
of setting up of IRCTC ”.
1.19 The Ministry of Railways has further informed that a committee
of senior officers of Railways was also constituted to consider the
recommendations of Dr. Sreedharan Committee Report. The committee
of senior officers has also recommended in favour of handing over of
catering services to IRCTC in a phased manner. Under these
circumstances, on 27 February, 2017, New Catering Policy, 2017 was
issued. The new Catering Policy mandates IRCTC to carry out the
unbundling of catering services on trains by creating a distinction
primarily between food preparation and food distribution.
1.20 The policy document of New Catering Policy, 2017 envisages
mainly to mitigate the following:
“With the objective to provide quality food to our customers
unbundling of catering services on trains has been envisaged in
Catering Policy, 2017. This Policy supersedes Catering Policy, 2010
and related instructions, unless specifically referred to in Policy
document (Annexure).
IRCTC has been mandated to carry out the unbundling by creating
a distinction primarily between food preparation and food
distribution. In order to upgrade quality of food preparation IRCTC
shall be setting up new kitchens and upgrade existing ones.
Modifications have been necessitated in the management of catering
service on mobile and static units to implement social objectives
of the Government besides encouraging fair competition in allotment
of catering units over stations.
IRCTC shall be responsible for catering services through mobile
catering units, Base Kitchens, Cell Kitchens, Refreshment Rooms at
A1 and A category of stations, Food Plazas, Food Courts, Train Side
Vending, Jan Aahaars. All other catering units like Refreshment
Rooms at B and below category of stations, AVMs, Milk Stalls,
trolleys shall be managed by the Zonal Railways. ”

10
1.21 The Committee asked the Ministry whether IRCTC has proper
resources/manpower to handle the responsibilities entrusted to it for
implementation of new Catering Policy 2017, the Ministry of Railways,
in a written reply, submitted that new Catering Policy has been issued
on 27th February, 2017 with the objective to provide quality food to
rail passengers by unbundling of catering services on trains. IRCTC has
been mandated to carry out the unbundling by creating a distinction
primarily between food preparation and food distribution. In order to
upgrade quality of food preparation, IRCTC will set up new kitchens
and upgrade existing ones. IRCTC shall manage catering services on all
mobile units. Meals for all mobile units to be picked up from the
nominated kitchens owned, operated and managed by them. It should
not out-rightly outsource or issue licenses for provision of catering
services to private licensees. IRCTC would retain the ownership and be
fully accountable for all the issues pertaining to setting up and operation
of the Base Kitchens and quality of food. It shall prepare a detailed
concession agreement of the Business Model proposed for setting up
of the kitchens and engage service providers from hospitality industry
for service of food in trains. Therefore, sufficient policy framework
and hand holding support has been given to IRCTC so as to garner
adequate resources/manpower to handle the situation.
1.22 As per mandate of Policy Document of new Catering Policy,
2017, IRCTC shall supervise catering services on each mobile unit
through its own supervisors directly employed by IRCTC. When enquired
whether IRCTC has sufficient manpower to supervise the catering
services in each mobile units, the Ministry, in their written reply,
submitted as follows:—
“As per Catering Policy-2017, IRCTC has been mandated for
supervision of catering services of mobile units through its own
supervisors. For this purpose, IRCTC has started deploying its own
catering supervisors for onboard monitoring of catering services on
Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto trains. Further , it is being planned to
expand the scope of onboard monitoring by addition of more trains.”
1.23 On being asked about the manner in which catering services
is to be undertaken by IRCTC, the Ministry, in their written reply,
elaborated that in mobile units, all pantry car service contracts awarded
by zonal railways shall be reassigned to IRCTC on the same terms and
conditions, as per the plan decided mutually by IRCTC and Railways.
Sharing of license fee between IR and IRCTC shall be in the ratio of
40:60 in all cases other than departmentally managed units by IRCTC
wherein revenue shall be shared in the ratio of 15:85. Also all such

11
reassigned contracts should be got vetted by Legal Deptt. of Zonal
Railways:
“IRCTC shall manage catering services on all mobile units having
pantry car service presently with IRCTC. IRCTC shall also take over
management of catering services on trains for which contracts
have not been awarded by zonal railways due to various reasons
or trains are being run departmentally by zonal railways.
Management of catering services on all new trains/trains started
on short notice shall also be done by IRCTC.
Since all trains are not provided with pantry cars, Train Side Vending
will be provided from a suitable unit of nominated station/stations
en-route. For this purpose, arrangements will be made through
static kitchen units under the management of IRCTC by either
segmentation of run or on end to end basis, as practicable. IRCTC
shall manage Train Side Vending as per instructions entailed in this
policy.”
1.24 When the attention of the Ministry of Railways was drawn
towards the Report of C&AG tabled in the Monsoon Session inter alia
stating that due to frequent policy change, Indian Railways could not
take effective steps to provide the necessary infrastructure like base
kitchen, static catering with vending arrangements and automatic
vending machines etc., during Catering Policy 2010, wherein all Zonal
Railways were instructed to give priority to provisions of good quality
food, drinking water and toilet facilities and ensure cleanliness on
trains and stations and also availability of Janata Khana/Ahaar , the
Ministry, in a written reply, submitted as follows:—
“There have been changes in policy that have impacted the catering
over Indian Railways adversely. Catering Policy 2004 and 2005
mandated IRCTC to manage catering services on IR. But it was
superseded by Catering Policy 2010, wherein management of
catering services was shifted to Zonal Railways, as it was observed
that IRCTC focused on revenue generation and no substantial and
visible improvement in catering services was seen.
On 27 February, 2017, new Catering Policy 2017 was issued. The
new catering Policy mandates IRCTC to carry out the unbundling
of catering services on trains by creating a distinction primarily
between food preparation and food distribution.

12
The policy by introducing unbundling services brings in a paradigm
shift in catering business on IR and is expected to provide healthy,
wholesome and hygienic food to the passengers through closely
monitored units. ”
1.25 In this regard, the Chairman, Railway Board in his oral evidence
deposed before the Committee as under:—
“....the latest policy is quite a well thought out policy.......It has
restored the work of catering back to IRCTC where it should
rightfully be because this body was developed for this purpose. In
the near future, we can see a lot of improvement in the quality
of catering in the Indian Railways. ”
1.26 On being asked about the audit findings of C&AG wherein it
was stated that Zonal Railways were required to prepare a Master Plan
(Blue Print) of catering services to be provided at each station and
onboard trains which was not prepared in seven Zonal Railways like
ECR, ER, NFE, NWR, SER, SWR and ECOR. The Ministry attributed the
reasons as follows:—
“Under Catering Policy 2010, Master Plans of catering services
were to be prepared by all zones. Master Plans were prepared by
SR, WR, SCR, NCR, NR, SECR, CR, NER and WCR by Zonal Railways,
in coordination with Divisions.
As making a master plan is considered important for planning
catering services accordingly, it was also included in the new
Catering Policy 2017.
Catering Policy 2017 mandates that Zonal Railways will prepare
the plan in coordination with Divisions and IRCTC at each station,
taking into consideration bans as notified from time to time. ”
1.27 When enquired whether the Ministry of Railways had invited
any suggestion from the Zonal Railways before formulation of new
Catering Policy, 2017, specifically timely supply of meals, effective
supervision, quality catering services, catering equipments, management
of catering services by professionals, selection of catering contractors,
trained and qualified staff etc., the Ministry, in their written reply,
submitted as under:—
“Draft catering Policy 2016 was in public domain on Indian Railway
website for all the stakeholders including zonal railways to give
their comments/suggestions. The suggestions on draft Catering Policy

13
2016 so received from zonal railways and after examining the
same, they were included in Catering Policy 2017 wherever found
feasible.”
1.28 Further, the representative of the Ministry of Railways (Railway
Board), in a oral evidence, accepted before the Committee that during
earlier policy when the catering services were transferred to IRCTC,
base kitchens and some other things could not be handed over to
IRCTC but in new Railway Catering Policy, 2017, full time-line has
been prepared to transit the catering services to it with effect from
27th February, 2017.
1.29 The representative further added that all mobile units will be
handed over to IRCTC along with existing contracts. The contracts
which have been over will be awarded afresh on immediate basis. The
contracts which were awarded in 2013-14 will gradually be short
terminated or continued till expiry and re-allotted afresh after expiry.
Further , Mega Base Kitchens will be constructed by IRCTC and the
existing four Mega Base kitchens at Ahmedabad, Howrah, Mumbai and
Delhi will be upgraded by IRCTC on PPP mode so that there should be
a Base Kitchen on every 300 Km. Out of 80 number of proposed Mega
Kitchens, 16 have been proposed to be prepared in 2017. Food Plazas
and Food Courts have already been handed over to IRCTC and taken
over by them except those which are under litigation.
1.30 The Committee were apprised that after launch of new Catering
Policy, 2017, the IRCTC was required to submit ‘Business Plan ’ to
Railway Board within 30 days from the date of issuance of the Policy.
When asked about whether the Business Plan has been submitted and
approved by the Board, the Ministry in their written reply, submitted
as under:—
“Ministry of Railways has issued Catering Policy, 2017 vide
commercial circular-20 of 2017 on 27.02.2017. As per the Catering
Policy, 2017, IRCTC was required to submit Business Plan to Railway
Board within 30 days from issuance of the Policy. IRCTC vide letter
dated 6.4.17 has submitted the said Business Plan to Railway Board.
Railway Board has raised some issues and accordingly IRCTC has
been requested to furnish the revised Comprehensive Business Plan.”
1.31 On being asked about the steps being taken by the Railways
on the Audit Findings of CAG relating to sub-standard catering services
in Indian Railways, the Ministry of Railways, in a written reply, submitted
as under:—
“There have been changes in policy that have impacted the catering
over Indian Railways adversely. Catering Policy 2004 & 2005

14
mandated IRCTC to manage catering services on IR. But it was
superseded by Catering Policy 2010, wherein management of
catering services was shifted to Zonal Railways, as it was observed
that IRCTC focused on revenue generation and no substantial and
visible improvement in catering services was seen.......The new
Catering Policy mandates IRCTC to carry out the unbundling of
catering services on trains by creating a distinction primarily
between food preparation and food distribution. This
policy........brings in a paradigm shift in catering business on IR
and is expected to provide healthy, wholesome and hygienic food
to the passengers through closely monitored units. ”
1.32 When the Committee drew the attention of the Ministry
towards the findings of the CAG that Zonal Railways did not ensure
provision of pantry cars in a number of long distance trains. It was
seen that in nine trains having a run of more than 24 hours, no pantry
car was provided. No Train Side Vending services were provided by
NCR, SECR and SR for the trains which run for more than 12 hours
during the day time. The Ministry, in their reply, informed as under:—
“Presently 360 trains are running with pantry car and 232 mail/
express trains have sectional train side vending. Non attachment
of pantry cars in a long distance train can also be due to capacity
constraints. The Capacity of a train, in terms of number of coaches
that can be attached is restricted (around 24/26 coaches) because
of various reasons such as length of platforms or loop lines en-
route, washing pits etc.
However , in cases where pantry cars can not be attached, it is
ascertained that there are provisions such as adequate number of
catering static units on stations en-route, Train Side Vending
contracts or E-catering available to ensure that catering needs of
passengers are met. ”
1.33 When enquired about base kitchens that base kitchens were
to be set up in Railway premises to monitor and control the quality
and hygiene of food served in trains. However , only 16 base kitchens
were located in railway premises. 115 base kitchens were located
outside the railway premises and were not subjected to quality check.
In respect of 128 trains of seven Zonal Railways, meals were picked
up from outside base kitchens. The Ministry furnished as follows:—
“In the new Catering Policy there is a paradigm shift to unbundling
of food preparation and food distribution. The food is envisaged to
be prepared in modern, mechanized and state-of-the-art kitchens

15
developed by IRCTC. These kitchens will be located in Railway
premises and will run under the direct supervision of IRCTC. In the
new scheme of things, no food will be picked from kitchens located
outside the premises. ”
1.34 When the attention of the Ministry was drawn towards the
audit observation that in 2012, the Railway Board had instructed Zonal
Railways to make efforts to improve the sale/availability of Janta
Meals so as to provide good quality food at affordable price to railway
passengers. However , out of 74 stations where joint inspections were
conducted by Audit Party, Jan Ahaar units were not provided on
46 stations. Share of Janta meals to the overall meals sold in six Zonal
Railways was declining in the last three years. In this regard, the
Ministry of Railways explained as under:—
“Janta Meals are sold not only at Jan Ahaars but also at other
static units as per Board ’s instructions. Thus, absence of Jan Ahaar
outlets does not mean no sale of Janta Meal at any station as
other outlets are also mandated to be sold in all static units. ”
1.35 The Ministry further added as under:—
“Instructions have been issued to Zonal Railways for setting up of
Jan Ahaar outlets and for ensuring sale of Janta meals to passengers.
Also, there can be many factors for decline in sale of Janta meal,
including rising purchasing power of passengers, availability of
greater variety of food etc. ”
E. ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF CATERING SERVICES
1.36 The Committee have been informed that the Directorate of
Catering and Tourism under the direction and control of Member (Traffic)
is responsible for policy formulation relating to catering services in
Indian Railways. At Zonal level, the departmental catering is under the
administrative control of the Chief Commercial Managers (CCMs). In
Zonal Railways where the control of the catering units is decentralized,
the executive control in the matters rests with the Divisional
Commercial Managers.
1.37 In IRCTC, the responsibility of managing static catering units
assigned to them lies with their respective Regional Offices. The work
of awarding and managing contracts for mobile catering units, however ,
is the responsibility of the Corporate Office of IRCTC.

16
CHAPTER II
CATERING UNITS
A. TRANSITION OF CATERING UNITS TO IRCTC
2.1 Catering services are provided to the travelling public either
through Static units or mobile units.
2.2 Mobile Units
(i) Trains which are currently managed by IRCTC and the trains
currently being run under temporary arrangement by Zonal
Railway are proposed to be handed over to IRCTC for
managing catering services as per budget announcement.
(ii) All new trains introduced are proposed to be handed over
to IRCTC.
(iii) Trains for which contracts get terminated or surrendered
are also proposed to be handed over to IRCTC.
2.3 When asked the current status of take over of mobile units by
IRCTC, the Ministry of Railways in a written reply stated as under:
“Mobile units take over completed on 30.11.2017 and all trains
with pantry/mini pantry have been taken over except one train
(Train No. 12629-30/12649-50 Yashwantpur-Hazrat Nizamuddin
Sampark Kranti Express), which would not been taken over due to
litigation.”
2.4 STATIC UNITS:
(i) Currently IRCTC has 4 base kitchens viz. New Delhi, Rajendra
Nagar , Howrah and Ahmedabad.
(ii) Four Zonal Railway base kitchens viz. Nagpur , Balharshah,
Mumbai Central and CSTM are proposed to be handed over
to IRCTC.
(iii) Five other locations have also been identified by IRCTC for
setting up of base kitchens.
(iv) Other static units with kitchen viz. Cell Kitchens, Refreshment
Rooms, Jan Aahaars are being identified for formation of
kitchen grid to supply food in trains.

17
2.5 When asked the current status of take over of static units by
IRCTC, the Ministry of Railways in a written reply stated as under:
“All static units have been taken over as on 13.12.2017 except
18 units which are under process of take over. ”
2.6 When the Committee asked to state the reasons for pendency
of take over of 18 static units by IRCTC, the Ministry, in a written
reply, submitted that IRCTC is in advance stage of taking over of static
units (i.e. Base Kitchens, Refreshment Rooms at A1 and A class stations,
Jan Ahaars and Cell Kitchens) over Indian Railways Network. Presently,
out of 272 static units, 255 static units have been taken over from
Zonal Railways and remaining 17 static units are still pending with
Zonal Railways due to various legal issues.
2.7 The Ministry further elaborated that, at present, there are 347
pairs of trains with pantry cars, which include 22 pairs of Rajdhanis,
24 pairs of Shatabdis, 18 pairs of Duranto trains and 283 pairs of mail/
express trains. There are about 10149 Major and Minor Static Units on
Indian Railways which include 46 Jan Aahaar outlets, 188 Food Plazas/
Fast Food Units.
2.8 In compliance of the budget announcement 2016-17, vetting
and approval of instructions for handing over catering services to
IRCTC is under process:
As on 31.03.2016
- Trains with pantry car services over Indian — 347
Railways
- Pantry car services in trains licensed by Zonal — 254
Railway for 5+5 years
- Pantry car services in trains currently managed — 63
by IRCTC
- Pantry car services in trains currently being run — 30
under temporary arrangement by Zonal Railways
2.9 To the query on the current status of transition of catering
services to IRCTC, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated that
IRCTC is undertaking the process of taking over of the units from Zonal
Railways through tripartite agreement. As on 17.1.2018, all mobile
units (Pantry and Mini-pantry) have been taken over by IRCTC except
01 train which is under litigation. With respect to the static units, all
units except 17 units have been taken over by IRCTC. The static units
still to be taken over are primarily held up due to issues of litigations.

18
2.10 Since catering services are facilitated to voluminous travelling
passengers on a large scale over Indian Railways, there is no place of
shortcomings to be taken place in catering services and if noticed, the
same are required to be removed immediately. In this regard, the
Committee invited the attention of the Ministry towards shortcomings
detected by C&AG. When enquired the measures proposed to be taken
by the Indian Railways in regard to quick removal of shortcomings, the
Chairman, Railway Board, in his oral evidence, stated that the
shortcomings detected by C&AG in their Report came to the notice of
the Ministry of Railways from time to time and also the Ministry is well
aware of these shortcomings and preparing Action Taken Report thereon.
As regard the changes in catering policy, in 2005, it was handed over
to IRCTC and in 2010 the same was taken back but the basic problems
were not addressed. The contractors who were in Railway catering
went in IRCTC and again came to Railway. The contractor remained
the same. Only the agency which was managing them got shifted.
There was no hope for improvement. Based on the feedback, complaints
and other information that the Railways got from time to time, they
brought in a new Catering Policy, 2017.
2.11 The Ministry has informed that new Catering Policy, 2017
proposes to hand over mobile and kitchen units to IRCTC which are
presently being managed either through a licensee or departmentally
or through a temporary arrangement. Zonal Railways and IRCTC shall
finalize and submit to Railway Board an action plan within 30 days ’ of
issuance of this policy, wherein the list of units along with the status
and the time frame in which it shall be handed/taken over shall be
stated.
2.12 All four Base Kitchens under departmental operation of Zonal
Railways (Nagpur , Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus, Mumbai Central and
Balharshah) shall be handed over to IRCTC on ‘as is where is ’ basis i.e.
the infrastructure including equipments shall be transferred to IRCTC.
All kitchen units i.e. Refreshment rooms at A1 and A category stations
(i.e. excluding Refreshment Rooms at B and below category stations
being minor units that will remain with Railways), Jan Ahaar , Cell
Kitchens shall also be handed over to IRCTC on ‘as is where is ’ basis
i.e. the infrastructure including equipments shall be transferred to
IRCTC.
B. UPGRADATION OF BASE KITCHENS
2.13 The Committee asked the Ministry to provide the details of
base kitchens which have presently been made operational. In response,
the Ministry in their written reply, stated that IRCTC has planned to

19
upgrade the base kitchen and 16 units have been identified for
upgradation by 31.3.2018. Five (5) base kitchens have been made
operational as on 31.11.2017. It is planned to make operational the
balance 11 base kitchens by 31.3.2018.
2.14 When asked to furnish the details of additional kitchens which
are required to be set up by IRCTC to meet the demand of Catering
Services of travelling passengers as per new Catering Policy, 2017 and
by when these kitchens will be made operational, they in a written
reply stated as follows:
“11 additional kitchens are required to be set up by IRCTC in 2017-
18 and 16 additional kitchens are required to be set up in 2018-
19 to meet the demand of Catering Service over IR.
It is expected that all the additional kitchens would be made
operational by the end of Financial Year 2018-19. ”
2.15 The Ministry further elaborated that in order to upgrade the
quality of food, meals are to be picked up from the nominated kitchens
owned, operated and managed by IRCTC and no food will be picked
from kitchens located outside the railway premises.
C. CATERING UNITS: ALLOTMENT, PROCEDURE AND MANAGEMENT
2.16 The Committee have been informed that allotment of all
major units including mobile units and all static General Minor Units
(GMUs) at A, B, and C categories of stations is done through open,
competitive, two packet tender system while allotment of static Special
Minor Units (SMUs) at A, B and C categories of stations and all GMUs
and SMUs at D, E and F categories stations is done by calling applications
through press notification.
2.17 Allotment of Major Units and General Minor Units (GMUs) at
A,B, and C Categories of Stations: The Ministry informed that Zonal
Railways have an effective and transparent contract awarding,
management and monitoring system. Allotment of all major units and
of General Minor Units at A, B and C categories of stations is done
through open, competitive, two-packet tendering system based on
Standard Bid Document (SBD) and duly following all the procedures/
instructions issued by Government of India/Railway Board from time
to time.
2.18 Allotment of Special Minor Units and General Minor Units
(GMUs) at D, E, and F Category of Stations: Allotment of 25% of Special

20
Minor Units at A, B and C category of stations and all SMUs and General
Minor Units at D, E and F category stations is made by DRMs by calling
applications. Division calls for applications through press notifications.
Individuals/partnership firms/companies/Cooperatives can apply.
Applications are invited by calling for the following information and
allotments are based on these criteria such as:—
(i) Reputation/business standing of the applicant,
(ii) Turnover of applicant ’s business in catering (to be supported
by Income Tax Return for the last five years),
(iii) Financial Standing,
(iv) Previous experience in catering service,
(v) location of the unit, and
(vi) domicile of the units etc.
2.19 Tenure: On the tenure of the units, the Ministry has informed
that tenure of all major units including food courts, fast food units
(except food plazas, base kitchens and AVMs) will be for a period of
five years. There will be no renewals. In case of mobile units and base
kitchen, the tenure will be five years with one renewal for five years
subject to satisfactory performance and payment of all dues and arrears:
(i) Tenure of General Minor Units and Special Minor Units at A,
B and C category stations, shall be initially five years with
subsequent renewal after every 3 years. Allotment of all
GMUs and SMUs at D, E and F category stations will be
initially for a period of 5 years and subsequently renewal
after every 5 years for a further period of 5 years.
(ii) Tenure of Food Plaza will be for 9 years with an extension
of 3 years on satisfactory performance. Tenure of AVMs will
be made for a period of 5 years. There will be no renewals.
(iii) Tenure of Milk stalls at A, B, C stations will be for 5 years
and renewal every 3 years whereas Milk stalls at D, E and
F stations will be for 5 years and renewal every 5 years.
2.20 Licence Fee: Regarding the license fee to be deposited by the
licensees with Indian Railways, the Ministry has informed that minimum
license fees/minimum reserve price shall be fixed realistically based
on the factors like (i) category of stations, (ii) type of license,
(iii) number of originating passengers, (iv) number of trains stopping
(day and night), (v) duration of stoppages and (vi) location of the unit

21
at the station etc. Minimum license fee will be fixed as 12% of the
estimated annual sales turnover for static units, 10% of the annual
sales turnover for mobile units of Rajdhani/Shatabdi trains/Duranto/
mail/express trains and premium super fast trains. License fee will be
reassessed and revised at the time of each renewal subject to a
minimum of 10% increase over the prevailing license fee.
2.21 Management: On the system of management for allotment of
units, the Committee have been informed that Two Packet Systems of
tendering will be followed by Zonal Railways while selecting the
successful bidder for award of major contracts and GMU at A, B and
C category stations by the Zonal Railways. Allotment of Special Minor
Units and General Minor Units at D, E and F category stations will be
done by DRMs by calling applications. In the eligibility criteria, weightage
will be given to previous experienced (applicants) in catering business.
AVMs will be allotted by zonal railways under two packet bidding
system. Milk stalls at A, B and C stations will be allotted by zonal
railways by calling of applications. There is no change in the procedure
prevailing earlier for allotment of Milk stalls at D, E and F stations.
2.22 Reservation in allotment of Minor Units at A1, A, B and C
Category of Stations: The Ministry has elaborated that there is no
Constitutional provision for making reservations in matters other than
services/appointment. However , in order to uplift socially and
economically backward people of the society, Indian Railways has already
made 25% reservation at A, B and C category of railway stations for
allotment of minor static catering units and 49.50% reservation at D,
E and F category of railway stations for allotment of minor catering
static units. This provision of reservation is a conscious and proactive
decision of Ministry of Railways which is in the general interest of the
travelling public and society at large.
2.23 Though, there is no reservation for allotment of major units,
however , 25% reservation has been provided for allotment of minor
units in A, B and C categories of stations viz. (i) SC-6%, (ii) ST- 4%,
(iii) people below poverty line-3%, (iv) Women including war widows
and widows of railway employees-4%, (v) Other Backward Classes-3%,
(vi) Minorities (Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Zoroastrians i.e.
Parsis and Jain)-3%, and (vii) Physically Handicapped persons-2%.
2.24 Reservation in allotment of Minor Units at D, E and F Category
of Stations: The Ministry has stated that similar to reservation provision
in allotment of minor units at A1, A, B and C category of stations,
49.5% reservation has been earmarked for allotment of minor units in

22
D, E and F category of stations. SC-12%, ST-8%, OBC-20%, Minorities
(Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Zoroastrians i.e. Parsis and Jains)-
9.5%. Out of this 49.5% reservation, there will be sub quota of 10% for
freedom fighters and war widows and widows of Railway employees
and another sub quota of 2% will be for physically challenged people.
Within 49.5% of total reservation, 2% sub quota will be provided to the
persons who have been dislocated/displaced due to their land having
been taken over by the railways for its own use. The quota of 10% for
freedom fighters and war widows and widows of Railway employees;
sub quota of 2% for physically and mentally challenged people will also
apply in the general category of 50.5%.
2.25 The Ministry of Railways have informed that:
“The issue of reservations is at present sub-judice in the Hon ’ble
Supreme Court. Any allotment/extension in the case of reservations
will be subject to the final order of the Hon ’ble Supreme Court in
Civil Appeal No. 7513 of 2005 and analogous case referred to the
Constitutional Bench. ”
2.26 The Ministry has further informed that in compliance of Budget
Announcement 2016-17, process for giving a sub quota of 33% for
women in each of the reserved categories in allotment of minor catering
units has been initiated. Accordingly, there shall be a provision of 33%
sub quota for women in allotment of each of the reserved category of
minor catering units at all category of stations. The sub quota of 33%
for women will also apply in general category. Also for the purpose of
reservation, one division will be considered as one entity for which a
one time station-wise exercise will be done for the whole division and
reservation percentage will be progressively achieved as and when
either new units are provided or old units get vacated due to any
reason.
2.27 When enquired about the rationale behind differences in
reservation quota in allotment of minor units between A1, A, B and C
category of stations i.e. 25% compared and D, E and F category of
stations which is 49.50%, the Ministry, in a written reply, submitted as
under:
“There is no Constitutional provision for making reservations in
matters other than services/appointment. However , in order to
uplift socially and economically backward people of the society,
Indian Railways has already made 25% reservation at A, B and C
category of railway stations for allotment of minor static catering

23
units and 49.50% reservation at D, E and F category of railway
stations for allotment of minor catering static units. This provision
of reservation is a conscious and proactive decision of Ministry of
Railways which is in the general interest of the travelling public
and society at large. ”
2.28 Measures to control monopoly-ceiling limit: On the ceiling
limit of allotment of Minor Units to licensees, the Ministry has informed
that a licensee can be allotted maximum of two minor catering units
at a station and a maximum of 10 units per Zonal Railway. In case of
suburban station, there is ceiling limit of 2 units per Division. Regarding
ceiling in allotment of major units at D, E and F category of stations,
a provision has been made for allotment of maximum two units of
Food Plaza, Food Courts and Fast Food Units per Division and a maximum
10% of all the units over Indian Railways. As regard Refreshment Rooms,
maximum 2 units per Division and a maximum 10% of all the units over
Indian Railways. The provision of allotment of Premium Franchisees
outlets including stand alone beverage vending machines will be
maximum 10% of all units over each railway. Ceiling of allotment of
Mobile Units will be 10% of similar category of major units over Indian
Railways.
2.29 Train Side Vending: With a view to facilitate travelling
passengers of their need of catering services enroute, the Ministry of
Railways have informed that the trains which do not have pantry cars
are facilitated with Train Side Vending. In this regard, they have
submitted as under:
“It is provided from a suitable unit of a nominated station/stations
enroute and arrangements will be made through static units by
either segmentation of run or end to end basis as practicable. ”
D. MENU AND TARIFF
2.30 The Ministry has informed that as per the extant guidelines,
the Railway Board notifies the menu and tariff for meals on Rajdhani/
Shatabdi and Duronto Express Trains and the standard meals, breakfast
and tea/coffee. Further, Zonal railways are empowered to fix the
menu and tariff of a­la­carte items. Menu and tariff for food plaza,
fast food units and food courts are market driven and fixed by IRCTC
since the management is with IRCTC. The menu and catering charges
of Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi Express Trains were last revised on
06.08.2014. The rates for standard meals, breakfast and beverages for
other Mail/Express trains has been revised on 21.12.2012.

24
2.31 When enquired the steps proposed to be taken against
contractors when they found guilty of adulteration of foods, the Ministry,
in a written reply, submitted as under:
“The allotment of catering units are done by following transparent
contract awarding management system. Regular and surprise
inspections are conducted by railway officials to check the quality
of food and samples of food are also taken for testing for
adulteration. Punitive action is taken in the case of irregularity
found as per the term of the contract including fine, warning,
termination and blacklisting etc. ”
2.32 The Committee, during their deliberations, enquired to know
the steps being taken by the Ministry against the blacklisted licensees
who after being blacklisted arrange to get contract in different names
in collusion with some railway officials and indulge in adulteration. In
this regard, the Ministry apprised the Committee as under:
“As per Catering Policy 2017, contracts are awarded through a
competitive, transparent contract awarding system through tenders
strictly in consonance with the letter and spirit of extant policy
guidelines. The contractors to whom licenses are awarded have to
submit an affidavit clearly indicating that they have not been
debarred or blacklisted by the Railway Administration. Any false
declaration by the bidder on such affidavit is treated as material
breach and result in termination of license and debarment/black-
listing of licensee from participating further in allotment of catering
units on any zonal railway/IRCTC. ”
2.33 New Menu and Tariff Committee: The Ministry have informed
that New Menu and Tariff Committee has been constituted by Ministry
of Railways on 25.4.2017 to examine the issues as per following terms
of reference:
(i) Finalization of menu and tariff for standard menu/food items
to be served on trains like Rajdhani, Shatabdi, Duronto,
Gatiman, Mail/Express and a­la­carte items in Mail/Express
trains.
(ii) Finalization of empirical formula to calculate annual or
periodical escalation of tariff for meals. This may take into
account inter alia  the following aspects:
(a) Price of ingredients as per laid down norms and other
components required for preparation of food.

25
(b) Distribution cost of meals.
(c) Hygienic food production and distribution and efficient
disposal of garbage.
The Committee will submit its report shortly.
E. UNAUTHORIZED VENDING
2.34 When asked to state the steps taken to stop unauthorized
vending in railway premises, the Ministry submitted that the
unauthorized vending in Railway premises is not allowed in any way.
It is a punishable offence under section 144 of Railway Act, 1989.
Railways carry out surprise inspections with the help of Railway
Protection Force (RPF) to check the menace of unauthorized vending
and fines, imprisonment or both are imposed on the offenders.
2.35 To a pointed query that C&AG in their audit Report tabled in
Monsoon Session of Parliament in 2017 observed that during joint
inspections of selected trains, a number of unauthorized vendors were
found active on platforms and in trains. On being asked about the
steps being taken by the Railways to check this menace, the Ministry
informed that unauthorized vending is a punishable offence under
section 144 of Indian Railway Act, 1989 which includes imprisonment,
fine or both. Drives against unauthorized vending are organized by RPF
constantly to check this menace. During 2013-14 to 2015-16, 2,39,096
cases were prosecuted by Railway Protection Force and fine imposed
in eight Zonal Railways.
2.36 In this regard, a representative of the Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board) during oral evidence accepted that Indian Railways are
the victim of unauthorized vending. The Chairman, Railway Board during
oral evidence, deposed before the Committee as under:
“The total traffic at our stations has gone up considerably in the
last one or two decades. In New Delhi Station, almost five lakh
people enter and exit. There is no design for this volume. Our
stations are open from all sides. We have not added that kind of
infrastructure. Anybody can enter the station from any side. There
is hardly any access control which we will put in place in future
but access control is a major problem and that results in
unauthorized vending. We regularly have a drive on unauthorized
vending but this is a ground reality like the New Delhi Station
which is open from Paharganj and Ajmeri Gate sides. It is totally
open. Anybody can walk in and do anything and then go out.

26
Unless you bring in access control, the problem of unauthorized
vending can be controlled from time to time but it will not be
limited altogether .”
2.37 When asked to furnish the details of cases of unauthorized
vendors reported/prosecuted/fined by RPF during the last three years
and Railway ’s strategy to check this menace in new Catering Policy,
2017, the Ministry of Railways, in their written reply, stated as follows:
“Prosecution under section 144 of Railway Act for the years 2014,
2015 and 2016 are as under:
Year No. of cases of No. of No. of Amount of No. of
 unauthorized persons persons fine realized persons
vending prosecuted fined (in Rs.) sent to
reported/ jail
registered
2014 167169 177104 166809 74575644 3058
2015 183153 193159 181452 90305379 3324
2016 221233 228786 214307 118138662 3456
.......Since already provisions exist in law of the land to prohibit
unauthorized vending with suitable deterrent punishment
incorporated in the Railway Act, hence clause of unauthorized
vending was not incorporated in New Catering Policy, 2017. ”
2.38 The Committee asked the Ministry to specify that after all
out efforts taken by the Ministry to check the menace of unauthorized
vending in railways, the problem is increasing manifold indicating that
either no stringent action is being taken in the matter or there is some
loopholes in the penal provisions due to which offenders are exonerated.
The Ministry, in their written reply, stated that action is taken by RPF
under Section 144 of the Railways Act against unauthorized vendors
apprehended from station premises and trains. During the year 2016
and 2017 (upto December) a total of 4,43,199 number of unauthorized
vendors have been prosecuted by RPF with realization of fine to the
tune of Rs. 21,45,73,139/-. To further strengthen the penal provisions
under the provisions of the Railways Act including Section 144, a
proposal is under consideration for amendment in the Railways Act,
1989.
2.39 The Ministry has further elaborated that in order to refrain
unauthorized vending of food items and water bottles in trains, IRCTC

27
has issued the instructions to service providers to provide prescribed
uniforms along with name badge and logo of IRCTC to their staff for
creating distinction from unauthorized vendors inside the trains. IRCTC
undertakes various inspections and the matter regarding unauthorized
vending is reported to the concerned authorities under Zonal Railways.
Also, Railway is regularly constructing boundary wall at vulnerable
locations over Railway Network depending upon availability of fund.
During last three years, 425 KM of boundary wall at different locations
has been constructed.

28
CHAPTER III
NEW INITIATIVES
3.1 The Ministry of Railways have informed that following new
initiatives have been taken/are being taken to further improve the
quality of catering services:
A. E-CATERING
3.2 The e-catering facilities have been implemented on 1350 trains
running without pantry cars. Passengers can book their choice of meals
either on the websites of IRCTC directly or on phone/SMS. The website
address is www.ecatering.irctc.co.in and phone numbers are 1800-
1034-139 (Toll free), 0120-4383892-99 (Toll) and SMS MEAL to 139. On
16.9.2015, Instructions have been issued to IRCTC and Zonal Railways
to start Station-based E-catering on 45 identified stations across Indian
Railways on pilot basis upto 31st March, 2016. Subsequently, as
announced in Rail Budget, 2016-17, extension of station based e-catering
service to all 408, A1 and A category stations is being undertaken
through IRCTC. At present, an average of 4000 meals per day are being
booked which is expected to increase as the scheme gains popularity.
3.3 In this regard, the Chairman, Railway Board, in his oral evidence
before the Committee, deposed as under:
“We also want to give an option to the passengers to order the
food as they wish. We have covered all the ‘A’ category stations,
which are almost 400 stations with e-catering where one can order
the food of his choice. We have also initiated a third party audit
for catering. ”
3.4 When enquired about the measures taken for expansion of
e-catering facilities in Indian Railways, the Chairman, Railway Board in
his oral evidence tendered before the Committee stated that Railways
are taking steps for expansion of e-catering services. Currently, around
350 trains have pantry cars. Even the passengers of those trains having
pantry cars, are expressing concern to have foods from reputed Food
Chain. In this regard, the Ministry have tied up with Reputed Food
Chains.
3.5 In this regard, the Chairman, Railway Board stated that the
Railways have given option to passengers of these trains to de-opt
railway foods during the reservation. However , only 5% passengers
have de-opted the railway foods.

29
3.6 On enquired about making availability of meals to passengers
under E-catering facilities, the Ministry of Railways have informed as
under:
“Passenger can pre-order the meal from the different options
available as per the choice, for delivery at the opted stations
through the e-catering (website & phone/SMS call centre). The
mode of payment in e-catering shall be pre-paid i.e. online payment
as well as cash on delivery (CoD) basis. The shortlisted vendor shall
deliver the pre-ordered meal to customer on stationary train at
the opted station. The opted meal is communicated to the vendor
through SMS as well as email at the time of booking and also again
at about 2 hours in advance of delivery time (delivery time is the
train arrival time on a particular station). The short- listing vendor
can provide meals through his catering units on all India basis.
Each unit/location, requested by vendor , to be included for
e-catering project is required to have all statutory licenses as
required under the central/state laws and should comply with the
laws of the land. The short- listed entity may request for addition
of more locations/units during the currency of the short-listing.
The shortlisted entity may supply food items under e-catering
project only from its approved (by IRCTC) locations/units to the
stations in the reasonable vicinity of the said units. ”
3.7 On being asked about safety hazards on availing e-catering
services in trains and the preventive measures taken/to be taken
therefor , the Ministry of Railways, in a written reply, submitted as
under:
“No such incident has been reported in Tourism and Catering
Department.”
3.8 The Ministry have further added:
“E-catering service on Indian Railways is managed by IRCTC. Initially,
e-catering service was train specific and was made available in
1350 trains which did not have services of pantry car or Train Side
Vending. As a major initiative during September , 2015, this scheme
has been reoriented to make it ‘Station-based E-catering’ in place
of train specific e-catering. In the first phase, a pilot project has
been undertaken on 45 major stations and subsequently extended
to all ‘A1’ & ‘A’ category of stations which is presently under
implementation. E-catering service is now available on 357 railway
stations and the average supply of meals under this scheme is

30
around 6000 meals per day which was around 400 meals per day
during Oct., 2015.
Revamp of E-catering services in September , 2015 also permitted
Food Aggregators to join the E-catering initiative. Aggregators like,
Railrestro, Zoop, Comesum, Mera Food Choice, Rail Darbar have
been integrated through API covering 529 vendors and 244 offline
vendors have also been incorporated for e-catering services across
357 stations.
Passengers travelling from these stations are now able to access
E-catering facilities for all trains passing through these stations.
IRCTC is facilitating booking of meals through a specified phone
number/website/SMS/Mobile Apps etc. Passengers having mobile
number are able to book meals under this scheme. CoD facility to
passengers under this scheme has also been made available. ”
3.9 When asked about the current status of implementation of
re-oriented e-catering, the Ministry of Railways have informed that
e-catering has now been re-oriented to make it station-based e-catering
in lieu of train specific. They had undertaken a pilot project on
45 major stations which has been extended to all A1 and A category
stations. The Ministry further elaborated as under:
“..IRCTC has established a state-of-the-art call centre for
operationalizing E- catering services where passengers can pre-
order the meal from the different options available as per the
choice, for delivery at the opted stations. ”
3.10 The Committee asked the Ministry how the Indian Railways
monitor the hygiene and quality of foods supplied through E-catering,
the Ministry, in their written reply, stated as follows:
“Only the F & B operator having valid FSSAI license are allowed to
take and serve orders through E-catering.
As the orders generated through E-catering are 100% traceable,
IRCTC can trace back errant vendors in order to take penal action
on quality related problems.
In addition to above, E-catering safeguards customers ’ interest by
the following measures:
(a) Customer can pay online and thus can not be overcharged.
(b) Raise a complaint online.

31
(c) Can rate the customer services for quality, quantity of good
and better parameters.
(d) The services allow as many vendors to join the platform and
provide ample choice to customer to order and create an
environment of competition amongst vendors for maintaining
quality and value for money. ”
3.11 The Committee enquired about the number of complaints
received by them with respect to poor quality of services of E-catering
during the last three years, the Ministry informed that a total of 19796
complaints were received on poor E-catering services, out of which
17873 complaints have been closed and 1923 are pending. The pending
complaints are in process of being resolved upto the customers ’
satisfaction.
3.12 On a pointed query about the measures being taken to
reorganize and revamp market strategy to popularize e-catering and to
increase supply of meals under this scheme from 6000 meals per day,
at present, to one lakh meals per day, the Ministry, in their written
reply, submitted as under:
“Currently, the services are being marketed in following ways:
1. All E-ticket customers due for travel next day are sent a
promotional message (SMS) introducing the services with a
link of E-catering website and mobile app.
2. Radio spots, physical marketing at stations, newspaper
advertisements, information on e-ticket print out,
advertisements on DMRC etc. were done in past.
3. Digital Marketing:
(a) SEO-Search Engine Optimization and SEM- Search Engine
Market:—Digital marketing tools for improving upon the
online visibility of website and obtaining a high ranking
placement in the results page of a online search and
thus driving more visitors to website.
(b) Remarketing:—A digital marketing tool to follow a visitor
(of E-catering website who hasn ’t booked an order) in
digital space to keep reminding him of the service.
IRCTC is in process of implementation of a nationwide
marketing plan covering various media like audio, visual,
print etc. with emphasis on digital media to promote
the services in future. ”

32
3.13 When enquired about the number of service providers
registered to supply foods under E- catering services and the steps to
be taken to bring more service providers under the E-catering services
so as to give a boost to E-catering services, the Ministry, in a written
reply, informed as follows:—
“At present, 11 aggregators and 359 independent vendors are
providing services through E-catering at 310 stations. IRCTC will
soon implement an online mechanism for any vendor to get itself
registered with IRCTC and start taking orders for supply to
passengers. Vendors will then not be required to visit IRCTC office
in person or fill up an empanelment document. ”
3.14 The Committee further asked the Ministry regarding the
measures taken for empanelment of service providers and imposition
of penalty for non-delivery of order , the Ministry, in a written submission
informed that they have taken steps for empanelment of service
providers by simplifying the process of empanelment of direct vendors
for e-catering and at the same time, they have made arrangement to
impose a fine of Rs. 100/- per order on vendor for non-delivery of
every order . Customer is provided a full refund of non-delivered order
along with a voucher of Rs. 100/- that can be redeemed by customer
in his next order with E-catering. In addition to this, IRCTC reserves
the right to impose more stringent actions on the repeated defaulters
including fines, deactivation from website and dis-empanelment from
the services.
3.15 The Committee enquired about the details of complaints
received in connection with supply of unhygienic and poor quality of
foods under the E-catering services, the Ministry has furnished following
data:
Year Total Total Complaints Complaints
complaints complaints closed of pending of
on quality quality quality
Sept., 2015 to 890 72 72 0
March, 2016
April, 2016 to 3357 306 306 0
Dec., 2016
Jan., 2017 to 17745 2357 2061 296
19 Jan., 2018
Total 21992 2735 2439 296
Only 296 out of 2735 complaints are pending and are under process
of getting resolved and closed.

33
B. SELF HELP GROUPS
3.16 The Ministry, in a written reply, informed the Committee that
in new Catering Policy, 2017, IRCTC may involve/empanel Self Help
Groups (SHGs) for providing healthy, wholesome regional cuisine at an
affordable cost to the travelling public through E-catering. Nine SHGs
have been empanelled at 10 stations  i.e. 4 in Andhra Pradesh, one in
Karnataka, 2 in Kerala, 3 in Madhya Pradesh, one each in Maharashtra
and West Bengal.
C. READY TO EAT MEALS
3.17 The Ministry have informed that the Indian Railways Catering
and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) has started sale of Ready-To-Eat (RTE)
food packets at some of the Railway stations on trial basis. During the
trial period, the MRP has been kept at Rs. 40/- per packet for all
items. IRCTC has signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Defence
Food Research Laboratory, Mysore of DRDO for transfer of technology
of Retort Pouch Processed Foods so that ready to eat food can be
warmed and eaten straight out of the packet. Further , an MoU has also
been signed on 27.6.2016 between IRCTC and Central Food Technology
Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysore for transfer of technology to provide
hygienic food products and services to train passengers. IRCTC and
CFTRI will mutually finalize the list of products and service to be
provided to passengers. The scheme of ready to eat meals has already
been implemented in train No. 12565/66 Bihar Sampark Kranti Express
w.e.f. 16.08.2017.
3.18 When enquired about the outcome of the trial of sale of
Ready-to-Eat (RTE) food packets conducted by the Railways at some of
the stations, the Ministry, in a written reply, submitted as under:
“IRCTC had conducted trials of Ready-to-Eat (RTE) foods in several
trains across the country stretched over a period of time. The
details of the RTE trials are summarized below:
Sl.No. Train No./Name Date Remarks
12 3 4
1. 12260, New Delhi-Sealdah 17.4.2014 76% Appreciated R TE Food
Duronto Exp.
2. 02723, Secunderabad-New Delhi 25.4.2014 72% Appreciated R TE Food
Premium Train

34
 3. 02724, New Delhi 26.4.2014 83% Appreciated R TE Food
Secunderabad-Premium Train
 4. 12958 Ahmedabad Rajdhani 19.5.2014 82% Appreciated R TE Food
Express
 5. 12954 NZM BCT 5.8.2014 76% Appreciated R TE Food
 6. 12953 BCT NZM 6.8.2014 67% Appreciated R TE Food
 7. 12246 YPR HWR Duronto 5.8.2014 90% Appreciated R TE Food
 8. 12245 HWR YPR Duronto 8.8.2014 83% Appreciated R TE Food
 9. 22914 NDLS BCT 9.8.2014 65% Appreciated R TE Food
10. 22913 BCT NDLS 10.8.2014 68% Appreciated R TE Food
11. 12048/47 8.9.2017  to 64% in Breakfast and 47% in
22.9.2017 Dinner Rated RTE as
excellent/very good.
(a) RTE food was also sold to passengers in mail express trains like
Bihar Sampark Kranti Exp. However , the response was not very
encouraging.
(b) Presently, IRCTC serves branded RTE food as distressed meals
during late running trains in all departmentally operated prepaid
trains like Rajdhani and Duronto Trains. ”
3.19 When asked about the current status of transfer of the
technology of Retort Pouch Processed Foods to Indian Railways, the
Ministry, in their written reply, stated as follows:
“LAToT (License Agreement for Transfer of Technology) was signed
between IRCTC, Food Research Laboratory, Mysore and DRDO on
4.6.2016 for transfer of Technology for manufacturing of RTE Food
in DFRL premises. Under the agreement, 51,000 nos. of RTE packets
were prepared out of total of 1,21,000 nos. RTE packets. However ,
due to non-availability of time slots at DFRL, remaining numbers
of RTE packets are still to be prepared at DFRL. Responses pertaining
to allotment of time slots for manufacture of RTE meals are still
awaited from DFRL. The matter is under follow up. ”
3.20 When asked what action Railways are taking to expedite the
response pertaining to allotment of time slots for manufacture of
Ready-To-Eat meals which are still awaited from DFRL, the Ministry, in
 12 3 4

35
their written reply, stated that IRCTC has requested DFRL to allot time
slot for preparation of remaining RTE meals in their premises vide
letter dated 11.10.2017 and 20.11.2017. South Zone office of IRCTC
has also approached DFRL, Mysore for allotment of time slot. However ,
no response has been received till date.
3.21 On a pointed query asked about action taken/to be taken
against the registered food companies for non-adherence of norms by
them for supply of good quality of foods to railway passengers under
e-catering services, the Chairman, Railway Board in his oral evidence
tendered before the Committee stated as under:
“The Helpline No. 138 is operational and any complaint made on
any issue on this number will be immediately responded to and on
the next station required assistance is provided so as to address
the grievance. ”
3.22 When asked about the penal provision defaulter companies
for non-adherence of norms for supply of hygienic and good quality of
foods, the Ministry of Railways, in a written reply, submitted as under:
“Monitoring of quality is made through inspections and food quality
checks. If any violation of the provision of the policy or deficiency
is noticed in the service, suitable penal action is taken as per the
provision of agreement. In case of continued failure in performance,
Railways will have the right to close down any unit. ”
3.23 The Committee asked the Ministry to provide feedback of
passengers regarding opting/de-opting of Ready-To-Eat Foods (RTE) in
trains, the Ministry, in a written reply, stated that RTE food is served
in several pre-paid trains either as a distressed meal or as an option
to regular lunch/dinner meal. Regular feedback of passenger is collected
during taking of orders for service. As per feedback from passengers
not opting for RTE food, it is understood that RTE food is not much
tasty, refreshing, flavorful and appealing as fresh food. Secondly, quite
a few number of passenger avoid RTE food as they are under the
impression that it may not be good and nutritious as fresh food.

36
CHAPTER IV
MONITORING AND REDRESSAL
4.1 Keeping in view the vast network of Indian Railways and volume
of travelling passengers, good quality and hygienic catering services
are of paramount importance to the Railways and it should invariably
be part of the new Catering Policy, 2017. With a view to ensure good
and hygienic catering services, the monitoring mechanism of complaints/
grievances arising out therefrom, should be strong and strengthened
with the provision of every complaint/grievance being attended to/
redressed in a time bound manner. The new Catering Policy, 2017
envisages that with a view to provide hygienic and quality food to the
rail passengers, a strict and effective system of monitoring of catering
services should be adhered to. Monitoring of quality should be made
through inspections and food quality checks. If any violation of the
provision of the Policy or deficiencies is noticed in the service, suitable
penal action shall be taken as per the provision of agreement.
4.2 When asked about to state the details of monitoring mechanism
being put in place in new Catering Policy, 2017, the Chairman, Railway
Board during his oral evidence tendered before the Committee submitted
as follows:
“We have also established a system of feedback. We are making
one lakh calls per day to various passengers and getting their
feedback. A lot of passengers decide not to give but based on the
feedback we have been getting the satisfaction level which is
almost 62 per cent. Still that leaves a big gap of those who say
that the facilities or services that they got from the Railways was
not upto the mark. We have also started a grievance redressal
system which has online through use of social media. The response
has been very good and we are able to provide assistance to the
public within 30 minutes. ”
4.3 The Ministry of Railways have elaborated that new Catering
Policy, 2017 envisages to ensure hygienic and quality food to the rail
passengers, a provision has been made in new Catering Policy, 2017
that IRCTC would supervise catering services on each mobile unit
through its own supervisors directly employed by IRCTC.
4.4 The Committee asked about how many supervisors will be
deputed per train having pantry car to supervise distribution of food
to passengers and what action will they take on the spot in case any

37
deficiency is noticed or reported to them. The Ministry, in a written
reply, stated that as per the existing plan, 01 supervisor has been
deployed on rake of important Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto trains and
further plans for deployment are under process for monitoring of other
important Mail/Exp. trains on sectional or end to end monitoring as
the case may be. The on board IRCTC ’s supervisors take immediate
necessary corrective action as per the deficiency noticed or reported
by passengers. In addition to the IRCTC supervisor , pantry car manager
of service provider is also available onboard and the passengers have
the option to approach the pantry car manager or the train
superintendent of the train for redressal of deficiency/complaint/
grievances.
4.5 On being asked about the measures being taken by the Railways
on the Audit conducted by C&AG observing shortcomings found out
that despite a complaint redressal system put in place, there is no
reduction in the number of complaints over the years. It was also seen
that the major share of complaints pertained to overcharging and
quality issues. The Ministry, in their written reply, stated as under:
“A complaint redressal system is firmly in place on IR. There is
centralized Catering Service Monitoring Cell (CSMC) (toll free number
1800-111-321) for prompt redressal of passenger grievances relating
to the catering activities. There is also all India Helpline (NO. 138)
for rail users to lodge complaints/suggestions regarding food and
catering services. There is also twitter handle with the address
@IRCATERING to cater to the complaints/suggestions with regard
to catering services.
......in the past, complaints were received through only one source
i.e. the complaint book at static as well as mobile units, today ’s
passenger is empowered with many more medium viz. mobile,
internet, Facebook, social media through tweets. ”
4.6 On this issue, the Chairman, Railway Board in his oral evidence
tendered before the Committee, submitted as under:
“Regarding increase in complaints, we always say that the number
of complaints has increased but in the last couple of years, the
method of making complaints have also undergone a radical change.
There has been a paradigm change in it. We have got Face Book,
Twitter etc. All these modes were not there earlier. Increase in
number of complaints is due to increase in awareness. It does not
exactly mean that our performance has gone down. It can not be
exactly related to that because there has been improvement in
catering as such. In quality and hygiene, there has been
improvement and we are continuously stressing upon the fact that
we have to improve it much further . ”

38
4.7 The Ministry has elaborated that regarding effective check and
control of unfair practices of overcharging, issues of quality as well as
quantity, they have taken following measures:
“(i) Optional catering is planned to be introduced as a pilot
project in mail/express trains so that passengers can pay
for the meals and Packaged Drinking Water (PDW) in advance
at the time of booking of journey tickets.
(ii) In prepaid trains, optional catering is being introduced as a
pilot project so that passenger has the option to ‘not eat ’
if he does not want the food supplied on board.
(iii) A policy of zero tolerance towards bad quality of food served
to passengers and overcharging is being followed and during
the last six months, seven contracts have been terminated
on account of poor quality of food served. 16 contractors
have been blacklisted for breach of contact term in last one
year.
(iv) More than 40,000 inspections have been conducted by railway
officials annually to improve the catering services.
(v) A fine of Rs. 4056 crores has been imposed during January
to June, 2017 as compared to Rs. 4.05 crores imposed during
2016 (Jan. to Dec.), Rs. 2.61 crores in 2015 (Jan. to Dec.)
and Rs. 1,73 crores in 2014 (Jan. to Dec.).
(vi) Disciplinary action has been taken against 21 railway officials
in the last one year .
(vii) In the latest SBD being drafted, issue of electronic receipt
is being made mandatory for sale of every item over Indian
Railways. Further , through the use of Bar and QR Codes,
each food item would be closely monitored.
(viii) Third party Audit of mobile units and base kitchen is to be
undertaken by zonal railway periodically, by hiring an
independent agency in accordance with provision given in
new Catering Policy 2017 ”. (LOP 1/10 P7-8)
4.8 The Ministry have further added that to maintain the quality
of foods and have better monitoring of catering services in new Catering
Policy, 2017, endeavour is being made that all catering services are ISO
certified and FSSAI approved and as per latest norms.

39
PART II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
1. The Indian Railways, being one of the largest rail networks
in the world, have 66,687 route kilometers of route length and
cover 8495 stations and more than 22.21 million passengers avail
of the services at stations and trains per day. Being a sole national
common carrier transporting passengers of high magnitude, the Indian
Railways also plays a key role in country ’s social and economic
development apart from bringing together the people of diversed
cultures of sub-continent. Being an affordable means of
transportation for millions of passengers, it becomes imperative on
the part of Indian Railways to provide fresh, hygienic and good
quality catering services and pure drinking water to their travelling
passengers who extend their continued patronage to the Railways.
2. The Committee note that commensurate to announcement of
the Minister of Railways in Rail Budget 2016-17, IRCTC was designated
to manage the catering services in a phased manner by unbundling
catering services and creating a distinction primarily between food
preparation and food distribution. Accordingly, a Commercial Circular-
20 of 2017, christening the ‘new Catering Policy, 2017 ’ was issued
on 27th February, 2017 in compliance of the announcement of the
Minister of Railways and the recommendations of the departmental
committees on Railways namely ‘Debroy Committee’ and ‘Sreedharan
Committee’ to this effect. The IRCTC would now begin to manage
catering services over Indian Railways in a phased manner through
IRCTC operated, mechanized, sophisticated base kitchens and ensure
supply of good quality hygienic foods on board and at static units.
The Committee have been given to understand that the Catering
Policy 2005 mandated IRCTC to manage catering services on Indian
Railways which was later superseded by Catering Policy, 2010 wherein
management of catering services was transferred to Zonal Railways.
The reason for this transition was attributed to focus on revenue
generation instead of improvement in catering services. It was
substantiated by White Paper on Indian Railways, presented in
Parliament in 2009, observing that no substantial and visible
improvements in catering services were seen as IRCTC focused on
revenue generation and catering services continued to be operated
by the same set of licensees. The new Catering Policy, 2017 targets

40
to replace the management from Zonal Railways to IRCTC contrary
to Catering Policy, 2010 which was required to be modified and
revamped in the light of the complaints arising out of the
shortcomings experienced in the Policy. The Committee, after having
been seized of the matter, conducted an in-depth examination of
the New Catering Policy, 2017 and arrived at certain conclusions
which are being discussed in succeeding paragraphs.
3. The Committee note that catering services had undergone
frequent changes which have adversely impacted the catering over
Indian Railways. The Catering Policy of 2005 mandated IRCTC to
manage catering services which was subsequently transited to Zonal
Railways in Catering Policy, 2010 on the grounds that the IRCTC
focused to revenue generation instead of improving the catering
services. The Indian Railways Catering and Tourism Corporation
(IRCTC) was restricted to management of Food Plazas, Food Courts,
Fast Food Units and tourist activities. The Committee are distressed
to note that the Catering Policy, 2010 too could not bring fruitful
improvement in catering services and complaints were flooding from
all corners over Indian Railways. The Committee further note that
C&AG in its Report No. 13 of 2017 has pointed out that preceding
to new Catering Policy, 2017, the management of catering services
was with Zonal Railways wherein cleanliness and hygiene were not
maintained properly at catering units at stations and in trains.
Unpurified water straight from taps and at times toilets was used in
preparation of beverages, waste bin were not found covered/emptied
regularly and not washed, food stuff were not covered to protect
them from flies, insects and dust. Rats and cockroaches were found
in Kitchens, Station Kitchens and Train Pantries. Besides, unfair
practices were followed in execution of catering services at stations
and in trains. Bills were not provided for the food items served in
mobile units. Printed menu cards with tariff for the list of food
items sold in the mobile units were not available with waiters and
Catering Managers in trains. Less than prescribed quantity of food
stuff were served, unapproved packaged drinking water was sold,
Proprietary Article Depot (PAD) items were sold at the Railway
Stations at Maximum Retail Price (MRP) with weight and prices
different from open market and per unit price of food articles sold
in railway premises was significantly higher. Deficiencies in respect
of quality of food served were noticed. Articles unsuitable for human
consumption, contaminated food stuff, recycled food stuff, shelf
life expired packaged and bottled items, unauthorized brands of
water bottles etc. were offered for sale on stations. The Committee
have been apprised by the Ministry that in new Catering Policy,

41
2017, these problems would be removed and IRCTC would be
responsible for catering services through mobile units and static
units viz. Base Kitchens, Cell Kitchens, Refreshment Rooms at A1
and A category of stations, Food Plazas, Food Courts, Train Side
Vending, Jan Ahaars. In order to upgrade quality of food preparation,
IRCTC shall set up new Kitchens and upgrade existing ones which
shall comply all statutory guidelines of food safety. The Committee
are of the view that unless the basic problems and deficiencies
which the railways and IRCTC have experienced in the past such as
supply of quality and hygienic foods and beverages including purified
water to their customers are addressed, nothing is going to happen
for betterment of catering services. Mere bringing a new policy and
blaming the concerned agencies to be responsible for the lapses will
not solve the problem. They hope that the railways would endeavour
in this direction so that the new Catering Policy, 2017 could bring
a paradigm shift in catering business on Indian Railways to provide
healthy, wholesome and hygienic food to the passengers through
closely monitored units by creating a distinction between food
preparation and food distribution and removing all the deficiencies
experienced earlier.
4. The new Catering Policy, 2017 has again mandated IRCTC to
take over the management of catering services in a slightly modified
way of carrying out the unbundling of catering services by creating
a distinction primarily between food preparation and food
distribution. The Committee are of the view that not only the
Catering Policy of 2005 lacked professional, practical and futuristic
vision but also the Catering Policy, 2010 was not well planned in a
professional and scientific way to cater to the needs of the
commuters of Indian Railways which have necessitated to introduce
new Catering Policy, 2017 in a very short span of time. Besides,
frequent changes in Catering Policy for an undertaking of the size
of the Indian Railways where 23 million passengers travel daily,
have adversely impacted the catering services leaving the travelling
passengers in lurch and switch over to other means of catering
resulting into intrusion of unauthorized vendors. The Committee
fail to understand as to how it was decided to frequently change
the responsibility of such an important service of catering of a vast
organization like Indian Railways from IRCTC, which was incorporated
on a decision of the Cabinet, as an extended arm of Indian Railways.
Frequent changes in policies not only affect the efficiency of the
system due to time slag in dealing with teething problem of
implementation but also hits the morale of the employees of the
organization. The Committee hope that the new Catering Policy,

42
2017 has been designed in a more scientific manner. They hope
that it will be implemented effectively in letter and spirit with no
further change in the system.
5. The Committee have been informed that the Catering Policy,
2010 had aimed a paradigm shift with regard to the whole approach
towards railway catering. Whereas earlier policy sought to treat
catering as an independent profit centre, the Policy of 2010
acknowledged catering as a passenger service. The New Catering
Policy, 2017 mandates that Zonal Railways will prepare the plan in
coordination with Divisions and IRCTC at each station. In the Policy
of 2017, the Ministry has categorically demarcated the areas of
service providers of Food Preparator (who shall prepare the food)
and the Distributor (who will distribute the prepared foods). The
Committee have been informed that the system of train based
contracts prevailing in earlier Catering Policy, 2010 has now been
done away with in new Catering Policy, 2017 and instead IRCTC run
state-of-the-art kitchens of various sizes would be provided at
locations across the country. IRCTC would be responsible for catering
services through mobile catering units, Base Kitchens, Cell Kitchens,
Refreshment Rooms at A1 and A category stations, Food Plazas,
Food Courts, Train Side Vending, Jan Ahaars as defined in the Policy.
All mobile units will be handed over to IRCTC along with existing
contracts. The contracts which were awarded in 2013-14 and still
continuing, will gradually be short terminated or continued till expiry
and re-allotted afresh after expiry of term. Further, Mega Base
Kitchens will be constructed by IRCTC and the existing four Mega
Base Kitchens of Ahmedabad, Howrah, Mumbai and Delhi will be
upgraded by IRCTC on PPP mode. Mega Kitchens will be provided
with the provisions that there should be a Base Kitchen on every
300 Km. The Committee are unhappy to note that out of 80 number
of Mega Kitchens proposed to be constructed, only 16 have been
planned to be constructed in 2017. Further, to their dismay, only
5 Mega Kitchens have been completed so far. The Committee feel
that if Railways intend to provide good quality hygienic foods to
their passengers, they will have to focus on timely construction of
base kitchens. The Committee emphasize the need of expeditious
completion of remaining Base Kitchens to satisfy the need of growing
number of passengers by way of providing good quality hygienic
food. Further, the Ministry have claimed that out of 272 static
units, 255 static units have been taken over by IRCTC and remaining
17 static units are still pending with Zonal railways. Likewise, as on
17.1.2018, all mobile units (Pantry and Mini pantry) have been
taken over by IRCTC except 01 (one) train which is under litigation.

43
The Committee have taken note of lack of seriousness on the part
of the Ministry and are of the view that if proper preparedness
were made to settle the issues before launch of such a prioritized
Scheme of public importance, there would have no scope of any
litigation and all units would have been transferred to IRCTC
smoothly. The Committee are apprehensive that such incomplete
transition of catering services may cause considerable inconvenience
to the travelling passengers as it will hamper IRCTC in facilitating
smooth and unhindered catering services. They, therefore, desire
that with a view to implement the new Catering Policy, 2017 in
letter and spirit, the Railway should hand over remaining catering
services immediately to IRCTC to make them responsible for supply
of quality, wholesome and hygienic foods to passengers. They,
therefore, desire the Ministry to take the remedial measures
immediately to hand over all units including Food Plazas and Food
Courts to IRCTC urgently.
6. The Committee are happy to note that in new Catering Policy,
2017, a New Menu and Tariff Committee has been constituted by
the Ministry to study the workability of the rates in catering contracts
and to recommend/report upon the fixation of tariff for standard
menu/food items on the list of menu items given by IRCTC and
calculation of empirical formulae so as to calculate annual or
periodical escalation with respect to increase in prices of the
components leading to preparation of meal. The committee will
submit its report shortly. The Committee, therefore, desire that
while implementing the new Catering Policy, 2017, the Railways
should closely examine the recommendations of the New Menu and
Tariff Committee and implement them in letter and spirit to avoid
difficulty and demotivation to the parties concerned in the endeavor
for the betterment of catering services over Indian railways. The
Committee would like to be apprised of its recommendations
vis-a-vis status of their implementation.
7. The Committee have been informed that in the Catering
Policy, 2010, Zonal Railways had a contract awarding, management
and monitoring system which was effective and transparent. The
allotment of all major units and General Minor Units at A, B and C
categories stations were done through open, competitive and two-
packet tendering system based on Standard Bid Document (SBD) and
duly following all the procedures/instructions issued by Government
of India/Railway Board from time to time. Allotments of static Special
Minor Units (SMUs) at A, B and C categories of stations and all GMUs
and SMUs at D, E and F categories stations were done by calling

44
applications through press notification. The Ministry have informed
that tenure of all major units being handed over to IRCTC will be
governed as per Catering Policy, 2010 and continue till the expiry
of the contracts. IRCTC shall further manage these units as per the
provisions of the new Catering Policy, 2017. Tenure of all other
catering units (major units and minor units) will be for a period of
5 years only. The contracts awarded by zonal railways for kitchen
units viz. Refreshment Rooms at A1 and A category stations, Jan
Ahaar, Cell Kitchens shall be reassigned to IRCTC on the same terms
and conditions with sharing of license fee between IR and IRCTC in
the ratio of 40:60 in all cases other than departmentally managed
units by IRCTC wherein revenue shall be shared in the ratio of
15:85. The allotment of Refreshment Room (at B and below category
stations), a stall or a trolley is deemed as one unit and shall be
awarded through a single license. No new license for khomcha/
Dallah/Chhabba/Wheel Barrow/Hand Barrow/Tray/Table/Tea Balta (or
any other similar unit by a different name) shall be awarded by
Zonal Railways. The Committee are, however, note that though the
Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure) has mandated all
Ministries/Departments of Central Government, their attached and
subordinated offices, Central Public Sector Enterprises and
Autonomous/Statutory bodies to commence e-procurement through
e-tendering in respect of all procurements with estimated value of
Rs. 2 lakhs or above w.e.f. 1.4.2016 vide Office Memorandum dated
30.03.2012, 09.01.2014 and 21.01.2016 by selecting e-Procurement
service provider of their own choice, the Railways are still continuing
awarding contracts by following old systems even after unification
of Railways Budget with Union Budget. The reasons for opting
e-tendering process has been stated to be more transparent for
awarding contracts. In this regard, the Ministry have informed that
they have constituted a committee for preparation/modification in
the Standard Bid Document for allotment of static catering units
and development of e-tendering module for Zonal Railways which
has submitted its report on e-tendering module for catering tenders
along with draft SBDs (Standard Bid Documents). The SBDs are under
examination. The Committee desire that the examination of SBDs
may be expedited and e-tendering module may be implemented
over Indian Railways in letter and spirit. A monitoring mechanism
be evolved to enable that all contracts may be awarded
commensurate to this e-tendering module.
8. The Committee note that after the Catering Policy 2010,
Zonal Railways were required to prepare a Master Plan (Blue Print)
of catering services to be provided at each station and on-board

45
trains which was not prepared in Zones like ECR, ER, NFE, NWR,
SER, SWR and ECOR. They are of the considered view that making
a master plan (Blue Print) as per given mandate, was important for
planning catering services over Indian Railways. The Ministry failed
to submit any reasons for not making plan/blue print by these Zonal
Railways. Also, the Ministry could not take effective steps to bridge
the gap to provide necessary infrastructure in terms of base kitchens,
Static Catering units, train-side vending arrangements and Automatic
Vending Machines etc. to ensure adequate catering facilities available
to the travelling public. Even, in the new Catering Policy, 2017, the
Zonal Railways are required to prepare plan in coordination with
Divisions and IRCTC at each station taking into consideration bans
notified from time to time as making master plan is considered
important for planning catering services. The Committee desire the
Ministry to ensure that the required plan/blue print for each station
are prepared in a time bound manner and be implemented in all
Zonal Railways in letter and spirit.
9. The Committee note that during earlier catering policies, the
catering services was used to shift from IRCTC to Zonal Railways
and vice versa but the basic problems were not addressed. The
same set of contractors who were in Railway catering, went to
IRCTC and came back to Railways. Then, with the change in policy,
the contractor with their same products and services remained the
same. Based on the feedback, complaints and other information
that the Railways got from time to time, they brought in the new
Catering Policy, 2017 which aims to remove anomalies which the
earlier policies had over looked. The Committee appreciate this
move of the Ministry and hope that the new Catering Policy, 2017
will be implemented efficaciously to benefit the passengers at large.
10. The Committee have been given to understand that in new
Catering Policy, 2017, IRCTC was required to submit Business Plan
to Railway Board within 30 days from issuance of the Policy. The
IRCTC is stated to have submitted the business plan to Railway
Board which has been sent back to IRCTC for rectification/
modification. They wonder that even after lapse of one year of
issue of the Policy, the Business Plan is still at scrutiny stage reflecting
lack of preparedness and lackadaisical approach on the part of the
Railways. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Railway should
take effective steps to support IRCTC to finalize concrete Business
Plans urgently so that vested responsibilities of IRCTC aiming at
improvement in catering services are not hampered due to non-
implementation of the new Catering Policy, 2017.

46
11. The Committee are happy to note that with a view to uplift
socially and economically backward people of the society, a provision
for reservation in award of contracts has been made in favour of
the underprivileged and marginalized sections of society in the new
Catering Policy, 2017. Indian Railways follow the reservation criteria
in allotment of catering units except the major units wherein no
reservation is applied. They find that in allotment of minor units at
A1, A, B and C categories of stations, twenty five percent (25%)
reservation has been provided wherein 6%, 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 4% and
3% reservation is earmarked to SCs, STs, OBCs, Minorities, Divyang,
Freedom Fighters/war-widows/widows of railway employees/persons
displaced due to their land taken over by the Railways for its own
use and People Below Poverty Line respectively. Among minorities,
Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Zoroastrians (Parsis) and Jain
are covered. Likewise, 49.5 percent reservation has been made for
allotment of Minor Units at D, E, and F category stations wherein
SCs are provided 12%, STs 8%, OBCs 20% and minorities 9.5%. The
Committee desire that a uniform policy of reservation should be
followed in all catering units at all stations/trains. They, therefore,
recommend that the existing reservation policy of the Government
of India should be strictly followed and complied with. The Committee
note that the issue of reservation is, at present, sub-judice in the
Hon’ble Supreme Court and as a result, all allotments/extensions in
the case of reservations are subject to the final order of the Hon ’ble
Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 7513 of 2005 and analogous
cases referred to the Constitutional Bench. They would like the
Ministry to pursue the matter expeditiously so that catering need
of passengers met appropriately.
12. The Committee note that preceding to new Catering Policy,
2017, the Zonal Railways did not ensure provision of pantry cars in
a number of long distance trains. It was seen that in nine trains
having a run of more than 24 hours, no pantry car was provided.
No Train-Side Vending services were facilitated by NCR, SECR and SR
for the trains which run for more than 12 hours during the day
time. They are not convinced with Ministry ’s attribution that non-
attachment of pantry cars in long distance trains was due to capacity
constraints of trains as 360 trains are already running with pantry
cars and 232 mail/express trains have sectional train side vending.
The Committee are of the view that wherever the Indian Railways
do not attach pantry cars to trains, they should arrange adequate
number of catering static units on stations en-route, Train Side
Vending and E-catering facility available to passengers. They hope
that in new Catering Policy, 2017, these anomalies would be removed

47
and the trains having run of 12 hours or more will be facilitated
with pantry cars and trains having run of 12 hours, where no pantry
car is attached, shall be provided proper catering services like
catering static units on stations en-route, train side vending and e-
catering facilities available to passengers.
13. The Committee note that the new Catering Policy, 2017
envisages for setting up of base kitchens in the Railway premises to
monitor and control the quality and hygiene of food served in
trains. Earlier, foods were prepared in kitchens most of them located
outside railway premises and carriage of foods from the kitchen to
the serving destination used to take much time and as such prepared
foods could not reach to the customers in time resulting into decline
in quality of foods. Besides, the quality of foods prepared in base
kitchens located outside railway premises could not be easily
monitored and controlled unlike the foods prepared in kitchens
located in railway premises. The Committee are satisfied to find
that in new Catering Policy, 2017, foods will be prepared in modern,
mechanized and state-of-the-art kitchens developed by IRCTC located
in railway premises only under the direct supervision of IRCTC and
no food will be picked from kitchens located outside the rail
premises. The quality of foods so prepared will be monitored easily.
The Committee emphasize the need of narrowing the time gap of
food preparation and its distribution and development coordination
between the agencies of food preparation and food distribution so
as to ensure that the prepared foods could remain as fresh as
possible and reach the customers within the shortest time gap.
14. The Committee note that the Ministry has made arrangements
for Third Party Audit of catering services to be conducted at periodic
intervals by independent and reputed auditing agencies. For this
purpose, IRCTC has already selected an agency to conduct Third
Party Audit for 96 number of trains and 206 number of Food Plazas
and Fast Food Units. The Committee are of the considered view
that these issues require continuous surveillance of the Railways.
They desire that frequent surveys should be conducted and feedback
taken from passengers and deficiencies noticed, may be eliminated
immediately. The complaints and suggestions should not be ignored
rather than should be the basis for better service.
15. The Committee find that in the new Catering Policy, 2017,
the Ministry has taken measures for Third Party Audit of Catering
Services to be conducted at periodic intervals by independent and
reputed auditing agencies accredited by National Accreditation Board

48
for Certification Bodies (NABCB) as empanelled by the Zonal Railways.
The parameters for Audit of catering services have been enumerated
to be personal hygiene of service providers, infrastructure facilities,
cleaning and sanitation, food safety, storage facilities, implementation
of regulatory, statutory and safety regulations, quality of presentation
etc. IRCTC has already selected an agency to conduct Third Party
Audit for 96 trains and 206 Food Plazas and Fast Food Units. The
Committee desire that all mobile and static units within the
jurisdiction of IRCTC, may be brought under the third party audit.
They hope that the audit will be conducted in details, regularly and
shortcomings, if any, will be removed immediately.
16. The Committee note that New Catering Policy, 2017 mandates
IRCTC to supply low cost Janta Meals through static catering units,
including the units handed over to IRCTC at the rates decided by
Railway Board. In this regard, instructions have already been issued
to Zonal Railways and IRCTC for sale of Janta Meals at Static Units.
The Zonal Railways would endeavour to make efforts to improve
the sale/availability of ‘Janta Meals ’ of good quality at affordable
rates to railway passengers. The Committee find that in Catering
Policy, 2010, Zonal Railways were required to provide Jan Ahaar
units to facilitate passengers which could not materialize in letter
and spirit. Even, the C&AG, in their audit observation, revealed
that out of 74 stations where joint inspections were conducted,
Jan Ahaar units were not provided on 46 stations. Further, share of
Janta meals to the overall meals sold in six Zonal Railways was
declining in the last three years. The reasons explained by the
Ministry that Janta Meals were sold not only at Jan Ahaars but also
at other static units as per Board ’s instructions and thus, absence
of Jan Ahaar outlets does not mean no sale of Janta Meal at any
station as other outlets were also mandated to sell Jan Ahaars in all
static units. However, this is not acceptable to the Committee as
the passengers may not be even aware the availability of Jan Ahaar
at other outlets. They feel that lack of preparedness in ensuring
sale of Janta meals at stations as mandated in the Policy resulting
into slippages and depriving the passengers from availing good quality
catering services at affordable rates at designated places. The
Committee urge the Ministry for regular monitoring of availability
of Janata Meals at Stations and ensure that the concerned agencies
at the stations are alert towards their duties and responsibilities.
They also urge the Ministry to take up the work in right earnest so
that both the passengers and the Railways are benefitted from the
scheme.

49
17. The Committee are concerned to note the mushroom growth
of unauthorized vending in trains and at stations. They are aware
that the Railways have taken measures to refrain unauthorized
vending in trains and at stations including inspections to check the
menace of unauthorized vending. The Ministry have issued
instructions to service providers to provide prescribed uniforms
along with name badge and logo of IRCTC to their working staff on
board for creating distinction from unauthorized vendors inside the
trains. Despite these efforts, unauthorized vendors are predominating
in trains and at stations in selling adulterated and simulated food
items, beverages and water bottles. Prosecution of 4,43,193 cases
of unauthorized vending in 2016 and 2017 (upto December), by
Railway Protection Force and imposition of fine and realization of
Rs. 21,45,73,139/- towards fine imposed as such, substantiate the
volume of menace of unauthorized vending and disclose inadequacy
of penal provisions and precautionary measures of Railways. The
Committee note that the strengthening of the penal provisions of
the Railways Act, 1989 including Section 144 is underway. Railways
are also constructing boundary wall at vulnerable locations over
Railway Network and 425 KM of boundary wall has been put at
different locations. However, the Committee apprehend that unless
and until stringent penal provisions are provided in the Act/Rules
and action is taken accordingly against the defaulters, no tangible
improvement can take place. Further, the probability of connivance
of railway officials with the unauthorized vendors should also be
looked into. According to C&AG Report, Audit para (Para No. 3.9)
tabled in Parliament on 21st July, 2017 has also observed activities
of a number of unauthorized vendors on platforms and in trains
which they detected during joint inspections in selected trains. The
Committee strongly feel that unauthorized vending not only causes
loss of revenue to Railways but also poses a health hazard to the
passengers. They, therefore, urge the Ministry to immediately work
out appropriate remedial measures to check unauthorized vending
both in mobile units and at stations.
18. The Committee appreciate to note that in new Catering
Policy, 2017, the Railways have planned to effectively check and
control unfair practices of overcharging, issue of quality as well as
quantity of food articles. The Ministry have informed that the
Railways have introduced optional catering facilities as a pilot project
in mail/express trains to enable travelling passengers to pay for the
meals and Packaged Drinking Water (PDW) in advance at the time
of booking of journey tickets. While appreciating the same, the
Committee desire the Ministry to cover foods of diverse varieties of

50
different choice in their menu/list of foods for sake of those
passengers who have to de-opt foods at the time of booking ticket
on the grounds of health, ailments or need to have fresh food
during long journey, in general, and delay of trains, in particular. In
this regard, an option of ‘specific food need ’ on the cost over and
above the general food can be asked to be exercised from these
passengers and differential cost, if any, may be charged from them.
The Committee note that many a times food servers refuse to give
bill to passengers even when asked to do so. In such cases, Railways
should make sure to put a policy in place. They are satisfied to note
that a policy of zero tolerance is being adopted in new Catering
Policy, 2017 for bad quality of food served to passengers,
overcharging of food articles sold and making issue of electronic
receipt mandatory for sale of every item over Indian Railways.
Through the use of Bar and QR Codes, each food item would be
closely monitored. The Committee are of the view that these
measures be implemented in all mobile and static units, Food Plazas
and Food Courts with proper monitoring from time to time with
stringent penal provisions for defaulters. They also desire that a
policy of ‘No Food Bill, No Payment ’ may be adopted to do away
with overcharging.
19. The Committee note that the new Catering Policy 2017,
mandates IRCTC to be responsible for catering services through
mobile catering units, Base Kitchens, Cell Kitchens, Refreshment
Rooms at A1 and A category of stations, Food Plazas, Food Courts,
Train Side Vending, Jan Ahaar. There would be no train based
contracts. The catering activity would be done in close supervision
by IRCTC on stations where kitchens are located. The Committee
are glad to note that the new initiatives taken by the Ministry for
ensuring computerized billing for the items sold in mobile and static
units will go a long way in yielding desired results besides bringing
in transparency in catering services over Indian Railways apart from
strengthening the trust of railway passengers.
20. The Ministry have informed that new Catering Policy, 2017
envisages for cashless transaction and ensuring computerized billing
in a phased manner to the extent feasible for all the items sold in
mobile and static units under the management of IRCTC. Apart from
this, passengers would be facilitated for cashless transaction through
usage of Point of Sale (POS)/swipe machine etc. in all the mobile
and static units. IRCTC and the licensees are in the process of
procurement of these machines. The Committee desire that concrete
measures may be taken to ensure that POS/swipe machines are

51
available with the catering serving personnel with regular monitoring
thereof to ascertain that these machines are in working condition
so that passengers could not face any hardships in making payment
and catering services remain transparent and passenger friendly.
21. Quantity and quality of food items and safe drinking water
supplied to the travelling passengers are the matters of utmost
concern for the Committee. Though quality control is of paramount
importance in any concern dealing with food and beverages as it is
directly linked with the health and safety of the passengers. Quantity
control of items supplied to passengers is in no way lesser than the
quality. Every travelling passenger has right to get accurate quantity
of items against payment of the given cost of that item. But things
are happening not like that. It is seen that items are sold over and
above the MRP prices mentioned thereon. Even in open market,
these items are available below the MRP. Sometimes, prices indicated
on items are got erased and overwritten to charge extra from the
passengers. No bills are provided for the items sold to passengers.
The Committee while commending the initiative of the Ministry to
make computerized billing mandatory in mobile trains as well as at
static units desire the Ministry to ensure its implementation in
letter and spirit with proper monitoring. Stringent penal provisions
may also be put in place for adherence.
22. The Committee find that the Railways have launched
e-catering facilities to travelling passengers which is presently
available on 357 railway stations. They note that only F and B
operators, having valid FSSAI license, are allowed to take and serve
orders through e-catering. The average supply of meals under this
scheme is around 6000 meals per day which was 400 meals per day
in 2015. The Ministry have informed that e-catering services are
being managed by IRCTC on stations where travelling passengers
can avail e-catering facilities for all trains halting at and originating
from those stations. Booking of meals is facilitated through specified
phone number (1323)/website/SMS/Mobile Apps etc. and passenger
can pre-order the meal from the different options available as per
choice for delivery at the opted stations. The mode of payment is
both pre-paid as well as cash on delivery (CoD). After the meal is
ordered, the same is communicated to the concerned vendor
immediately and also again at about 2 hours in advance of delivery
time where the delivery time is the train arrival time on a particular
station. The shortlisted vendor delivers the pre-ordered meal to
customer on stationary train at the opted station. The Committee
are glad to note that the Railways have taken steps to reorganize

52
and revamp marketing strategies to popularize E-catering so as to
achieve the target of 1 (one) lakh meals per day from 6000 per day,
as at present, but they would like to caution the Ministry not to
supply stale or unhygienic meals to passengers as the time of delivery
of pre-ordered food is train arrival time and trains usually run late.
In such cases, quality of pre-ordered meal packed for delivery as
per train ’s scheduled arrival time may deteriorate and there is no
option for passengers but to complain. The Committee find that
even in a short period between September, 2015 to January, 2018,
21992 complaints were lodged. The Committee are, therefore, of
the considered view that there should be a close coordination
between the agencies concerned to share the information pertaining
to running of train and supply of meal as any communication gap
may result into health hazard to passengers arising out of supply of
unhygienic meals to passengers. The Committee note that Railways
have provided for a penal provision to impose fine of Rs. 100/-
order for non-delivery of an order by the vendor. In such cases,
customer is provided full refund of non-delivered order along with
a voucher of Rs. 100/- which is redeemable in his next order with
E-catering. The Committee think that this redeemable amount is
very low and is redeemable in next order only. They, therefore,
desire that the redeemable amount may be increased at least to
Rs. 250/- with the options to redeem the same either during
on-going journey or in his next journey as per his/her convenience.
The Committee also desire that stringent penal provisions should be
provided for defaulting companies with imposition of fines,
de-activation from website and de-listing from empanelment from
the services for non-adhering to the orders of passengers.
23. The Committee note that to augment E-catering services,
the Railways have initiated to bring more and more Food Aggregators
within the ambit of E-catering and they will soon implement an
online mechanism for vendors to get registered with IRCTC and
start taking orders for supply of foods to passengers. The Committee
note that quality control of food items supplied to the travelling
passengers is a matter of the utmost concern and paramount
importance as it is directly linked with the health and safety of the
customers. The Ministry have informed that E-catering services allows
as many vendors to join the platform and provide ample choice to
customers to order and create an environment of competition
amongst vendors for maintaining quality and value of money. Vendors
will then not be required to visit IRCTC office in person or fill up
any empanelment document. The Committee are of the considered
view that apart from coverage of as many number of Food Aggregators

53
under the aegis of E-catering Service to provide food of ample
choice and taste to customers, a strong mechanism of quality control
of foods supplied under E-catering services may also be put in
place.
24. The Ministry have informed that IRCTC has started sale of
Ready-to-Eat (RTE) food packets at some of the railway stations @
Rs. 40/- packet for all items and in Firozpur Shatabdi and Special
Rajdhani trains on trial basis. RTE is being served in pre-paid trains
either as a distressed meal or as an option to regular lunch/dinner
meal. The Committee note that the feedback of passengers not
opting for RTE food discouraged the railways to arrive at that RTE
is not much tasty, refreshing, flavourful and appealing as fresh
food. Also, some passengers avoid RTE food under the impression
that it may not be good and nutritious as fresh food. The Ministry
have informed that to make RTE a success, IRCTC has signed a MoU
with Defence Food Research Laboratory (DFRL), Mysore and DRDO
for transfer of technology of Retort Pouch Processed Foods so that
Ready-to-Eat food can be warmed and eaten straight out of the
packet. The IRCTC has also signed a MoU with Central Food
Technology Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysore for transfer of
technology to provide hygienic food products and services to train
passengers. The IRCTC and CFTRI will mutually finalize the list of
products and services to be provided to passengers. The Committee
find the initiatives of the Ministry laudable and hope that the
synergize activities of IRCTC, Defence Food Research Laboratory,
Mysore, DRDO and CFTRI may facilitate in getting fresh and hygienic
foods over Indian Railways. They, therefore, desire the Ministry to
finalize the proposals for RTE food technology which is pending
with CFTRI, DRDO, and DFRL for implementation. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the same.
25. The Ministry have informed that the new Catering Policy
2017, envisages for empanelment of Self Help Groups (SHGs) for
betterment of catering services over Indian Railways by way of
providing healthy, wholesome regional cuisine at an affordable cost
to the travelling public through E-Catering. In this regard, 9 SHGs
have been empanelled at 10 stations. Out of this number, one is in
Karnataka, 2 in Kerala, 3 in M.P and one each in Maharashtra and
West Bengal. The remaining are in Andhra Pradesh. The Committee
note with concern that the Ministry have taken steps to empanel
more SHGs by creating a portal on its website for sale of catering
items, handicrafts, artefacts etc. which will not only synergise
catering services but also contribute in revenue generation. The

54
only need is to closely monitor them to ensure that the items
supplied by SHGs are of good quality and available to passengers at
affordable rates with computerized billing.
26. The Committee note that as per the new Catering Policy,
2017, emphasis has been laid on ensuring quality foods to the rail
customers by unbundling of catering services by creating a distinction
primarily between food preparation and food distribution. The
Committee appreciate the contention of the Ministry to make
catering services ISO certified and FSSAI approved as per latest
norms, but at the same time, they would like to caution the Railways
to not to compromise with the hygiene and quality of food provided
to the passengers of Indian Railways having a vast network stretching
from Jammu & Kashmir in North to Kanyakumari in South and from
Bhuj in the West to Agartala in the East with each region having its
distinct regional cuisines. Therefore, it becomes imperative on the
part of Indian Railways to ensure availability of regional cuisines
depending upon the area. The Committee hope that in new Catering
Policy, 2017, railway will ensure these concerns to optimize good
catering services for their passengers over the network.
27. The Committee note that the most of the complaints of
passengers mainly pertain to catering services specifically hygiene
and quality of foods served to them on board and in static units.
The Ministry have informed that the Railways have set up Catering
Monitoring Cells at Zonal and Division levels for real time assistance
to travelling passengers, all Zonal Railways have also a detailed
institutionalized mechanism for monitoring of quality and hygiene
of catering services through regular, surprise and periodical
inspections. Besides, a Centralized Catering Services Monitoring Cell
(CSMC) is also operational at national level having toll free number
1800-111-321 excluding operationalization of an all India helpline
number 138 for all rail users in the mobile trains. Though the
Committee appreciate the initiatives of the Ministry for providing
real time assistance to passengers and prompt disposal of their
grievances through social media and for this needful, they have
established a twitter handle with address of @IRCATERING to cater
to the complaints/suggestions of passengers, they are distressed to
note that despite all these mechanism, the complaints of passengers
are not decreasing. The attribution of the Ministry that flooding of
complaints is due to twitter, social media etc., is not acceptable to
the Committee as prior to twitter and social media, plenty of
complaints did not reach to the Railways. They, therefore, desire
that stringent measures should be taken in new Catering Policy, 2017

55
to contain the grievances by complying all statutory guidelines/
norms for food safety and quality control from preparation level to
its distribution. Also, strict penal provisions should be in place and
adhered to in letter and spirit in respect to those who flout and
default the provisions.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY ,
02 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

56
ANNEXURE
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
RAILWAY BOARD
No. 2016/TG-III/600/1/Pt. New Delhi, dated 27.02.2017
The General Managers
All Indian Railways
The Chairman & Managing Director
Indian Railway Catering & Tourism Corporation Ltd.
New Delhi.
(Commercial Circular No. 2O/2017)
CATERING POLICY , 2017
1. OBJECTIVES
With the objective to provide quality food to our customers
unbundling of catering services on trains has been envisaged in
Catering Policy 2017. This policy supersedes Catering Policy 2010
and related instructions, unless specifically referred to in this
policy document.
IRCTC has been mandated to carry out the unbundling by creating
a distinction primarily between food preparation and food
distribution. In order to upgrade quality of food preparation
IRCTC shall be setting up new kitchens and upgrade existing
ones.
Modifications have been necessitated in the management of
catering service on mobile and static units to implement social
objectives of the Government besides encouraging fair
competition in allotment of catering units over stations.
IRCTC shall be responsible for catering services through mobile
catering units, Base Kitchens, Cell Kitchens, Refreshment Rooms
at A1 & A category of stations, Food Plazas, Food Courts, Train
Side Vending, Jan Ahaars. All other catering units like Refreshment
Rooms at B and below category of stations, AVMs, Milk Stalls,
trolleys shall be managed by the Zonal Railways.

57
2. DEFINITIONS: AS ANNEXURE-1
3. MANAGEMENT OF CATERING SERVICES IN MOBILE UNITS
3.1 All pantry car service contracts awarded by zonal railways shall
be reassigned to IRCTC on the same terms and conditions, as per
the plan decided mutually by IRCTC and Railways. Sharing of
license fee between IR and IRCTC shall be in the ratio of 40:60
in all cases other than departmentally managed units by IRCTC
wherein revenue shall be shared in the ratio of 15:85. Also all
such reassigned contracts should be got vetted by Legal Deptt.
of Zonal Railways.
3.2 IRCTC shall submit its business plan for approval of Railway
Board, for managing mobile catering services on the trains after
the issuance of this policy. Business plan may be prepared by
IRCTC separately for those trains in which cost of meals is included
in the ticket and for those where catering is optional. While
framing the Business Plan IRCTC may take into consideration the
terms and conditions of existing contracts re-assigned to IRCTC
and time frame required to put into effect various provisions
contained in paras 3.7, 3.8 and other relevant provisions of this
policy.
3.3 IRCTC shall manage catering service on all mobile units having
pantry car service presently with IRCTC. IRCTC shall also take
over management of catering services on trains for which
contracts have not been awarded by zonal railways due to various
reasons or trains are being run departmentally by zonal railways.
3.4 Management of catering services on all new trains/trains started
on short notice shall also be done by IRCTC.
3.5 Since all trains are not provided with pantry cars, Train Side
Vending will be provided from a suitable unit of nominated
station/stations enroute. For this purpose, arrangements will be
made through static kitchen units under the management of
IRCTC by either segmentation of run or on end to end basis, as
practicable. IRCTC shall manage Train Side Vending as per
instructions entailed in this policy.
3.6 IRCTC should submit the Business Plan within a period of 30 days
from the date of issuance of the policy, which shall be approved
by Railway Board within 30 days from the date of submission by
IRCTC.
3.7 Method of Operation of Mobile Catering Service
3.7.1 Preparation of Food: To ensure quality, hygiene and cleanliness,
meals for all mobile units will be picked up from the nominated

58
kitchens owned, operated and managed by IRCTC. This is subject
to Business Plan for mobile catering as well as Base Kitchens, as
approved by Board.
3.7.2 Service of Food in Trains: IRCTC can engage service providers
from hospitality industry for service of food in train.
3.7.3 IRCTC shall supervise catering services on each mobile unit through
its own supervisors directly employed by IRCTC.
3.7.4 IRCTC shall determine the menu of standard meals, in consultation
with zonal railways, keeping into consideration the local taste
and cuisine. The standard meals served in trains shall be within
the fixed tariff approved by Railway Board.
3.7.5 Sale of a-la-carte items, Ready-to-Eat (RTE) Meals shall be
permitted both through e-catering and onboard services by IRCTC.
3.7.6 The rates of standard, a-la-carte and RTE items shall be
prominently displayed in coaches and Railways ’ websites and
shall be made available through mobile apps.
3.8 Setting up and Operation of Kitchen Units
3.8.1 All four Base Kitchens under departmental operation of Zonal
Railways (Nagpur , Chhtrapati Shivaji Terminus, Mumbai Central
and Balharshah) shall be handed over to IRCTC on ‘as is where
is basis ’ i.e. the infrastructure including equipments shall be
transferred to IRCTC. All kitchen units i.e. Refreshment Rooms at
A1 and A category stations ( i.e. excluding Refreshment Rooms at
B and below category stations being minor units that will remain
with Railways), Jan Aahaar , Cell Kitchens shall also be handed
over to IRCTC on ‘as is where is basis ’ i.e. the infrastructure
including equipments shall be transferred to IRCTC.
3.8.2 Contracts awarded by zonal railways for kitchens units viz.,
Refreshment Rooms at A1 and A category stations, Jan Ahaar ,
Cell Kitchens shall be reassigned to IRCTC on the same terms and
conditions with sharing of license fee between IR and IRCTC in
the ratio of 40:60 in all cases other than departmentally managed
units by IRCTC wherein revenue shall be shared in the ratio of
15:85. Also all such reassigned contracts should be got vetted by
Legal Deptt. of Zonal Railways.
3.8.3 The setting up/development/refurbishment of new or existing
Base Kitchens/Kitchen units (after contract ceases to exist in
case of units discussed in Para 3.8.1) shall be undertaken by
IRCTC on the following broad parameters:-
i. IRCTC shall develop different types of kitchens keeping in
view supply of food and usage assessed.

59
ii. Kitchen should be on a Business model so that they can
expand and enhance the service. Revenue sharing,
operational modalities are to be submitted by IRCTC for
prior approval of Railway Board. Land license fee for such
cases shall be decided as per the plan submitted by IRCTC
and terms agreed by Land & Amenities (L&A) Directorate.
iii. IRCTC shall prepare a detailed concession agreement of the
Business Model proposed for setting up of the kitchens,
which shall be approved by Board.
The services provided currently through Refreshment Rooms, Jan
Ahaars and Cell Kitchens shall be provided by IRCTC.
3.8.4 IRCTC shall not outrightly outsource or issue licenses for provision
of catering services to private licensees. IRCTC shall retain the
ownership and shall be fully accountable for all the issues
pertaining to setting up and operation of the Base Kitchens and
quality of food.
3.8.5 The kitchens set up/developed/refurbished by IRCTC shall be
modern and mechanized. IRCTC shall ensure that the kitchens
acquire valid ISO certification within the specified fixed time
period including compliance of all statutory guidelines and food
safety norms issued from time to time.
3.8.6 Apart from kitchen units handed over by zonal railway, IRCTC
may set up its own Kitchens at additional stations identified by
it preferably within the railway premises and as per availability
of land.
3.8.7 Kitchen structures/land handed over by Zonal Railways to IRCTC
for setting up/development/refurbishment of Kitchen units shall
be done on a token license fee of Re. 1/- (Re. one) per sq.ft.
p.a. subject to minimum of Rs. 100/- (Rs. One Hundred) p.a.
However , the concessional land license fee will be applicable
only for Railway related catering work and not for any other
purpose. In case IRCTC use these base kitchens for the purpose
other than mandated in the catering policy, land license fee
shall be decided as per the plan submitted by IRCTC and terms
agreed by Railway Board.
3.8.8 It shall be mandatory for IRCTC to establish the kitchens in a
time bound manner as stipulated hereunder. The location and
area of the land for construction of Base Kitchens shall be decided
mutually by the Divisions and IRCTC to be approved by Zonal
Railways. IRCTC and Divisions shall jointly prepare a General
Agreement Drawing (GAD) of the proposed kitchen duly showing

60
addition/alteration. Sr.DCM in the Division and CCM (Catering)/
CCM will be the nodal officer for matters relating to handing
over of the land and setting up of the kitchens. Following
timeframe shall be followed for setting up of the kitchen:—
Activity T imeframe R esponsibility
(i) Identification of site 10 working days Sr. DCM, Sr. DEN and IRCTC. Any
from 21 days delay will require condonation
after the issue by DRM along with a speaking
of the policy order.
(ii) Preparation of GAD 21 working days Sr. DEN, Sr. DCM, Sr. DEE,
plan after identification Sr. DSTE, IRCTC and any other
of the site official, if required. Any delay
will require condonation by DRM
along with a speaking order.
(iii) Approval of GAD 21 working days CEE, PCE, CSTE, CCM and any
after preparation other official, if required. Any
of GAD delay will require condonation
by GM along with a speaking
order. This will be deemed to
be the approval of Zonal
Headquarters.
(iv) Handing over of 10 working days Sr. DEN, Sr. DCM and IRCTC. Any
the land/site after approval delay will require condonation
of GAD by DRM along with a speaking
order.
(v) Signing of 10 working days DRM and IRCTC. Commencement/
agreements (Land after handing setting up of kitchens will start
Licensing Agreement over of the only after signing of the
and O&M Agreement) land/site agreement. GM shall ensure that
the agreement is signed within
the given timeframe.
(vi) Setting up of the (a) 3 months where CMD/IRCTC shall be responsible
kitchen basic structure is for setting up of kitchens in fixed
provided by timeframe. Reasons for delay
Railways; and shall be reported by the CMD/
(b) 6 months where IRCTC to Railway Board.
only vacant land is
provided by
Railways.
From the date of
handing over of
land/site

61
3.8.9 The existing railway operated Base Kitchens/Kitchen units and
the land allotted for setting up of new kitchens shall be handed
over to IRCTC for a term period of 10 years which shall be
extendable for another period of 5 years at a time subject to
mutual agreement. There shall be a provision for taking back
the Base Kitchens/kitchen units/land handed over to IRCTC in
case said premises are required for integrated development of
stations. The shifting shall take place only after the alternative
site is made functional in all respects for which both parties
shall act proactively as per laid down timeframe. This condition
should be incorporated in the agreement to be executed
between Zonal Railway and IRCTC before handing over the
kitchen unit/land to IRCTC.
3.8.10 A separate land licensing agreement will be signed by the
Zonal Railways and IRCTC for all the above purposes.
3.8.11 There shall be no lease/licensing of land to third party for the
purpose of setting up of Base Kitchens/Kitchen Units. IRCTC
will design its model for operation and maintenance without
assigning any right/lien to third party over the space allotted.
3.8.12 Electricity and water charges shall be charged based on actual
consumption basis and the same shall be payable by IRCTC.
Additional capital cost involved in augmenting utilities, if any,
shall also be borne by IRCTC.
3.8.13 For the mobile units already licensed out by the Zonal Railways,
IRCTC shall take over those contracts and monitor the
management of catering services by licensee by deputing IRCTC
supervisors in each train who shall be accountable for the
performance of the contractor .
3.8.14 The mobile and kitchen units proposed to be handed over to
IRCTC in this policy are presently being managed either through
a licensee or departmentally or through a temporary
arrangement. Zonal Railways and IRCTC, shall finalize and
submit to Railway Board an action plan within 30 days of
issuance of this policy, wherein the list of units along with the
status and the timeframe in which it shall be handed/taken
over shall be stated.
3.8.15 Delay in setting up of kitchen by IRCTC, as defined in para
3.8.8 (vi), shall invite a minimum penalty of Rs. One Lakh per
month per unit.
3.8.16 IRCTC should submit the Business Plan for Base Kitchens within
30 days of the issuance of this policy and Board shall approve
the same within 30 days of submission of the Business Plan by
IRCTC.

62
3.9 Inspection and Supervision by IR
3.9.1 Officials of Railway Board, Zonal Railway & Division shall be
authorized to inspect the kitchen units/mobile catering units.
If any violation of the provision of the policy or deficiencies
is noticed in the service, suitable penal action as decided by
Zonal Railways will be taken as per the provision of agreement
signed between IRCTC and Zonal Railways or IRCTC, Zonal
Railway and Licensee for tripartite agreement (In case of
licenses which are to be reassigned to IRCTC).
3.9.2 IRCTC and CCMs of the concerned Zonal Railways shall enter
into an agreement with respect to each unit to be handed over
to IRCTC. Railway Board shall issue a draft model agreement
incorporating appropriate penal action against IRCTC for the
violation of extant policy guidelines/deficiency. This agreement
shall be executed between IRCTC and Zonal Railway before
handing over of the contract.
3.10 General Instructions
3.10.1 IRCTC may involve/empanel Self Help groups for providing
catering related services. However , IRCTC shall not outsource
or issue licenses for provision of catering services to SHGs.
3.10.2 IRCTC shall ensure compliance of all statutory guidelines viz.
FSSAI norms of food safety in Base Kitchens/Kitchen units and
mobile catering units, pollution control, Green Tribunal etc.
(the statutory bodies mentioned are indicative in nature, not
exhaustive). Further, it shall be entirely responsible for payment
of any penalty imposed for non-compliance of these guidelines.
3.10.3 IRCTC shall ensure payment of all taxes, as applicable from
time to time.
3.10.4 Third Party Audit of mobile units and base kitchens shall be
done by Zonal Railway periodically by an independent agency
as per Board ’s instructions issued vide letter No. 2013//TG-III/
600/17 dated 12.08.2014 and any other instructions issued
from time to time. Cost of the audit shall be borne by IRCTC.
3.10.5 IRCTC and Zonal Railways shall ensure compliance of extant
policy guidelines issued from time to time.
3.10.6 In view of change in role of IRCTC in terms of management of
catering service, the existing MoU between Ministry of Railways
and IRCTC shall be redefined and a revised MoU shall be issued.
3.10.7 In case of any issues of interpretation of any clause/expression
referred to in this policy the interpretation of MoR shall be
final and binding.

63
3.10.8 IRCTC shall be responsible for ensuring that the standards, as
laid down for different services, are maintained and policy
directives issued by Railway Board from time to time are strictly
complied with. Concerned Zonal Railways shall monitor the
performance of IRCTC over their jurisdiction.
3.10.9 IRCTC shall ensure computerized billing in a phased manner to
the extent feasible for all the items sold in mobile and static
units under the management of IRCTC. Facility for cashless
transaction viz. POS/Swipe machine etc. shall be compulsorily
available in all the mobile and static units.
3.10.10 Railways’ share of revenue shall be realized division/station/
unit-wise on monthly basis and reflected in monthly station
balance sheet of the concerned station. A procedure Order for
accountal of the revenue share shall be issued by Railway
Board.
4. MANAGEMENT OF CATERING SERVICE IN STATIC UNITS:
4.1 As already decided, IRCTC would begin to manage catering
services over IR in a phased manner . However , catering services
in static units (except units mentioned in Paras 3.8.1 & 4.2)
shall continue to be awarded and managed by Zonal Railways.
4.2 IRCTC will be responsible for management of catering units
mentioned in Para 3.8.1 and for operations of Food Plaza, Food
Courts, fast food units within the ambit of this policy.
5. SCALE OF CATERING SERVICES THROUGH STATIC UNITS:
5.1 Zonal Railways, in coordination with Divisions and IRCTC, will
prepare a comprehensive blue print for the catering units (under
the control of Zonal Railways and IRCTC) at each station taking
into consideration bans as notified from time to time. Further ,
Zonal Railways should ensure that adequate facilities are
available for providing affordable food to passengers before
permitting any other type of outlets. In case of banned stations,
Zonal Railways shall be empowered to make provisions for
catering units with concurrence of Finance and approval of
General Manager.
6. INFRASTRUCTURE AT STATIC UNITS:
6.1 There should be no cooking on platforms at suburban stations
and for other stations there should be efforts to progressively
reduce cooking on stalls and trolleys on the platforms, except

64
for items which could be prepared through electrically operated
equipments. Railway Board ’s instructions issued vide letter no.
2011/TG-III/600/14 dated 25.04.2012 and other instructions
issued from time to time may be followed in this regard.
6.2 No new Khomcha or alike shall be allotted, however , trolleys/
khomchas (already allotted) may be continued on selective
basis. In order to reduce congestion, these should be made
area specific. Care should be taken not to place them near
FOBs or doors of trains. Preference should be given towards
providing them at the ends of platforms so that General Service
Coaches and unreserved passengers have easy access to them.
Such trolleys/khomchas must have adequate availability of the
low priced Janta Khana.
6.3 Gradually all old catering stalls should be replaced with compact
modular stalls of superior quality material to ease congestion
on the station platforms and circulating area and improve on
aesthetics, durability and convenience for maintenance.
6.4 Static Catering Units should have service across the counter
only. There shall be compulsory and prominent display
arrangements of rates and FSSAI certification.
6.5 Zonal Railways shall ensure computerized billing for all the
items sold at static units under its management in a phased
manner to the extent feasible. Facility for cashless transaction
viz. POS/Swipe machine etc. shall be compulsorily available in
all the static units.
6.6 All systems and processes and equipments such as deep freezers,
hot cases, microwave ovens, refrigerated storage units, bain-
maries should progressively replace the existing traditional
equipments and manual methods in static units.
7. AUTOMATIC VENDING MACHINES (AVMs):
7.1 Zonal Railways shall manage through licensee the automatic
self vending machines. Automatic Vending Machines shall be
permitted only in the form of stand-alone self dispensing units.
They shall not be permitted to sell any other item except
those to be dispensed through these machines. The operations
of the AVMs shall not involve any manual interface except for
the purpose of refilling/repair/maintenance of machine.
However , all dispensation related operations shall be through
coin/currency/card only.

65
7.2 The AVMs that are not stand alone self dispensing units should
be closed down forthwith taking into account the provisions of
contract. Other existing AVMs would be allowed to continue
only until the currency of the existing contract and no extension
should be given.
7.3 New AVMs, adhering to current norms, shall be awarded through
two-packet tender system. Allotment will be done by e-tendering
method. Till the finalization of e-tendering module and issuance
of procedure order by Railway Board normal tendering process
shall be followed.
7.4 The allotment of new AVMs should be done by following SBD
guidelines for major units issued by Railway Board on 05/
07.09.2012. Fixation of license fee shall be governed by Para
12 of this policy. Specification of machine and other modalities
may be decided by zonal railway.
8. MILK AND MILK PRODUCT STALLS:
8.1 Milk Stall license shall be awarded to apex dairy cooperative
societies approved by Government, dairy cooperative
federations/members of National Cooperative Dairy Federation
of India Limited (NCDFI) and/or developed under the aegis of
Operation Flood Programme, bodies/agencies registered/
certified by FSSAI for sale of milk and milk products.
8.2 Allotment at all category of stations shall be done through
tender system. The process of allotment, tenure, fixation of
license fee and ceiling shall be governed by Para 9 (except
conditions stipulated in 9.3.1), 11, 12 and 13 respectively of
this policy. Allotment will be done by e-tendering method. Till
the finalization of e-tendering module and issuance of procedure
order by Railway Board normal tendering process shall be
followed.
8.3 Sale of Packaged Drinking Water (Rail Neer) shall be permitted
at Milk Stalls and instructions issued vide letter no. 2015/TG-
III/631/8 dated 12.02.2016 shall be followed in this regard.
9. Allotment Procedure for Static Catering Units (except static
units mentioned in Para 3.8.1):
9.1 For the purpose of allotment, a Refreshment Room (at B and
below category stations) or a stall or a trolley shall be deemed
as one unit. As such, a single unit shall be awarded through a
single license.

66
9.2 No new license for khomcha/Dallah/Chhabba/Wheel Barrow/
Hand Barrow/Tray/Table/Tea Balta (or any other similar unit
by a different name) shall be awarded by Zonal Railway.
9.3 Zonal Railways shall have an effective and transparent contract
awarding system for static catering units at A1, A, B & C
category stations. Allotment of static catering units will be
done by e-tendering method. Till the finalization of e-tendering
module and issuance of procedure order by Railway Board,
normal tendering process shall be followed.
9.3.1 Allotments of all major static units (except units mentioned in
Para 3.8.1) and of General Minor Units at A1, A, B & C category
stations will be done through open, competitive, two-packet
tendering system by divisions in accordance with the Standard
Bid Documents issued vide Board’s letters No. 2010/TG-III/
600/12/SBD/Pt.3 dated 05.09.2012 and No. 2010/TG-III/600/
12/SBD/1Pt 05.07.2011, duly following all the procedures/
instructions issued by Government of India/Railway Board from
time to time.
9.3.2 Allotment of Special Minor Units at A1, A, B & C category
stations will be done by divisions through open tendering system
within the similar reserved category. The technical eligibility
criteria, however , shall be as under:—
(a) Turnover of applicant’s business in catering (to be supported
by Income Tax Return for the last 3 years) duly certified by
Chartered Accountant (Exempted in case of BPL category).
(b) Previous experience in catering business (to be supported
by certificate/letter of experience/allotment from
concerned agencies for the last 3 years).
(c) The bidder shall be an Individual/sole proprietor who shall
furnish relevant certificate from competent government
authority as a proof of being a member of the particular
reserved category in which he/she is bidding.
(d) Government approved identity proof and residence proof
such as Aadhaar Card/PAN/Voter ID etc. to ensure
genuineness of the bidder and VAT registration, if required.
(e) Affidavit to the effect that the applicant is solvent, there
are no pending dues of railways, no debarment of the
bidder by any zonal railways and that there is no conviction
of the bidder in any criminal case by Court.

67
(f) Medical certificate on allotment to certify that those
handling preparation and service of food are not suffering
from infectious diseases.
(g) Any false declaration by the bidder on affidavit shall be
treated as ‘Material Breach’ and would result in termination
of the license and debarment/blacklisting of the licensee
from participating further in allotment of catering units on
any zonal railway/IRCTC.
(h) Any other special condition considered relevant by Railways
with the approval of the concerned CCM.
Allotment should be made to the highest eligible bidder subject
to the fulfillment of all the above criteria.
9.3.3 Standing Tender Committee, to be nominated by DRM, shall
comprise of three members one each from Commercial and
Finance department and third member from any other
department. The level of committee members as per category
of stations shall be as under:—
Category of stations Level of Committee Accepting Authority
A1, A, B & C Sr. Scale level officers Next Higher Grade officer
D, E & F Jr. Scale level officers Next Higher Grade officer
9.3.4 Any amendment in the above delegation of powers by Zonal
Railway shall be carried out with the approval of the Chief
Commercial Manager.
9.4 Allotment of Special Minor Units at D, E, F and General Minor
Units at D, E, F category stations will be made by Divisions
through open tender system from the eligible bidders. In case
of SMUs at D, E, F category stations, tenders shall be called
from the similar reserved category applicants. The eligibility
criteria shall be as under:—
(a) General Minor Units at D, E & F category stations: Divisions
will call for tenders through press notifications from
Individuals/partnership firms/companies/Co-operatives/Self
Help Groups etc. In case of partnership firms, a certified
copy of legal partnership deed should be submitted.
(b) Special Minor Units at D, E and F category stations:
Divisions will call for tenders through press notifications
from an Individual/sole proprietor who shall furnish relevant
certificate from competent government authority as a proof
of being a member of the particular reserved category in
which he/she is applying. Benefit of reservation shall be
admissible only in case of individual or sole proprietor.

68
(c) Experience in catering business to be supported by turnover
(Income Tax Return/bank statements) in that business for
the last three years duly certified by Chartered Accountant
(Exempted in case of BPL category).
(d) Government approved identity proof and residence proof
such as Aadhaar Card/PAN/Voter ID etc. to ensure
genuineness of the bidder and VAT registration, if required.
(e) Affidavit to the effect that the applicant is solvent, there
are no pending dues of railways, no debarment of the
bidder by any zonal railways and that there is no conviction
of the bidder in any criminal case by Court.
(f) Medical certificate on allotment to certify that those
handling preparation and service of food are not suffering
from infectious diseases.
(g) Any false declaration by the bidder on affidavit shall be
treated as ‘Material Breach’ and would result in termination
of the license and debarment/blacklisting of the licensee
from participating further in allotment of catering units on
any zonal railways/IRCTC.
(h) Any other special condition considered relevant by Railways
with the approval of the concerned CCM.
Allotment should be made subject to the fulfillment of all the
above criteria by the nominated Tender Committee as stated
in Para 9.3.3.
9.4.1 Minimum licence fee will be fixed as 12% of the estimated
annual sales turnover for the respective static unit. Minimum
license fee will be fixed by Zonal Railways/Divisions based on
criteria mentioned in para 12.1.
9.4.2 Divisions shall maintain the vacancy position of units allotted
under reserved categories. In case no application is received
against a particular reserved category as per break up specified
in this policy, one re-notification will be done for allotment of
units to reserved category applicants. In case no reserved
category applicant turns up, the earmarked unit shall be treated
as GMU and shall be allotted for one term of 5 years only.
However , after completion of that 5 year term, the re-
notification exercise shall be repeated for allotment of reserved
category stall to reserved category applicant.
9.4.3 Total allotment to a particular category should not exceed the
specified percentage reserved for that particular category. The

69
total number of allotments of minor units to the various reserved
categories should not exceed 49.5% of the total allotments of
minor units made on a particular Division at D, E and F category
stations and 25% of the total allotments of minor units made
on a particular Division at A1, A, B and C category stations.
Record of allotments based on reservation will be maintained
by the concerned division.
10. RESERVATION IN ALLOTMENT:
10.1 RESERVATION IN A1, A, B & C CATEGORIES
10.1.1 There shall be no reservation for major units.
10.1.2 There shall be 25% reservation for minor units in A1, A, B & C
categories of stations with the following break up.
Sl.No. Category %age reservation
1. Scheduled Caste 6%
2. Scheduled Tribes 4%
3. Other Backward Classes 3%
4. Minorities* 3%
5. Divyang 2%
6. Freedom Fighters/war widows and widows of 4%
railway employees, persons who have been
dislocated/displaced due to their land having
been taken over by the railways for its own use
7. People below Poverty Line 3%
Total 25%
*the term minorities will include the communities namely (i) Muslims, (ii) Christians, (iii)
Sikhs, (iv) Buddhists, (v) Zoroastrians (Parsis) (vi) Jain
10.2 RESERVATION IN D, E & F CATEGORY:
There shall be 49.5% reservation for allotment in D, E & F
categories of stations with following break up.
Sl.No. Category %age reservation
12 3
1. Scheduled Caste 12%
2. Scheduled Tribes 8%

70
3. Other Backward Classes 20%
4. Minorities* 9.5%
Total 49.5%**
*the term minorities will include the communities namely (i) Muslims, (ii) Christians,
(iii) Sikhs, (iv) Buddhists, (v) Zoroastrians (Parsis) (vi) Jain
**Out of this 49.5%, there will be sub quota of 10% for freedom fighters & war widows &
widows of Railway employees and another sub quota of 2% will be for physically challenged
people. Within 49.5% of total reservation 2% sub quota will be provided to the persons who
have been dislocated/displaced due to their land having been taken over by the railways
for its own use.
The sub quota of 10% for freedom fighters & war widows & widows of Railway employees;
sub quota of 2% for physically & mentally challenged people will also apply in the general
category of 50.5%.
The issue of reservations is at present sub-judice in the Honble
Supreme Court. Any allotment/extension in the case of
reservations will be subject to the final order of the Honble
Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 7513 of 2005 and analogous
case referred to the Constitutional bench.
10.3 There shall be a provision of 33% sub quota for women in
allotment of each of the reserved category of minor catering
units at all category of stations. The sub quota of 33% for
women will also apply in general category.
10.4 For the purpose of reservation, one division will be considered
as one entity for which a one time station-wise exercise will
be done for the whole division and reservation percentage will
be progressively achieved as and when either new units are
provided or old units get vacated due to any reason.
11 TENURE
11.1 Tenure of all major units being handed over to IRCTC will be
governed as per Catering Policy 2010 till the expiry of the
contracts. IRCTC shall further manage these units as per the
provisions of this policy.
11.2 Tenure of Food Plaza shall be for a period of 9 years. Tenure
of all other catering units (Major Units & Minor Units) will be
for a period of 5 years only. There will be no further extension/
renewal, except for units specifically referred to in para 3.8.1.
12. FIXATION OF LICENCE FEE FOR STATIC UNITS (EXCEPT UNITS
MENTIONED IN PARA 3.8.1)
12.1 Minimum license fees/minimum reserve price shall be fixed as
12% of the annual sales turnover for static units. Annual sales
12 3

71
turnover shall be based on the following factors (i) category of
station, (ii) type of licence, (iii) number of originating
passengers, (iv) number of trains stopping (day & night),
(v) duration of stoppages (vi) location of the unit at the station,
(vii) approximate licence fees of a similar type of unit at a
similar category of station in proximity. In case of Static Units
on Category ‘A1’ and ‘A’ stations of Metro cities, and ‘C’
Category stations having high purchasing power , the fixation of
minimum licence fee will apart from all other factors take into
account the Circle rates notified by the competent authority
of the State Government as fixed from time to time. The zonal
railways shall evolve a formula based on the above parameters
for fixing the licence fees for the units falling within their
jurisdiction. A Committee comprising three SA Grade officers
from Commercial, Finance and Civil Engineering shall be
nominated by the General Manager which shall fix the formula
for each category of stations. The formula so fixed by the
zonal railway shall be applicable to the entire zonal railway.
Apart from the above zonal railways may include and consider
any other factor/s unique to the unit/units. General Managers
shall have full discretionary powers on recommendation of
CCM and concurrence by FA&CAO of the zonal railways to
revise/modify the minimum licence fee calculated as per the
SAG formula also keeping in view the Last Accepted Rate (LAR)
of the completed contract.
12.2 In the case of static units there will be no separate charges
payable towards rent for building/land, venders fee and
conservancy charges etc., except electricity and water charges,
which will be based on actual consumption and payment of
applicable taxes.
12.3 The licensee will be required to pay all the charges as per the
contract agreement and all statutory duties/charges/levies/
taxes, etc. (including Service Tax on Licence Fee) would also
be borne by the licensee as and when due or any new tax
(including GST) is notified.
12.4 In case of all units under the management of IRCTC, land
license fee for land leased to IRCTC will be payable by IRCTC
and revenue sharing will be as stipulated in para 3.1 and 3.8.2
above.
13. CEILING LIMITS ON HOLDING OF CATERING LICENSES:
13.1 Zonal Railway and Divisions shall maintain a data base of the
various catering establishments to ensure that the under
mentioned ceiling on holding of catering licenses are complied

72
with. The data base should be reconciled by Zonal Railway
Headquarters on six monthly basis. As and when a tender is
finalized, the information may be circulated to all concerned
for updating the data base. Railways shall consolidate and
circulate a list of all catering establishments as on 1st January
of each year to be circulated latest by 31st March and as on
1st July of each year to be circulated latest by 31st October
of that year. Such information should be updated and accordingly
uploaded on 1st January and 1st July of every year on the
websites of the Railways.
13.2 Stand alone AVMs: An entity will be allowed to hold a maximum
of 10 AVMs over each zonal railway.
13.3 For Milk Stalls, authorized franchisee/agencies of allottees (apex
dairy cooperative societies approved by Government, dairy
cooperative federations/members of NCDFI and/or developed
under the aegis of Operation Flood Programme, bodies/agencies
registered/certified by FSSAI) will be allowed to hold a maximum
of five milk stalls per Division.
13.4 A licensee will be allowed to hold a maximum of five minor
catering units per Division.
13.5 Food Plaza, Food Courts and Fast Food Units: An individual/
firm/company will be allowed to hold maximum two units per
division, subject to a further limit of 25 units over Indian
Railways.
13.6 If a licensee holds more than one unit under a single or multiple
licences, for the purpose of implementation of ceiling limit,
one RR (at B & below category stations), one stall or one
trolley or one khomcha shall be equivalent to one unit.
13.7 No new license for khomcha/Dallah/Chhabba/Wheel Barrow/
Hand Barrow/Tray/Table/Tea Balta (any other similar unit) shall
be awarded by Zonal Railway.
13.8 Modification of the above limits may be done only with prior
approval of Railway Board.
14. MENU AND TARIFF:
14.1 Menu and Tariff of food items will be fixed as follows.
14.1.1 For Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto trains and such other trains in
which catering charges are inbuilt in the passenger fare, the
menu shall be decided by IRCTC in consultation with Railway
Board to make it commensurate with the tariff, which will be
fixed by Railway Board.

73
14.1.2 For controlled segment items/standard menu/Janta Meals on
units handed over to IRCTC, the menu shall be decided by
IRCTC in consultation with Zonal Railways within the fixed
tariff approved by Railway Board.
14.1.3 Menu and tariffs for Food Plaza, Food Courts and fast food
units will be decided and fixed by IRCTC.
14.1.4 Menu of controlled segment items including regional cuisine on
minor static catering units shall be decided by Zonal Railways
within the fixed tariff approved by Railway Board.
14.1.5 Menu & Tariff of a­la­carte items served through static catering
units managed by Zonal Railways as well as IRCTC, will be
fixed by Zonal Railways in consultation with IRCTC.
14.1.6 The Menu & Tariff of a-la-carte meals on mobile units handed
over to IRCTC shall be decided by IRCTC. However , in cases
where the contracts for mobile units are being re-assigned to
IRCTC, the same terms and conditions including menu and
tariff shall be applicable till the reassigned contracts cease to
exist.
14.1.7 Adequate emphasis should be laid on availability of regional
cuisine all over Indian Railway.
14.1.8 Instructions issued vide CC No. 78/2012, CC No. 63/2013,
CC No. 32/2014 and issued vide letter no. 2012/TG-III/631/2
dated 11/07/16 and related instructions to ensure availability
of diabetic/patients/ailing passengers/jain food on demand and
availability of food to infants at stations, shall be followed.
14.1.9 The procedure for regular revision of tariff based upon certain
index, parameters, inflation etc. would be finalized by Board
from time to time.
15. QUALITY ASSURANCE PROGRAMME :
Zonal Railways/IRCTC shall frame an efficient quality assurance
programme to ensure good quality and hygienic food to the
passengers. Progressively, ISO 22000 Standards & relevant
international standards in vogue from time to time will be
implemented for all catering units.
16. DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE
Zonal Railways and IRCTC shall ensure compliance of instructions
on waste management already issued vide Commercial Circular
No. 45/2011 dated 13.09.2011 and instructions issued in this
regard from time to time. Instructions issued in this regard
from time to time should be incorporated in all agreements.

74
17. MECHANISM FOR MONITORING OF CATERING SERVICES
17.1 Inspections/Quality checks and monitoring of complaints.
17.1.1 Endeavour should be made that all catering services are ISO
certified as per latest norms.
17.1.2 To provide hygienic and quality food to the rail passengers a
strict and effective system of monitoring of catering services
should be adhered to. Monitoring of quality should be made
through inspections and food quality checks. If any violation of
the provision of the policy or deficiencies is noticed in the
service, suitable penal action shall be taken as per the provision
of agreement.
17.1.3 System for complaint redressal for catering services for static
and on-board services that is already in place providing proactive
and effective complaint redressal mechanism shall be
strengthened.
17.1.4 Complaint Monitoring Cells set up at zonal railway headquarters
and divisional offices wherein all complaints received through
toll free number , complaint books, emails, SMS and other online
platforms etc. should be collected and forwarded to concerned
Zonal Railways/IRCTC for necessary action. A mechanism be
devised to acknowledge the complaints/feedback within
24 hrs. Action taken on complaints should be monitored by the
CCM of the zonal railway and DRMs of the divisions on a monthly
periodical basis. Complaints of repetitive nature should be
taken up sternly.
17.2 IRCTC will conduct passenger satisfaction surveys by means of
third party audits. In case of deficiencies noticed by Third
Party Audit Agency, suitable penal action shall be taken as
stated in paras 17.3 & 17.4.
17.3 If any violation of the provision of the policy or deficiencies
is noticed in the service, suitable penal action as decided by
Zonal Railways will be taken as per the provision of agreement.
In case of continued failure in performance, Railways will have
the right to close down any unit. The event of continued
failure may be explicitly defined in the tender document/
agreement.
17.4 Zonal Railways and IRCTC will take corrective action for
deficiency in services, which may include D&AR action against
the concerned employees.

75
18. TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Transfer of license to the legal heir would be allowed only in
the event of death of the original licensee. The license shall
be transferred in the name of the legal heir for the unexpired
period of the contract as per General Conditions of Contract
(GCC) of Railways. No subletting will be allowed.
19. EXCLUSION OF GOVT. EMPLOYEES AND THEIR DEPENDENTS:
As per extant instructions, no catering/vending license should
be awarded to any Government employee or railway servant or
any other member of his/her family (as defined in rule no. 103
para 17 of the Indian Railway Establishment Code - Vol.-I). The
existing catering/vending licensees who are coming under the
above category, should also not be allowed to continue their
license on confirmation of the above position.
20. APPLICABILITY OF THE NEW POLICY:
20.1 The revised catering policy will be applicable with immediate
effect i.e. from the date of issue. This policy supersedes all
prior policy circulars issued from time to time unless specifically
referred to in this policy document.
20.2 Tenders that have been finalized and LoA issued prior to the
date of notification of this policy, shall be allowed to continue
as per policy guidelines prevailing at that time. Zonal Railways
will cancel all such tenders and return the earnest money to
the tenderers in cases, where LoA has not been issued before
issuance of this circular.
20.3 Any other special condition including provision of catering
service during unforeseen circumstances including accidents,
as considered relevant by Railways with the approval of the
concerned CCM, shall form part of the agreement to be entered
into, which shall be binding on the IRCTC/static units licensees.
20.4 Pending litigation and any new litigation on existing units being
handed over to IRCTC, shall be defended/contested by IRCTC
on behalf of Indian Railways before all courts/forums.
21. NEW INITIATIVES
Zonal Railways shall be permitted to introduce innovative/new
initiatives in catering on stations, with the concurrence of
Associate Finance and approval of General Manager. Tenure for
such initiatives shall be one year extendable to second year
with the approval of General Manager. Further , extension for

76
remaining period of the full tenure ( i.e. five years) shall be
with the approval of Railway Board.
22. ARBITRATION
For units being managed by zonal railway contract agreement
should have arbitration clause for the case of any dispute,
difference, or question arising between Railways and the
licensee as to the respective rights, duties, obligations of the
parties hereto or as to the construction or interpretation of
any of the terms and conditions of the agreement or as to its
application the same shall be resolved amicably failing which
GMs of the Zonal Railways will be nominating authority as per
GCC of the railways. The disputes referred for arbitration shall
be dealt as per the procedure laid down in the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, as amended from time to time. The
place of arbitration would be Zonal Railways Headquarters and
language for arbitration proceeding shall be English.

77
ANNEXURE I
DEFINITIONS OF THE TERMS USED IN THE CATERING POLICY
1. A-la-carte Menu: These are popular food items served through
static/mobile units and decided by market/customer , the rates
for which are fixed by zonal railways/IRCTC. CCMs of the zonal
railways will be the competent authority to decide the A-La-
carte rates. Zonal Railways, after taking into consideration the
regional tastes and cuisine, will approve such items. A-la- carte
menu and standard items shall be mutually exclusive to ensure
that passengers are not overcharged.
2. Automatic Vending Machines (AVM): These are automatic vending
machines for dispensing hygienically packaged catering items
e.g. PAD items, PDW, eatables, tea/coffee, cold drinks, etc. AVM
stalls should not be permitted to sell any other item except
those to be dispensed through these machines.
3. Base Kitchen: Base Kitchen is a large cooking and packing facility
set up in the vicinity of railway premises whether inside or
outside Railway premises from where food is prepared and
distributed in trains or to the static units. There will be no sale
of food directly to the passengers from a base kitchen. All base
kitchens should be ISO certified.
4. Category of station: Stations are categorized on the basis of
passenger earnings as follows:
Category A-1 Non sub-urban stations with an annual passenger
earning of more than Rs. 60 crore.
Category ‘A’ Non sub-urban stations with an annual passenger
earnings of more than Rs. 8 crore and upto
Rs. 60 crore.
Category ‘B’ I. Non sub-urban stations with an annual
passenger earnings between Rs. 4 crore to
Rs. 8 crore.
II. Stations of tourist importance or an important
junction station (to be decided by G.M.)
Category ‘C’ All-suburban stations.
Category ‘D’ Non sub-urban stations with an annual passenger
earnings between Rs. 60 lakhs and Rs. 4 crore.
Category ‘E’ Non sub-urban stations with an annual passenger
earnings less than Rs. 60 lakhs.
Category ‘F’ Halts.
(Note:- The above categorization based on monetary limits is subject to further
revision from time to time.)

78
5. Catering Stalls: These are of three different types of stalls selling
catering products like beverages, snacks and other light
refreshments. First is the tea stall where tea, biscuits and snacks
are served. The second type of stall is milk bar, which are specially
meant for various milk products and the third type of stall is
juice bar meant for juices and fresh fruits.
6. Ceiling Limit: It is the upper limit put on holding of major/minor
units by acompany/firm/individual to prevent monopolistic
tendencies.
7. Cell Kitchen: Cell Kitchens are Mini Base Kitchens which supply
food to other catering units, static/mobile and at the same time
can sell food and beverages directly to the passengers.
8. Earnest Money: It is the amount of money to be deposited along
with tender for consideration of tenders. Tenders submitted
without the prescribed earnest money are liable to will be
summarily rejected.
9. Food Courts: It is a cluster of stalls at a nominated place, where
food items such as branded products/eatables are provided.
10. Fast Food Units: Fast Food Units are major units synonymous to
Snack Bar , where through self service counters, fast food items
are sold.
11. Food Plaza: Food Plaza is a multi cuisine plaza giving a variety
of choice for eating. The quality and rates for items of food
plazas are market-driven.
12. Island Platform: It is the platform located between two lines and
it serves trains opposite each other .
13. Jan Ahaar: Jan Ahaar meals comprise economy combo meals that
may be served and vended from a Jan Ahaar outlet or any
major/minor unit. They comprise a variety of regional and local
items.
14. Khomcha: It is generic term used for small vending unit, which
is usually made of sarkhanda and could be in a form of Dallah/
Chhabba/Wheel Barrow/Hand Barrow/Tray/Table/Tea Balta etc.
15. License: It is a document issued by either Indian Railways or
IRCTC giving authorization to the licensee to operate a particular
service. This license can be for a stipulated period defined for
that unit. The license can be issued open tendering system.
16. Licensee: An agency which can be a company or a firm/society/
cooperative or an individual, as the case may be. The firm can

79
be a proprietorship or partnership. The licensee is the entity
authorized by railway administration or IRCTC to carry out the
particular service.
17. Main Platform: It is the platform adjacent to the concourse and
usually includes the main entrance hall.
18. Major Units:
• Fast Food Units, Food Plaza and Food Courts at all category
of stations.
• Refreshment Rooms at ‘A1’ & ‘A’ category stations.
• Jan Ahaar .
• Mobile catering units.
• AVMs at all category of stations.
• Base kitchens.
• Cell Kitchens.
• Train Side Vending.
19. Minor Units:
All other units at A1, A, B, C, D, E & F category stations which
are not covered in major units as above are known as minor
units, i.e. :
• Stalls, Trolleys and Khomchas at all categories of stations.
• Refreshment Rooms at ‘B’ & below categories of stations.
• Minor Units are of two types.
• General Minor Unit (GMU):
(i) 75% unreserved Refreshment Rooms at ‘B’ & ‘C’ categories
stations.
(ii) 75% unreserved stalls, trolleys, khomchas at A1, A, B & C
Category stations.
(iii) 50.5% unreserved stalls, trolleys and Khomchas, etc. at D,
E & F category stations.
• Special Minor Unit (SMU):
(i) 25% reserved Refreshment Rooms at ‘B’ and ‘C’ category
stations.
(ii) 25% reserved Stalls, Trolleys and Khomcha (wherever licensed
independently) at A1 and A, B & C Category stations.
(iii) 49.5% of reserved stalls, trolleys and Khomchas, etc. at D,
E & F category stations.

80
20. Mobile Units: All catering service through pantry cars/mini pantry
cars are collectively known as mobile units.
21. Quoted license fee: This is the license fee quoted by a licensee
including mark up over minimum license fee.
22. Refreshment Room: It is a place where a-la-carte items, Ready-
to-Eat meals and thali meals are also served.
23. Sales Turnover of Static Units: The sales turnover of any static
unit is considered for the purpose of making assessment of volume
of business and for fixing of minimum floor prices.
24. Static Units: All units at the stations including Food Plazas, Food
Courts, fast food units, refreshment rooms, stalls, trolleys, Jan
Ahaar , base kitchen, cell kitchen, AVMs, etc. are collectively
called as static units.
25. Controlled Segment Items/Standard Menu: Consists of standard
meals, breakfast, tea, coffee, packaged drinking water for which
quantity and rates are fixed by Railway Board.
26. Trains Side Vending (TSV): A large number of trains do not have
pantry cars or mini pantries attached to them. From the static
units of important station/stations, food is supplied to the train
during meal time through vendors, who travel on the trains and
take orders.
27. Two packet Tendering consists of Packet-A and packet-B
In packet-A, technical details received from the licensee are
detailed and the Packet-B is the financial offer, which is considered
only for those bidders who qualify as per short listing based on
all the laid down eligibility criteria for Packet-A.

81
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RAILWAYS (2016-17)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 31st May, 2017, from
1100 hours to 1323 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ganesh Singh — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
3. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary
4. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav
5. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
6. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
8. Shri A.T . Nana Patil
9. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy
10. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
11. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shanker
12. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
13. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev
15. Shri T . Rathinavel
16. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
17. Shri Alok Tiwari
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun Kumar Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Geeta Parmar — Deputy Secretary

82
*REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)
1. Shri A.K. Mital Chairman, Railway Board & Ex.­
Officio Principal Secretary to the
Government of India.
2. Shri B.N. Mohapatra Financial Commissioner (Railways) &
Ex.­Officio  Secretary to the
Government of India.
3. Shri Aditya Kumar Mittal Member Engineering, Railway Board
& Ex.­Officio  Secretary to the
Government of India.
4. Shri Mohd. Jamshed Member-Traffic, Railway Board & Ex­
officio Secretary to the Government
of India.
5. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Member Traction, Railway Board &
Ex­officio  Secretary to the
Government of India.
2. In the absence of Chairperson, the Committee chose Shri Ganesh
Singh to act as Chairperson for the sitting under the provision of Rule
258(3) of ‘Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha ’
which inter alia  states as under:—
“258(3) If the Chairperson is absent from any sitting, the Committee
shall choose another member to act as Chairperson for that sitting.”
3. **** **** **** ****
4. **** **** **** ****
5. Thereafter , representatives of the Ministry of Railways were
called in and the Chairperson welcomed the officials of the Ministry
of Railways to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson then
drew the attention of the witness to Direction 55 of the Directions by
Speaker, Lok Sabha.
6. The representatives of the Ministry of Railways briefed the
Committee in connection with the subject ‘Passenger Amenities including
Modernisation of Railway Stations, and Catering Services’. The members
sought certain clarifications relating to the subject and the
representatives of the Ministry replied to the same. The Committee
desired the Chairman, Railway Board to furnish the replies to the
*Present during briefing by the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).

83
unanswered questions at the earliest to the Committee. The witnesses
then withdrew.
7. **** **** **** ****
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
****not relevant to the Report.

84
APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RAILWAYS (2016-17)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 4th August, 2017, from
1500 hours to 1620 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary
3. Shri Rajeev Satav
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
5. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
8. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy
9. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
10. Shri Ganesh Singh
11. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
12. Shri Thota Narasimham
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev
14. Shri Shwait Malik
15. Shri Mukut Mithi
16. Shri T . Rathinavel
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun Kumar Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav — Deputy Secretary

85
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)*
1. Shri A.K. Mital Chairman, Railway Board &
Ex.­Officio Principal Secretary to
the Government of India.
2. Shri B.N. Mohapatra Financial Commissioner (Railways) &
Ex.­Officio  Secretary to the
Government of India.
3. Shri Aditya Kumar Mittal Member Engineering, Railway Board
& Ex.­Officio  Secretary to the
Government of India.
4. Shri Mohd. Jamshed Member-Traffic, Railway Board &
Ex­officio  Secretary to the
Government of India.
5. Shri Ravindra Gupta Member Rolling Stock, Railway Board
& Ex­officio  Secretary to the
Government of India.
6. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Member Traction, Railway Board &
Ex­officio  Secretary to the
Government of India.
2. **** **** **** ****
3. Thereafter , representatives of the Ministry of Railways were
called in and the Chairperson welcomed the officials of the Ministry
of Railways to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson, then,
drew the attention of the witness to Direction 55 of the Directions by
the Speaker , Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee, then, took evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on the subject ‘Passenger
Amenities including Modernisation of Railway Stations, and Catering
Services’. The members sought certain clarifications relating to the
subject. The Committee desired the Chairman, Railway Board to furnish
the replies to the unanswered questions at the earliest to the
Committee. The witnesses then withdrew.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Present during the evidence.
****Not related to the Report.

86
APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RAILWAYS (2017-18)
The Committee met on Thursday, the 7th December , 2017 from
1400 hrs. to 1510 hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Block A, Parliament
House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
3. Shri Sudheer Gupta
4. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
5. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
6. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
7. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
8. Shri Rajeev Satav
9. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Shwait Malik
11. Shri Mukut Mithi
12. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
13. Shri Motilal Vora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
2. Shri Ram Lal Yadav — Deputy Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)
1. Shri Ashwani Lohani Chairman, Railway Board & Ex­officio
Principal Secretary to the Government
of India

87
2. Shri Mohd. Jamshed Member-Traffic, Railway Board &
Ex­officio  Secretary to the
Government of India
3. Shri Sanjiv Garg Additional Member (Tourism and
Catering)
4. Shri M.P . Mall CMD, IRCTC
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) to the sitting and invited their
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions
by the Speaker , Lok Sabha regarding the proceedings to be treated as
confidential.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Railways made
a Power-point presentation highlighting the major aspects of the new
Railway Catering Policy-2017. They also outlined the changes that had
been effected by the new policy as well as the steps being taken for
its effective and early implementation.
4. Thereafter , the Chairperson and Members of the Committee
sought certain clarification on the subject. The Chairperson, then
thanked the Chairman, Railway Board and other officials for appearing
before the Committee and providing valuable information on the subject
and also directed the Ministry to provide written replies to queries
that remained unanswered. The evidence remained inconclusive.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Committee has
been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

88
APPENDIX IV
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RAILWAYS (2017-18)
The Committee met on Thursday, the 21st December , 2017 from
1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs. Committee Room C, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
3. Shri Sudheer Gupta
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
5. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
8. Shri A.T . Nana Patil
9. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy
10. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
11. Shri Ganesh Singh
12. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Shwait Malik
14. Shri Mukut Mithi
15. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya
16. Shri Motilal Vora
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun Kumar Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav — Deputy Secretary

89
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)*
1. Shri Ashwani Lohani Chairman, Railway Board & Ex­officio
Principal Secretary to the Government
of India
2. Shri Mohd. Jamshed Member-Traffic, Railway Board &
Ex­officio  Secretary to the
Government of India
3. Shri Sanjiv Garg Additional Member (Tourism and
Catering)
4. Shri M.P . Mall CMD, IRCTC
2. **** **** **** ****
3. Thereafter , the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) to the sitting and invited their
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions
by the Speaker , Lok Sabha regarding the proceedings to be treated as
confidential.
4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on the subject “New Railway
Catering Policy-2017 ”. The representatives of the Ministry replied to
various queries raised by the Chairperson and Members of the Committee
on the subject “New Railway Catering Policy-2017 ”. Thereafter, the
Chairperson and Members of the Committee sought certain clarification
on the subject on matter relating thereto. The Chairperson, then
thanked the Chairman, Railway Board and other officials of the Ministry
for appearing before the Committee and providing valuable information
on the subject and also directed the Ministry to provide written replies
to queries that remained unanswered. The evidence remained
inconclusive.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Committee has
been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Present during evidence only.
****Not related to the Report.

90
APPENDIX V
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RAILWAYS (2017-18)
The Committee met on Thursday, the 2nd August, 2018 from
1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, PHA, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
3. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
4. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
5. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
6. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
7. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
8. Shri Rajeev Satav
9. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Shwait Malik
11. Shri Mukut Mithi
12. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya
13. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun Kumar Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav — Deputy Secretary
**** **** **** ****
2. In the absence of Chairperson, the Committee chose Shri Motilal
Vora to act as Chairperson for the sitting under the provision of Rule

91
258(3) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of Lok Sabha
which inter alia  states as under:
“258(3) If the Chairperson is absent from any sitting; the Committee
shall choose another member to act as Chairperson for that sitting.”
3. At the outset, the Convener welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee took up for consideration
the following draft Reports and adopted them without any modifications:
(i) **** **** **** ****
(ii) Draft Report on “New Railway Catering Policy 2017 ”
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports
in light of the factual verification received from the Ministry of Railways
and present the same to the Parliament.
5. **** **** **** ****
6. **** **** **** ****
7. **** **** **** ****
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Committee has
been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.