gg`   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
       (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations/  observations 
contained in the 12th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Safety and Security in Railways’] 
 
 
 FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
                  
           
             
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
AUGUST, 2017/ SHRAVANA, 1939 (SAKA) 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS 
(2016-17) 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
15 

SCR NO. 209 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
                  MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
               (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the 12 th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Safety and Security in Railways’] 
 
 
 
 
    Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2017 
 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 AUGUST, 2017/ SHRAVANA, 1939 (SAKA) 

 
      CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE................................................................ (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v) 
 
PART-I 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government………………………………………… 
 
12 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply…………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
44 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require 
reiteration…………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
55 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Governmen t are still 
awaited………………………………………………………………………. 
 
 
62 
                          ANNEXURE  
I. & II Instructions on duty hours of Safety Staff issued as per the 
recommendations of the High Power Committee   
 
54 
III. Medical Facilities for Loco Pilots and other running staff 58 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 I.      Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on    
31.05.2017 
 
60 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the      
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 12th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Safety and Secuirty in Railways’ 
 
61 
 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2015-16)@ 
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P.K. Kunhalikutty* 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
5. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav# 
6. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
7. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
8. Shri Ramesh Kaushik 
9. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
11. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
12. Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
13. Shri R. Radhakrishnan 
14. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy 
15. Shri Lakhanlal Sahu 
16. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shanker 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20. Shri Narasimham Thota 
21. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri A.K. Antony 
23. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
24. Shri Shwait Malik 
25. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
26. Shri Mukut Mithi 
27. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao 
28. Shri T. Rathinavel 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
30. Shri Alok Tiwari 
31. Shri Motilal Vora 
 
@ Constituted w .e.f. 01.09.2016 vide Lok Sa pbha Bulletin Part II 
No.4105 dated 15.09.2016 
* Shri E. Ahmed passed away on 01.02.2017 (Ref.: Lok Sabha 
Sectt. Notification No.24/4(1)/2017/T(B) dated 01.02.2017) . Shri 
P.K. Kunhalikutty was nominated w.e.f. 19.07.2017 (Ref.:LS Bulletin 
Part II No.5526 dated 19.07.2017) 
# Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav was nominated in place of Shri 
Gaurav Gogoi vide LS Bulletin Part II No.5163 dated 28.03.2017 

 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik - Director 
3. Smt. Banani Sarker Joshi - Sr. Cte. Assistant 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
I, the Chairperson , Standing Committee on Railways (201 6-17), having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fifteenth 
Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Twelfth Report (Sixteenth  Lok Sabha) on ‘ Safety and 
Security in Railways’. 
 
 
2. The Twelfth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha 
on 14.12.2016.  The Report  contained 34 recommendations/observations.  The Ministry 
of Railways furnished their Action Taken Notes on all the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Report on 01.02.2017. 
 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 31.05.2017.  The minutes of the sitting is given in Appendix-I. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observation and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                      SUDIP BANDHYOPADHYAY 
26 July, 2017                                                                           Chairperson, 
4 Ashadha, 1938 (Saka)                            Standing Committee on Railways 

1 
CHAPTER I 
  REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Railways deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations /Observations 
contained in the ir Twelfth Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on "Safety and Security in 
Railways".  
2. The Twelfth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha
on 14 December, 2016. It contained 34 Recommendations/Observations. 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations
have been received and categorised as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
Para Nos. 2,4,5,8,9,12,13,14,16,20,22,25,27,28,29,30,31,33 and 34  
 Total :  19 
 Chapter II 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:- 
Para No. 10, 17 and 18 
 Total :03 
   Chapter III 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:- 
Para Nos. 1,6,7,11,15 and 32 
     Total : 06 
    Chapter IV  
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies are still 
awaited:- 
Para No.  3,19,21,23,24 and 26  
Total : 06 
  Chapter V 

 
 
2 
 
4.  The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to 
the implementation of the Recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  The Committee desire that a ction taken replies to  the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report 
and final replies to the recommendations included in Chapter V of th e 
Report should be furnished to them not later than three months of the 
presentation of this report. 
 
5.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of their recommendations/observations. 
 
A.  Overview of Safety in Indian Railways  
Recommendation (Para No.1) 
 
6.  The Committee had noted that the Indian Railways is entrusted with 
the immense task of providing transportation facilities to the passengers and the 
freight alike while undertaking utmost care to ensure that the operations are safe 
and secure. They had further observed that adherence to safety, an ongoing and a 
continuous process, is a multi -disciplinary effort in the Indian Railways. Each 
department defines its own safety parameters for assets installed/used and 
monitors/maintains the parameters in the safety limits which are co dified manuals 
i.e. General and Subsidiary Rules and are maintained as per laid down protocol. 
Each department lays emphasis and keeps the concern of their own department a 
priority without realizing that the needs could be more significant on other sides.  
The Committee, however, had their reservations on the existing system in IR of 
providing safety in the backdrop of inter department differences or even intra –
department prioritization on safety issues. They were of the view that safety being 
a non negotia ble subject should be dealt with in a prompt, precise and diligent 
manner and preferably by a separate department as inter disciplinary methods of 
dealing with this aspect at micro level only serves to reduce its efficiency, resulting 
in delayed response a nd compromises on safety. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the current structure of Railway Board as well at the Zonal and 
Divisional levels should be reviewed and the safety infrastructure of the Indian 
Railways should be recast to the extent th at it 63 includes at least a separate or a 

 
 
3 
 
full-fledged Department solely entrusted with providing safety and security across 
its area of jurisdiction. The Ministry with their presently ongoing organisational 
restructuring, should seriously consider appoin tment of a full -fledged Member 
(Safety) within the Railway Board in order to provide dedicated focus to the railway 
safety operations. This will help and ensure synchronise micro level safety measures 
into a holistic and macro level safe Railway operations . They agree d with the 
proposal of the Ministry that there will be in-house operational changes such as the 
Safety Directorate will now be involved in proactive auditing operations, instead of 
being the passive data analyst as of now. They, however, desired that this proposal 
should be finalised at the earliest so that necessary correctives can be taken up 
immediately. 
 
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:  
“Safety is integral to the construction, certification, operation and 
maintenance of Railway System.  Each Member is responsible for the respective 
part pertaining to the department viz .: infrastructure, rolling stock, signaling and 
operations. 
Overall co-ordination is done by Member (Traffic), Railway Board.  Hence, the 
question of a separate Member for Safety is not pertinent.”  
 
  
8. The Committee had expressed their reservations on the existing 
system in Indian Railways for providing safety in the backdrop of inter 
department difficulties and had urged for the integration of all aspects of 
rail safety under a single nodal department for quicker response time as 
well as avoiding bureaucratic friction. The reply of the Ministry on this 
suggestion has been very dismissive. The Committee feel that such an 
attitude reflects the Ministry's unwillingness to relinquish a ge old 
practices and procedures.  The Committee feel the Member (Traffic) is 
fully engrossed with the running of trains through the entire Railway 
network in India and the related works on daily basis.   A Separate 
Member for ‘Safety’ would be able to exclusively focus on the Safety 
issues of Railways. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation 

 
 
4 
 
and urge the Ministry to give a serious consideration to optimising the 
composition of the Railway Board to the extent of including an 
independent member with the sole responsibility of ensuring safety of rail 
operations without being burdened by other considerations.   
 
B.  Accidents at UMLCs  
 
 Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
   
9. The Committee were aware about the contention of the Railways that the 
onus of safe movement over UMLCs is on the road users. However, given the 
magnitude of casualties at UMLCs, Railways will have to fulfill their role as a 
facilitator for safe train operations and therefo re there is need for expeditious 
corrective steps in this direction. The Committee were also aware that the Ministry 
is taking various steps to prevent accidents at UMLCs like provision of basic 
infrastructure on all UMLCs, organising social awareness campaigns to educate road 
users with the use of various print and electronic media, provision of second whistle 
Board (Repeater) for level crossings for loco drives to whistle while approaching 
level crossing to warn road users and deployment of Gate Mitras on  experimental 
basis at vulnerable level crossings. However in spite of these measures, the 
Committee noted that out of total 107 accidents, 29 (around 28 per cent) occurred 
at UMLCs. Besides, out of 122 casualties, 58 (around 48 per cent) were at UMLCs. 
The Committee found that while a third of the total accidents occurred at UMLCs, 
yet the casualties are disproportionately high, accounting for around 50% of the 
total casualties. The Committee desire d that certain concrete steps such as 
Approaching Train Wa rning System, Train Actuated Warning System for giving 
audio-visual warning to road users about an approaching train and additional road 
speed breakers before the level crossing gates to reduce the speed of approaching 
traffic should be used to reduce accidents at UMLC. This needs to be provided at all 
manned and unmanned level crossing. In view of the foregoing, the Committee 
strongly urged the Ministry to create awareness among people and take up the 
preventive steps on extensive scale proactively on miss ion mode for progressive 
elimination of the UMLCs. The Committee had come across various instances of 

 
 
5 
 
faulty designs of RUBs, which do not have adequate drainage facilities leading to 
sever water logging in Monsoon Season rendering them not only unusable b ut 
unsafe as well. Besides, there have been problem of poor lighting arrangements in 
some RUBs, which are susceptible to anti social criminal activities besides being 
accident prone. The Committee were not convinced with the contention of the 
Ministry that  the drainage, lighting and maintenance aspect of RUBs is the 
responsibility of State Governments or the local bodies. They felt that there are 
some lacunae in the basic design of these RUBs, which is the responsibility of the 
Railways. The Committee, therefore, desired the Railways to look into the designing 
concept of the RUBS, so that such problems do not occur in future. They also wanted 
the Railways to conduct a survey of all the existing RUBs and remove the 
deficiencies including their design, if any,  so that the users do not face any 
inconvenience.  
 
10.  In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:  
 
"Radio based Unmanned Level Crossing Warning System - RDSO in 
association with IIT/Kanpur has developed a Radio based advance warning system 
to pre-warn road users against approaching trains at unmanned L C Gates. Field 
trial of the equipment has been conducted at L C Gate No.29C  (manned) between 
Sonik and Unnao stations in Lucknow- Kanpur section on Northern Railway. 
Further trials at unmanned L C Gates (8-10 locations)  spread over different 
zones is required to be conducted to check the efficacy of the s ystem and its 
ruggedness particularly against theft /vandalism. 
Satellite Communication based Warning system at Unmanned Level Crossing 
Gates - Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) has taken up a project based 
on Satellite Communication based system t o warn road users about approaching 
trains at Unmanned L C Gates. Train driver is also warned about the approaching 
Unmanned LC Gate and Loco hooter starts sounding automatically. The proto type 
is under development. 
Railway intends to eliminate all unmanned level crossings on Broad Gauge in 
next 3-4 years.  In the last two years (2014 -16) and the current year (upto Nov, 

 
 
6 
 
2016), 3144 unmanned level crossings have been eliminated (1191 by manning and 
1953 by Closure/Merger/Subway). 
It is true that adequate drainage arrangement should be carried out before 
constructing RUBs. As per Railway Board letter dated 18.04.2012 it is the 
responsibility of the State Governments to maintain drainage arrangement for RUBs. 
Zonal Railways have been advised to design and co nstruct RUB only, if proper 
drainage arrangements can be made as per site conditions.”           
 
 
11. The Committee are happy to note the initiatives taken by Railways  
for elimination of Unmanned Level Crossings (UMLCs) on all Broad Gauge 
lines by the year 2020  and urge them to strictly adhere to the timelines 
identified so as to maximise the benefits of such action.   The Committee 
are however extremely critical of the reply of the Ministry regarding the 
problem of water logging of RUBs during Monsoons  which was 
highlighted by them. The cavalier manner in which the Ministry has tried 
to evade its accountability by stating that drainage is the  sole 
responsibility of the concerned State Government concerned is not 
acceptable to the Committee. They are of the view that the main fault 
/problem of these RUBs lie in their designing which is exclusively done by 
the Railways. The Committee wish to remind the Ministry that RUBs are 
built solely to make passage across rail tracks seamless and safe. Yet the 
Committee find that instead of assisting in safe passage RUBs act more 
as an obstacle and people are forced to cross railway tracks in an unsafe 
manner thereby negating the very purpose of building RUBs. The 
Committee therefore reiterate their earlier recommendat ion and desire 
that the Railways should include drainage in their basic design concept 
for RUBs. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
7 
 
C. Accidents due to Derailment  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
    
12. The Committee had observed that during 2003 -04 to 2015 -16, second 
highest reason for consequential accidents and casualties was derailment. Out of 
total 239 rail accidents occurred during 2003-04, 202 accidents (around 85 percent) 
were due to derailment. During 2015-16, out of total 78 rail accidents, 65 accidents 
(around 84 percent) were due to derailment. The situation does not seem to have 
improved during 2016 -17, where already one devastating major incident of the 
derailment of Indore -Patna Express with casualties running into 1 49 deaths and 
injuries to more than 180 people has already occurred. As submitted one of the 
reasons for derailment is defect in the track or rolling stock. The Committee had 
gathered and is also explicitly stated in Safety Performance (2015-16) document of 
the Ministry of Railways that track forms the backbone of the rail transportation 
system and therefore needs to be maintained in a safe and fit condition. However, 
in the instant case there seems to be total failure in regard to maintaining the safety 
standards of their tracks. Ideally, out of the total track length of 1,14,907 kms, 4500 
kms should be renewed annually, however, out of 5000 kms of track length due for 
renewal as currently, only 2700 kms of track length were targeted to be renewed. 
It is evident that the targets kept for track renewals are not commensurate with the 
actual requirement on ground. Taking into account that Ministry of Railways accord 
highest priority to saf ety, the Committee believe d that the physical as well as 
financial targets in respect of track renewals need to be enhanced as per the annual 
requirement for track renewals.  
 
13. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
 
 “Track renewal is an ongoing process which is undertaken as and when a 
stretch of track becomes due for renewal on age-cum-condition basis. Track Renewal 
works are planned in advance every year and their execution is prioritized according 
to the condition of track and overall availability of funds ensuring all the time that 
track is in a sound condition for safe running of trains.  

 
 
8 
 
As on 31.03.2016, track renewal covering 5900 km of track have been 
sanctioned. Initially 1500 km was targeted for the year  2016-17 against original 
Budget Outlay of Rs. 4000 Cr. Budget outlay in year 2016 -17 has been enhanced 
from Rs. 4000 Cr to Rs. 6735.74 Cr in Revised Estimates (RE) to speed up the track 
renewal works in the country. Accordingly, physical targets have also been increased 
from 1500 km to 2668 km. The physical targets are fixed as per financial outlay.”  
 
 
14. The Committee are fully aware that track forms the backbone of the 
Indian Railways and any compromise to the same would lead to severe 
loss both in ter ms of life and property .  However, t he Committee are 
dissatisfied with the pattern of  track renewals over the past few years 
where targets for track renewal continue to lag behind actual requirement   
and have not been commensur ate with actual requirements  which has 
resulted in huge backlogs.  While reiterating their earlier recommendation 
the Committee desire the  Ministry to keep their targets realistic keeping 
in view the annual requirement for track renewals.  
 
 
 D. Accidents Due to Failure of Railway Staff  
 Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
.   
15.  The Committee had inter-alia recommended as under:- 
“It is a matter of grave concern that more than half of the accidents is on account 
of the lapses on the part of the railway staff. Out of 69 , 71, 85 and 78 rail accidents 
during 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015 -16, respectively, 46, 51, 60 and 54 
accidents, respectively were on account of the failure on the part of the railway 
staff. The faults of railway staff in such cases include carelessness working, poor 
maintenance cases, adoption of short -cuts, non -observance of laid down safety 
rules and procedures. The most serious form of accidents involved in such cases is 
collision and Signal passing at Danger (SPAD) for which particularly loco -pilots are 
responsible. As submitted, with traffic going up, there has been substantial increase 
in number of signals because of various intermediate block stations, huts, various 
gate signals, loco pilot encounters a signal almost every km. of his run and almost 
every minute he has to see a signal and accordingly control the train. What is more 

 
 
9 
 
alarming is that at prese nt there is no technological support available to the loco -
pilots and he has to depend only vigilant watch on the signal and control the train 
accordingly. Looking at the huge number of rail accidents due to lapse of the railway 
staff, the Committee derive that the Ministry have failed to assess the root cause of 
continuous and possibly repeated lapses by railway staff and therefore have failed 
completely to curb such accidents. They, therefore, urge the Ministry to deliberate 
on the issue with various Railway Associations and railway staff, to check the faults 
of the railway staff and take the required corrective measures.  
  
16. The Ministry of Railways in their action taken notes have stated as under: 
 
“Each and every accident is analysed in detail and Safety Meetings are regularly 
conducted at all levels in which corrective measures required or lapses brought out 
are duly addressed.   Safety Counsellers personally counsel staff on line, informing 
them of latest instructions and Safety bulletins.    
Recognized Railway Unions are also encouraged to hold periodical 
Conferences/Seminars of Safety category staff of different departments to highlight 
and discuss the measures required for improving safety in train operations.  The 
Railway administration grants special casual leave and passes for such Conferences 
to facilitate staff to take part in the deliberations.” 
 
17. The Committee had regretted  the lack of technological support to 
loco pilots for avoidin g Signal Pass at Danger ( SPAD) and collisions. The 
Committee had also advised the Ministry to thoroughly investigate the 
reasons for the increasing trend of accidents due to failure on the part of 
railway staff. The reply of the Ministry has simply stated that lapses are 
duly investigated while remaining silent on issue of technological aids for 
loco pilots. The Committee are not happy with  such perfunctory replies,  
that too on such a critical issue and recommend that their concern be 
addressed properly and the Ministry should outline the steps taken in this 
regard.  
 
 
 

 
 
10 
 
E.  Vacancy Position of Loco Pilots & Assistant Loco Pilots (ALPs) 
 Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 
18. The Committee were concerned to note that at present 16464 posts of loco 
pilots are vacant. Further, as on 01.04.2016, out of total staff strength of 7,46,676 
posts (provisional), for safety category, there are 1,22,736 vacancies. The Committee 
were extremely concerned that  the Railways are functioning with the vacancy 
position of around 16% and take a serious view in this matter. Needless to say the 
role of safety category staff is crucial in running of trains especially in the present 
scenario where there is more threat perception and lack of staff directly affect their 
performance and consequently jeopardise safety of rail passengers and property. 
The Committee were not convinced by the statement of the Ministry that recruitment 
is a continuous process. They felt that there is definite callousness towards the need 
to fill up these vacancies promptly. The Committee had desired  that the hitherto 
faulty recruitment process and planning regarding the filling up of vacancies in 
security (GRP and RPF) should be rectified by taking up all corrective measures. They 
should ensure that all the safety category posts are filled up promptly on regular 
basis. Further, more safety category posts for maintenance of new assets should be 
promptly created and the persons be deployed forthwith.  
 
19. The Ministry of Railways in their action taken notes have stated as under: 
“This Para has three parts:- 
1. High number of Safety category vacancies (1,22,763 as on 
01.04.2016). 
2. Faulty recruitment process and planning regarding the filling up of 
vacancies in security (GRP and RPF) should be rectified. 
3. Creation of more Safety category posts for maintenance of new 
assets. 
 
Item-wise remarks are as follows: 
1.   Vacancies for Group ‘C’ DR quota posts are assessed by the General 
Managers of Railway s/PUs and accordingly indents are placed by them on 
RRB(s) concerned. The function of RRB is to recommend names (against the 
indents placed by Zonal Railways/PUs) of suitable candidates to the CPO of the 

 
 
11 
 
concerned Zonal Railways/PUs. Further processing of appointment for 
provisionally RRB empanelled candidates is made by the Railway concerned. 
Further, No direct recruitment is made for the post of loco pilots through 
RRBs. In this Cadre, the element of Direct Recruitment is at the stage of 
Assistant Loco Pilots (ALPs). All out efforts are being made to fill up Group ‘C’ 
vacancies on Indian Railways through RRBs. RRBs are providing panels for 
safety categories including ALP to indenting Zonal Railway(s)/PUs regularly. 
Position of candidates empanelled through RRBs for the said categories during 
last 5 years alongwith current year is as under- 
*Provisional                              
# Under Compilation 
 The position of filling up vacancies in Safety categories in the last four years 
is shown below:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Further, as regards loco pilots specifically the figures are as under:- 
 
 
Sl. 
N. Year 
Candidates 
Empanelled 
Percentage Candidates 
Empanelled 
for ALP under 
Safety 
Category 
Percentage 
of ALP 
Total 
Only for 
Safety 
Category 
1. 2011-12 23292 18224 78% 9389 52% 
2. 2012-13 28467 23593 83% 14568 62% 
3. 2013-14 31805 23168 73% 8959 39% 
4. 2014-15 15191 8134 53% 1737 21% 
5. 2015-16 27995 22965 82% 13825 60% 
6. 2016-17 
(upto 
30.11.2016* 
15188 13824  #  
TOTAL 141938 109908 77% 
As on Sanctioned 
Strength 
On Roll 
Strength 
Vacancy 
01.04.2013 7,15,579 5,73,268 1,42,311 
01.04.2014 7,27,582 5,98,430 1,29,152 
01.04.2015 7,37,273 6,13,072 1,24,201 
01.04.2016 7,46,676 6,23,913 1,22,763 

 
 
12 
 
 
It can be seen from the above two tables that the number of Safety 
category posts including loco pilots have increased over the last four years.  
There has also been net increase in the on roll strength also due to induction 
by way of direct recruitment. 
 
2. Arising and filling up of vacancies is an ongoing process. As and when 
vacancies in RPF/RPSF arise, necessary measures are being t aken to initiate 
recruitment process for filling up the vacancies. In recent past, recruitment of 
16388 Constables has been completed and selected candidates have been 
inducted into field units of RPF/RPSF after completion of initial training.  Further 
process has been initiated for recruitment for 2030 women Constables, 4220 
Constables (Male) and 160 Sub Inspectors.  
So far as filling up of vacancies in Government Railway Police (GRP) is 
concerned, GRP is a wing of State Police and GRP personnel are State Govt. 
employees. As such, issues concerning recruitment, training and filling up of 
vacancies in GRP falls within the domain of concerned States Government.  
3. General Managers are having powers to create posts in Safety category as 
may be required by matching surrender/utilizing vacancy bank.   Posts for the 
running staff can be created depending on the crew links and loading.  It does 
not require any matching surrender/vacancy bank. 
 Powers have now been further delegated to DRMs to create posts for new 
assets in Safety category on 1:1 basis by utilizing vacancies in any department 
which are not required to be filled.” 
 
 
As on Sanctioned 
Strength 
On Roll 
Strength 
 
Vacancy 
01.04.2013 83610 65381 18229 
01.04.2014 88568 71448 17120 
01.04.2015 93181 76717 16464 
01.04.2016 95931 77298 18633 

 
 
13 
 
20. The Committee take note of the reply of the Ministry stating that no 
direct recruitment is done at the level of loco pilots and instead 
recruitment is  done at Assistant Loco Pilot (ALP)  level.  However, 
vacancies are still extremely and worryingly high.  Though the declaration 
of vacancies depends on the respective general managers, yet, the 
Committee feel that the Ministry must emphasize on the zones , the need 
to declare vacancies well in time so that the recruitment process can be 
completed in a time bound manner.  The Committee wish to stress that in 
spite of the all efforts made by the Ministry in reducing the vacancies in 
this category not enough is being alone as is amply exhibited in the very 
high rates of vacancy is the loco pilot category almost to the tune of 20% 
in 2016.  The Committee reiterate this earlier recommendation and direct 
the Ministry to speed up the recruitment procedure so that  greater man -
power is made available to them and lesser strain is put on the existing 
ones.                                                                                         
 
Vacancy position in RPF and GRP 
 Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
  
21. The Committee found to their dismay that the vacancy position in respect of 
RPF is quite alarming. Out of the sanctioned strength of 76000, the actual strength 
is about 69000. The vacancies in RPF itself is therefore to the tune of 7000 posts. 
The large number of posts of RPF lying vacant, have certainly mounted undue burden 
on the existing workforce and compromise security in railways. Furthermore, at times 
it has been noticed that the RPF personal on alternative duties putting further burden 
on them in their performance. The Committee had urgeed the Ministry to fill up the 
vacant post of RPF urgently on priority basis to give a boost to the security in Railways 
and also ensure that the RPF personal are not utilised on some other alternative 
duties. The Ministry should not he sitate in engaging officers from other security 
forces/organisations on deputation basis as a temporary measure till the requisite 
RPF strength is made available to them. With a view to expedite the recruitment 
process, the possibility for selection of can didates through the examinations 
conducted by UPSC/SSC could also be explored.  

 
 
14 
 
 
22. The Ministry of Railways in their action taken notes have stated as under: 
“Arising and filling up of vacancies is an ongoing process. As and when 
vacancies in RPF/RPSF arise, necessary measures are being taken to initiate 
recruitment process for filling up the vacancies. In recent past, recruitment of 16388 
Constables has been successfully completed and selected candidates have been 
inducted into field units of RPF/RPSF after completion of initial training.  Further 
process has been initiated for recruitment for 2030 women Constables, 4220 
Constables (Male) and 160 Sub Inspectors.” 
 
 
23. The Committee in their recommendation had expressed dismay at 
the high  rate of vacanc y in the Railway Protection Force (RPF). 
Notwithstanding the reasons forwarded by the Ministry for the same the 
Committee are deeply disturbed with the high levels of vacancies and the 
tardy pace of filling up the vacancies. The Committee would like to remind 
the Ministry that personnel in the safety category are required to undergo 
training for a considerable period of time and as such they are not available 
to the railways immediately on recruitment. In such a situation it  is 
imperative on the part of the Railways to make a fair assessment  in 
advance of the vacancies that are likely to arise in the course of a year due 
to retirements etc. and conduct recruitments accordingly so that there is 
a seamless exchange and there ar e lesser gaps. Further the Committee 
would like to reiterate that the Ministry may temporarily engage officers 
on deputation basis so that safety and security on Railways is maintained 
at all times.  

 
 
15 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED           
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2)  
 
OVERALL GROWTH OF INDIAN RAILWAYS SINCE 1950  
The Committee are concerned to note that over the last 64 years i.e. from 
1950-51 to 2015 -16, though the traffic of both passengers and freight over the 
Railways network has increased by 1344 per cent and 1642 per cent respectively, 
the route kilometres had grown only by 23 per cent. The reason for this sluggish rail 
network expansion which is not commensurate with the growth of passenger and 
freight traffic thus putting undue burden on existing infrastructure leading to safety 
compromise and severe congest ion, is stated to be chronic and significant under 
investment nonpriority area of attention, more focus on adding and running of trains 
to carry passengers and freight as well as low internal generation of resources. 
Further, there has been a significant d ecline in expenditure in railways as a 
percentage of total transport sector expenditure, that is, it has come down from 56% 
in 7th Plan (1985-90) to 30% in 11th Plan (2007-12). Further, the share of the Indian 
Railway in overall GDP has in fact sunk now below 1 per cent of the total. The extent 
of this immense congestion can be assessed from the fact that on the Indian Railways 
out of total 1219 sections, 492 sections (40%) are running at 100% or above line 
capacity. Similarly 161 sections out of 247 section of High Density Network are over 
saturated. The Committee are concerned to note that the scale of under-investment 
in Railways and decline in expenditure in Railways as a percentage of transport sector 
expenditure has resulted in severe congestion on the  oversaturated IR rail routes, 
inability of the system to accommodate more trains, affecting drastically the speed 
of trains and more importantly becoming one of the major causes of Railway 
accidents. Needless to say, the bottlenecks in this regard have to  be dealt by the 
Railways with a great sense of urgency and utmost priority.  
 
 

 
 
16 
 
Reply of the Government 
To overcome severe congestion on the oversaturated Indian Railways routes, 
253 doubling, 39 Gauge Conversion & 554 Traffic facility works have been 
sanctioned.  Number of these works have been accorded high priority and given 
enhanced funds. Two dedicated freight corridors of total 3376 Km length have been 
sanctioned and work is in progress. 
In the budget of 2015-16, a 5 year investment plan of Rs.8,56,020 crore  was 
indicated comprising of Rs.1,99,320 crore for Network decongestion, Rs.1,93,000 
crore for network expansion, Rs.5,000/- crore for Information Technology/Research, 
Rs.1,02,000/- for Rolling Stock, Rs.12,500/ - crore for Passenger Amenities, 
Rs.65,000/- crore for High Speed Rail & Elevated corridor, Rs.1,00,000/ - crore for 
Station redevelopment and logistic parks and Rs.13,200/ - for others. Capital 
investment on infrastructure augmentation upscaled from 58,718 crore in 2014 -15 
and 94,000 crore in 2015-16 and further enhanced capital plan expenditure of Rs. 
1.21 lakh crore in 2016-17. 
Position of Plan Expenditure and expenditure under planheads New Lines 
(Construction), Gauge Conversion, Doubling and Traffic Facilities, over the last three 
years and the current year, is shown in the following table.  It would be observed 
that the Capital Expenditure of the Railways in general and for works relating to asset 
creation, capacity augmentation and throughput enhancement in particular has been 
increasing over the years. 
 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 
(Prov) 
2016-17 
(BE) 
Total Plan 
Outlay 
53989 58718 93520 121000 
New Lines 
(Construction) 
5809 7139 13248 15586 
Gauge 
Conversion 
3103 3664 3735 4342 
Doubling 2978 3881 10497 25119 
Traffic Facilities 659 785 989 1226 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
17 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4)  
 
SAFETY PERFORMANCE OF INDIAN RAILWAYS  
 
The Committee note that the constraints faced by Railways to address the areas 
of concern are stated to be non -availability of funds to create additional capacity, 
modernisation of assets and difficulty in finding time for maintenance of assets due 
to saturation of the current network. Resource Crunch has been the basic cause for 
not proceeding with identified safety items like track circuiting or renewal of overaged 
assets in the past three or four decades. The Ministry have submitted that additional 
funds are being raised from internal and external resources to generate new capacity 
so as to create required maintenance time slots. Mechanisation of maintenance and 
modern technology is also being used so as to reduce downtime. Also, the system of 
assured integrated maintenance blocks for scheduled maintenance/overhaul of track 
has been envisaged and is under consideration of Railway Board. According to the 
Ministry, notwithstanding increase in freight loading and passengers kilometers, 
accidents have come down from 418 in 2001 -02 to 107 in 2015 -16 which indicates 
improved safety performance of Indian Railways year after year. Despite the above 
submission of the Ministry, the Committee are not convinced about their contention 
that there is no compromise on the safety part in rail operations. They desire the 
Ministry to acknowledge the seriousness of safety and the fact that 107 rail accidents 
during 2015-16 were due to collision, derailments, fire in train and at level crossings 
etc. involving certain lapse what soever on the part of Railways which could have 
been avoided. Hence, the Committee desire the Railways to gear up itself to 
overcome the challenges before them to attain much higher level of safety by 
addressing the basic reasons for these accidents contained in the findings of various 
enquiries set up at the time of occurrences of the accidents.  
Reply of the Government 
Railways accord highest priority to safety. Follow up action in consonance with 
the findings of the Inquiry Committees are duly taken by t he concerned Zonal 
Railways. Besides, preventive measures are also taken on continual basis to avert 
accidents. This includes launching of safety drives, undertaking safety audits and 
inspections with a view to identify weak areas in asset maintenance, saf ety 
procedures and systemic defects etc. 

 
 
18 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5)  
 
ACCIDENTS AT UMLCs  
 
The Committee note with concern that Unmanned Level Crossings (UMLCs) 
continue to be the biggest cause of maximum casualties in rail accidents. There are 
still 11440 UMLCs in IR network. During 2014 -15, out of 135 train accidents, 50 
accidents (around 40 per cent) were at UMLCs. The trend continued during 2015-16 
as well with 29 out of 107 (around 28 %) accidents being attributed to unmanned 
level crossings. Further,  the Committee are dissatisfied to note that against the 
targets to eliminate 720, 2065, 1735 and 1352 unmanned level crossings during 
2010-11, 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2013-14 actual achievement stood at 1234, 1258, 
1163 and 1102 respectively. Further, to the ir dismay, they find that there were 
underutilisation of funds during all these years. The funds were utilised to the extent 
of 65%, 80% and 79% of the allocation during 2010 -11, 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 
respectively. The Committee fail to understand the reason (s) for keeping lower 
targets for elimination of UMLCs for the year 2014 -15 and 2015-16 at 730 and 820 
respectively, i.e., a reduction in physical targets by nearly 50 per cent as compared 
to previous years. The Committee take a very serious view of this l ackadaisical 
attitude of the Ministry in dealing with elimination of UMLCs and recommend the 
Ministry to act proactively and take all possible measures to ensure that financial and 
physical targets are optimally achieved.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Elimination of unmanned level crossings and utilization of funds under road 
safety works  during the last three years are as under:- 
Year 
Elimination of 
unmanned level 
crossings 
Allocation of 
funds 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Expenditure 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Utilization 
of Funds 
2013-14 1102 2000 1986.29 99.31% 
2014-15 1148 2200 2222.41 101.02% 
2015-16 1253 2662 2689.18 101.02% 
 

 
 
19 
 
From the above, it is clearly visible that elimination of Unmanned Level 
Crossings (UMLCs) is progressing year by year and the funds allocated for Road 
Safety Works are being fully utilized.  
Now, Railways has decided to eliminate all UMLCs on Broad Gauge in next 3-4 
years by Closure/ Merger/ Subways. As on 01.04.2016, there are 9340 Nos. UMLCs 
out of which 6388 Nos. are on Broad Gauge. In 2016 -17, 1440 UMLCs have been 
targeted for elimination out of 6388 LCs are on Broad Gauge. The progress achieved 
during 2016-17 (upto Nov.’ 16) is 743 and expected to achieve the target during the 
year. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8)  
MEASURES TO REDUCE DERAILMENT  
 
The Committee observe that the Ministry are taking several steps in order to 
reduce the defects in tracks viz. upgradation of track structure consisting of Pre -
Stressed Concrete(PSC) sleepers, standardisation of track structure with 60 kg rails 
and PSC sleepers, laying of long welded rails to minimise number of welded joints, 
flash butt welding, ultrasonic testing of rails and welds, use of tie tamping and ballast 
cleaning machines and rail grinding machines besides carrying out electronic 
monitoring of track geometry, adopting modern bridge inspection and management 
system and patrolling railway tracks at vulnerable locations. Also in order to reduce 
defects in rolling stock, railways are taking steps to technically upgrade certain safety 
related systems of wagon mainly- brakes, CBC, draft gears etc. Further, low speed 
stocks are being replaced/upgraded to higher speed versions. The Committee also 
note the initiative of the Ministry to utilize the modern technologies to monitor asset 
quality through satellite imaging and urge the Ministry to explore more such avenues 
such as increasing frequency of detecting faults in tracks with ultrasonic devices 
extensively in order to reduce errors and improve the system. The Committee trust 
that the Railways’ focussed ef forts to reduce the defects in track and rolling stock 
through detection of faults in tracks by ultrasonic devices, switching from 
conventional ICF coaches to LHB coaches especially on High Speed, Superfast train 
routes and in overnight express trains. The Committee are hopeful that these would 
yield the desired result and lessen the accidents due to derailment.  
 

 
 
20 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
To lessen the accidents due to derailment Zonal Railways have been advised 
to take following action:  
(i) Safety focused Inspections to identify and make good deficiencies in 
the under-gear, etc. 
(ii) A special drive to detect and remove flat tyres. 
(iii) Ensure that WILD and Weigh bridges are in working order.  
(iv) System of bearing monitoring for both coaches and wagons during 
rolling in and enrooted examinations should be audited. 
(v) Workshops to ensure a special audit of quality of welding in the area 
of underframe, critical structural and bogies of coaches and wagons is 
taken up.  
(vi) System audit of corrosion repair practices being followed for coaches 
is taken up. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9)  
The Committee note that the progressive fitment of tight lock Centre Buffer 
Couplers (CBC) in lieu of Screw Coupling of new manufacturing of ICF design coaches 
has been carried out with a view to prevent the coaches from climbing over each 
other in an unfo rtunate event of accident. Further, so far 2900 LHB coaches, 425 
hybrid stainless coaches and 1340 ICF design coaches have been manufactured with 
Centre Buffer Couplers. Further the design of CBC has been upgraded to mitigate the 
problem of jerks during ac celerations/decelerations of trains. The Committee have 
been informed that such designs enables absorption of significant amount of energy 
during the impact/collision, which minimises injury/loss of life in the event of collision 
when compared with ICF design conventional coaches.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Progressive fitment of tight lock Center Buffer Couplers (CBC) in lieu of screw 
coupling on new manufacturing of ICF design coaches has been carried out with a 
view to prevent the coaches from climbing ov er each other in unfortunate even of 
an accident. So far, 4873 LHB coaches, 439 Hybrid Stainless Steel Coaches & 1584 

 
 
21 
 
conventional coaches have been manufactured with CBC. Design of CBC has been 
upgraded to mitigate problem of jerks during acceleration/deceleration of trains. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12)  
WORKING HOURS/CONDITIONS OF LOCO-PILOTS 
  
The Committee are aware that the working hours of Loco Pilots are governed 
by the provisions of the Railways Act, 1989 and the Railway Servants (Hours of Work 
& Period of Rest) rules, 2005 and accordingly, Loco Pilots are required to work for 
cumulative 104 hrs. in a fortnight and their running duty at a stretch ordinarily should 
not exceed 10 hours but sometimes they are required to work beyond stipulated duty 
hours due to operational exigencies. In terms of Hours of Employment Rules (HoER) 
provisions, locomotive or traffic running staff are granted each month a rest of at 
least five periods of not less than 22 consecutive hours each, or a rest of at least 
four periods of not less than thirty consecutive hours each including a full night. The 
hours of work for this purpose shall be calculated from signing on to signing off. The 
Committee, however, wonder that the High Power Committee constituted to review 
the duty hours of running and other safety related categories of staff on Railways 
had submitted its Report way back in August 2013 and is still under consideration of 
the Ministry. The fact that Report of the High Power Committee is still under 
consideration of Railways even after a period of more than two and a half years casts 
a poor reflection on the functioning of Indian Railways besides indicating the 
nonpriority attached to such a vital issue. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the report of the High Power committee to review the working hours 
of the safety staff, should be considered and implemented by the Ministry of Railways 
forthwith.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the High Power Committee constituted to review the 
duty hours of running and other safety related categories of staff have been finalized 
by the Full Board in their meetings held on 06.10.2015, 08.12.2015 and 27.04.2016. 
Copies of instructions issued on duty hours are attached as Annexure-I & II. 
 
 

 
 
22 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13)  
 
MEASURES TO REDUCE ACCIDENTS DUE TO HUMAN FAILURE  
 
The Committee are aware that in order to correct the failures by the railway 
staff, the Ministry has been providing need based training in new equipments  
accompanied by periodical refresher courses. Besides, Railways have taken up trials 
for systems like TCAS, TPWS, FOGSAFE devices, Vigilance Control Devices(VCDs) 
which can work as aid to the Railway staff towards prevention of accidents. The 
Committee are really concerned about the fact that the Ministry has been found doing 
trials with the technological support system for quite some time now and none of the 
above have so far been adopted by the Railways. Safety of passengers which should 
be the first and foremost responsibility of the Railways are not given the importance, 
it deserves. Needless to mention that the is required to be taken up more seriously 
and expeditiously. The Committee also desire that a regular refresher course for each 
category to be based on case study of accidents due to common errors, on modified 
operating system, pattern of working, modernisation and technology upgradation 
should be arranged undertaken to make them simple for compliance. Stress 
management skill should also be taken for various categories regularly. Further, HRD 
cell involving knowledgeable supervisors to study working habits of ground level staff 
factors leading to short cuts of to reduce fatigue, minimise, monotony and to improve 
safety consciousness should also be undertaken. There should be intensive training 
regularly to upgrade knowledge levels to handle improved security, arms and 
ammunition. The training facilities with Indian Railways should be fully utilised.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Regular refresher courses are prescribed for each Safety category.  The number 
of staff sent for refresher training in last three years is as under: 
Year Refresher Training 
2013-14 1,01,806 
2014-15 1,06,849 
2015-16 1,32,399 
 
Content of these refresher courses is further modified to include case studies 
also. 

 
 
23 
 
 As regards stress management, yoga training has been prescribed in the 
Training Institutes since the last two to three years. 
 There is already a separate Safety Branch in all Divisions and Zonal Railway 
Headquarters responsible to study the various working practices and prevent short 
cuts and improve safety consciousness through direct contact with the staff at their 
work spots. 
Train protection and Warning System (TPWS)  
TPWS is based on proven European Train Control System (ETCS -L1) 
Technology for mitigating safety risk arising due to driver’s error of Signal Passing at 
Danger (SPAD) or over speeding. 
Indian Railways have already completed pilot projects on Suburban section of 
Southern Railway -Chennai to Gummidipundi (50 RKM) as well as on non Sub urban 
section - Delhi to Agra (200 RKM) and the system is operational for commercial 
services. TPWS is also implemented on Kolkata metro from Kavi Subhash to Dumdum 
(25 RKM) section and all existing 27 EMU rakes are equipped with TPWS. 
Based on the above experience,   further TPWS works have been sanctioned 
on busy Automatic Signalling section covering 3300 RKM. In first phase , work on 
suburban sections covering 1240 RKM on Eastern, South Eastern, Northern, Southern 
and South Central Railways have been taken up for implementation.  
During current financial year (2016 -17) TPWS has been commissioned on 
Chennai (Basin Bridge)-Arakkonam (67 RKM) suburban section of Southern Railway. 
Efforts are being made to allocate resources (funds) to implement other TPWS 
sanctioned works on the Zonal  Railways. 
Train Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) 
       RDSO in association with Indian Vendors has taken up a pilot project for 
indigenous development of a cost effective safety system called Train Collision 
Avoidance System (TCAS).  TCAS deploys radio communication for transmission of 
movement authority from track side to the Locomotive. This system is aimed at 
providing capability of preventing train accidents caused due to Signal Pass ing at 
Danger (SPAD) or over speeding by train drivers.   
       After successful Proof of Concept trials of TCAS, RDSO has taken up 
extended field trials of TCAS on a pilot section Lingamapalli –Vikarabad-Wadi-Bidar 
(250 Route km) section of South Central Railway. After completion of all field works 

 
 
24 
 
equipment deployments trials on two pair of passenger trains have already 
commenced. Safety validation of the system has also been taken up by Independent 
Safety Assessor (ISA). 
  Further implementation of TCAS on Absolute Block Signalling sections of IR is 
planned after successful conclusion of the extended field trials and safety validation 
of system. 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
In this context, the Committee observe that ultimately the task of train 
operations is solely entrusted to loco pilots who are the human element of train 
operations. The Committee, however, find that in actual practice especially the 
drivers and gangman wo rk for even 22 to 24 hours at a stretch. At times, drivers 
have been working for five consecutive days. Due to work stress, fatigue and stifling 
conditions, the life of thousands of commuters is at risk and it certainly affects the 
safety of train operations. Therefore, the Committee desire that the loco pilots and 
other related running staff be provided with sound working conditions, better medical 
facilities and other amenities to improve their performance. Certain measures should 
be undertaken by the Rai lways across the Railway network viz. improvements in 
terms of air cooled rooms, availability of hygienic eating and staying arrangements 
at running rooms, improvements in the locomotive cabs in terms of increase in space 
and better driver seats in all new  locomotives manufactured by CLW and provision 
of cab air conditioning in Electric loco cabs, Guard friendly Brake Vans etc., proper 
display of instructions. The location of signals be uniformly displayed with linked with 
visibility, braking distance, speed load etc. These signals should be placed uniformly 
and in standerised format so as to not create confusion in minds of loco drivers and 
they identify correct signals. Further, the signal aspect could be displayed in driving 
cab itself with recording arra ngement and if a loco pilot could be alerted about the 
signal in his cabin with the help of technology like Global positioning, it may help in 
safe and punctual running of trains. The Committee believe that such a move would 
definitely help in better performance by the running staff.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
25 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
For medical facilities: Provision in this regard has already been made vide letter 
No. 2012/H/5/19 dated 03.09.2012 copy of the same is enclosed as Annexure III. 
  The following facilities/aids are provided to Loco Pilots working in electrified 
territories/electric locos: 
(i) Provision of air coolers/air conditioners in running rooms: 
• Air Coolers have been provided in all Running Rooms.  
• Running Rooms are properly cleaned and maintained regularly.  
• High Power Committee constituted ‘To review the duty hours of Running staff 
and other safety related categories of staff on Railways’ had recommended  
vide item No. 9.59 that all running rooms should be provided wit h air 
conditioners in due course beginning with running rooms located in 
humid/coastal areas, with 100% power back up arrangements .  The 
recommendation has been accepted in principle  and General Managers of 
Indian Railways have been advised vide letter No. 2016/M(L)/165/3 dated 
22.09.2016 to take necessary action taking local conditions and budgetary 
constraints into account.  
(ii) Ergonomic design for locos: 
All new electric locos being produced by CLW have ergonomically 
designed crew friendly cabs. 
(iii) Provision of water closets in loco cabs: 
Research Design Standards Organization (RDSO) has finalized a 
specification for provisio n of water closet in electric locomotives. Based on 
which, Chittaranjan Locomotive Works (CLW) has been advised to provide 
Water Closets with revised specification in five WAP5/WAP7 locos during 
current financial year on trial basis.  Tender for provisioni ng of Water Closets 
on electric locos have been opened on 09.09.16 at Chittaranjan Locomotive 
Works and letter of acceptance (LOA) has been issued on 31.10.16.   
 
 
 
 

 
 
26 
 
(iv) Provision of air conditioners in loco cabs: 
      All locos to be turned out from CLW shall be fitted with cab air 
conditioners. CLW has placed order for supply of 798 AC units for fitment on 
electric locos.  24 units (12 locos) have been fitted on electric locomotives.   
(v)  Display of instructions in loco cab: 
      Trouble shooting messages/instructions are displayed in the 
Microprocessor Based Fault Diagnostic Control System. 
(vi) Location of signals be uniformly displayed linked with visibility 
To minimise the delay in train operation due to po or visibility, a retro -
reflective strip in sigma shape for identification of signals is being provided on 
two OHE masts prior to all signals in electrified territories.  This is an additional 
aid to Loco Pilots working in fog affected Divisions/Railways. 
 The location of Signals is as per General and Subsidiary rules of Indian 
Railway as well as Indian Railway Signal Engineering Manual (IRSEM).The 
drivers are well versed with the rules and undergo extensive Road learning (LR) 
to acquaint themselves with the location of signals. The signals are located after 
confirming by a multi disciplinary Sighting Committee that they offer adequate 
visibility & do not cause any confusion to the loco pilot from his cab. 
TCAS has provision of displaying aspect of signal in the driver cab. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
ACCIDENTS CAUSED DUE TO FIRE  
 
The Committee find that though the instances of accidents due to fire in trains 
are not many yet the casualties in such cases are usually very high. During 2012-13, 
there were 31 deaths and 40 injuries and in 2013 -14, there were 35 deaths and 6 
injuries due to fire in train. The Committee note the steps taken by the Ministry to 
prevent incidents of fire on trains viz., improving fire retardancy in coaches, provision 
of automatic fire and smoke detection system in coaches, provision of fire 
extinguishers and provision of fire suppression system on pantry cars and powers 
etc. The Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that combustible or high inflammable 
material are not carried by the passengers on the trains through public awareness 
as well as through a syste m of rigorous inspection. The Ministry may consider 
imposing stiff fines on passengers carrying inflammable material in trains. Also, 

 
 
27 
 
pictorial warnings regarding inflammable material and the quantum of fines should 
be strategically placed in coaches and at stations to act as a deterrent as well as for 
educating the travellers.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Improving Fire Retardency in coaches : Coaches are being provided with 
fire retardant furnishing materials such as Fire retardant curtains, partition paneling, 
roof ceiling, flooring, seat and berths along with cushioning material and seat covers. 
Windows and UIC vestibules etc. The specifications of these items are being 
upgraded from time to time as a part of continual improvement. In the recent past,  
another parameter called ‘Heat Release Rate (HRR)’ has been added in the material 
specification of all major interior furnishing materials used in coaches as per latest 
European norms. 
Provision of Automatic Fire and Smoke Detection System in Coaches: 
A pilot project for field trial with Automatic Fire and Smoke Detection System was 
taken up in one rake of New Delhi-Bhubaneshwar Rajdhani. Beside, one LHB rake in 
New Delhi-Jammu Tawi Rajdhani train and one rake of LHB AC Double Decker rake 
running between Kacheguda-Tirupati/Guntakal of South Central Railway have been 
provided with Automatic Fire and Smoke Detection System. Extended field trials on 
representative population of coaches are planned to be conducted further with 
revised specification of Air Brake  System has been interfaced with Fire and Smoke 
detection system for stoppage of trains in emergency situations. 
Provision of Water mist type Fire Suppression in pantry cars and power 
cars: 
Power cars and Pantry cars are relatively more prone to fire and therefore Fire 
suppression system based on water -mist technology is being tried out on limited 
numbers of coaches before large scale proliferation. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
  
PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION  
 
The Committee are unhappy to note that as on 31.03.2015 there are 230 claim 
cases pending with the Railways for compensation in case of casualties occured in 
rail accidents. Out of these, 46 cases are pending for up to one year, 63 cases 

 
 
28 
 
pending for uto 1-3 years, 89 cases for 3 -5 years and 32 cases are such which are 
pending for settlement for more than 5 years. This is a very alarming position. The 
Committee feel that the next of kin who have lost their near and dear ones and 
others for compensation shoul d be paid the same at the earliest without holding 
them back. The Committee, therefore, call upon the Ministry to ensure that all the 
pending cases for compensation claims should be settled within a time frame of 6 
months.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The dis posal of claim cases in RCT pertaining to death has improved 
considerably. As on 30.11.2016, the number of pending claim cases pertaining to 
death is 74 cases as against 230 cases on 31.02.2015. The details of Age -wise 
pendency of claim cases pertaining to death cases are as under:-  
Age of Pendency As on 
31.03.2015 
As  on 
30.11.2016 
Upto 1 year 46 29 
Upto 1-3 years 63 10 
Upto 3-5 years and more than 5 years 121 35 
Total 230 74 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22)  
 
PROVISION OF FUNDS FOR SAFETY  
 
The Committee find that while the traffic has increased manifold, the 
commensurate increase in Assets for capacity generation has not been there. The 
system is over -stretched and over -stressed which has a direct co -relation with the 
safety of operations in running trains. The Committee are of firm opinion that there 
is an urgent and over powering need for renewal and replacement of overaged 
assets, modernisation and technological upgradation of not only the operation assets 
but also the rolling stock. The Committee urge the Ministry to approach the Ministry 
of Finance for creation of another special Railway Safety non -lapsable fund which 
could cater to this long impending and urgent need in order to ensure safety of train 
operations.  
 

 
 
29 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Setting up of ‘Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh’ (RRSK) having a corpus of Rs.1.19 
lakh crore, with support from Government of India of Rs.1.12 lakh crore, has been 
taken up with Ministry of Finance.  Recently the issue has also been raised by Hon’ble 
Minster of Railways with Hon’ble Minister of Finance through a letter on 25.11.2016.  
The matter of additional support for Safety works has also been included in Ministry 
of Railways’ Revised/Budget Estimates proposals made to Ministry of Finance. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 
RAILWAY BUDGET 2016-CHANGES IN FUNDS PROPOSED FOR SAFETY   
WORKS  
 
As reported, the General Budget has proposed changes in the CRF Act 2000, 
which are mentioned in part VII of the Finance Bill 2016 that proposes to cover 
‘railways safety works’ also in the scope of works on which this amount could be 
allocated. Earlier under CRF Act, railways could take up works relating to ROBs/RUBs 
and Level Crossings but now under the proposed amendment, the scope has been 
enlarged to also cover New Lines, Gauge Conversion, Electrification and Safety works 
but excluding any repairs, mai ntenance and renovation works. The Ministry of 
Finance had stipulated that out of the allocation of Rs 10780 crore during 2016 -17, 
out of railways’ share in ‘diesel cess’ proceeds under CRF Act, the allocation for 
Railway Safety Works (through Central Road Fund) was ring-fenced at Rs 3000 crore 
and Rs 7780 crore for capital expenditure for electrification, gauge conversion and 
new lines with a stipulation that no ‘repairs/maintenance/renovation work would be 
allowed out of Central Road Fund proceeds’.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The para is factual in nature, not needing any action taken report. 
 
 

 
 
30 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27)  
SUGGESTIONS ON RAILWAY SAFETY BY RAILWAY ASSOCIATIONS  
 
The Committee fully appreciate the valuable suggestions/views brought 
forward by the various railway associations viz. National Federation of Indian 
railways(NFIR), All India Railwaymen's federation(AIRF) and All India RPF 
Association(AIRPFA), recognising their vast experience in train operations. They note 
that certain measures suggested by these Federations/Association to improve the 
working conditions of safety staff are being taken up by the Railway Board like 
instructions have been issued for night inspections of maintenance depots, efficiency 
cells at all zonal railways headquarters for studying working habits of ground level 
staff to improve safety, yoga training has been made mandatory for stress 
management in Centralised Training Institutes (CTIs) and other training centres for 
all the staff of Indian Railways, 8 wheeler Guard Brake Vans have been replaced by 
4 wheeler Vans to make them Guard-friendly and easing stress on Guards, separate 
categorywise modules containing DO's and DON't's have already been issued for 
most of the equipments, handbooks with simple language containing relevant rules 
for different categories of staff have been supplied. As stated, Railways have codified 
periodic schedule of inspections and safety checks for all its assets, to be undertaken 
by different level of Railway officials. For provision of AC in running room, instructions 
have been issued to zonal railways to examine the matter, instruction have also been 
issued to Diesel Locomotive Works(DLW) for provision of AC cab on all newly 
manufactured locomotives, upgradation of crew lobbies is also being done on the 
requirement and availability of funds. Besides, provision of TABs to loco pilots is 
under consideration of the Ministry. While noting the above stated steps, measu res 
taken to improve the working conditions of the safety staff, the Committee desire 
that these should be implemented in letter and spirit uniformly over the entire 
network. In matters under consideration, it is desired to expedite the process to avoid 
any sort of stress on the staff and avoid even a single lapse.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This para essentially mentions working conditions of the Safety staff should be 
improved in letter and spirit uniformly over the entire network.  This is being done 
on a continuous basis. 

 
 
31 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28)  
ALL INDIA SECURITY HELPLINE  
 
The Committee note that an All India Security Helpline number 182 has been 
introduced by the Railways. First it was introduced in the year 2014 through 
Divisional Security Control Rooms (DSCR) of RPF over Northern Railway and 
subsequently extended from DSCR of other Zonal Railways. Zonal Railways have 
been advised to get the calls, received at 182 Helpline, assessed and accordingly to 
ensure provision of adequate lines at DS CR to ensure that calls do not remain in 
waiting when needed most. Further, 182 security helpline number is being publicised 
through advertisements and print media. Emphasis has also been accorded for its 
publicity during passenger interaction programmes and on special occasions like ‘RPF 
Raising Day week’, ‘upbhogta pakhwara’, through Railway stall at IITF etc. The 
Committee are of the view that 182 security helpline number need to be vigorously 
publicised on war footing to make the public aware of the same. Use of electronic as 
well as print media. Besides, pictorial advertisement in coaches and at stations be 
done at places where it catches the eyes most with a view to make passengers aware 
of this helpline number.  
 
Reply of the Government 
A Security Helpline no. 182 has been made functional through Divisional 
Security Control Rooms of RPF to provide round the clock security related assistance 
to passengers during their journey over Railways. Various measures have been 
initiated by Zonal railways for wide publicity of Security Helpline number 182 which 
include pasting of stickers at conspicuous places in coaches of trains and through 
other means of print and electronic media.  
Guidelines have been retreated and all the Zonal Railways have bee n further 
advised to ensure wide publicity of 182 Security Helpline as recommended by 
Standing Committee. 
 
 
  

 
 
32 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29)  
 
INTEGRATED SECURITY SYSTEM (ISS)  
 
The Committee learn that an Integrated Security System (ISS) is being 
implemented over 202 sensitive railway stations at an approved cost of Rs.353 crore. 
Under the system CCTV surveillance cameras have been installed at 94 stations and 
113 baggage scanners, 206 Door Frame Metal Detectors (DFMDs), 997 Hand Held 
Metal Detectors (HHMD) & 40 Block Detectors (BD) items have also been installed. 
Further, the Ministry of Women and Child Development has agreed to fund the 
project for provision of Video Surveillance System (VSS) at 983 important stations in 
the category of A1, A and B & suburban stations, out of the corpus fund available on 
the ‘ Nirbhaya Fund’ for the safety and security of women and children in station 
areas. While appreciating this cooperation from M/o Child & Welfare, the Committee 
desire that seeing the utmost significance of security and safety of passengers and 
tariff the Ministry of Railways should also probe more such possibilities and at any 
cost all categories of stations should be covered by CCTV surveillance Cameras. The 
Committee would like to be informed of the further development in the matter.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
At present 344 railway stations have been provided with CCTV cameras over 
Indian Railways (including 96 stations under Integrated Security System). A total of 
202 railway stations have been identified for installation of CCTV cameras under 
Integrated Security System (ISS). Contracts have already been awarded for 120 
stations and, as stated above, 96 stations have so far  been provided with CCTV 
cameras under ISS.   
In addition to above, 983 A1, A, B and C category stations have been further 
nominated for installation of CCTV cameras under Nirbhaya Fund at an approved cost 
of Rs.500 crore.  
Since strengthening and upgradat ion of security infrastructure is an ongoing 
process, more stations will be brought under CCTV surveillance in due course. 
  

 
 
33 
 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 30 and 31)  
 
LEGAL EMPOWERMENT OF RPF  
 
The Committee find that security in Indian Railways is provided by three 
separate forces, i.e., the RPF, GRP and District Police. The Committee also note that 
security on running trains is provided by RPF whereas the other two agencies provide 
security to railway tracks, bridges, tunnels and in station premises and circulating 
areas. The Committee are in full agreement with the Ministry that the existing three 
tier security system is not at all conducive to providing optimum safety. It is common 
knowledge that RPF does not have FIR powers which are only available with the GRP 
and District Police, yet they are entrusted with the security on trains. This presents 
a peculiar situation where passengers who are not well versed with the existing 
security system feel that the Railways are apathetic to their concerns.  
& 
In this context, the Committee note that the Ministry of Railways had moved a 
proposal for amendment in the RPF Act, 1957, to empower RPF to deal with 
passenger related offences in the passenger area, with the concurrence of Ministries 
of Law and Justice a nd Home Affairs. As advised by the Cabinet Secretariat, 
comments of States have been solicited on the above proposal. Comments have so 
far been received from 26 States and reply is awaited from 05 States. Out of 26 
States, 17 States have opposed the propos ed amendment on various grounds. 
Further, the Home Minister has emphasized for continuation of crime management 
on Railways by GRP and capacity enhancement and modernization of GRP for 
improving passenger safety and crime prevention in the Railways 
properties/passenger area etc. Hon’ble Home Minister has concluded that Min. of 
Home Affairs does not support the proposal contained in the draft Cabinet Note for 
amendment in the RPF Act, 1957. The Committee are aware that an atmosphere of 
opposition to this Bil l already exists and therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should intensify their efforts to convince the State Government to favour the Bill so 
that safety on rail travel can be seamlessly achieved.  
 
 
 

 
 
34 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A proposal for amendment i n the RPF Act to empower RPF to deal with 
passenger related offences in passenger area has been initiated by the Ministry of 
Railways. The proposal was vetted and concurred by the Ministry of Law and Justice 
and Ministry of Home Affairs. As desired by Cabinet Secretariat, comments of States 
were solicited on the above proposal. Comments have so far been received from the 
27 States. Position of comments received from States is as under- 
States in favour - Goa, Karnataka, Mizoram, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Rajasthan & Puduchery.  
No comments- Andaman & Nicobar has said that they have no comments to 
offer.  
States opposing - Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Madhya 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Uttrakhand, Meghalaya and West 
Bengal.  
Reply not received- Haryana, Jharkhand, Maharastra, Manipur  
Since the Ministry of Home Affairs has recently conv eyed their opposition to 
the proposed amendments in the RPF Act, matter is being re-examined. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
 
WOMEN PERSONNEL IN RPF  
 
The Committee laud the decision of the Ministry to increase the representation 
of women in RPF to 10 per cent of the entire force. They are of the considered view 
that such a step would surely enhance the safety for women and increase their 
confidence in train journey. At the same time, they caution the Ministry that such a 
step would be meaningless if the decision in this regard is not implemented within a 
fixed time frame. recruitment for the same is not done in a time bound manner. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that desired recruitment and training of women 
personnel in the RPF should be completed in a time bound manner.  
 
 
 

 
 
35 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per recruitment policy in RPF, 10% of total posts in direct recruitments of 
Constables and Sub-Inspectors have been reserved for women candidates. Presently, 
recruitment for the post of 2030 Constables (Female) is under process. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 34)  
 
The Committee find that the Railways are in the process of introducing a safety 
app for women passengers. Given the popularity of mobile based apps in present 
day scenario, they are of the opinion that the proposed app will go a long way in 
ensuring safety of women, if implemented in the right spirit. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend tha t this technology should be expeditiously developed and 
given wide publicity through electronic as well print media and they be kept apprised 
about the progress in this matter.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Railway is developing single App in which Security will be covered. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
36 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10)  
 
The Committee feel that had the Railways completely switched over to the 
manufacturing of LHB coaches – which do not pile up unlike the conventional coaches 
in case of an accident, the toll in the recent accident of Indore -Patna Express on 
20.11.2016 could have been much lower. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Railways to switch over to the LHB coaches replacing the conventional coaches in a 
time bound manner and in the meantime work on attaching CBC to the ICF designed 
coach. In any case the existing LHB coaches should be made available on super fast 
train routes forthwith.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Railways have decided to stop the production of ICF design coaches 
with screw coupling with immediate effect. Railways Production Units will 
manufacture only LHB design coaches w.e.f. 2018 -19, instead of previous plan of 
2019-20.  ICF design co aches for available inventory will be turned out with CBC 
couplers only.  
Progressive fitment of tight lock center Buffer Couplers (CBC) in lieu of screw 
coupling on new manufacturing of ICF design coaches has been carried out with a 
view to prevent the coaches from climbing over each other in unfortunate even of an 
accident. So far, 4873 LHB coaches, 439 Hybrid Stainless Steel Coaches & 1584 
conventional coaches have been manufactured with CBC. Design of CBC has been 
upgraded to mitigate problem of jerks during acceleration/deceleration of trains. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
37 
 
Recommendation (Para No.17) 
 
The Committee find that the fire incident at the RRI Itarsi caused immense 
damage not only to Railway property but to train operations for several months as 
well . There was a major disruption in Railway traffic, cancellation of 2404 trains and 
a 34 days disruption of services at the station (Itarsi). The Committee take a note of 
the fact that the fire could have been prevented if the electrical wiring of Relay Room 
was replaced in time as its codal life had expired. The Committee do not approve of 
such callous approach of the Railways with regard to maintenance of their electrical 
gadgets and recommend that the Ministry should take all necessary steps to check 
recurrence of such unf ortunate incidents. The Committee further hope that the 
matter has been investigated with a view to fixing responsibility for the same. They 
would like to be apprised of the final outcome of the investigations in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
  A J.P.O (Joint Procedure Order) for periodical checking electrical system has 
been issued. Its implementation is being monitored closely. 
Primary responsibility of the fire incident has been fixed on electrical 
department. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18)  
 
RAIL ACCIDENTS INVOLVING ANIMALS  
 
The Committee note that there are an increasing number of railway accidents 
involving animals especially in Northeast Frontier Railway. Out of total animal deaths 
in rail accidents, maximum deaths occur in Northeast Frontier Railway. Out of total 
14, 26, 5  deaths during 2012 -13, 2013 -14 and 2014 -15, 6, 19, and 5 deaths, 
respectively have occurred in Northeast Frontier Railway. Some instances of killing 
of Tigers, an endangered species, have also come to the notice of the Committee 
through Media Reports. The  Committee note that various steps are being taken to 
prevent animal deaths during rail operations. Further, a permanent Co -ordination 
Committee has been formed at Zonal Railway level and at Ministry Level (Ministry of 

 
 
38 
 
Railway and Ministry of 78 Environmen t and Forests) to monitor and review the 
measures taken to control incidences of elephants mortalities. Also, in North Frontier 
Railway, Construction of Passes, Construction of Ramps and Construction of Girder 
Bridge have been completed to address the prob lem of animal accidents. The 
Committee trust that the Railways will continue with their efforts to avoid animal 
deaths during rail operations.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
There have been incidences of wild animals casualties due to collision with 
running trains which is a serious issue. There have been regular interactions at 
various levels between the Ministry of Railways and the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests to resolve the matter and several measures taken. Railway is taking utmost 
care to minimize the deaths of wild animals by speeding trains on track.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
39 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1)  
 
OVERVIEW OF SAFETY IN INDIAN RAILWAYS  
 
The Committee note that the Indian Railways is entrusted with the immense 
task of providing transportation facilities to the passengers and the freight alike while 
undertaking utmost care to ensure that the operations are safe and secure. They 
further observe that adherence to safety, an ongoing and a continuous process, is a 
multi-disciplinary effort in the  Indian Railways. Each department defines its own 
safety parameters for assets installed/used and monitors/maintains the parameters 
in the safety limits which are codified manuals i.e. General and Subsidiary Rules and 
are maintained as per laid down protocol. Each department lays emphasis and keeps 
the concern of their own department a priority without realizing that the needs could 
be more significant on other sides. The Committee, however, have their reservations 
on the existing system in IR of providing safety in the backdrop of inter department 
differences or even intra–department prioritization on safety issues. They are of the 
view that safety being a non negotiable subject should be dealt with in a prompt, 
precise and diligent manner and preferably by  a separate department as inter 
disciplinary methods of dealing with this aspect at micro level only serves to reduce 
its efficiency, resulting in delayed response and compromises on safety. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the current structure of  Railway Board as 
well at the Zonal and Divisional levels should be reviewed and the safety 
infrastructure of the Indian Railways should be recast to the extent that it includes 
at least a separate or a full-fledged Department solely entrusted with providing safety 
and security across its area of jurisdiction. The Ministry with their presently ongoing 
organisational restructuring, should seriously consider appointment of a full -fledged 
Member (Safety) within the Railway Board in order to provide dedicated focus to the 
railway safety operations. This will help and ensure synchronise micro level safety 
measures into a holistic and macro level safe Railway operations. They agree with 

 
 
40 
 
the proposal of the Ministry that there will be in -house operational changes such as 
the Safety Directorate will now be involved in proactive auditing operations, instead 
of being the passive data analyst as of now. They, however, desire that this proposal 
should be finalised at the earliest so that necessary correctives can be take n up 
immediately.  
Reply of the Government 
Safety is integral to the construction, certification, operation and maintenance 
of Railway System.  Each Member is responsible for the respective part pertaining to 
the department viz: infrastructure, rolling stock, signaling and operations. 
Overall co-ordination is done by Member (Traffic), Railway Board.  Hence, the 
question of a separate Member for Safety is not pertinent. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
The Committee are aware about the contention of the Railways that the onus 
of safe movement over UMLCs is on the road users. However, given the magnitude 
of casualties at UMLCs, Railways will have to fulfill  their role as a facilitator for safe 
train operations and therefore there is need for expeditious corrective steps in this 
direction. The Committee are also aware that the Ministry is taking various steps to 
prevent accidents at UMLCs like provision of ba sic infrastructure on all UMLCs, 
organising social awareness campaigns to educate road users with the use of various 
print and electronic media, provision of second whistle Board (Repeater) for level 
crossings for loco drives to whistle while approaching l evel crossing to warn road 
users and deployment of Gate Mitras on experimental basis at vulnerable level 
crossings. However in spite of these measures, the Committee note that out of total 
107 accidents, 29 (around 28 per cent) occurred at UMLCs. Besides, out of 122 
casualties, 58 (around 48 per cent) were at UMLCs. The Committee find that while a 
third of the total accidents occurred at UMLCs, yet the casualties are 
disproportionately high, accounting for around 50% of the total casualties. The 
Committee desire that certain concrete steps such as Approaching Train Warning 
System, Train Actuated Warning System for giving audio-visual warning to road users 

 
 
41 
 
about an approaching train and additional road speed breakers before the level 
crossing gates to reduce the speed of approaching traffic should be used to reduce 
accidents at UMLC. This needs to be provided at all manned and unmanned level 
crossing. In view of the foregoing, the Committee strongly urge the Ministry to create 
awareness among people and take u p the preventive steps on extensive scale 
proactively on mission mode for progressive elimination of the UMLCs. The 
Committee have come across various instances of faulty designs of RUBs, which do 
not have adequate drainage facilities leading to sever wate r logging in Monsoon 
Season rendering them not only unusable but unsafe as well. Besides, there have 
been problem of poor lighting arrangements in some RUBs, which are susceptible to 
anti social criminal activities besides being accident prone. The Committ ee are not 
convinced with the contention of the Ministry that the drainage, lighting and 
maintenance aspect of RUBs is the responsibility of State Governments or the local 
bodies. They feel that there are some lacunae in the basic design of these RUBs, 
which is the responsibility of the Railways. The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Railways to look into the designing concept of the RUBS, so that such problems do 
not occur in future. They will also like the Railways to conduct a survey of all the 
existing RUBs and remove the deficiencies including their design, if any, so that the 
users do not face any inconvenience.  
Reply of the Government:  
Radio based Unmanned Level Crossing Warning  System - RDSO in 
association with IIT/Kanpur has developed a Radio based  advance warning system 
to pre-warn road users against approaching trains at unmanned L C Gates. Field trial 
of the equipment has been conducted at L C Gate No.29C  (manned) between Sonik 
and Unnao stations in Lucknow- Kanpur section on Northern Railway. 
Further trials at unmanned L C Gates (8 -10 locations)  spread over different 
zones is required to be conducted to check the efficacy of the system and its 
ruggedness particularly against theft /vandalism. 
Satellite Communication based Warning system at Unmanned Level 
Crossing Gates - Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) has taken up a project 
based on Satellite Communication based system to warn road users about 
approaching trains at Unmanned L C Gates. Train driver is also warned about the 

 
 
42 
 
approaching Unmanned LC Gate and Loco hooter starts sounding automatically. The 
proto type is under development. 
Railway intends to eliminate all unmanned level crossings on Broad Gauge in 
next 3-4 years.  In the last two years (2014 -16) and the current year (upto  Nov, 
2016), 3144 unmanned level crossings have been eliminated (1191 by manning and 
1953 by Closure/Merger/Subway). 
It is true that adequate drainage arrangement should be carried out before 
constructing RUBs. As per Railway Board letter dated 18.04.2012 it is the responsibility of 
the State Governments to maintain drainage arrangement for RUBs. Zonal Railways have 
been advised to design and construct RUB only, if proper drainage arrangements can be 
made as per site conditions. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7)  
ACCIDENTS DUE TO DERAILMENT  
 
The Committee observe that during 2003-04 to 2015-16, second highest reason 
for consequential accidents and casualties was derailment. Out of total 239 rail 
accidents occurred during 2003-04, 202 accidents (around 85 percent) were due to 
derailment. During 2015-16, out of total 78 rail accidents, 65 accidents (around 84 
percent) were due to derailment. The situation does not seem to have improved 
during 2016-17, where already one devastating major incident of the derailment of 
Indore-Patna Express with casu alties running into 149 deaths and injuries to more 
than 180 people has already occurred. As submitted one of the reasons for 
derailment is defect in the track or rolling stock. The Committee gather and is also 
explicitly stated in Safety Performance (2015 -16) document of the Ministry of 
Railways that track forms the backbone of the rail transportation system and 
therefore needs to be maintained in a safe and fit condition. However, in the instant 
case there seems to be total failure in regard to maintaining the safety standards of 
their tracks. Ideally, out of the total track length of 1,14,907 kms, 4500 kms should 
be renewed annually, however, out of 5000 kms of track length due for renewal as 
currently, only 2700 kms of track length were targeted to be re newed. It is evident 

 
 
43 
 
that the targets kept for track renewals are not commensurate with the actual 
requirement on ground. Taking into account that Ministry of Railways accord highest 
priority to safety, the Committee believe that the physical as well as financial targets 
in respect of track renewals need to be enhanced as per the annual requirement for 
track renewals.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Track renewal is an ongoing process which is undertaken as and when a stretch 
of track becomes due for renewal on age-cum-condition basis. Track Renewal works 
are planned in advance every year and their execution is prioritized according to the 
condition of track and overall availability of funds ensuring all the time that track is 
in a sound condition for safe running of trains.  
As on 31.03.2016, track renewal covering 5900 km of track have been 
sanctioned. Initially 1500 km was targeted for the year 2016 -17 against original 
Budget Outlay of Rs. 4000 Cr. Budget outlay in year 2016 -17 has been enhanced 
from Rs. 4000 Cr to Rs. 6735.74 Cr in Revised Estimates (RE) to speed up the track 
renewal works in the country. Accordingly, physical targets have also been increased 
from 1500 km to 2668 km. The physical targets are fixed as per financial outlay. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11)  
ACCIDENTS DUE TO FAILURE OF RAILWAY STAFF  
 
 It is a matter of grave concern that more than half of the accidents is on 
account of the lapses on the part of the railway staff. Out of 69 , 71, 85 and 78 rail 
accidents during 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16, respectively, 46, 51, 60 
and 54 accid ents, respectively were on account of the failure on the part of the 
railway staff. The faults of railway staff in such cases include carelessness working, 
poor maintenance cases, adoption of short-cuts, non-observance of laid down safety 
rules and procedures. The most serious form of accidents involved in such cases is 
collision and Signal passing at Danger (SPAD) for which particularly loco -pilots are 
responsible. As submitted, with traffic going up, there has been substantial increase 
in number of signal s because of various intermediate block stations, huts, various 

 
 
44 
 
gate signals, loco pilot encounters a signal almost every km. of his run and almost 
every minute he has to see a signal and accordingly control the train. What is more 
alarming is that at pres ent there is no technological support available to the loco -
pilots and he has to depend only vigilant watch on the signal and control the train 
accordingly. Looking at the huge number of rail accidents due to lapse of the railway 
staff, the Committee derive that the Ministry have failed to assess the root cause of 
continuous and possibly repeated lapses by railway staff and therefore have failed 
completely to curb such accidents. They, therefore, urge the Ministry to deliberate 
on the issue with various Railway Associations and railway staff, to check the faults 
of the railway staff and take the required corrective measures.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Each and every accident is analysed in detail and Safety Meetings are regularly 
conducted at all levels in which corrective measures required or lapses brought out 
are duly addressed.   Safety Counsellers personally counsel staff on line, informing 
them of latest instructions and Safety bulletins.    
Recognized Railway Unions are also encouraged to hold periodical 
Conferences/Seminars of Safety category staff of different departments to highlight 
and discuss the measures required for improving safety in train operations.  The 
Railway administration grants special casual leave and passes for such Conferences 
to facilitate staff to take part in the deliberations. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15)  
VACANCY POSITION OF SAFETY CATEGORY POSTS  
 
The Committee are concerned to note that at present 16464 posts of loco pilots 
are vacant. Further, as on 01.04.2016, out of total staff strength of 7,46,676  posts 
(provisional), for safety category, there are 1,22,736 vacancies. The Committee are 
extremely concerned that the Railways are functioning with the vacancy position of 
around 16% and take a serious view in this matter. Needless to say the role of safety 
category staff is crucial in running of trains especially in the present scenario where 
there is more threat perception and lack of staff directly affect their performance and 

 
 
45 
 
consequently jeopardise safety of rail passengers and property. The Committe e are 
not convinced by the statement of the Ministry that recruitment is a continuous 
process. They feel that there is definite callousness towards the need to fill up these 
vacancies promptly. They desire that the hitherto faulty recruitment process and 
planning regarding the filling up of vacancies in security (GRP and RPF) should be 
rectified by taking up all corrective measures. They should ensure that all the safety 
category posts are filled up promptly on regular basis. Further, more safety category 
posts for maintenance of new assets should be promptly created and the persons be 
deployed forthwith.  
Reply of the Government 
This Para has three parts:- 
1. High number of Safety category vacancies (1,22,763 as on 01.04.2016). 
2. Faulty recruitment process and planning regarding the filling up of vacancies 
in security (GRP and RPF) should be rectified. 
3. Creation of more Safety category posts for maintenance of new assets. 
 
 
Itemwise remarks are as follows: 
1.   Vacancies for Group ‘C’ DR quota posts are assessed by the General Managers 
of Railways/PUs and accordingly indents are placed by them on RRB(s) concerned. 
The function of RRB is to recommend names (against the indents placed by Zonal 
Railways/PUs) of suitable candidates to the CPO of the concerned  Zonal 
Railways/PUs. Further processing of appointment for provisionally RRB empanelled 
candidates is made by the Railway concerned. 
Further, No direct recruitment is made for the post of loco pilots through RRBs. 
In this Cadre, the element of Direct Recru itment is at the stage of Assistant Loco 
Pilots (ALPs). All out efforts are being made to fill up Group ‘C’ vacancies on Indian 
Railways through RRBs. RRBs are providing panels for safety categories including 
ALP to indenting Zonal Railway(s)/PUs regularly . Position of candidates empanelled 
through RRBs for the said categories during last 5 years alongwith current year is as 
under- 
S. 
N. Year 
Candidates 
Empanelled 
Percentage Candidates 
Empanelled 
for ALP under 
Safety 
Category 
Percentag
e of ALP 
Total 
Only for 
Safety 
Category 

 
 
46 
 
*Provisional                         
# Under Compilation 
  
The position of filling up vacancies in Safety categories in the last four years 
is shown below:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Further, as regards loco pilots specifically the figures are as under:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It can be seen from the above two tables that the number of Safety category 
posts including loco pilots have increased over the last four years.  There has also 
been net increase in the on roll strength also due to induction by way of direct 
recruitment. 
1. 2011-12 23292 18224 78% 9389 52% 
2. 2012-13 28467 23593 83% 14568 62% 
3. 2013-14 31805 23168 73% 8959 39% 
4. 2014-15 15191 8134 53% 1737 21% 
5. 2015-16 27995 22965 82% 13825 60% 
6. 2016-17 
(upto 
30.11.2016* 
15188 13824  #  
TOTAL 141938 109908 77% 
As on Sanctioned 
Strength 
On Roll 
Strength 
Vacancy 
01.04.2013 7,15,579 5,73,268 1,42,311 
01.04.2014 7,27,582 5,98,430 1,29,152 
01.04.2015 7,37,273 6,13,072 1,24,201 
01.04.2016 7,46,676 6,23,913 1,22,763 
As on Sanctioned 
Strength 
On Roll 
Strength 
 
Vacancy 
01.04.2013 83610 65381 18229 
01.04.2014 88568 71448 17120 
01.04.2015 93181 76717 16464 
01.04.2016 95931 77298 18633 

 
 
47 
 
2. Arising and filling up of vacancies is an ongoing process. As and when vacancies 
in RPF/RPSF arise, necess ary measures are being taken to initiate recruitment 
process for filling up the vacancies. In recent past, recruitment of 16388 Constables 
has been completed and selected candidates have been inducted into field units of 
RPF/RPSF after completion of initial training.  Further process has been initiated for 
recruitment for 2030 women Constables, 4220 Constables (Male) and 160 Sub 
Inspectors.  
So far as filling up of vacancies in Government Railway Police (GRP) is 
concerned, GRP is a wing of State Police and GRP personnel are State Govt. 
employees. As such, issues concerning recruitment, training and filling up of 
vacancies in GRP falls within the domain of concerned States Government.  
3. General Managers are having powers to create posts in Safety category a s may 
be required by matching surrender/utilizing vacancy bank.   Posts for the running 
staff can be created depending on the crew links and loading.  It does not require 
any matching surrender/vacancy bank. 
 Powers have now been further delegated to DRMs to create posts for new 
assets in Safety category on 1:1 basis by utilizing vacancies in any department which 
are not required to be filled. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 20 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32)  
 
VACANCIES IN RAILWAY PROTECTION FORCE (RPF)  
 
The Committee find to their dismay that the vacancy position in respect of RPF 
is quite alarming. Out of the sanctioned strength of 76000, the actual strength is 
about 69000. The vacancies in RPF itself is therefore to the tune of 7000 posts. The 
large number of posts of RPF lying vacant, have certainly mounted undue burden on 
the existing workforce and compromise security in railways. Furthermore, at times it 
has been noticed that the RPF personal on alternative duties putting further burden 
on them in their performance. The Committee urge the Ministry to fill up the vacant 
post of RPF urgently on priority basis to give a boost to the security in Railways and 
also ensure that the RPF personal are not utilised on some other alternative duties. 

 
 
48 
 
The Ministry s hould not hesitate in engaging officers from other security 
forces/organisations on deputation basis as a temporary measure till the requisite 
RPF strength is made available to them. With a view to expedite the recruitment 
process, the possibility for sele ction of candidates through the examinations 
conducted by UPSC/SSC could also be explored.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Arising and filling up of vacancies is an ongoing process. As and when vacancies 
in RPF/RPSF arise, necessary measures are being taken to initiate recruitment 
process for filling up the vacancies. In recent past, recruitment of 16388 Constables 
has been su ccessfully completed and selected candidates have been inducted into 
field units of RPF/RPSF after completion of initial training.  Further process has been 
initiated for recruitment for 2030 women Constables, 4220 Constables (Male) and 
160 Sub Inspectors.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 23 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
49 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3)  
PERFORMANCE OF THE CORPORATE SAFETY PLAN (2003-13) 
  
The Committee note that pursuant to the announcement made by the Hon'ble 
Minister for Railways in Budget 2015 -16, for framing of a new five year Corporate 
Safety Plan for Indian Railways, the Railways have initiated the preparation of draf t 
Corporate Safety Plan. The Committee also note that the targets set in the Corporate 
Safety Plan for 2003 -2013, relating to reduction in derailment and accidents at 
unmanned level crossings have been achieved. By the end of the Corporate Safety 
Plan in 2012-13, accidents per million train kilometres were reduced to 0.11 accidents 
per million train kilometres from 0.17 accidents per million train kilometres in 2002 -
03. Endorsing the statement made by the Railways that unless the operations are 
safe, there are no operations, the Committee strongly desire that a Corporate Safety 
Plan should be finalised and rolled out at the earliest thereby according the highest 
priority to Railways’ safety operations.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Draft Corporate Safety Plan has been prepared and is yet to be approved. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
WEATHER CONDITIONS  
 
The Committee note that weather conditions especially fog prove to be a 
challenge for operation of train services during winter. In order to combat the foggy 
weather, the Railways have implemented 1017 fog safe device in Northern Railway, 
240 in North Eastern Railway and 124 in North Western Railway, on trial basis. There 
are plans to further proliferate fog safe device, on ECR, NR, NCR, NER. As apprised, 
a proposal for further proliferation is under consideration of the Railway Board. The 

 
 
50 
 
Committee have also been informed that in advanced Railway System, technology of 
ATP system (Cab Signaling System) is used for High Speed Trains. But to their dismay 
the specific studies regarding combating the fog problem in other countries have not 
been undertaken on Ind ian Railways. The Committee recommended that the 
Railways should take up specific studies with regard to the technologies available in 
other countries to combat the fog problem without any further delay and implement 
such technologies in Indian Railways without further loss of time.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Proposal shall be initiated. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21)  
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF KAKODKAR 
COMMITTEE  
 
The Committee note that the Kakodkar  Committee was constituted to review 
safety of railways system and had submitted its report on 17.02.2012. The report 
has 106 recommendations in total. Out of these, 68 recommendations have been 
fully accepted and are stated to be under various stages of i mplementation, 19 
recommendations were partially acceptable and 19 recommendations were non -
acceptable to the Ministry of Railways. The Report laid down a series of 
comprehensive and far reaching recommendations calling for a concerted effort to 
improve th roughput and efficiency on the system, besides enhancing safety. It 
envisaged a method of investment and structural change to transform the Indian 
Railways to a more vibrant organization with commercial success and high levels of 
safety. It has projected an investment requirement of Rs. One Lakh Crore on safety 
over a period of five years and has recommended to generate a non -fungible 
nonlapsable safety fund in this regard. However, the Committee find to their utter 
dismay that the said recommendation has b een partially accepted. As stated, the 
mode for generating this fund, however requires further examination and the 
accepted recommendations are being implemented through regular budget. The 
Committee are concerned about the manner in which the Railways choose to ignore 
the recommendations of the various Committees which were constituted specifically 

 
 
51 
 
for a purpose using valuable money of the exchequer and the expertise of the 
Committees become infructuous when their suggestions/recommendations are not 
implemented or delayed for implementation. In case, the recommendations of Expert 
Groups are not implemented with a sincere approach, the Committee find no 
justification in constituting such Committees. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Minis try should prescribe a time -bound implementation of the 
recommendations of the Expert Committees at least those recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government. The progress made in this regard should be 
closely and scientifically monitored regularly, at the highest level in the Ministry. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Railways in this 
regard.  
Reply of the Government 
High Level Safety Review Committee (Kakodkar Committee): 27 
recommendations of the Committee h ave been implemented. Steps are underway 
for implementation of the remaining accepted recommendations. However, few 
recommendations involve change/introduction of new technology requiring trials etc. 
Implementation of such recommendations would be done in phased manner and may 
take around five years or so for complete and satisfactory implementation. 
Recommendation (Para No. 23)  
The Committee are well aware that the Railways have in recent years been 
reeling under a massive resource crunch due to severe underinvestment. This has 
permeated all aspects of rail infrastructure including safety. Prudence demands that 
in such a scenario there should be a careful and sagacious prioritization of works in 
terms of expenditure. However, expenditure on safety cannot be compromised with 
at any time and should always be kept on a high priority. The Committee however 
find that surprisingly the p ercentage of expenditure on safety from the total OWE 
has remained rather static, and is around 20%. The Committee wish to remind the 
Ministry that a rail accident does not merely involve damage to rail infrastructure 
alone. There is a huge cost to society as well, society pays dearly through lost lives, 
lost livelihood, loss of productivity, disability, medical expenses, disruption of traffic, 
loss of the wagons etc. However the highest cost is the loss of passenger confidence 
which may translate into loss  of revenue in future for the railways. The Committee 
are of the firm view that taking the issue of safety and investments on safety lightly 

 
 
52 
 
may cost the railways very dearly in terms of share in transportation of passenger 
and freight and thereby decrease in Revenues. They, therefore, recommend that not 
only the Ministry should optimally utilise the available funds for safety issues but take 
up the matter of higher allocations for safety at the highest level in the Ministry of 
Finance. They also emphasise that a portion of the railway funds should be utilised 
for R&D in safety related technology so that newer methods/equipments/technology 
is available to avert the accident.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Setting up of ‘Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh’ (RRSK) having a corpus of Rs.1.19 
lakh crore, with support from Government of India of Rs.1.12 lakh crore, has been 
taken up with Ministry of Finance.  Recently the issue has also been raised by Hon’ble 
Minster of Railways with Hon’ble Minister of Finance through a letter on 25.11.2016.  
The matter of additional support for Safety works has also been included in Ministry 
of Railways’ Revised/Budget Estimates proposals made to Ministry of Finance. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24)  
NEED FOR NON-LAPSABLE SAFETY FUND  
 
The Committee learn that a committee comprising of concerned Executive 
Directors of Railway Board has been formed for putting up the consolidated proposal 
for creation of a ‘Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) amounting to Rs. 1,10,237 
crore. As reported, the report of the said committee containing consolidated proposal 
is expected soon. Considering the huge requirement of funds for safety issues in 
Railways, the Committee support the need for creation of the RRSK and desire the 
Ministry to expedite the matter and inform them with the progress about the same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Setting up of ‘Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh’ (RRSK) having a corpus of Rs.1.19 
lakh crore, with support from Government of India of Rs.1.12 lakh crore, has been 
taken up with Ministry of Finance.  Recently the issue has also been raised by Hon’ble 
Minster of Railways with Hon’ble Minister of Finance through a letter on 25.11.2016.  
The matter of additional support for Safety works has also been included in Ministry 
of Railways’ Revised/Budget Estimates proposals made to Ministry of Finance. 

 
 
53 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26)  
As apprised, though the nature of safety works has not been defined in the 
proposed amendment, the Ministry of Railways, after the passing of the Budget for 
2016-17, would request Ministry of Finance to include within the scope of safety 
works, also works of replacements and renewals which has clear safety implications 
and which are sanctioned under DRF viz. track renewals, bridge renewals and 
signalling works, plan-heads having cent per cent safety implications. The Committee 
share the concern of the Ministry in the proposed amendment in the CRF Act and 
desire the Ministry to vigorously take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance in 
the right earnest and keep the Committee informed of the progress in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways has recommended to Ministry of Finance that the term 
‘railway safety works’ as per the amended Central Road Fund Act may include within 
its scope works/projects under the Works Demand No.16 of Railways of planheads 
31-Track Renewal works, 32-Bridge works and 33-Signalling works.  These planheads 
are very critical to railway safety and can be justifiably funded under Railway Safety 
Fund as per the enhanced scope of CRF Act. This Ministry’s OM dated 17.5.2016 has 
been followed up with reminder dated 25.5.2016. 
Recently another OM dated 23.12.2016 has been sent to MOF on the subject 
of provision of additional GBS funds towards safety related works.  Ministry of Finance 
is being regularly pursued in the matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                      Sudip Bandyopadhyay              
26 July, 2017                                                                                          Chairperson, 
4 Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Railways 

 
 
54 
 


 
 
55 
 
 


 
 
56 
 
 


 
 
57 
 
 


 
 
58 
 
 


 
 
59 
 
 
  


 
 
60 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON RAILWAYS (2016-17) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 31 st May, 2017, from 11 00 hours to 1 323 
hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
      
PRESENT 
Shri Ganesh Singh  -  In the Chair  
   
MEMBERS 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
3. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary 
4. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav 
5. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
6. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
9. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy 
10. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu 
11. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shanker 
12. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
13. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
14. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
15. Shri T. Rathinavel 
16. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
17. Shri Alok Tiwari 
        
 
         SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arun Kumar Kaushik  - Director 
2. Smt. Geeta Parmar   - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
61 
 
 
 
*REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
1.  Shri A.K. Mital  Chairman, Railway Board & Ex. –Officio 
Principal Secretary to the Government of India. 
 
2.  Shri B.N. Mohapatra  Financial Commissioner (Railways) & Ex. –
Officio Secretary to the Government of India. 
 
3.  Shri Aditya Kumar Mittal  Member Engineering, Railway Board & Ex. –
Officio Secretary to the Government of India. 
 
4.  Shri Mohd. Jamshed  Member-Traffic, Railway Board & Ex -officio 
Secretary to the Government of India.  
 
5.  Shri Ghanshyam Singh  Member Traction, Railway Board & Ex -officio 
Secretary to the Government of India. 
 
 
*Present during briefing by the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
 
2. In the absence of Chairperson, the Committee chose Shri Ganesh Singh  to act as 
Chairperson for the sitting under the provision of Rule 258(3) of ‘Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha’ which inter alia states as under:- 
“258(3)  If the Chairperson is absent from any sitting, the Committee shall 
choose another member to act as Chairperson for that sitting.” 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports  
(i) XXX XXX  XXX 
(ii) Action Taken Report on the recommendations of the Standing Committee on 
Railways contained in their 12th Report on ‘Safety and Security.’ 
 
The Draft Report at serial number (i) XXX XXX XXX and report at (ii)  without any 
modifications.  
 
4. The Committee appreciated the excellent work done by the Committee Secretariat 
in drafting the Reports.  The Committee, then, authorized Shri Ganesh Singh, MP to finalise 
the above-mentioned Reports. 
                                 
5. XXX  XXX  XXX 

 
 
62 
 
 
6. XXX  XXX  XXX 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned.   
-------- 
 
 
 
 
XXX: Not related to the report. 
  

 
 
63 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 12TH REPORT          
(16TH LOK SABHA) ON  THE SUBJECT "SAFETY AND SECURITY IN RAILWAYS"  
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 34 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the  Government –  
 
Para Nos.  2,4,5,8,9,12,13,14,16,20,22,25,27,28,29,30,31,33 
and 34  
 
 
 
19 
 Percentage of total   
 
55.88% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
 
Para Nos.  10,17 and 18 
 
 
 
3 
 Percentage of total   
 
8.82% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration –  
 
Para Nos.  1,6,7,11,15 and 32  
 
 
 
 
6 
 Percentage of total   
 
17.64% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited -      
 
Para Nos. 3,19,21,23,24 and 26     
 
 
 
6 
 Percentage of total 
 
17.64% 
 
 
        
 
 
 