STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RAILWA YS
(2017-2018)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RAILWA YS
(RAILWA Y BOARD)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 16th
Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Outstanding Dues for Indian Railways’]
TWENTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka)
20

TWENTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILW A YS
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 16th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Outstanding Dues for Indian Railways’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.08.2018
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka)

SCR No. 217
Price : Rs. 34.00
© 2018 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
PART I
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ......................................... 6
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ....................................................... 14
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ...... 15
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 16
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Railways held on 02.08.2018 .......................................... 18
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
16th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Outstanding dues
for Indian Railways’ ........................................................ 20

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWA YS
(2017-2018)@
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
3. Shri Sudheer Gupta
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
5. Dr. Ramshankar Katheria
6. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
7. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
8. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
9. Shri P.K. Kunhalikutty
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
11. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
12. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
13. Sadhvi Savitri Bai Phule
14. Shri S.R. Vijaya Kumar
15. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
16. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
17. Shri Rajeev Satav
18. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
19. Shri Ganesh Singh
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
21. Vacant **
(iii)
@ Constituted w.e.f. 01.09.2017 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 5837 dated 26.09.2017.
** Shri Mekapati Rajamohan Reddy resigned w.e.f. 20.06.2018 vide Bulleting Part II
No. 6904 dated 21.06.2018.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.K. Antony
23. Shri Shwait Malik
24. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
25. Shri Mukut Mithi
26. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
27. Shri T. Rathinavel
28. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh*
29. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya
30. Shri Motilal Vora
31. Ms. Saroj Pandey
#
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri R.L. Yadav — Deputy Secretary
4. Dr. Mohit Rajan — Under Secretary
* Shri Bashistha Narain Singh retired w.e.f. 02.04.2018 vide Committee Branch-I note dated
16.01.2018 and nominated w.e.f. 02.06.2018 vide Bulletin Part II No. 6894 dated 07.06.2018.
# Ms. Saroj Pandey was nominated w.e.f. 02.06.2018 vide Bulletin Part II no. 6894 dated
07.06.2018 in place of Shri Darshan Singh Yadav who retired w.e.f. 02.04.2018 vide
Committee Branch-I note dated 16.01.2018.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Railways deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Sixteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on “Outstanding
Dues for Indian Railways”.
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid
in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2017 and 09.08.2017 respectively. It contained 13
Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations have been r eceived and categorised as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
Total : 9
Chapter - II
(ii) R ecommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Para No. NIL
Total : NIL
Chapter - III
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Para No. 7
Total : 01
Chapter - IV

2
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies are still awaited:
Para Nos. 4, 6 and 13
Total : 03
Chapter - V
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
the implementation of the Recommendations accepted by the
Government. The Committee desire that final action taken notes to the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I and
Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished to them not later than
three months of the presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations.
A. Total Station Outstandings
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
6. In their 16th Report, the Committee had recommended as
under:—
“The Committee are unhappy to note that out of the total station
outstandings of H. 1764.09 crore at the end of May, 2017, around
H. 783.71 crore i.e. 44.42% owe to various State Electricity Board
(SEBs)/Power Houses (PHs). Further, out of H. 783.71 crore, the
major outstanding dues of H. 446.96 crore are against Punjab State
Electricity Board (PSEB), H. 45.33 crore against Rajasthan State
Electricity Board (RSEB), H. 114.28 crore against Delhi Vidyut Board
(DVB), H. 46.37 crore against Maharashtra State Electricity Board
(MSEB), H. 38.76 crore against West Bengal State Electricity Board
and H. 60.54 crore against Uttar Pradesh State Electricity Board.
Further, the outstanding dues against SEBs/PHs have slightly
decreased to H. 783.71 crore in May, 2017 from H. 869.36 crore in
May, 2016. In view of the foregoing, the Committee feel that there
is an urgent need to initiate concrete steps by the Ministry of
Railways against those SEBs/PHs having major share of outstanding
dues for recovery of the same at the highest level so as to recover
these outstanding dues. This will help in deploying the vital
resources in some productive areas in Railways.”

3
7. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:—
“To reduce the outstanding dues to a minimum level, Zonal
Railways have been advised to hold regular meetings with the
Power Houses against which there are heavy arrears in order to
persuade them to make payments of both current as well as old
outstanding dues.
In order to further strengthen the monitoring of outstanding dues
of Power Houses a system of age wise monitoring of dues is being
introduced. The format is as follows”:
Format for Monitoring of Outstanding dues of
Power Houses/State Electricity Boards
S.No. Name of Amount of If under Date of Date of next
PH/SEB Outstanding litigation, the meetings held meeting
to end of next date of in past with fixed with
July 2017 hearing PH/SEB PH/SEB
(in cr. of Rs.)
More than Less than
One Year Old One Year Old
8. The Committee had raised their concerns regarding recovering
of outstanding dues from various State Electricity Boards/Power Houses
and had urged the Ministry to take concrete steps at the highest level.
In this regard, the Committee take note of the efforts made by the
Ministry in terms of holding regular meetings with Power Houses and
introducing a system of monitoring. The Committee expected that
besides persuasion, the level of persuasion could also be raised.
Therefore, while reiterating their earlier recommendation, they would
like to emphasize on the Ministry to pursue the matter of recovery of
outstanding dues with the Electricity Boards more vigorously.
B. Issue of Empanelled Lawyers with Railways
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
9. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are not impressed to learn that Railways appoint
the advocates on their panels, only after interaction held by Legal

4
Adviser, Railways and recommendations of General Manager (GMs)
of the concerned Zonal Railways. They have been informed that
in respect of lower courts, the GMs of the concerned Zonal Railways
are the competent authority for empanelment of advocates, falling
within their jurisdiction. Railways empanel the advocates for a
period of 3 years and are being granted extension on the
recommendation from Zonal Railways. According to the Ministry,
a total of 414 Advocates are in the panel of Railway Advocates (for
all High Courts and CATs), for more than 5 years. The Committee
find it disturbing to note that the court cases with respect to
outstanding dues such as PSEB is pending since 2002, and has not
yet reached to a conclusive end. It reflects poorly on the presentation
of the case(s) by the advocates in the panel of Railways. The
Committee are of the considered opinion that the role of advocates
is very important in proceedings/decision/final outcome in any court
case and hence it is absolutely necessary that in future Ministry
of Railways should appoint experienced advocates of repute on
their panels so that their cases pending in various courts can be
contested forcefully, presented properly and decided in certain time-
frame. They equally emphasise on the need to relook on the
procedure for appointment of the advocates on the Railway panels
with grant of extension only in rarest of the rare cases.”
10. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
submitted as under:—
“The panel of Railway advocates is formed as per procedure laid
down in Legal Dte. letter no 84/LC/14/N/1 dated 05.11.1985 and
27.07.2015. The advocates are selected on the basis of
recommendation of Zonal Railways and after holding personal talks
with them. The names of the selected panels are duly approved
by Hon’ble Minister for Railways and Minister for Law and Justice.
As such it is felt that presently there is no need to review the
existing procedure.”
11. In their Report, the Committee had recommended the
Railways to appoint experienced advocates of repute on their panel to
contest the cases of Railways forcefully and presented properly in order
to get them settled in a fixed time frame. The pendency of the cases
to the extent of more than 15 years had led the Committee to believe
that there was something lacking in the competency of the advocates
pursuing these cases. Therefore, with a view to improve the method
of empanelment of advocates in order to bring them the cases to a
conclusive end, the Committee had desired to review the system. In
their action taken replies, the Ministry have stated that the advocates

5
are selected on the basis of recommendation of Zonal Railways and
after holding personal talks with them and finally approved by Hon’ble
Minister for Railways and Ministry of Law and Justice. As such there
is no need to review the existing procedure. The Committee are
apprehensive about the due selection process at the time of
recommendation at Zonal level itself as the results in pendency of
cases for more than 15 years reflect the quality of advocates empanelled
with Railways. Furthermore, the grant of extension of the term of these
empanelled advocates beyond 3 years by Zonal Railways becoming a
matter of routine rather than exception also raises serious questions
which needs review of this system atleast at Zonal level from where
the recommendations are coming forward. Therefore, the Committee
strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry
to take the recommendations of the Committee in right spirit and review
the system of empanelment of the advocates with a view to plug the
loopholes in the system.

6
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
General
The Committee were apprised that earnings of Railways are
accounted for, monthly on accrual basis. Some of these earnings are,
however realized in subsequent months and the unrealised earnings are
monitored through Railways Traffic Account Suspense comprising Station
Outstanding, Cash-in-Transit, Accounts Office Balance Sheet,
Miscellaneous and Demands Recoverable. It is a matter of consolation
that the outstanding dues of Indian Railways have shown a declining
trend in July, 2016 as compared to July, 2015. The outstanding dues which
were Rs. 3404.03 crore in July, 2015 have slightly came down to Rs. 3082.47
crore in July, 2016 but marginally increased to Rs. 3117.19 crore in May,
2017. The Committee have been apprised that Zonal Railways have been
informing the Ministry, every month, regarding the outstanding dues of
traffic Suspense to Railway Board’s office, for compilation and the Zonal
Railways, whose position reflect deterioration, are then instructed by the
Board regularly, to take all required steps to minimize the outstanding
dues. The Committee were also apprised that the Financial Commissioner
has written to Financial Advisor and Chi ef Accounts Officer (FA&CAOs)
of Zonal Railways over the position of the outstanding dues, to the end
of Oct. 2016 and also advising Zonal Railways whose position has
deteriorated. While noting the steps taken by the Railways, for recovery
of outstanding dues, the Committee feel that it will be prudent for the
Ministry to pay special attention to avoid accumulation of the outstanding
dues and take all corrective measures proactively and urgently at an
appropriate level promptly so that the total outstandings can be brought
to the bare minimum progressively.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways have taken note of the Directions of the
Committee and all possible measures will be taken to ensure that fresh
accumulation of outstandings are reduced and old outstanding realized.

7
The concerns of the Committee have also been conveyed to field
offices, vide Board letter dated 21.9.2017 addressed to GMs of Zonal
railways. These seek a concrete action plan so that there is progressive
clearance in outstanding dues.
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee observe that the Railways had kept very meagre
yearly targets of around Rs. 100 crore or less and at times only Rs. 50
crore for last 10 years, that is, since the year 2005-06 till the year
2015-16, for clearance of their outstanding dues. It is more disquieting
to note that even these targets remained unachieved over all these years
except in the years 2006-07 and 2015-16. For the year 2016-17, the
outstandings have again risen to Rs. 1673.62 crore as compared to
outstandings of Rs. 1666.89 crore in the year 2015-16. The shortfall in
achievement of targets is attributed to reasons like un-anticipated events
of disputes by parties, closure of siding, Court cases etc. The Committee
do not consider these reasons adduced by the Ministry as unexpected,
particularly when the matter is connected with the recovery of dues. The
Committee expect that the Ministry would make utmost efforts to realise
the targets fixed for the year 2017-18 and in subsequent years, for recovery
of their outstanding dues more so considering the fact that it a matter
of a huge sum of Rs. 3000 crore and odd. The Committee further urge
the Ministry to keep the targets for recovery of outstanding dues more
realistic vis-à-vis the total outstandings and fix them on slightly higher
side. They should strive hard to achieve the yearly targets. The Committee
urge the Ministry to direct the officers/staff about the utmost importance
of reducing the outstandings at stations to the minimum. The Station
Master should, therefore, personally involve himself/herself in periodically
scrutinizing the outstandings at his/her Station with a view to arranging
for expeditious clearance.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways have taken note of the Directions of the
Committee and all possible measures will be taken to ensure that fresh
accumulation of outstandings are reduced and old outstanding realized.
The concerns of the Committee have also been conveyed to field
offices, vide Board letter dated 21.09.2017 addressed to GMs of Zonal
railways. These seek a concrete action plan so that there is progressive
clearance in outstanding dues.

8
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee are unhappy to note that out of the total station
outstandings of Rs. 1764.09 crore at the end of May, 2017, around
Rs. 783.71 crore i.e. 44.42% owe to various State Electricity Board (SEBs)/
Power Houses (PHs). Further, out of Rs. 783.71 crore, the major
outstanding dues of Rs. 446.96 crore are against Punjab State Electricity
Board (PSEB), Rs. 45.33 crore against Rajasthan State Electricity Board
(RSEB), Rs. 114.28 crore against Delhi Vidyut Board (DVB), Rs. 46.37
crore against Maharashtra State Electricity Board (MSEB), Rs. 38.76 crore
against West Bengal State Electricity Board and Rs. 60.54 crore against
Uttar Pradesh State Electricity Board. Further, the outstanding dues against
SEBs/PHs have slightly decreased to Rs. 783.71 crore in May, 2017 from
Rs. 869.36 crore in May, 2016. In view of the foregoing, the Committee
feel that there is an urgent need to initiate concrete steps by the Ministry
of Railways against those SEBs/PHs having major share of outstanding
dues for recovery of the same at the highest level so as to recover these
outstanding dues. This will help in deploying the vital resources in some
productive areas in Railways.
Reply of the Government
To reduce the outstanding dues to a minimum level, Zonal Railways
have been advised to hold regular meetings with the Power Houses against
which there are heavy arrears in order to persuade them to make payments
of both current as well as old outstanding dues.
In order to further strengthen the monitoring of outstanding dues
of Power Houses a system of age-wise monitoring of dues is being
introduced. The format is as follows:—
Format for Monitoring of Outstanding due of
Power Houses/State Electricity Boards
S.No. Name of Amount of If under Date of Date of next
PH/SEB Outstanding litigation, the meetings held meeting
to end of next date of in past with fixed with
July 2017 hearing PH/SEB PH/SEB
(in cr. of Rs.)
More than Less than
One Year Old One Year Old

9
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation Para no. 8 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note the measures taken by the Railways to end
the accumulation of outstanding dues in respect of SEBs/PHs, by making
prepayment of freight compulsory for booking of coal for all SEBs/PHs.
Further, prepayment of freight is done through electronic-payment system
and payment is collected electronically within a fraction of minutes from
their bank account before issue of Railway Receipts, thus dismissing any
possibility of outstanding on account of freight. Also, there is a provision
of Letter of Credit (LC)/Bank Guarantee (BG). Railway may claim and
recover from the bank, funds equal to the amount of the LC/BG at any
time towards freight charges recoverable. The Committee find it equally
significant that in 15 States, where generation units of SEBs have
transaction with Railways for movement of coal are covered under
e-payment system and make the system transparent. The Committee feel
that these steps are in right directions and hope that Ministry would
continue to take such progressive measures to check accumulation of
outstanding dues by covering other States also.
Reply of the Government
The appreciation expressed by the Committee is gratefully
acknowledged. Efforts in this direction will continue.
Computer and Information Technology (CIT)
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note with some satisfaction that Railways has started
using CIT facilities for issuing of tickets in Ministry of Defence. Ministry
of Defence has started maintaining Rolling Deposit System (RDS) account
with IRCTC, for booking of e-tickets/i-tickets, by depositing a specified
amount in advance to which the payment against booking of e-tickets/
i-tickets is charged and this account is recouped periodically to maintain
the minimum amount in this account. Out of 10,000 defence units, 5000
units have been issued e-tokens, login Ids and passwords so far, for using
the Defence Travel System (DTS) for booking of e-tickets/i-tickets through
IRCTC. Defence Travel System for defence personnel has been developed
through IRCTC, to replace bookings against warrants. As informed, about
30 per cent of Army units are located in remote/locations/ships on board

10
where there is no access to internet facility. In such case, the Committee
would like the Ministry of Railways to concentrate on those defence units
which are having internet facilities, for provision of E-ticketing until
expansion of Internet facilities in areas not connected with Internet. In
this regard, the Committee would like to emphasize on data collection
and sharing about the total number of defence units having internet
facilities but not yet issued E-tokens, login Ids and passwords for using
the DTS so that these areas are also assimilated in the system as far as
possible.
Reply of the Government
Identification of defence units and allotment of E-tokens to Defence
units for online booking of tickets by defence personnel is responsibility
of the Ministry of Defence. Ministry of Defence have identified
approximately 900 Defence units which are not to be considered for
implementation of Defence Travel System due to being minor units. There
are approximately 5200 core Army units out of which 3400 units have
already collected E-tokens and rest approximately 1600 units are of
Tri-services. Most of these units are in areas without/poor internet
connectivity. Approximately 3800 units have a mix of civilians and
Tri-services personnel which are under jurisdiction of Ministry of Defence
or Ministry of Home Affairs and other miscellaneous institutions and
provision of E-tokens to such units is under examination of MoD. Ministry
of Defence has been progressively covering defence units under DTS and
presently, approximately 5495 Defence units have been provided with
E-tokens/IDs by CGDA for booking tickets online. However, Ministry of
Defence has been advised to cover all the Defence units under Defence
Travel System for booking E-tickets and to completely dispense with the
issue of warrants in the current year. Ministry of Defence has also
approached DoT regarding networking issues for the Defence units in
order to bring them on board the DTS.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee find that the Railways have also requested Ministry
of Home Affairs to develop system of booking of E-tickets/I-tickets for
para-military forces through IRCTC by opening an RDS account with
IRCTC similar to the one developed for Defence units, for discontinuing
booking against warrants. The Committee would like the Ministry of
Railways to pursue the matter with the Ministry of Home Affairs, for
opening of an RDS account with IRCTC and keep them informed of the
progress in this regard. In fact, they would emphasize that all such
Ministries/Departments/Government establishments who provide the
travel facility to their own employees on credit basis should be brought

11
on this E-platform or Rolling Deposit Schemes in association with IRCTC
so as to bring about prompt advance payment in line with DTS for
Railways.
Reply of the Government
As far as extending E-ticketing facility to para-military personnel
is concerned, Ministry of Home Affairs have been requested to develop
a similar software has been developed by CGDA in case of DTS for
integration with the IRCTC E-ticketing system. MHA has also been
requested to nominate a single authority in the Ministry of Home Affairs
to act as the nodal authority for different organizations under MHA in
the matter.
Cash Office Disallowance
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee are concerned to find that during the last 10 years,
Rs. 1,11,18,703 of base coins or forged currency notes were noticed by
the Railways when cash received from station is shroffed in the cash
office. Out of the same, Rs. 66,16,175 have been made good from staff
and Rs. 45,02,528 are still to be recovered. The Committee note the steps
taken by railways to check the receipt of forged currency notes in the
railway booking counters viz., use of E-mode of payment of railway dues,
installation of currency counting/fake currency detecting machines at
booking counters etc. and also training of some staff by RBI/SBI/
Nationalized Bank/Private Bank to detect Fake Indian Currency Notes
(FICN). In this regard, Railways have asked Zonal Railways to procure
and install Fake Currency Detecting Machines at Reservation Offices,
Passenger Reservation System Terminals, and Goods Booking Offices etc.
where cash is transacted in huge amount after making assessment of
their need. In view of the huge amount of fake currency being received
at railway stations booking counters, the Committee feel that fake currency
detecting machine is the need of the day and therefore, such machines
should be procured timely and installed at appropriate places. They would
also like to be apprised of the number of such machines procured
viz-a-viz installed in each zone by the Railways during 2016-17 and
proposed to be installed during 2017-18. Further, necessary training should
extensively be provided to staff at Railway’s receiving counters by the
RBI/SBI/Nationalized Banks/Private Banks to identify fake Indian currency
Notes.

12
Reply of the Government
Instruction dated 13.09.2007 already exists with Zonal Railways for
procurement of Fake Currency detecting Machines at large booking/PRS
offices. Further, the same has also be reiterated dated 29.05.2017 for
installation of Fake Currency detecting Machines at large booking/PRS
offices/stations and it has been directed for proper training to cash
handling staffs for detection of fake currency notes.
As regards number of Fake currency detection Machines, the
information is being collected from zonal Railways.
Alleged Irregularities in Transportation of iron ore
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee gather that there were cases of alleged irregularities
in transportation of Iron ore by various companies which were detected
during 2008. When these cases came to the notice of the Ministry of
Railways, those cases were immediately handed over to CBI for
investigation. As per the CBI investigations, accused companies had
availed concessional freight for the transportation of Iron Ore by
submitting invalid documents and false declaration that the iron ore would
be used for domestic consumption whereas the said iron ore was illegally
diverted for export and local trading. On this account, Railways suffered
losses to the tune of Rs. 6730.16 crore, out of which only Rs. 172.59 crore,
that is 2.56%, has been recovered from delinquent firms and still the
pending amount is remaining to the tune of Rs. 6557.57 crore. As Railways
had remained a victim of freight evasion due to submission of invalid
documents and false declarations by the companies resulting in incurring
of losses for the Railways to the tune of Rs. 6700 crore and odd, the
Committee would earnestly desire that at least now Railways should
adequately strengthen their manpower in assessing documents, monitoring
and verification mechanism for checking of the documents to make it
foolproof in order to avoid losses owing to submission of invalid or
incomplete documents. Further, there is an urgent need to ensure strict
compliance of laid down provisions and enforcement of initial scrutiny
and check, at all the stages right from assessment of requirement of rakes,
allotment of rakes, acceptance of indents to loading and unloading. They
also emphasize that while laying down Rate Circulars, Railway Board
should frame detailed guidelines for Zonal Railways laying down clearly
the procedure to be followed to ensure complete check of essential

13
documentation establishing the nature of use of Iron Ore transported and
other freight loadings and thereby earnings by Rail. The Committee also
emphasize on the ensuring that the extant Rules and Orders on the
clearances of freight outstandings should be strictly observed and adhered
to by all the Staff.
Reply of the Government
The concern shown by Committee is appreciated and noted. Efforts
are being made to make the Rates Circular more exhaustive by clearly
indicating the conditions subject to which the Rates will apply, procedures
to be followed for implementation, as to how the monitoring will be
done etc. through suitable instructions. Recently, a general advisory has
been issued to Zonal Railways regarding inspections and monitoring
with reference to policy guidelines issued by Railway Board. Moreover,
now the Railway Board’s endeavour is to strengthen and rely on IT system
and reduce the need itself for submission of manual documents.
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee further note that as per the recommendations of
CBI, the sanction for prosecution against one Gazetted official and ‘Regular
Department Action’ – Major penalty against one Gazetted official and 5
non-Gazetted officials, are under process. Further, SP/CBI/Kolkata has
been requested to provide the draft charge-sheet along with related
documents for ‘Regular Departmental Action’ – Minor penalty and action
‘Deem Fit’ against 56 of the delinquent railway officials. Also, the
post-retirement benefits of 2 officials of Eastern Railway have been
withheld till finalization of the respective cases. The Committee urge the
Ministry to pursue the matter vigorously so that suitable action is taken
against the erring officials. The Committee may be kept abreast of the
development.
Reply of the Government
Directions of Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance.
The sanction for prosecution against one Gazetted officer has already
been obtained from the competent authority and conveyed to the CBI.
The ‘Regular Departmental Action’ upon the delinquent railway officials
is being regularly monitored and position is being updated.
The Hon’ble Committee shall be kept abreast of the development.

14
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
- NIL -

15
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
 BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee are not impressed to learn that Railways appoints
the advocates on their panels, only after interaction held by Legal Adviser,
Railways and recommendations of General Manager (GMs) of the
concerned Zonal Railways. They have been informed that in respect of
lower courts, the GMs of the concerned Zonal Railways are the competent
authority for empanelment of advocates, falling within their jurisdiction.
Railways empanel the advocates for a period of 3 years and are being
granted extension on the recommendation from Zonal Railways.
According to the Ministry, a total of 414 Advocates are in the panel of
Railway Advocates (for all High Courts and CATs), for more than 5 years.
The Committee find it disturbing to note that the court cases with respect
to outstanding dues such as PSEB is pending since 2002, and has not yet
reached to a conclusive end. It reflects poorly on the presentation of the
case(s) by the advocates in the panel of Railways. The Committee are of
the considered opinion that the role of advocates is very important in
proceedings/decision/final outcome in any court case and hence it is
absolutely necessary that in future Ministry of Railways should appoint
experienced advocates of repute on their panels so that their cases pending
in various courts can be contested forcefully, presented properly and
decided in certain time-frame. They equally emphasise on the need to
relook on the procedure for appointment of the advocates on the Railway
panels with grant of extension only in rarest of the rare cases.
Reply of the Government
The panel of Railway advocates is formed as per procedure laid
down in Legal Dte. letter no. 84/LC/14/N/1 dated 05.11.1985 and 27.07.2015.
The advocates are selected on the bases of recommendation of Zonal
Railways and after holding personal talks with them. The names of the
selected panels are duly approved by Hon’ble Minister for Railways and
Minister for Law and Justice. As such it is felt that presently there is no
need to review the existing procedure.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no. 11 of Chapter I)

16
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH FINAL REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee are apprised that as on October, 2009, outstanding
dues against PSEB was Rs. 475.73 crore which have slightly come down
to Rs. 446.96 crore as on May, 2017. PSEB has disputed the outstanding
dues against them, and the issue is pending since 2002. At present, the
case is pending before the Hon’ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana
at Chandigarh and the next date of hearing has been fixed for 23.10.2017.
In the light of the fact that more than 15 years have passed and the case
is still pending, the Committee are inclined to believe that the Ministry
has not paid serious attention to pursue the matter for recovery of the
outstanding dues of Rs. 446.96 crore against PSEB. The Committee,
therefore, impress upon the Ministry to intensify their efforts in this
direction and expedite the matter. They would like to be kept informed
of the status of the aforesaid case after its hearing in High Court of
Punjab and Haryana on 23.10.2017.
Reply of the Government
Since the matter of outstanding dues of PSEB (now PSPCL) is sub-
judice, there is not much scope for Railways to expedite settlement of
the issue. Nevertheless, the court case is being closely monitored. As
desired by the Committee, the status of the aforesaid case will be informed
after its hearing in High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh
on 23.10.2017.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee were informed that the Committee constituted to
examine the case with regard to outstanding dues of DVB, has submitted
its report on 26.01.2016 to FA&CAO and Chief Commercial Manager
(CCM), Northern Railway. CCM, Northern Railway has, however desired
to establish the correctness of methodology adopted by the stated
Committee in arriving of the figures of outstanding dues against DVB/
Indraprastha Power Generation Corporation Limited (IPGCL). The

17
Committee would like to be informed of the criteria adopted and
correctness of methodology regarding the outstandings. The Committee
are hopeful that the Ministry will soon recover the outstanding dues
from DVB/IPGCL expedite the matter with the Ministry of Power for
reconciliation of the stated outstanding dues of Rs. 114.84 crores to identify
any possible impact of readjustment in methodology of calculations in
wake of dissolution of DVB and would like to be kept apprised of the
development in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The methodology worked out by Committee has not been accepted
by Northern Railway and accordingly outstanding dues stand at Rs. 114.84
crore. The realization of this amount will be pursued with the Ministry
of Power in view of the fact that now DVB stands dissolved. The Hon’ble
Committee shall be kept abreast of the development.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee learn that Railways have served Demand-cum- Show
Cause Notices in all the 47 cases on the defaulting companies in respect
of misleading declaration in Iron Ore traffic for different periods. However,
most of these companies approached court of law seeking relief. According
to the Ministry, the then Attorney General of India advised Railways to
file Money Suits against the defaulting companies to guard against possible
transgression of Limitation Act, 17, Money Suits amounting to
Rs. 3168,73,66,821/- have been filed. Railways are now coordinating with
learned Solicitor General for ensuring early listing and hearing of the
case in Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. In view of the above, the
Committee desire the Ministry of Railways to vigorously pursue the matter
at the appropriate level so that the documentation on their own part is
on preparedness for early listing and prompt recovery.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways is regularly pursuing the matter for early
hearing. The case is likely to be listed for hearing in November, 2017.
N
EW DELHI;  SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY,
02 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

18
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEEN TH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON RAILWA YS (2017-18)
The Committee met on Thursday, the 2nd August, 2018 from
1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, PHA, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Motilal Vora — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
3. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
4. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
5. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
6. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
7. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
8. Shri Rajeev Satav
9. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Shwait Malik
11. Shri Mukut Mithi
12. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya
13. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav — Deputy Secretary

19
*** *** *** ***
2. In the absence of Chairperson, the Committee chose Shri Motilal
Vora to act as Chairperson for the sitting under the provision of Rule
258(3) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of Lok Sabha
which inte ralia  states as under:—
“258(3) If the Chairperson is absent from any sitting; the Committee
shall choose another member to act as Chairperson for that sitting.”
3. At the outset, the Convener welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee took up for consideration the following
draft Reports and adopted them without any modifications:
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in their 16th
Report on “Outstanding Dues for Indian Railways”.
(ii) *** *** *** ***
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports
in light of the factual verification received from the Ministry of Railways
and present the same to the Parliament.
5. *** *** *** ***
6. *** *** *** ***
7. *** *** *** ***
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Committee has been
kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** not related to the Report.

20
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
16TH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) ON “OUTSTANDING
DUES FOR INDIAN RAILWAYS”
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 13
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
Total : 9
Percentage : 69.23%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Para No. NIL
Total : 0
Percentage : 0
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:
Para No. 7
Total : 1
Percentage : 7.69%
(iv) R ecommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies are still awaited:
Para Nos. 4, 6 and 13
Total : 3
Percentage : 23.08%

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2017-18),
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Twentieth Report on Action Taken by Government
on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
their Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Outstanding Dues for
Indian Railways’.
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid
in the Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2017/09.08.2017. The Report contained 13
recommendations/observations. The Ministry of Railways furnished their
Action Taken Notes on all the recommendations/observations contained
in the Report on 27.04.2018.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken
Report at their sitting held on 02.08.2018. The minutes of the sitting are
given in Appendix-I.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observation and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the
Standing Committee on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI;  SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY,
02 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.