SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 25th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Ongoing and Pending Railway Projects,
with special emphasis on Projects in North Eastern Region ’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2014
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 19.12.2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 ( Saka)


S.C.R. No. 189
Price : R  39.00
© 2014 BY L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE(S)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER IR eport ..................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................ 12
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
Government’s reply ..................................... 22
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ................................................ 25
C
HAPTER VR ecommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ................................................... 29
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Railways held on 17.12.2014 ................................. 30
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
25th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Suburban Train
Services of Indian Railways, with special emphasis on
Projects in North Eastern Region ’............................ 32
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RAILWAYS (2014-2015)
Shri Dinesh Trivedi —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri E. Ahamed
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
4. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
6. Shri Gourav Gogoi
7. Shri Rajen Gohain
8.
#Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
9. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
10. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
11. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
12. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
13. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
14. Shri Thota Narasimham
15. Shri A.T . Nana Patil
16. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
17. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy
18. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
19. Shri Ganesh Singh
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
21. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.K. Antony
23. Shri Mukut Mithi
(iii)
# Sh. Bandaru Dattatreya ceased to be a Member on his appointment as Minister w.e.f.
09.11.2014. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi was nominated as Member vide LSS Bulletin
Part No. 783 dt.14.11.2014.

(iv)
24. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
25. @Vacant
26. Shri Ambeth Rajan
27. Shri T . Rathinavel
28. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
29. Shri Devender Goud T .
30. Shri Alok Tiwari
31. Shri Motilal Vora
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal — Additional Director
4. Smt. Geeta Parmar — Deputy Secretary
@Smt. Kusum Rai retired on 25.11.2014 vide R.S.S. I.d. No.1(2)2014-coord. dt. 20.11.14.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Railways
(2014-15), having been authorized by the Committee to present the
Report on their behalf, present this Second Report of the Committee
on action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Standing Committee on Railways contained in their
Twenty-Fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Ongoing and Pending Railway
Projects, with special emphasis on Projects in North Eastern Region ’.
2. The Twenty-Fifth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
18.02.2014 and it contained 16 recommendations/observations. The
Ministry of Railways furnished their action taken replies on all the
recommendations/observations on 06.05.2014.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken
Report at their sitting held on 17.12.2014.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty-Fifth Report of
the Standing Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; DINESH TRIVEDI,
17 December, 2014 Chairperson,
26 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the
Government on the recommendations and observations contained in
the Twenty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways
(2013-14) on “Ongoing and Pending Railway Projects, with special
emphasis on Projects in North Eastern Region”. The Report was presented
to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.02.2014.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government on
all the 16 recommendations/observations contained in the Report. These
have been broadly categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted
by the Government:—
Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16
Total : 12
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s replies:—
Para Nos. 6 and 9
Total : 02
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:—
Para Nos. 2 and 8
Total : 02
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies are awaited:—
Total: NIL
Chapter-V
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted by
the Government. In cases where it is not possible for the Ministry to

2
implement the recommendations for any reason, the matter should
be reported to the Committee with reasons thereof. The Committee
further desire that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/
observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished
to them at the earliest.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations.
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
5. The Committee in their Report had noted that the Railways
while taking up a project on the basis of operational, strategic (Defence
Requirement) or socio-economic consideration to develop a particular
area had to ensure a proper financial return from every investment.
A proposal for fresh investment was considered as financially justified
if it could be shown that the net gain expected out of that was not less
than 14 per cent under the Discounted Cash Flow method. As Railways
had been an important instrument of economic and industrial
development of backward areas not connected by a reliable transport
network, a number of projects with return of less than the threshold
limit of 14 per cent were also taken up to develop backward areas. The
Committee were of the opinion that the Railways should keep a balance
in effectively playing their dual roles of fulfilling social service obligations
and of a revenue earner. They hoped that the Ministry of Railways
would continue to strive hard to keep a balance while undertaking
commercially viable projects and projects which were not so viable but
were socially relevant, thus fulfilling their social responsibility while
consistently raising adequate resources.
6. The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken notes, have stated
as under:
“Ministry of Railways will not shy away from the dual responsibility
and will relentlessly persevere to strike a balance between its role
of social service obligations and a commercially entity. It is neither
physically nor financially possible for the Ministry of Railways to
provide rail connectivity to all backward regions and meet huge
demand for people friendly mode of transportation. In pursuit of
fulfilling public aspirations, a large number of projects have already
been approved over the years creating a huge throw forward liability.
Given the precarious financial situation of Railways, it has entered
a vicious cycle of inadequate finance & cost overruns. In prevailing
circumstances, Railway will be able to discharge its dual
responsibility only if the Budgetary Support extended by Ministry of

3
Finance is suitably enhanced and State Government come forward
to share cost of the project. Ministry of Railways will relentlessly
pursue with Ministry of Finance & State Governments in this
direction.”
7. The Committee agree that in the prevailing circumstances it
is neither physically nor financially possible for the Ministry of
Railways to provide rail connectivity to all backward regions and
meet the huge demand for a people friendly mode of transportation.
As informed, in pursuit of fulfilling public aspirations, a large number
of projects have already been approved over the years, creating a
huge throw-forward liability. The Committee are, however, of the
considered opinion that since rail connectivity can give a push to
the much needed socio-economic development of backward and
remote regions, it becomes the prime responsibility of both the
Central and the State Governments to make available requisite
finances for implementing railway projects in these areas. It is,
therefore, imperative that the Ministry of Finance enhances the
Gross Budgetary Support to the required level and the State
Governments come forward to share the cost of the projects. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Railways should
pursue the matter purposively with the Ministry of Finance and
State Governments for such projects.
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
8. The Committee had further noted that the Gross Budgetary
Support (GBS) given by the Ministry of Finance for railway projects did
not keep pace with the number of projects getting sanctioned on socio-
economic consideration and inflationary trends. Consequently, the list
of pending projects kept on pilling up and the entire project execution
system had entered into a vicious cycle of inadequate grants and cost
escalation, adding to the list of pending projects. To break this vicious
cycle, the Planning Commission had started giving priority in according
“In Principle Approval ” to new projects where States were giving free
land and sharing 50 per cent cost of the Projects. The Committee had
urged the Ministry of Railways to take up the matter with the Planning
Commission to consider railway projects of crucial importance even in
those States which were in a position neither to give free land nor
share 50 percent cost of the projects so that the genuine needs of the
public in such States could be met.
9. The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken notes, have stated
as under:
“There are 368 nos. of ongoing projects out of which State
Government is contributing toward financing of 37 projects only.
Remaining projects are progressing even without any contribution

4
from State Government. Progress of these projects is dependent on
the extent of Gross Budgetary Support given by Ministry of Finance.
The stand of Planning Commission to give preference in according
“In Principle” approval to those projects where State Government is
sharing the cost, is for new projects. ”
10. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Government. They are aware that the stand of the Planning
Commission to give preference in according “In Principle ” approval
to those projects where State Government is sharing the cost, is for
new projects. However, their concern is in respect of those States
which are facing a resource crunch and are not in a position to
either give free land or share 50 percent cost for crucial projects.
The Committee feel that this stand of the Planning Commission will
result in non-approval of crucial railway projects in these States
which need rail connectivity in backward and remote areas. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should take up the
matter with the Planning Commission to review their decision and
relax the norms in respect of providing free land and sharing of cost
of the projects by the States in order to safeguard the interests of
the States having a resource crunch but are in dire need of rail
connectivity.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
11. The Committee had observed that a railway project was
considered as viable which was having 14 percent rate of return. The
Ministry of Railways had adopted this criterion on the basis of a letter
dated 23.08.1984 issued by the Ministry of Finance in this regard and
it was in vogue since 1993-94. Further, out of the 368 ongoing/pending
railway projects, only 88 projects (24 percent) were having projected
rate of return more than 14 percent. As two decades had passed when
the criterion for a project to be viable was adopted, the Committee
strongly felt that the existing criterion for a project to be viable,
needed immediate review especially keeping in view the inflation,
economic aspects and such other relevant factors.
12. The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken notes, have
stated as under:—
“As per suggestion of the Committee, review of the existing criterion
for a project to be viable is being undertaken by Ministry of Railways.”

5
13. The Committee are happy to note that the existing criteria
for proclaiming a railway project to be viable is being reviewed by
the Ministry of Railways. The Committee desire that the Ministry of
Railways should expedite the process and apprise them of the decision
taken in this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
14. The Committee in their Report had observed that out of the
368 ongoing/pending railway projects, 59 projects were sanctioned
more than 15 years ago (1997-98 or before). Out of those 59 projects,
6 projects were sanctioned 25 year ago, viz. (i) Tamluk-Digha, Deshpan-
Nandigram with new MM for Kanthi-Egra (26.2 km); Nandakumar-
Bolaipanda (927 km) New Line & Nandigram-Kandhimari (Nayachar)
(7 km) New Line sanctioned in the year 1984-85 in South Eastern Railway;
(ii) Howrah-Amta, Bargachia-Champadanga-Tarakeshawar , Amta-Bagnan
& new Material Modification (MM) for Janghipara-Furfura sharif
(12.3 km) sanctioned in the year 1974-75 in South Eastern Railway;
(iii) Nangal Dam-Talwara (83.74 km) new broad gauge line & Taking
over siding of Mukerian-Talwara (29.16 km) sanctioned in the year
1981-82 in Northern Railway; (iv) Eklakhi-Balurghat (87.11 km), Gazole-
Itahar (28 km) & new MM for Raiganj-Itahar (21.8 km) & Itahar-Buniadpur
(39 km) sanctioned in the year 1983-84 in North Frontier Railway;
(v) Guna-Etawah via Shivpuri-Gwalior-Bhind (348.25 km) sanctioned in
the year 1984-85 in North Central Railway; and (vi) Laxmikantapur-
Namakhana-Chandanagar (61.5 km) with new MM for Kakadip-Budakhali
(5 km) & Chandanagar-Bakhali (17.2 km) sanctioned in the year
1987-88 in Eastern Railway. Further, 3 projects were sanctioned
20 years ago viz. Daitari-Banspani (155 km) sanctioned in the year
1992-93 in East Coast Railway, Peddapalli-Karimanagar-Nizamabad
sanctioned in the year 1993-94 in South Central Railway and Amravati-
Narkher sanctioned in the year 1993-94 in Central Railway. The
Committee had pointed out that the details in respect of one of the
project viz. Dallirajahara-Jagdalpur (23 km.) in South East Central
Railway had not been provided. Taking into account such unsatisfactory
performance of the Railways, the Committee had recommended that
immediate corrective measures should be taken to expeditiously
complete these long pending projects before they lose their utility.
15. The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken notes, have
stated as under:—
“Details of Dallirajahara-Jagdalpur new line project is as under:—
Dallirajahara—Jagdalpur New Line (235 Km) was sanctioned in
1995-1996. The entire project is to be executed in 2 phases.
Phase-I (95 Km) between Dallirajahara-Rowghat, funded by SAIL, is

6
being executed by RVNL. Phase-II (140 km) between Rowghat to
Jagdalpur Being executed by South East Central Railway is funded
by Railway, NMDC and Chhattisgarh Government.
Land acquisition
For Phase I—30229 Hect. of Private Land, 49.92 Hect. of Govt.
Land, 2.39 Hect. of SAIL Land have been acquired. Regarding forest
land total requirement is 259.54 Hect. Stage-II clearance (Final
approval) has been received on 24.03.2011 from MOEF . Tree cutting
being done by forest deptt is in progress. As regard 83.12 Hect. of
Revenue forest land Stage-I clearance from MOEF/NDLS received in
April-10. Proposal for Stage-II clearance has been resubmitted to
MOEF after complying observation of MOEF .
Phase-II — Rowghat-Jagdalpur—Application and set of land plans &
land schedule for acquisition of land between Rowghat to Jagdalpur
for Phase-II construction of new line between Dallirajahara-Jagdalpur,
has been submitted to Collector/Jagdalpur and DFO/Narayanpur in
October 2010 along with requisite registration and processing fee.
Estimate — Phase-I — (95 Km) between Dallirajhara-Rowghat detailed
estimate sanctioned at the cost of the Rupees 631.78 Cr. On
15.07.2009.
Phase-II — (140 km) between Rowghat to Jagdalpur is under
preparation.
Progress for Phase-I — (Executedby RVNL):
(i) Earth work-15.10 Lac-cum completed out of 51 Lac-cum
(ii) Blanketing-0.654 Lac-cum completed out of 10 Lac-cum
(iii) Major Bridge-653 %
(iv) Minor Bridges-29.96%
(v) Ballast-8000 cum completed out of 284874 cum
Issues affecting progress— Due to various hindrances like delay in
diversion of revenue forest land, delay in tree cutting by forest
department, burning of vehicles by naxalites on 14.03.11 & 01.06.12,
contractors have stopped the work several times citing these
reasons. However, after constant persuation by RVNL, contractor
of 1st package (42 Km From Dallirajahara-Keoti) agreed to complete
only 1st block section i.e. between Dallirajahara to Dondi 17 km.

7
On 26.04.2013 mid-night, a group of about 30-35 naxalites attacked
contractor’s camp at Dondi Km. 10 in Pkg.-I and crossfire took
place between naxalites and CAF . Again on 11.06.2013, similar
attack took place at the same location. No casualties happened.
However, this incident has dented the confidence of contractor ’s
workforce. Citing these reasons contractor had completely stopped
the work. A high level meeting held at MHA on 24.07.2013 regarding
progress and security is concerned. From 10.10.2013 contractor has
restarted the work after providing the dedicated security in 1st
17 Km. (i.e. from Dallirajhara to Dondi). This issue was also discussed
during Project Monitoring Group meeting on 06.01.2014 at Raipur.
It was assured by the ADGP that for future work security will also
be arranged. Chief Secretary mentioned that election has been
conducted by the State Government in above area smoothly.
In most of the old projects some portion of it has been completed
and operationalised. Some of the projects mentioned above have
been completed and commissioned. They are appearing in the list
of pending projects as some more projects have been loaded on it
as Material Modification. Even though the projects have been
completed but the material modification component is still in
progress.
These will be completed as per availability of funds and assigned
priority in the prioritization list.
”
16. The Committee are unhappy with the pace of progress in
respect of the projects which were sanctioned more than 25 years
ago and are still incomplete. They are not satisfied with the
clarification given by the Ministry that in most of the old projects
some portion of the same has been completed and operationalised.
The Committee are further informed that some of the projects
mentioned in the list of pending projects have been completed and
commissioned; however, they are still appearing in the list of pending
projects as they have been loaded on it as Material Modification.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of all such
projects, mentioning the dates/years when the project was originally
sanctioned, completed and then loaded as material modification and
their likely dates for execution.
Recommendation (Para No. 10 & 11)
17. The Committee had noted that the Ministry, in the “Vision 2020”
document, has targeted to connect all the State Capitals on Broad
Gauge besides doubling of New Jalpaiguri-Samuktala Main line,

8
commissioning of alternative BG route from New Maynaguri to Jogighopa,
BG networking of the entire Barak Valley, completion of third Railway
Bridge across River Brahmaputra Rail-cum-Road Bridge at Bogibeel, BG
networking of North Bank of Brahmaputra, connection of South Bank at
Dibrugarh through Bogibeel and electrification of Katihar-Guwahti route.
However , they were disappointed to find that so far only two State
Capitals out of the seven North-East States are on Broad Gauge (BG)
Network. Further, the Capitals of Assam and Tripura had been connected
and Itanagar (Naharlagun), the Capital of Arunachal Pradesh, would be
connected by March, 2014. For the rest, funds and availability of land
were stated to the critical areas. The Committee had considered the
scarce allocation of funds for infrastructural projects as totally unjustified
and desired that Plan allocation should be suitably enhanced in
accordance with the needs of the Ministry. The matter for grant of
required budgetary support should be taken up vigorously with the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance.
18. The Committee were again distressed to find the tardy progress
in respect of their old railway projects in the North-East region viz.
(i) Dudhnoi-Mendipather(19.75 km.), a new line project in North-East
sanctioned in 1992-93; (ii) Harmuti-Naharlagun (20 km.), a new line
project sanctioned in 1996-97, (iii) Katakhal-Bhairabi (84 km.), a gauge
conversion project sanctioned in 1997-98; (iv) Katihar-Jogbani with
extension upto Radhikapur, Katihar-Tejanarayanpur (234 km.), and new
MM for Raniganj-Dalkhola (43.43 km.), a new line project in North-East
region sanctioned in 2000-01; and (v) New Moynaguri-Jogighopa, a new
line with gauge conversion project of New Mal (260 km.), sanctioned
in 2000-01. The Committee urged the Ministry to accord priority to
these ongoing/pending projects and take required measures to complete
these projects expeditiously in a time-bound manner.
19. The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken notes, have
stated as under:—
“Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance are being constantly
pursued for enhancement of Gross Budgetary Support for Capital
investments. This effort will relentlessly go in. Besides seeking
enhancement of yearly GBS, Ministry of Railways had piloted a
proposal to create a separate fund from regular GBS for National
Projects of North-Eastern Region. The proposal was for creation of
a non-lapsable fund in the name of NERRDF (North-East Region Rail
Development Fund) to be funded through Railways GBS to the tune
of 25% with the balance 75% being allocated at the beginning of the
year by Ministry of Finance as non-dividend additionality to GBS.

9
The setting up of the fund was approved by Cabinet but fund has
not been set up due to objections from Ministry of Finance. Creation
of the fund would have given huge impetus to execution of all
projects in general and projects in N.E. Region in particular.
Ministry of Railways, till now, has not been successful in getting
Gross Budgetary Support enhanced substantially & create NERRDF .
Despite this, Ministry of Railways will steadfastly pursue it. ”
Further with regard to the tardy progress in respect of their old
projects in North-Eastern Region, the Ministry have stated as under:—
“Primary reason for tardy progress of work in respect is inadequate
funds. Yearly fund allotment is much less than actual requirement
of fund to maintain a steady progress. In fact, yearly budget
allocation for projects in North-Eastern Region is around 55 to 60%
of optimal yearly requirement. Ongoing projects which are in the
last leg of completion are given priority. To tide over the fund
constraints, Ministry of Railways is vigorously pursuing with the
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission to enhance Gross
Budgetary Support.”
20. The Committee have been apprised that the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance are being constantly pursued
for enhancement of Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) for Capital
investments. Besides, they have piloted a proposal to create a
separate fund from regular GBS for National Projects in the North-
Eastern Region. The proposal was for creation of a non-lapsable fund
in the name of NERRDF (North-East Region Rail Development Fund)
to be funded through Railways GBS to the tune of 25% with the
balance 75% being allocated at the beginning of the year by the
Ministry of Finance as non-dividend additionality to GBS. The
Committee are constrained to note that though setting up of the
proposed fund was approved by the Cabinet, the Fund has not been
set up due to objections from the Ministry of Finance. As fund
constraints are adversely affecting the progress of the projects
undertaken by the Ministry in the North-Eastern Region, the
Committee recommend that the matter should urgently be sorted
out with the Ministry of Finance and, if needed, the matter may
again be brought before the Cabinet. As informed, the creation of
NERRDF would give a huge impetus to the execution of all projects
in the North-Eastern Region.

10
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
21. In their Report the Committee had noted that a Cabinet Note
for modifying the definition of National Projects had been prepared and
was under consideration of the Directorate concerned in the Ministry of
Railways. The Committee were of the opinion that Railway Projects
which were falling under difficult terrains in the Himalayan and North-
East Region and Jammu and Kashmir should be declared as National
Projects for expeditious completion of such projects.
22. The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken notes, have
stated as under:—
“Cabinet Note for modifying the definition of National Project will
be circulated for Inter-Ministerial Consultation shortly. ”
23. The Committee strongly feel that in order to expedite the
implementation of projects falling under difficult terrains in the
Himalayan and the North-Eastern Region and Jammu and Kashmir,
there is an urgent need to modify the definition of National Projects.
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry of Railways to
expedite the process and apprise them about the progress made in
this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
24. The Committee in their report had noted that the Ministry of
Railways had received a revised list of 14 strategically important projects
from the Ministry of Defence. However , the Ministry would undertake
the construction of these strategic lines only if they would be fully
funded by either the Ministry of Defence or the Ministry of Finance and
they would also want the operational losses to be reimbursed as those
lines are highly un-remunerative. The Committee were informed that
the Ministry of Defence was requested on 29.07.2013 to declare
additional 19 lines (including ongoing National Projects) as strategic
lines so that operating losses on these additional 19 lines could also be
reimbursed. The Committee had desired to be informed of the progress
in the matter.
25. The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken notes, have
stated as under:—
“No official response has so far been received from Ministry of
Defence. However , the matter will be taken up with them as desired
by the Committee. ”

11
26. The Committee appreciate the views of the Ministry of
Railways with regard to the execution of strategically important
projects. They further note that the Ministry of Railways have so far
not received any official response from the Ministry of Defence in
response to their letter dated 29.07.2013 to declare additional
19 lines (including ongoing National Projects) as strategic lines so
that operating losses on these additional 19 lines could be reimbursed.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry of Railways to earnestly
pursue the matter with the Ministry of Defence and in case no
positive response is received, the matter may be taken up at the
Cabinet level. They would also like to be informed of the progress
in the matter.

12
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that a railway project is conceived on the
basis of operational, strategic (Defence Requirement) or socio-economic
consideration to develop a particular area. The Railways have to ensure
that a proper financial return is earned from every investment. A
proposal for fresh investment is considered as financially justified if it
can be shown that the net gain expected to be realised as a result of
the proposed outlay would, after meeting the working expenses or the
average annual cost of service, yield a return of not less than
14 per cent under the Discounted Cash Flow method. However , as
Railways is an important instrument of economic and industrial
development of backward areas not concerned by a reliable transport
network, a number of projects having return of less than the threshold
limit of 14 per cent are also taken up on the basis of operational,
strategic/Defence requirement or on socio-economic consideration to
develop backward areas. The Committee are of the view that there is
a definite need to balance the role of Railways in effectively fulfilling
the dual roles of social service obligations and as a revenue earner. The
Committee trust that the Ministry of Railways would continue to strive
hard to keep such a proper balance while undertaking commercially
viable projects as well as projects which are not so viable but are
socially relevant, thus fulfilling their social responsibility as well as
consistently raising adequate resources.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways will not shy away from the dual responsibility
& will relentlessly persevere to strike a balance between its role of
social service obligations and a commercially entity. It is neither
physically nor financially possible for the Ministry of Railways to provide
rail connectivity to all backward regions and meet huge demand for
people friendly mode of transportation. In pursuit of fulfilling public
aspirations, a large number of projects have already been approved
over the years creating a huge throw forward liability. Given the
precarious financial situation of Railways, it has entered a vicious cycle
of inadequate finance & cost overruns. In prevailing circumstances,

13
Railway will be able to discharge its dual responsibility only if the
Budgetary Support extended by Ministry of Finance is suitably enhanced
& State Government come forward to share cost of the project. Ministry
of Railways will relentlessly pursue with Ministry of Finance & State
Governments in this direction.
Comments of the Committee
Please see para 7 of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee are perturbed to note that as on 01.04.2013, the
Ministry of Railways had 368 ongoing/pending projects — 156 new line,
43 gauge conversion and 169 doubling projects. It is equally disturbing
to note that the Railways have a throw forward liability of around
Rs. 4 lakh crore for their ongoing works and rolling stock. The main
reason for delays in timely completion of projects is stated to be funds
constraint as the Ministry of Railways is dependent upon financial support
from the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission for execution
of capital intensive projects, but the financial support has been far
from adequate. The Ministry had sought Gross Budgetary Support (GBS)
of Rs. 3,16,892 crore for the Twelfth Plan but were allotted only
Rs. 1,94,221 crore. Further , during 2012-13 and 2013-2014, the GBS to
the Ministry of Railways remained to the tune of Rs. 24,000 crore and
Rs. 26,000 crore, respectively, which was less than even the
proportionate yearly approved budgetary support. It is evident that the
curtailment of GBS has resulted in poor performance of the Railways.
Besides, time over-run due to funds constraint in almost all the projects
has resulted in cost over-run and inordinate delays and stretching of
projects for execution, thus slowing down the pace of development.
Keeping in mind the important role of the Railways in the socio-economic
development of the country and in view of large number of pending/
ongoing projects of the Ministry of Railways and the task ahead in the
expansion of railway network in the North-East and the Himalayan
regions, the Committee strongly feel that the GBS given by the Ministry
of Finance and the Planning Commission is too meagre and ought to be
supplemented suitably, commensurate with the needs of the Ministry.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is extremely grateful to the Hon ’ble Committee for a
truthful and accurate appreciation of the financial position of the
Railways, as far as project financing and execution is concerned. As is
well known and also acknowledged by the Hon’ble Committee, the

14
Railway projects are highly Capital intensive with a long gestation
period. Most of the projects, especially in NE Region and Himalayan
States, are commercially unviable and are required to be taken up on
socio-economic considerations. They need sustained funding during their
execution to reap the benefits. Insufficient support from General
Exchequer, even in comparison to the approved level of Five Year Plan
funding arrangement has been highlighted by the Ministry at various
fora. Requests for additional funding during the course of the year have
been made from the highest level in Ministry of Railways to the Ministry
of Finance. The sustained efforts in 2013-14 have yielded some positive
results and the GBS extended by MoF has been increased to Rs. 27,000
crore in Revised Estimates. The efforts would continue in 2014-15 also
and would hopefully prove fruitful.
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways are taking various
steps to deal with the financial constraints, viz. Controlling the
expenditure by enforcing austerity and economic measures, augmenting
internal resources through regionalization of fare and freight rate
structure, introduction of fuel Adjustment Component and revision of
rates for other services, etc. Further , the scope for generation of
resources is also being constantly explored though other avenues such
as commercial use of Railway’s surplus land, etc. Also the Plan investment
has been ring-fenced for several indentified priority projects after
carrying out prioritization of projects, including the last mile ones, to
reap benefits on their early completion. However, the Committee feel
that the Ministry will have to take urgent proactive measures to address
this challenge and seek an enhanced GBS from the Ministry of Finance
and the Planning Commission. The Committee trust that the Ministry
would continue to explore other avenues to raise the desired level of
funds.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is grateful to the Hon’ble Committee for the appreciation
of its efforts in tackling financial constraints and the steps taken in this
regard. The suggestions of the Committee have been noted and it is
submitted that the efforts initiated to contain expenditure and augment
resources would continue. The issue of enhanced level of Budgetary
Support from General Exchequer , especially in comparison to the
approved 12th Five Year Plan, would be taken up vigorously with Ministry
of Finance and Planning Commission.

15
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee are also distressed to note that out of 368 ongoing/
pending projects, there are only 42 projects (16 New Line, 7 Gauge
Conversion and 19 Doubling projects) which are in an advanced stage
of completion and the remaining 326 projects are at various stages of
implementation. The Committee note with rising concern that the figure
has increased to 368 on 01.04.2013 from 348 as on 01.04.2012 i.e., an
overall increase of 20 ongoing/pending projects in a year. The Committee
feel that concerted efforts from the Ministry of Railways are warranted
to take urgent corrective measures so that the situation does not
deteriorate further in the coming years. They, therefore, would like to
recommend that the Ministry should henceforth give their focused
attention to the expeditious completion of ongoing/pending projects
and announce any new railway projects only after getting a categorical
assurance on the availability of the required funds from the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance. The Committee also want that
priority should be given to the projects which are at an advanced stage
of completion.
Reply of the Government
Railways have already undertaken the exercise of prioritization of
projects to give focused attention to reap maximum benefits out of the
investment being made and prevent thin spread. Last mile projects
have been given top priority to assured funding for early completion.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee learnt that a viable railway project is the one
which has 14 per cent rate of return. The Ministry of Railways have
adopted this criterion on the basis of a letter dated 23.08.1984 issued
by the Ministry of Finance in this regard and the same is in vogue since
1993-94. As informed, out of the 368 ongoing/pending railway projects,
only 88 projects (24 per cent) are having projected rate of return more
than 14 per cent. As already two decades have passed when the criterion
for a project to be viable was adopted, the Committee strongly feel
that the existing criterion for a project to be viable, needs immediate
review especially keeping in view the inflation, economic aspects and
such other relevant factors.
Reply of the Government
As per suggestion of the committee, review of the existing criterion
for a project to be viable is being undertaken by Ministry of Railways.

16
Comments of the Committee
Please see para 13 of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee regret to note that so far only two State Capitals
out of the seven North-East States are on Broad Gauge (BG) Network.
The Ministry, in the “Vision 2020” document, has set certain targets for
implementation of projects in the North-East Region by 2020 like
Connecting all the State Capitals on Broad Gauge, doubling of New
Jalpaiguri-Samuktala Main line, commissioning of alternative BG route
from New Maynaguri to Jogighopa, BG networking of the entire Barak
Valley, completion of third Railway Bridge across River Brahmaputra-
Rail-cum-Road Bridge at Bogibeel, entire BG networking of North Bank
of Brahmputra, connection of South Bank at Dibrugarh through Bogibeel
and electrification of Katihar-Guwahti route.
With regard to accomplishment of the above targets, the Committee
are apprised that the Capitals of Assam and Tripura have already been
connected. Itanagar (Naharlagun), the Capital of Arunachal Pradesh,
will be connected by March 2014 and for the rest, funds and availability
of land are the critical areas. The Committee feel that scarce allocation
of funds for infrastructural projects is totally uncalled for and hence
Plan allocation should be suitably enhanced in accordance with the
needs of the Ministry. The matter for grant of required budgetary
support should be taken up vigorously with the Planning Commission
and the Ministry of Finance. In no case, fund constraints be allowed to
bring down physical performance of the Ministry of Railways, especially
insofar as the North-East region is concerned. Further , the bottlenecks
in regard to the procedural delays should be identified and removed.
Reply of the Government
Planning Commission & Ministry of Finance are being constantly
pursued for enhancement of Gross Budgetary Support for Capital
investments. This effort will relentlessly go in. Besides seeking
enhancement of yearly GBS, Ministry of Railways had piloted a proposal
to create a separate fund from regular GBS for National Projects of
North Eastern Region. The proposal was for creation of a non lapsable
fund in the name of NERRDF (North East Region Rail Development Fund)
to be funded through Railway GBS to the tune of 25% with the balance
75% being allocated at the beginning of the year by Ministry of Finance
as non-dividend additionality to GBS. The setting up of the fund was
approved by Cabinet but fund has not been set up due to objections

17
from Ministry of Finance. Creation of the fund would have given huge
impetus to execution of all projects in general and projects in N.E.
Region in particular.
Ministry of Railways, till now, has not been successful in getting
Gross Budgetary Support enhanced substantially & create NERRDF . Despite
this, Ministry of Railways will steadfastly pursue it.
Comments of the Committee
Please see para 20 of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee are distressed to find the tardy progress in respect
of certain railway projects in the North-East region; these include:
(i) Dudhnoi-Mendipather(19.75 km.), a new line project in North-East
which was sanctioned in 1992-93; (ii) Harmuti-Naharlagun (20 km.), a
new line project sanctioned in 1996-97; (iii) Katakhal-Bhairabi (84 km.),
a gauge conversion project sanctioned in 1997-98; (iv) Katihar-Jogbani
with extension upto Radhikapur; Katihar-Tejanarayanpur (234 km.), and
new MM for Raniganj-Dalkhola (43.43 km.), a  new line project in North-
East region sanctioned in 2000-01; and (v) New Moynaguri-Jogighopa, a
new line with gauge conversion project of New Mal (260 km.), sanctioned
in 2000-01. Taking a serious view of such inordinate delays in execution
of these railway projects in the North-East region, some of which are
15-20 year old, the Committee strongly urge the Ministry to accord
priority to these ongoing/pending projects and take required measures
to complete these projects expeditiously in a time-bound manner.
Reply of the Government
Primary reason for tardy progress of work is inadequate funds.
Yearly fund allotment is much less than actual requirement of fund to
maintain a steady progress. In fact, yearly budget allocation for projects
in North Eastern region is around 55 to 60% of optimal yearly
requirement. Ongoing projects which are in the last leg of completion
are given priority. To tide over the fund constraints, Ministry of Railways
is vigorously pursuing with the Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission to enhance Gross Budgetary Support.
Comments of the Committee
Please see para 20 of Chapter-I of the Report.

18
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee want to strongly record its deep concern at the
slow progress in respect of the National Projects in the North-East
region. Out of the 10 Projects in the North-East, the overall progress
in respect of the projects, viz. Dimapur-Kohima (88 km.) sanctioned in
the year 2006-07; Bhairabi-Sairang (51.38 km.) and Sivok-Rangpo
(44.39 km.) both sanctioned in the year 2008-09; and Byrnihat-Shillong
(108.40 km.) sanctioned in the year 2010-11, is to the tune of 0.37 per
cent, 2 per cent, 1.83 per cent and 0.07 per cent, respectively. For the
other projects, viz. Lumding-Silchar (482.73 km.) sanctioned in the
year 1996-97, the target date of completion has been shifted from
December 2014 to December 2016 for Bogibeel Bridge (73 km.)
sanctioned in the year 1997-98, the target has been shifted from
December 2015 to December 2017, for Jiribam-Tupul & Tupul-Imphal
(Tupul) (125 km.) sanctioned in the year 2003-04 the target date has
been shifted from March 2015 and March 2017 to March 2020 and March
2022; for Tetelia-Byrnihat (21.50 km.) sanctioned in the year 2006-07,
the target date has been shifted from March 2015 to March 2017; for
Agartala-Sabroom (110 km.) sanctioned in the year 2008-09, the target
date has been shifted from December 2015 to March 2019; and for
Rangiya-Murkongselek & linked fingers (510.33 km.) sanctioned in the
year 2003-04, the target date has been shifted from March 2014 to
March 2015. As already submitted, the main reason for non-completion
of these National Projects in the North-East Region is funds constraint.
Such drastic shifting of target dates speaks very poorly of the priority
given to completion of National Projects in the North-East region which
is poorly connected with the rest of India. Undoubtedly, this points to
the startling fact that the National Projects are not given the attention
they deserve. Spilling over of these projects for longer period of time
would lead to frustration among the people of the North-East who are
already under-served in respect of railway connection. The Committee
are of the view that the very purpose of creating the North-East Region
Rail Development fund (NERRDF) would be defeated if National Projects
of such crucial significance are kept starved of funds. The matter of
allocation of required funds should be continuously pursued with the
agencies concerned so that these projects do not get stuck for want of
funds.
Reply of the Government
The proposal for creation of a non lapsable fund in the name of
NERRDF (North East Region Rail Development Fund) to be funded through
Railway GBS to the tune of 25% with the balance 75% being allocated

19
at the beginning of the year by Ministry of Finance as non dividend
additionality to Gross Budgetary Support has already been approved by
Cabinet but the fund has not been set up due to objections from
Ministry of Finance. Creation of the fund would have given huge impetus
to execution of all projects in general and projects in N.E. Region in
particular.
Ministry of Railways will steadfastly pursue creation of NERRDF .
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee have been informed that many of the ongoing/
pending rail projects in the North-East Region are now at a stage where
there is no external problem and environmental and technical clearances
are there. These include the Lumding-Shilchar-Agartala gauge conversion
project, doubling of New Jalpaiguri-Samuktala, New Maynguri-Jogighopa
New line, Bogibeel bridge project. As stated, there is no problem other
than of funds and the work can be expedited substantially depending
on the availability of funds. The Committee take a serious view of the
fact that even for National Projects, the Ministry of Railways are facing
the problem of shortage of funds. The Committee strongly feel that the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance should review the
situation urgently in view of the demands of the strategically located
North-East region for better connectivity, as also the demands of the
people of the region for better rail connectivity and sanction adequate
financial support for these National Projects.
Reply of the Government
The primary reason for tardy progress of work is inadequate funds.
Yearly fund allotment is much less than actual requirement of fund to
maintain a steady progress. To tide over the fund constraints, Ministry
of Railways is vigorously pursuing with the Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission to enhance Gross Budgetary Support.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note that on 21 January, 2014, the Prime Minister,
after reviewing the progress of infrastructural projects in the
North-East with the Chief Ministers of the North-Eastern States, had set
a deadline for completion of various projects during the 12th Five Year
Plan period under the supervision of the monitoring Committee. He had
directed the Planning Commission to set up a Committee comprising
representatives of the North-Eastern States and Central Ministries
concerned. This Committee will co-ordinate the execution of the projects

20
and help to improve upon connectivity of the region with the rest of
the country. The Committee find this as a very crucial opportunity for
the Ministry of Railways to apprise the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance about their concern with regard to the inordinate
delays in the execution of infrastructural projects in the North-East
region. The Committee would like to be apprised of the developments
in the matter.
Reply of the Government
Empowered Committee comprising representatives of Central
Ministries under the Chairmanship of Member (Transport), Planning
Commission already exists. Meeting of this Committee has been held in
September , 2013. As per the directions of Hon ’ble Prime Minister, this
Committee has been expanded to include representatives of North
Eastern States. Ministry of Railways will use this important forum to
highlight the problems being faced in implementation of infrastructural
projects in North Eastern region.
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee note that a Cabinet Note for modifying the definition
of National Projects has been prepared and is under consideration of
the Directorate concerned in the Ministry of Railways. The Committee
are of the definite view that Railway Projects which fall under difficult
terrains in the Himalayan and North East region and Jammu and Kashmir
should be declared as National Projects for expeditious completion of
such projects.
Reply of the Government
Cabinet Note for modifying the definition of National Project will
be circulated for Inter-Ministerial Consultation shortly.
Comments of the Committee
Please see para 23 of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways have received a
revised list of 14 strategically important projects from the Ministry of
Defence. Further, the Ministry would undertake the construction of

21
these strategic lines only if they will be fully funded by either the
Ministry of Defence or the Ministry of Finance; they would also want
the operational losses to be reimbursed as these lines are highly
un-remunerative. The Committee have been informed that the Ministry
of Defence has again been requested on 29.07.2013 to declare additional
19 lines (including ongoing National Projects) as strategic lines so that
operating losses on these additional 19 lines are also reimbursed. The
Committee desire to be informed of the progress in the matter.
Reply of the Government
No official response has so far been received from Ministry of
Defence. However, the matter will be taken up with them as desired
by the Committee.
Comments of the Committee
Please see para 26 of Chapter-I of the Report.

22
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT ’S REPLY
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee do not accept the oft repeated explanations given
by the Ministry for delay in execution of railway projects, leading to
piling up of pending projects, like delays in land acquisition and forestry
clearances, adverse law and order situation and other market forces,
failure of contracts and technological changes, improved standard of
construction and other changes in scope of work due to change in
traffic pattern, etc. The Committee find that these problems are not
new to the Ministry and are being faced by them all through. After all,
every aspect is considered at the time of sanction of project. However,
with regard to the problem being faced by the Railways in land
acquisition, the Committee felt that if need be, suitable amendments
be made in the Railway Act, 1989, to make land acquisition easier so
as to avoid inordinate delays in execution of Railways Projects. As
these projects are instrumental in ensuring the expansion of railway
infrastructure in the country thus enabling the Railways to fulfil its
obligations to the nation, the Committee would like to be assured that
the Ministry, instead of citing routine reasons for delays in completion
of projects, would take concrete steps to resolve these procedural
hurdles and avoid such delays in execution of the projects.
Reply of the Government
Railway is doing its best to clear all impediment and road block to
enable timely commencement and completion of projects. Major
impediments to execution of projects are nearly same. Their extent
and nature may vary. Ministry of Railways does not have direct control
on many of them. Railway is resolute in its commitment toward speedy
execution and steadfast in removing all impediments. Railway does its
best in coordinating with all stockholders for timely removal of
impediments such as, land acquisition, forestry clearances, tackling
law & order issues. There will be no let up in this direction. The land
for most of the projects is not acquired under Railway Act. However,
consequent to amendment to Railway Act in 2008, land for Special
Railway Projects are acquired under Railway Act. The acquisition under
Railway Act, is certainly quicker than under the land acquisition Act

23
applicable to other projects. At present, no need is felt for further
amendments in Railway Act, 1989.
[Ministry of Railways, O.M. No. 2013/BC-II/XV/300/11,
Dated: 06.05.2014]
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee have been apprised that electric traction is better
than the diesel traction in terms of economic, operational and
environmental considerations. However , they are constrained to note
that as on 01.04.2013, out of the total 65,436 route kms., only 23,541
route kms. have been electrified. In the “Vision 2020” document, issued
in December , 2009, it has been mentioned that by the year 2020, 33000
kms. of route would be electrified. The Committee do appreciate that
in order to meet the targets, a Blue Print for Railway Electrification has
been prepared and the targets of Railway Electrification are being
consistently achieved. The Committee would want that the Ministry
would make sincere efforts to achieve electrification targets as envisaged
in “Vision 2020 ” without any delay. At the same time, they would like
to point out that even after accomplishing the above targets, the
Railways would still be left with 32436 route kms. for electrification.
Keeping in view the various benefits of electric traction when compared
to diesel traction, the Committee would like to urge the Ministry of
Railways to further enhance the yearly targets of electric traction.
Reply of the Government
With a view to enhance the electrification works in Indian Railways,
electrification targets have been increased from 1000 Route Kilometres
(RKM) in 2010-11 to 1300 RKM in 2013-14. Electrification target during
12th Five Year Plan has been enhanced to 6500 RKM. The table below
depicts a comprehensive summary of the emphasis given, which indicates
progressively higher level of targets and achievements on year to year
basis:
Year Target (in RKM) Achievement (in RKM)
2010-11 1000 975
2011-12 1100 1165
2012-13 1200 1317
2013-14 1300 972 (till February, 2014)

24
The annual electrification targets are dependent upon the availability
of funds and Indian Railways is capable of achieving higher targets,
provided adequate funds are provided and more projects are sanctioned.
The expected shelf of Railway Electrification projects shall be
5618 Route Kilometres as on 01.04.2014, after achieving the target of
1300 Route Kilometres in 2013-14. These works shall be completed in
next 4 years time and efforts are being made to get the sanction of
more railway electrification projects, wherever operationally and
financially viable.

25
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note with concern that the Gross Budgetary Support
(GBS) given by the Ministry of Finance for railway projects do not keep
pace with the number of projects getting sanctioned on socio-economic
consideration and inflationary trends. As a result, the list of pending
projects keep on pilling up, as a result of which the entire project
execution system, enters into a vicious cycle of inadequate grants and
cost escalation, consequently adding to the list of pending projects.
The Committee understands that to break this vicious cycle, among
other things, the Railways have been requesting State Governments to
come forward and share the cost of the projects. The Planning
Commission have now started giving priority in according "In Principle
Approval" to new projects where States are giving free land and sharing
50 per cent cost of the Projects. The Committee considers it to be a
well thought out measure to ensure speedy execution of the railway
projects. However, they are very apprehensive about the position of
those States which are not in a position to either give free land or
share 50 per cent cost of the projects; such States will be adversely
affected by this stand of the Planning Commission. The Committee,
therefore, urge the Ministry of Railways to take up the matter with the
Planning Commission to consider railway projects of crucial importance
even in those States which are not in a position to give free land and
share 50 per cent cost of the projects in order to meet the genuine
needs of the public in these States.
Reply of the Government
There are 368 Nos. of ongoing projects out of which State
Government is contributing towards financing of 37 projects only.
Remaining projects are progressing even without any contribution from
State Government. Progress of these projects is dependent on the
extent of Gross Budgetary Support given by Ministry of Finance. The
stand of Planning Commission to give preference in according “In
Principle” approval to those projects where State Government is sharing
the cost, is for new projects.

26
Comments of the Committee
Please see para 10 of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee observe that out of the 368 ongoing/pending
projects, there are as many as 59 projects which were sanctioned more
than 15 years ago (1997-98 or before). Among these 59 projects, there
are in fact 6 projects which were sanctioned 25 year ago, viz.
(i) Tamluk-Digha, Deshpan-Nandigram with new MM for Kanthi-Egra
(26.2 km.); Nandakumar-Bolaipanda (927 km.) New Line & Nandigram-
Kandhimari (Nayachar) (7 km.) New Line sanctioned in the year
1984-85 in South Eastern Railway; (ii) Howrah-Amta, Bargachia-
Champadanga-Tarakeshawar, Amta-Bagnan & new Material Modification
(MM) for Janghipara-Furfura sharif (12.3 km.) sanctioned in the year
1974-75 in South Eastern Railway; (iii) Nangal Dam-Talwara (83.74 km.)
new broad gauge line & Taking over siding of Mukerian-Talwara
(29.16 km.) sanctioned in the year 1981-82 in Northern Railway;
(iv) Eklakhi-Balurghat (87.11 km.), Gazole-Itahar (28 km.) & new MM
for Raiganj-Itahar (21.8 km.) & Itahar-Buniadpur (39 km.) sanctioned in
the year 1983-84 in North Frontier Railway; (v) Guna-Etawah via Shivpuri-
Gwalior-Bhind (348.25 km.) sanctioned in the year 1984-85 in
North Central Railway; and (vi) Laxmikantapur-Namakhana-Chanda Nagar
(61.5 km.) with new MM for Kakadip-Budakhali (5 km) & Chandanagar-
Bakhali (17.2 km.) sanctioned in the year 1987-88 in Eastern Railway.
Further , there are 3 projects which were sanctioned 20 years ago viz.
Daitari-Banspani (155 km.) sanctioned in the year 1992-93 in East Coast
Railway, Peddapalli-Karimanagar-Nizamabad sanctioned in the year
1993-94 in South Central Railway and Amravati-Narkher sanctioned in
the year 1993-94 in Central Railway. Details in respect of one project
viz. Dallirajahara-Jagdalpur (23 km.) in South East Central Railway
have not been provided. The Committee, while stressing that this is far
from satisfactory, recommend that immediate corrective measures should
be taken to expeditiously complete these long pending projects before
they lose their utility.
Reply of the Government
Details of Dallirajahara-Jagdalpur new line project is as under:—
Dallirajhara-Jagadalpur New Line (235 Km) was sanctioned in
1995-1996. The entire project is to be executed in 2 phases. Phase-I
(95 Km.) between Dallirajahara-Rowghat, funded by SAIL, is being
executed by RVNL. Phase-II (140 km) between Rowghat to Jagdalpur
being executed by South East Central Railway is funded by Railway,
NMDC and Chhattisgarh Government.

27
Land Acquisition
For Phase I, 302.29 Hect. of Private Land, 49.92 Hect. of Government
Land, 2.39 Hect. of SAIL Land have been acquired. Regarding forest
land total requirement is 259.54 Hect. Stage-II clearance (Final approval)
has been received on 24.03.2011 from MoEF . Tree cutting being done
by forest department is in progress. As regard 83.12 Hect. of Revenue
forest land Stage-I clearance from MoEF/NDLS received in April-10.
Proposal for Stage-II clearance has been resubmitted to MoEF after
complying observation of MoEF .
Phase-II—Rowghat-Jagdalpur—Application and set of land plans &
land schedule for acquisition of land between Rowghat to Jagdalpur for
Phase-II construction of new line between Dallirajahara-Jagdalpur , has
been submitted to Collector/Jagdalpur and DFO/Narayanpur in October
2010 along with requisite registration and processing fee.
Estimate—Phase-I (95 Km) between Dallirajhara-Rowghat detailed
estimate sanctioned at the cost of the Rupees 631.78 Cr. On 15.07.2009.
Phase-II (140 km) between Rowghat to Jagdalpur is under preparation
Progress for Phase-I (Executed by RVNL)
(i) Earth work-15.10 Lac-cum completed out of 51 Lac-cum
(ii) Blanketing-0.654 Lac-cum completed out of 10 Lac-cum
(iii) Major Bridge-6.53%
(iv) Minor Bridges-29.96%
(v) Ballast - 8000 cum completed out of 284874 cum
Issues affecting progress—Due to various hindrances like delay in
diversion of revenue forest land, delay in tree cutting by forest
department, burning of vehicles by naxalites on 14.03.11 & 01.06.12,
contractors have stopped the work several times citing these reasons.
However , after constant persuation by RVNL, contractor of 1st package
(42 Km From Dallirajhara-Keoti) agreed to complete only 1st block
section i.e. between Dallirajhara to Dondi 17 km. On 26.04.2013 mid
night, a group of about 30-35 naxalites attacked contractor ’s camp at
Dondi Km 10 in Pkg-I and crossfire took place between naxalites and
CAF . Again on 11.06.13, similar attack took place at the same location.
No casualities happened. However , this incident has dented the
confidence of contractor ’s work force. Citing these reasons contractor
had completely stopped the work. A high level meeting held at MHA on

28
24.07.2013 regarding progress and security is concerned. From October
10, 2013 contractor has restarted the work after providing the dedicated
security in 1st 17 KM ( i.e. from Dallirajhara to Dondi). This issue was
also discussed during Project Monitoring Group meeting on 06.01.2014
at Raipur. It was assured by the ADGP that for future work security will
also be arranged. Chief Secretary mentioned that election has been
conducted by the State Government in above area smoothly.
In most of the old projects some portion of it has been completed
and operationalized. Some of the projects mentioned above have been
completed and commissioned. They are appearing in the list of pending
projects as some more projects have been loaded on it as Material
Modification. Even though the projects have been completed but the
material modification component is still in progress.
These will be completed as per availability of funds and assigned
priority in the prioritization list.
Comments of the Committee
Please see para 16 of Chapter-I of the Report.

29
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; DINESH TRIVEDI,
17 December, 2014 Chairperson,
26 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

30
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RAILWAYS (2014-15)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 17th December , 2014, from
1500 hours to 1530 hours in Committee Room No. ‘62’, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Dinesh Trivedi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri E. Ahamed
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
4. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
5. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
6. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
7. Shri Gaurav Gogoi
8. Shri Rajen Gohain
9. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
10. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
11. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
12. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
13. Shri Thota Narasimham
14. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
15. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy
16. Shri Ganesh Singh
17. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
Rajya Sabha
18. Shri Mukut Mithi
19. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
20. Shri Ambeth Rajan
21. Shri T . Rathinavel
22. Shri Devender Goud T .
23. Shri Alok Tiwari
24. Shri Motilal Vora

31
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal — Additional Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for
consideration the following draft Reports and adopted the same without
any modifications:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 25th Report on “Ongoing
and Pending Railway Projects, with special emphasis on
Projects in the North-East Region ”; and
(iii) *** *** ***
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the
Reports and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

32
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS  OF  ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
25th REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘ONGOING AND
PENDING RAILWAY PROJECTS, WITH SPECIAL
EMPHASIS ON PROJECTS IN NORTH
EASTERN REGION ’
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations: 16
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 12
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15 and 16
Percentage of total 75%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 2
do not desire to pursue in view  of the Government ’s
replies:
Para Nos. 6 and 9
Percentage of total 12.5%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 2
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos. 2 and 8
Percentage of total 12.5%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Nil
final replies are still awaited:
Para No. Nil
Percentage of total 0%