SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Twenty-third Report of the Standing Committee on
Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Suburban Train Services of
Indian Railways, with particular emphasis on
security of women passengers ”]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 05.05.2015
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 05.05.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2015/ Vaisakha, 1937 ( Saka)


S.C.R. No. 195
Price : R  53.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ..................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................ 11
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ............................. 33
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ................................................ 35
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ................................................... 40
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Railways held on 29.04.2015 ................................. 41
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
23rd Report (15th Lok Sabha) on “Sub-urban Train
Services of Indian Railways, with particular emphasis on
security of women passengers ”............................... 43
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RAILWAYS (2014-2015)*
Shri Dinesh Trivedi —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri E. Ahamed
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
4. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
6. Shri Gourav Gogoi
7. Shri Rajen Gohain
8. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi #
9. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
10. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
11. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
12. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
13. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
14. Shri Thota Narasimham
15. Shri A.T . Nana Patil
16. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
17. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy
18. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
19. Shri Ganesh Singh
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
21. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.K. Antony
23. Shri Mukut Mithi
(iii)
* Constituted vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 623 dated 01.09.2014
# Sh. Bandaru Dattatreya ceased to be a Member on his appointment as Minister w.e.f.
09.11.2014. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi was nominated as Member vide LSS Bulletin
Part-II, No. 783 dt. 14.11.2014.

(iv)
24. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
25. Shri Parimal Nathwani @
26. Shri Ambeth Rajan
27. Shri T . Rathinavel
28. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
29. Shri Devender Goud T .
30. Shri Alok Tiwari
31. Shri Motilal Vora
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raju Srivastava — Additional Director
4. Smt. Swati Parwal — Committee Officer
@Smt. Kusum Rai retired on 25.11.2014 vide R.S.S. I.d. No. 1(2)2014-coord. dt. 20.11.14.
Shri Parimal Nathwani nominated as Member w.e.f. 19.12.2014 vide LSS Bulletin Part II
No. 1212 dated 31.12.2014.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Railways
(2014-15), having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Sixth Report of the Standing
Committee on Railways on action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty Third Report
of the Standing Committee on Railways on “Suburban Train Services of
Indian Railways, with particular emphasis on security of women
passengers”.
2. The Twenty Third Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
06.02.2014 and it contained 40 recommendations/observations. The
Ministry of Railways have furnished their action taken replies in respect
of all the recommendations/observations.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Action Taken
Report at their sitting held on 29.04.2015.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the T wenty Third Report of
the Standing Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; DINESH TRIVEDI,
29 April, 2015 Chairperson,
09 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (2013-14) deals
with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in their Twenty-Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
on “Suburban Train Services of Indian Railways, with particular emphasis
on security of women passengers ”.
2. The Twenty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 06.02.2014. The Report contained 40 recommendations/
observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the recommendations/
observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Government. These have been examined and categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14,16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38,
39 and 40
Total: 32
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s replies:
Para Nos. 4, 12 and 24
Total: 3
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Para Nos. 3, 11, 15, 21 and 23
Total: 05
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are awaited:
Para No. NIL
Total: 00
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the
recommendations/observations contained in Chapter-I of the Report
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the recommendations/observations in the
succeeding paragraphs.
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
6. The Committee were of the view that the criterion of minimum
traffic for augmentation of coaches is largely met by many suburban
stations, particularly during peak hours. Hence, the Committee had
strongly recommended that immediate surveys should be undertaken
by all the Zonal Railways to determine the traffic at all the suburban
stations and to upgrade the infrastructure to accommodate the
augmented coaches. Presently, out of the total 471 EMU rakes in service,
only 5 number of rakes have 15-car capacity. The Committee were of
the view that suburban train services have to expand with time because
of spatial factors. Therefore, the Committee had advised the Railway
Board to target 15-coach EMUs rather than 12 coach EMUs so that the
investment and development of infrastructure could be more far-sighted.
This would go a long way in enhancing the carrying capacity on the
suburban system, besides easing out on passenger rush, that can be a
check on untoward incidents.
7. The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken reply, have stated
as under:—
“The total number of passengers carried on the suburban sector in
Mumbai area during FY 2011-12, 2012-13 & 2013-14 is as follows:
FY Number of passengers booked (in millions)
Central Railway Western Railway
2011-12 1432.82 1276.77
2012-13 1436.00 1294.88
2013-14 1468.46 1278.70
Moreover , there are standing instructions to zonal railways to conduct
census on periodical basis.
However , increasing the load of all the EMU rakes to 15 cars is not
feasible due to operational/infrastructural/geographical constraints”.

3
8. The Committee, considering the need to expand suburban
train services, had recommended the Railway Board to target
15-coach EMUs rather than 12 coach EMUs. The Ministry, in their
reply, have inter alia stated that increasing the load of all the EMU
rakes to 15-cars is not feasible due to operational/infrastructural/
geographical constraints. The Committee are disheartened to note
that the reply of the Ministry is silent on the essence of their
recommendation which was related to the expansion of the carrying
capacity of the suburban system primarily to ease out the passenger
rush and also to contain recurrence of untoward incidents. Their
recommendation for upgradation of infrastructure and other facilities
to accommodate future requirements of 15-coaches EMUs has not
been replied to. The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate
their recommendation and await specific action by the Government
in this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
9. The Committee had noted that toilet facility is one of the foremost
basic amenities and its absence from a public space like a railway
station/platform will result in serious inconvenience to the commuters.
During their study visit, the Committee had found that toilets, especially
ladies toilets, were badly maintained, located at the outskirts of the
stations in poorly lit areas, and often remained locked. The Committee
had desired that the Zonal Railways take immediate and effective steps
to improve the situation. The Committee earnestly suggested that the
Railways should undertake safety audits of the suburban stations and
take necessary action to tackle issues that crop up in the light of the
audit observations. To promote transparency and public watch, the
Committee desired the Railway authorities to provide/display names
and contact numbers of the maintenance staff and responsible senior
officials at specified areas in the station/platform and at all the toilet
entrances. Where facilities are in disrepair, the Railways should urgently
and expeditiously do the needful.
10. The Ministry of Railways, in their action taken reply, have
stated as under:
“As per extant policy, toilets should be provided only in concourse/
circulating areas in sub-urban stations. Provision of toilets is not
preferred on platforms at sub-urban stations as the major
requirement of sub-urban passengers is urinal. The repairs/
maintenance of facilities including toilets is undertaken as per
requirement. The names of the stations, where toilet facilities

4
were observed by the Committee in disrepairs have not been
mentioned in the Report. However , Committee’s observations have
been noted and concerned Zonal Railways shall be advised in this
regard. Policy guidelines exist for ensuring approved lux level for
different category of stations, including suburban stations
(C-category) and Foot Over Bridge (FOB) for adequate lighting
arrangements at stations premises. Accordingly, lighting at suburban
stations has also been provided as per these norms. Any shortcoming/
malfunctioning in lighting arrangement are made good as soon as
it comes to the notice. Further, names and contact numbers of the
maintenance staff and responsible officials are available with Station
Manager/Superintendent. T wo types of Safety Audits are being
conducted by Railways regularly i.e. one by individual Railway of
its own divisions once in two months period and another inter-
railway safety audit which is conducted twice a year i.e. from
January to June and July to December. Safety Audit is conducted
by a team of five Senior Administrative Grade (SAG) level officers
of Civil, Mechanical, Signal, Electrical and Safety departments. The
teams carry out audits/inspections and focus on pinpointing
deficiencies found in the system including ancillary activities, staff
training, material supply, availability of funds, system failures,
defective policies/rules etc. Zonal Railways submit their Reports/
Action taken reports to the Ministry of Railways. These reports are
analyzed by the Railway Board which gives them further necessary
instructions as and when necessary ”.
11. The Ministry, in regard to the recommendation of the
Committee to undertake safety audits of all the suburban stations,
has replied that two types of audits are being conducted by Railways
regularly i.e. one by individual Railway once in two-month period
and another inter-railway safety audit twice a year. The Ministry has
further stated that the names and contact numbers of the
maintenance staff and responsible officials are available with Station
Manager/Superintendent. The Committee do not dispute the efficacy
of safety audits being conducted by the Railways. However, the
Committee are of the opinion that one mechanism cannot remain
relevant all the times. Although this mechanism has contained the
deficiencies found in the system, including ancillary activities, staff
training, material supply, system failures, etc., it leaves scope for
improvement especially the maintenance of toilet facility at railway
stations/platforms. The Committee are also disturbed to note that
their recommendation of displaying names and contact numbers of
the maintenance staff at specified areas in the station/ platform and
at all the toilet entrances has not been taken up by the Ministry in

5
the right perspective. The Committee were of the view that as a
first step towards ensuring cleanliness at stations/platforms, if the
details of maintenance staff are prominently displayed, it will have
an impact not only on the maintenance staff but also on the railway
commuters in approaching them in hour of need. Accordingly, the
Committee reiterate that the Ministry should work out a concrete
action plan to display the names of maintenance staff at prominent
places in the railway stations/platforms. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the modalities worked out by the Railways in this
regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
12. The volume of suburban passenger traffic has gone up steadily
in the last decade whereas the facilities at railway stations have
remained more or less stagnant. One crucial issue is the width of the
platforms that should have been increased to accommodate the rapidly
increasing passenger traffic. Where the platforms have been extended
to accommodate twelve coach trains, in certain cases the width of the
platforms has been narrowed to as low as 7 to 8 feet which is indeed
hazardous. Even the Railway bridges are narrow which could lead to
stampede-like situations during peak hours. The Committee had,
therefore, desired the Railway Ministry to examine whether the presently
prescribed width of platform is adequate to facilitate easy and
unhampered movement of passengers at suburban stations. The Schedule
of Dimensions prescribed in the Indian Railway Standards may be
specifically looked into. The Committee should be apprised of the steps
taken in this regard.
13. In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated
as under:
“As per Indian Railway Standards, the width of platform is determined
on the basis of clearance specified in Schedule of Dimensions (SOD)
and it should be adequate to permit a free unhampered movement
of passengers. Standard width has not been prescribed for any
railway platform. However, the concern of the Committee has been
noted & concerned Zonal Railways shall be advised to examine and
take appropriate steps in this matter. ”
14. The Committee, with an intention to facilitate easy and
unhampered movement of passengers at suburban railway stations,
had recommended to the Ministry to examine the width of platforms
and railway bridges. The Committee being aware of the fact that
standard width has not been prescribed for any railway platform in

6
the Indian Railway Standards, also recommended the Ministry to re-
visit the Schedule of Dimensions. The Committee are not satisfied
with the reply furnished by the Ministry. It is desired that the Ministry
should avoid furnishing vague reply such as ‘the concern of the
Committee has been noted’. The Committee expect that action taken
replies of the Government should be specific, comprehensive and
reflecting timelines. The action taken reply should also reflect the
specific efforts made to implement the recommendation or at least
mention the roadmap or specific strategy of the Ministry to implement
the same. The Committee desire the Ministry should henceforth
follow this norm for furnishing action taken reply.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
15. The provision of platform shelters falls under the list of
mandatory amenities to be provided by the Ministry of Railways at the
suburban train stations and platforms. The Committee had recommended
that the Railways should provide shelters for the foot over bridges also
as passengers find it very difficult to use them during summer , rainy
season and inclement weather.
16. In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Railways has stated
as under:
“As per norms of Minimum Essential Amenities (MEA), shelters are
provided on FOBs at A1 & A category stations only. However , the
recommendations made by the Committee is noted for examination”.
17. The Ministry ’s reply has revealed that as per norms of
Minimum Essential Amenities (MEA), shelters are provided on foot
over bridges at A1 and A category stations only. Since the provision
of platform shelters falls under the list of mandatory amenities and
the passengers using suburban trains find it difficult to use it during
summer, rainy season and inclement weather, the Committee had
desired the Ministry to provide shelters on foot over bridges also.
While the Ministry has informed that the recommendation of the
Committee has been noted for examination, no specific proposal has
been provided to show that this aspect has been taken up by them
with all the seriousness it deserved. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate that it would be more appropriate if a time bound strategy
is chalked out to realize the intended objective. The Committee
would like the Ministry to furnish details of the status of
implementation of this project in a structured manner encompassing
targets and efforts to achieve them.

7
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
18. The Committee had found that unauthorised vendors, beggars
and hawkers are a major problem on suburban trains, stations, platforms,
over bridges, pathways, etc. They not only obstructed the free movement
of the passengers but also indulge in pick-pocketing and other such
crimes. The Committee strongly recommended that all unauthorised
hawkers and beggars shall be strictly prohibited from boarding trains or
operating at platforms/stations. Further, non-commuter licenced
vendors/hawkers must carry their ID cards issued by the Railways and
must wear their Railway Badges, carrying their names and licence
numbers. The Railways must ensure that vendors, along with their
luggage, travel in the luggage compartment or earmarked areas of
coaches reserved exclusively for their use. The Committee noted that
different Zones have different areas marked for vendors in trains. The
Railways may look into this, identify which is the best practice, and
consider introducing such practice uniformly across the suburban railways
in all Zones.
19. In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated
as under:
“Regular drives are being conducted against unauthorized hawkers
and beggars and offenders are being prosecuted under relevant
sections of the Railways Act. Time to time instructions are issued
to escorting staff to ensure that the vendors do not board with
their wares in coaches other than the earmarked coach/earmarked
areas reserved exclusively for their use. Proper Identity Cards with
travelling authorities are issued by the Railways to the authorized
staff of catering/vending licenses to enable them to manage catering
services on mobile and static units effectively. Almost in all the
Zonal Railways having suburban services, viz. Central, Western,
Eastern, South Eastern and South Central Railways, bogies or part
of bogies at either ends are generally earmarked for vendors for
easy alighting of material and also to facilitate passengers to move
inside the train, except in the suburban services in Southern Railway,
where this provision has not been made due to operational
constraints.”
20. The Committee have been informed that regular drives are
being conducted against unauthorized hawkers and beggars and
offenders are being prosecuted under the relevant sections of the
Railways Act. It has also been stated that almost in all the Zonal
Railways having suburban services, bogies or part of bogies at either

8
ends are generally earmarked for vendors for easy alighting of material
and also to facilitate passengers to move inside the train. The
Committee are surprised to note that in spite of all these measures,
unauthorized vendors, beggars and hawkers are still a problem on
suburban trains, stations, platforms, over bridges, pathways, etc.
The Committee are inclined to believe that proper implementation
of relevant provisions of the Railways Act to curb this problem is not
done with due diligence and this practice has been continuing
unabated. The Committee feel that some innovative steps need to
be taken to put an end to the entry of unauthorised vendors and
hawkers that causes much discomfort to the suburban railway
commuters. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
modalities and concrete action plan worked out by the Ministry in
this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
21. The Committee have received several written complaints
regarding problems relating to the Suburban train time-table. The
Committee suggested that Zonal Railways should regularly publish user-
friendly suburban time-table in consultation with the commuters’ forums/
associations. These time-tables should be developed in a manner to
serve as a handy guide book for the commuters which must, inter alia,
include such details as railway officials ’ names and phone numbers,
etc. Unauthorised publications of time-tables by private agencies should
be investigated and appropriate action taken by the authorities
concerned. Time-tables should be made available in local languages as
well. Most importantly, the Railways should seriously look into the issue
of shortage of time-tables and ensure their easy availability at all
railway premises.
22. In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Railways has stated
as under:
“The suburban time-tables are published in consultation with
Commuters’ forums/associations. Also, the addresses, phone numbers
and the name of the officers of public grievances redressal machinery
are provided in the suburban time-tables. While Zonal Railways
have not received complaints regarding unauthorized publication of
time-table by private agencies, with regard to non-availability of
suburban time-tables, at all railway premises, Zonal Railways, based
on demand, make available sufficient quantity of suburban time-
tables. Printing of suburban time-table in regional language is not
commercially viable ”.

9
23. The Committee had recommended that the Zonal Railways
should regularly publish user-friendly time table which may also
include details of railway officials ’ name, phone numbers, etc. in
consultation with commuters ’ forums/associations. The Committee
had also recommended that time tables should be made available in
local languages and to ensure its easy availability at the railway
premises. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have inter alia
stated that printing of sub-urban time table in regional language is
not commercially viable. The Committee feel that the Ministry have
not taken their recommendation in its right perspective. In fact, the
idea behind the Committee ’s suggestion to print and circulate time
table in regional languages was to disseminate the information for
the benefit of sub-urban train commuters. Merely pronouncing the
proposal as commercially non-viable even without undertaking a
preliminary cost-benefit analysis does not do justice to the
Committee’s recommendation. The Committee, therefore, once again
emphasise that there are various activities before any organisation,
especially the Indian Railways, which may not be commercially viable
but have greater element of public importance. As a first step in this
direction, the Ministry should work out modalities to publish
pamphlets/brochures of suburban time tables in regional languages.
The Committee would like to be kept abreast of the steps being
taken by the Ministry and the progress made thereafter.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
24. The Committee had found the RDSO standards with regard to
the amenities to be provided at Railway Stations for persons with
disabilities (Annexure B) as part of the fundamental amenities. However,
the Committee had been highly disappointed and very critical of the
apathetic attitude of the Railway authorities in giving practical effect
to these recommendations. The Committee had desired that the Railways
should take expeditious steps to implement the recommendations of
the RDSO guidelines in letter and spirit for the benefit of the differently
abled commuters inline with the provisions of the Persons with Disabilities
(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act,
1995. The Committee had also desired that they be informed regularly
of the progress achieved in providing facilities like standard ramps,
signages, designated parking lots, non-slippery walkway, disabled friendly
toilets, inter-platform transfer facility, “May I Help You ” booth, etc.,
for the benefit of the differently abled commuters.
25. In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Railways has stated
as under:
“Based on the RDSO ’s Report, revised guidelines on provision of
amenities at Railway station and other Public Building for Persons

10
with Disabilities have been issued to Zonal Railways for
implementation, vide Railway Board’s circular No. 2012/LM(PA)/08/
04/ Policy. PwDs dated 06.06.2013. 562 stations falling in A1, A and
B category have been provided with following facilities viz. Standard
ramp with railing for barrier free entry, earmarking of at least one
parking lot for two vehicles used by disabled persons, a non-slippery
walkway from parking lot to building, Signages of appropriate
visibility, at least one drinking water tap suitable for use by a
disabled person, at least one toilet on the ground floor and ‘May
I help you ’ booth ”.
26. The Ministry, in their reply, have stated that based on RDSO’s
Report, on 6 June, 2013, revised guidelines on the provision of
amenities at Railway stations and other public buildings for persons
with disabilities have been issued to Zonal Railways for
implementation. The Committee are constrained to state that the
Ministry should endeavour towards providing adequate amenities in
consonance with the provisions of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal
Opportunities, Protection of Right and Full Participation) Act, 1995
that was promulgated by Government of India to ensure equal
opportunities to differently abled persons. In the opinion of the
Committee, implementation of the provisions of the Act requires a
multi-sectoral collaborative approach of the Ministry of Railways and
should not be confined to facilities for differently abled persons only
at A1, A and B category of stations. Since it appears to the Committee
that the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995, had not been implemented
in totality by the Indian Railways under the ‘non-discrimination clause’
of the Act, the Committee expect that a candid evaluation would be
undertaken by the Railways to assess the actual implementation of
the RDSO ’s Report on the lines of the Act. The Committee may be
apprised of the action taken in this regard.

11
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Suburban Railways, apart from being one of the major services
rendered by the Indian Railways, also plays a facilitating role in
addressing the challenges of the public transport system in many of
India’s important cities. Various Railway Zones, viz., Central, Eastern,
Southern, South Eastern, South Western and Western and Kolkata Metro,
are providing dedicated suburban services in the country covering about
4,377 million passengers, working out to 53.23 percent of the total
passengers on the Indian Railway system. In view of this, it is imperative
that the Railways provide the best of the services and amenities to this
huge travelling public who use these services on a daily basis. A
substantial segment of the Railways ’ clients comprises of women
passengers. As such, besides providing adequate facilities to women
passengers, ensuring their safety and security has been a matter of
grave concern to the Committee. The Committee have made an
in-depth examination of the subject and arrived at certain conclusions
which have been discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
Reply of the Government
All out efforts are being made by RPF with special emphasis on the
security of women passengers travelling by suburban trains. The following
steps are being taken in co-ordination with GRP and Local Police to
provide hassle free journey to women commuters—
• Security personnel including lady security personnel are
deployed in trains and on Railway platforms.
• An Integrated Security System consisting of electronic
surveillance of vulnerable stations through CCTV camera
network, access control, anti-sabotage checks has been
approved to strengthen surveillance mechanism over 202
sensitive and vulnerable Railway Stations.
• Gender Sensitization through awareness campaigns amongst
the front line Railway Staff like ticket checking staff, RPF
and on-board employees who have constant interface with
the travelling public is done constantly.

12
• Lady staff are being deployed as per available resources on
platforms for the help of women commuters.
• Security Help-Line numbers have been set up in the concerned
Zonal Control Rooms to facilitate the passengers to inform
about any untoward incidents. The numbers of such security
help-lines have been displayed at conspicuous places of
important Railway stations and in the coaches of trains.
• Regular coordination meetings are held with State Police at
all levels to ensure proper registration and investigation of
crime by Government Railway Police.
• Regular drives are conducted against male persons travelling
in ladies compartment and offenders are prosecuted under
provisions of the Railways Act.
Railways are providing value for money as far as amenities in EMU
coaches are concerned. Following amenities are provided in the EMU
coaches:
(i) Earmarking of separate compartments for special needs such
as I class general, I class ladies, II class ladies etc.
(ii) Ergonomically designed seats with cushion in the I class and
durable polycarbonate seats in the second class.
(iii) Panoramic large windows with button half opening and fixed
top half with louvers for air flow and to prevent rain water
entry.
(iv) Stainless steel luggage racks made from tubular sections on
all compartments.
(v) Alarm chain for each row of seats on all compartments.
(vi) External LED alarm signal lights for special compartments.
(vii) Special zebra marking near doorways with colours similar to
what is provided in the platform for identification of special
compartments.
(viii) 3/4th opaque covering of partitions for ladies compartments.
(ix) Full stainless steel tubular partitions between specially
marked compartments.
(x) Handholds with Stainless Steel handles in general and ladies
compartments.
(xi) Grab pole at the center of doorway and handles at sides of
doorway.

13
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee observe that since the inception of the suburban
services, the proportion of suburban traffic has more or less been on
the higher side as compared to the non-suburban traffic. However , the
Committee find that the quantum and quality of services and facilities
provided in the suburban sector are much below the expectations of
the commuters. Most of the Electric Multiple Units (EMUs) which number
5223 per day run with dense crush loading. During interactions of the
Committee with commuters in different Zones, there had been a
persistent demand from them for replacing the existing 9 coach car
with that of 12/15 coach cars. The Committee are not convinced with
the argument of the Ministry of Railways that augmentation of the
existing EMU services on Indian Railways from 9 to 12/15 coaches is a
continuous process and this depends upon the traffic requirements and
availability of infrastructure required for operation of 12/15 coach EMU
trains. The Committee feel that periodic surveys should be conducted
in respect of each of the suburban railways to assess the actual
requirement of 9/12/15 coaches EMU trains at different points of time
during the day and the trains should be run accordingly. The Indian
Railways should also dwell to keep in sharper focus the future burden
on the suburban railways keeping in view the continuous influx of
population into the Metros.
Reply of the Government
In majority of concerned zonal railways where suburban services
are available, suburban trains with 9 car coaches have already been
augmented into 12 car service wherever feasible, subject to availability
of coaches. So also, 15 car services have also been introduced, as per
availability of coaches and infrastructure facilities such as availability
of 15 coach length platforms on suburban stations. As such, augmentation
of the existing EMU services on Indian Railways from 9 to 12/15 coaches
is a continuous process and this depend upon the traffic requirements
and availability of infrastructure required for operation of 12/15 coach
EMU trains. However, the recommendation of the committee inter-alia
regarding “conduct of periodic surveys in respect of each of the suburban
railways to assess the actual requirement of 9/12/15 coaches EMU
trains at different points of time during the day and the trains should
be run accordingly ” has been advised to concerned zonal railways for
compliance suitably and further necessary action.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee have been informed that in the Mumbai Suburban
System, the existing DC EMU rakes are being replaced with 30-35%
more energy efficient EMU rakes which also have regenerative braking

14
features. 128 rakes are reported to have been inducted into passenger
services by the end of 2011-12. The Committee desire that the
replacement of the remaining EMU rakes should be done at the earliest
and such advanced technology may be considered for other Railway
Zones also in a time-bound manner.
Reply of the Government
It has been decided by Ministry of Railways that henceforth EMU
rakes for other zonal Railways will have 3-phase propulsion equipment
as recommended by the Committee to ensure energy efficiency.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
Unlike EMU trains that are designed for running in a Metropolitan
City and its suburbs, the Mainline Electrical Multiple Units Trains (MEMU)
are designed for semi-urban and rural areas. The Committee note that
out of the total MEMU rakes of 116 in different Zones, only 48 rakes
are 12 car rakes, while 53 rakes are 8 car rakes. There are only thirteen
16 car rakes and just two 20 car rakes. The Committee feel that this
is one of the crucial reasons for the extreme overcrowding in suburban
trains, leading to severe discomfort for the travelling public, especially
women. They, therefore, recommend that the augmentation of all MEMU
rakes to 12/16/20 car rakes should be undertaken and completed in a
time-bound manner.
Reply of the Government
Railways are planning to progressively augment all 8 car MEMU
rakes to 12/16/20 car rakes. Procurement of MEMU rakes is being
planned accordingly.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee are dismayed to note that out of the 187 suburban
services which were announced in the Railway Budget of 2012-13, only
34 suburban trains have been introduced so far. They desire that the
remaining services should be introduced without any further delay; the
Committee may be apprised of the progress of this endeavour.
Reply of the Government
Out of the 187 suburban services announced in Railway Budget
2012-13, 121 new suburban services have been introduced till date and
16 suburban in Southern Railway are proposed to be introduced shortly.

15
Remaining 50 suburban services in Kolkata Metro, have not been
introduced so far due to shortage of crew and are likely to be introduced
as and when the same becomes available. Further, 50 services (Non-
Budget) have been extended from Dum Dum/Kavi Subhas to Noapara,
thereby providing additional services between Dum Dum/Kavi Subhas
and Noapara.
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee observe that the operational losses incurred by the
suburban railways on all India basis has been going up with every
passing year, and during 2012-13 stood at Rs. 2852.32 crore which is a
matter of grave concern. The Committee desire that the specific reasons
for incurring such huge losses by the suburban railways should be
examined urgently and appropriate steps taken to ensure that at least
they reach break-even level without any additional financial burden on
the commuters.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has specified the loss of Rs. 2852.32 crore incurred
by suburban railways but this is pertaining to year 2011-12 instead of
2012-13 as mentioned. The reasons for incurring such huge losses have
been examined in detail. Mainly, the staff cost, cost of fuel, operating
expenditure, burden of appropriation to pension fund etc. have
aggravated the cost of services as compared to less earnings due to low
fare structure and form the reasons for such huge losses. Suburban
fares were also not increased since the year 2002-03 while the cost of
repair & maintenance of coaches/tracks, fuel, etc. increased manifold.
However , feasibility of reduction of cost to be studied to minimize the
loss upto the break-even point, apart from rationalization of fares and
frequent check on ticketless travel.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee have been informed that the Operating Ratio of the
Suburban Services is not calculated separately. However, during the
Study Tour of the Committee to various Zones, they were informed that
the Operating Ratio in respect of suburban services in Central Railway,
Eastern Railway, South Central Railway, Western Railway and Kolkata
Metro was to the extent of 194, 178.86, 88.09, 191 and 328, respectively.
Such a high level of Operating Ratio in respect of suburban services is
certainly not acceptable. The Committee want that all suburban railway
systems should be asked to regularly work out the Operating Ratio; the
Railways should also examine the reasons for such high levels of Operating
Ratio and take appropriate steps to address the matter.

16
Reply of the Government
The Operating Ratio in respect of suburban services in various
Railways mentioned in Item No. 9 is not correct. It should be; Central
Railway-176.4, Eastern Railway-710.3, South Eastern Railway-441.21,
Western Railway 112.23, Southern Railway-296.03 and Metro Railway-
310.89 for the year 2011-12. Loss of suburban services of South Central
Railway is not included in suburban loss of Indian Railways for 2011-12
and 2012-13 as this service is declared as Suburban service in December
2013. So far, Suburban Railway System did not work out operating
ratios. However they have now worked out the same and have been
instructed to work this out regularly from the forthcoming years. The
Railways have examined the reasons for such high levels of operating
ratios and observed that there are many such reasons like (i) low fare
structure compared to the high operation & maintenance cost, (ii) cost
of general overheads etc. To reduce the Operating Ratio, it has been
the constant endeavour on part of Railways to avoid wasteful expenditure
and control its growth by improving staff productivity, better assets
utilization, control over fuel expenditure etc.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Indian Railways has about 483 suburban stations. Depending
upon the importance of the station from the point of view of passenger
traffic, the stations in Indian Railways have been categorized into seven
categories, viz., A1, A2, B, C, D, E and F . Suburban stations come under
category ‘C’ where certain minimum amenities have been specified.
The Committee regret to note that although the Railways have specified
a very impressive list of basic amenities that should be provided in the
suburban stations, yet they have not been very successful in ensuring
that all these amenities are made available to the travelling public. In
this context, the Committee find that 258 suburban stations have been
identified for development as ‘Adarsh’ Stations with specific areas of
focus relating to passenger facilities and amenities. However , during
the Study Tours, the Committee noted, and were also apprised by the
commuters, that several of the listed facilities were not available to
the passengers. In view of this, the Committee urge the Ministry to
deliver all its promises as far as basic amenities are concerned without
any further delay.
Reply of the Government
246 stations falling under ‘C’ category have been developed under
‘Adarsh’ station scheme as per norms. The names of the stations where
the non-availability of amenities, as per prescribed norms, were noted

17
by the Committee, are not mentioned in the Report. However , the
Committee’s observation has been noted for advising zonal Railways to
take appropriate action in the matter.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee are surprised to note that despite detailed policy
guidelines issued regarding proper lighting at suburban station, the
non-implementation of the same is very conspicuous. In the opinion of
the Committee, it is absolutely essential that proper lighting is provided
in the station premises, platforms and circulating area, besides at
toilet facilities, to thwart anti-social elements and instill a sense of
confidence in travellers, especially women. The Ministry of Railways
should conduct periodic checks to ensure proper and adequate lighting
arrangements at suburban stations. Similarly, encroachments of Railway
land by criminal elements and trespassing into station premises by
unauthorized persons should be strictly prohibited.
Reply of the Government
Policy guidelines exist for ensuring approved lux level for different
category of stations. Adequate lighting arrangements have been provided
at platforms/Railway stations as per norms. Any shortcoming/
malfunctioning in lighting arrangement are made good as soon as it
comes to the notice.
Service improvement Groups at Divisional & Zonal levels are formed
to inspect passenger amenities at railway stations. Based on their reports,
remedial measures, as needed, are taken. Periodic/surprise checks &
inspections are also carried out by officers at different levels to ensure
proper and adequate lighting arrangements at suburban stations.
Railways are engaged in a continuous exercise to prevent
encroachments and protect its land by providing boundary wall, fencing
tree plantation etc. Also encroachments on Railway land are dealt with
in accordance with the provision of the Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 and Railway Act, 1989.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee have noted that the uneven height of platforms and
coach level is a major cause of several casualties at platforms, besides
causing grievous injuries to many passengers. Smooth boarding and de-
boarding of trains are seriously impaired because of uneven height of
rakes and platforms, particularly during peak hours. Women, children,

18
patients and differently abled persons face considerable difficulty in
view of this. The Committee understand that the feasibility of reducing
the gap between platform level and coach level for suburban stations
is still under examination of the Ministry of Railways. Taking into
consideration the heavy footfall and peak hour rush at the suburban
platforms, the Committee strongly recommend to the Railways to look
into the issue of uneven platform-coach height and to take immediate
steps to do the needful in the larger interests of the safety of the
travelling public.
Reply of the Government
Based on Board’s approval, instructions have already been issued to
Central Railway, Western Railway & RDSO vide letter no. 2007/CEDO/
SD/IRSOD/O dated 19.02.2014 (copy enclosed as Annexure A) for taking
necessary action w.r.t. raising of height of passenger platform of suburban
stations.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The provision of platform shelters falls under the list of mandatory
amenities to be provided by the Ministry of Railways at the suburban
train stations and platforms. The Committee recommend that the
Railways should provide shelters for the foot over bridges also as
passengers find it very difficult to use them during summer , rainy season
and inclement weather.
Reply of the Government
As per norms of Minimum Essential Amenities (MEA), shelters are
provided on FOBs at A1 & A category stations only. However , the
recommendations made by the Committee is noted for examination.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee, while noting the assertion of the Ministry of Railways
that potable drinking water is provided at all the suburban stations,
state that they have been informed by commuters about a number of
suburban stations where this basic amenity is still lacking or where they
are not maintained properly and hygienically. The Committee would
urge the Ministry to ensure that there is regular and uninterrupted
supply of potable water at every suburban station.
Reply of the Government
The observation has been noted and concerned Zonal Railways shall
be advised in this regard.

19
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee have been informed that while no air-conditioned
EMU/MEMU is currently running on the Indian Railways, it is planned to
introduce AC EMU services on Mumbai Suburban on trial basis. The
Committee desire that they may be apprised of the progress in this
matter.
Reply of the Government
IGBT based 3-phase electrics are likely to be supplied by M/s BHEL
in the March/April 2014. Air conditioned EMU rake will be manufactured
at ICF during 2014-15 and planned for introduction in Mumbai suburban
area on trial basis by July, 2014.
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee are deeply concerned at the lack of proper
maintenance of the suburban railway property. During their visit to
various places, the Committee found that the coaches of suburban
trains and the walls of suburban stations and platforms were defaced
with posters, banners, festive decorative materials, rampant spitting,
etc. The Committee strongly recommend that such defacement of
Railway property must be severely dealt. It is the responsibility of the
Railways to protect and maintain the rakes of the trains. The Committee
would like to stress that a foolproof mechanism should be put in place
to ensure the protection of the suburban railway property, which should
include proper display of warnings against any sort of vandalism of
railway property, proper surveillance through both physical monitoring
and through CCTVs, imposition of penalty/punishment, thereby promoting
a culture of upholding railway property as a national asset. Further , the
Committee stress that the rakes of all the suburban trains must be
cleaned on a daily basis without fail as it is part of the basic amenities
which Railways are duty-bound to ensure.
Reply of the Government
All out efforts are being made to improve the standard of cleanliness
at railway stations. The measures taken include introduction of
mechanized cleaning process, award to rag picking/garbage disposal
contracts, pay & use toilet scheme etc. Regular checks are conducted
at officers/supervisors levels and corrective action is taken wherever
any deficiency is noticed. Rules under the Railways Act 1989 has been
duly framed vide Gazette Notification dated 26.11.2012 to penalize the
persons affecting cleanliness & hygiene at Railway premises. Cleanliness
awareness campaigns are also launched for education of the rail users
to ensure a satisfactory level of cleanliness at railway stations.

20
All suburban rakes are being cleaned (swept) in the night in stabling
yards/maintenance sheds.
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee have found that unauthorised vendors, beggars and
hawkers are a severe nuisance on suburban trains, stations, platforms,
over bridges, pathways, etc. They not only obstruct the free movement
of the passengers but also indulge in pick-pocketing and other such
crimes. The Committee strongly recommend that all unauthorised
hawkers and beggars shall be strictly prohibited from boarding trains or
operating at platforms/stations. Further, non-commuter licenced
vendors/hawkers must carry their ID cards issued by the Railways and
must wear their Railway Badges, carrying their names and licence
numbers. The Railways must ensure that vendors, along with their
luggage, travel in the luggage compartment or earmarked areas of
coaches reserved exclusively for their use. The Committee note that
different Zones have different areas marked for vendors in trains. The
Railways may look into this, identify which is the best practice, and
consider introducing such practice uniformly across the suburban railways
in all Zones.
Reply of the Government
Regular drives are being conducted against unauthorized hawkers
and beggars and offenders are being prosecuted under relevant sections
of the Railways Act. Time to time instructions are issued to escorting
staff to ensure that the vendors do not board with their wares in
coaches other than the earmarked coach/earmarked areas reserved
exclusively for their use.
Proper Identity Cards with travelling authorities are issued by the
railways to the authorized staff of catering/vending licenses to enable
them to manage catering services on mobile and static units effectively.
Almost in all the Zonal Railways having suburban services,  viz.
Central, Western, Eastern, South Eastern and South Central Railways,
bogies or part of bogies at either ends are generally earmarked for
vendors for easy alighting of material and also to facilitate passengers
to move inside the train, except in the suburban services in Southern
Railway, where this provision has not been made due to operational
constraints.
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
Proper signage and Electronic Train Indicator Board are part of
basic provisions assured by the Railways. Much to the Committee ’s
regret, the absence of proper signage and Electronic Train Indicator

21
Boards are so conspicuous in most of the suburban stations/platforms.
The lack of signage indicating the location of ladies/handicapped coaches
or toilets leads to confusion, difficulties and even harassment of female
commuters and differently abled passengers. The Committee, therefore,
desire that immediate steps be taken by the Ministry to declare proper
signage as an “absolutely essential amenity ” for smooth and easy flow
of passengers. The Railways are primarily a service-provider and,
therefore, they must strive continuously to eliminate all problems faced
by the commuters availing its services. In this context, the Committee
consider Electronic Train Indicator Boards as an absolute necessity which
should be prioritised by the Railways.
Reply of the Government
Commercial Directorate of Railway Board has categorized the Railway
Stations into A1, A, B, C, D, E & F categories depending upon the
earnings, which is the indicator of passenger traffic. Further Land &
Amenities and Passenger Marketing Directorates of Railway Board have
issued comprehensive instructions for the scale of Passenger Amenities
items at these categorized stations, vide Railway Board ’s letter no.
2012/LM(PA)/3/5 dated 11.09.2012. As per these instructions only
stations categorized as A1, & A are to be provided with Electronic Train
Indicator Boards under “Minimum Essential Category ”. In addition to
this, B & C category stations are also to be provided with Electronic
Train Indicator Board under norms of “Desirable Amenities ”.
As on date, out of 393 (A1, +A category) stations Electronic Train
indication Board is available at 369 stations and out of 723 (B+C category)
stations, Train Indication Board is available at 419 stations.
The Committee’s observation has been noted and the same will be
considered in the next review of guidelines for provision of Minimum
Essential Passenger Amenities at railway stations.
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
Considering the high rate of accidents and fatalities on the suburban
train network, the Committee believe that some kind of instant medical
aid system should be built in into the suburban trains and stations. A
paramedic and a helper with stretcher, ladder and medical box could
be suitably accommodated on suburban trains. It may also be advisable
to prominently display the method of administering Cardio Pulmonary
Resuscitation (CPR) in all coaches. The Ministry may examine the
feasibility of such an arrangement expeditiously.

22
Reply of the Government
The feasibility of implementing the above recommendations has
been examined. As regards display of CPR procedure in all coaches of
all suburban trains is concerned, the recommendation is accepted and
the same will be implemented. As regards facilities for providing first
aid, the same are already available with the guards of suburban trains
and also in all suburban stations. Since inter-station distance in suburban
sections is short and traversed by suburban trains in about 3-5 minutes,
medical attention can easily be provided at the stations including shifting
to hospitals, wherever necessary.
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
With millions of passengers using the suburban train services in the
country, the safety and security of the travelling public in general is a
matter of serious concern. The terrorist attack on the Mumbai Railway
System has brought the issue into sharper focus. Threats like terrorist
attacks pose a grave danger to the commuters and the Railway security
mechanism should be equipped to adequately and effectively deal with
such threats. Escorting of trains, access control, crowd management,
medical emergency, etc., are issues that need urgent and proactive
attention. Security procedures like frisking and baggage screening should
be strictly complied with to avoid any security lapse that can lead to
disastrous consequences. The Indian Railways would be advised to look
into all these aspects and come out with an appropriate strategy,
including by use of latest technology, to counter any challenge to the
safety and security of passengers and also to Railway property.
Reply of the Government
To enhance the security arrangement following steps are being
taken:
• An Integrated Security System consisting of electronic
surveillance of vulnerable stations through CCTV camera
network, access control, anti sabotage checks has been
approved to strengthen surveillance mechanism over 202
sensitive and vulnerable Railway Stations.
• Security personnel are being deployed at all entry/exist gates
of important station for frisking and baggage checking for
which security gadgets like DFMDs, HHMDs and luggage
scanners are being used for the safety and security of
passengers.

23
• Bomb detection squads with trained RPF personnel and
modern equipment are deployed at important stations in
sub-urban areas to conduct regular anti-sabotage checks in
trains and stations.
• Frequent joint combing operations exhibiting high profile
presence of RPF , GRP , BDS, Dog Squad and Commercial
Department are organized at important stations and sections
to create a sense of security among rail passengers.
• Intelligence inputs received from various quarters are shared
with GRP and Local Police regularly and prompt action is
taken there on.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee understand that in view of the three-tier security
arrangement on the Indian Railway system, the Railways have to maintain
regular coordination with the State Governments, as the cases of crimes
on Railways are reported to, registered and investigated by the
Government Railway Police (GRP); the Railway Protection Force (RPF)
which functions under the Ministry of Railways, supplements the efforts
of the GRP . However, the Committee is of the view that such an
ambiguous segregation of powers and responsibilities among the three
authorities can be problematic in addressing security challenges. The
Committee suggest that the Ministry of Railways should consider further
streamlining and fine tuning of the entire security arrangement so that
the safety and security of passengers and railway property are not
compromised in any way due to multiplicity of agencies. In addition,
the filling up of vacancies of security personnel should be accorded the
highest priority and recruitment/training completed expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
At present a three tier security system of Railway Protection Force
(RPF), Government Railway Police (GRP) and District Police is existing
over Indian Railways:
District Police: Security of tracks, bridges and tunnels.
GRP: Prevention and detection of crime and maintenance of law
and order in station premises and trains.
RPF: Protection and security of railway property, passenger area
and passengers and matters connected therewith for supplementing
efforts of GRP .

24
Coordination and liaison is maintained by the RPF with GRP and
District police at the Divisional, Zonal and Board ’s level to ensure
smooth train operation over Indian Railways.
A proposal for amendment in the RPF Act to empower the RPF to
deal with passenger related offences, in the passenger area, is under
process. The proposal has been concurred by the Ministries of Law &
Justice and the Home Affairs. As desired by the Cabinet Secretariat,
comments of States have been solicited on the proposal to amend the
RPF Act. Comments have been received from 22 States/UTs as such
matter is still under process.
For filling up 511 posts of Sub-Inspectors, recruitment has been
finalized and initial training of selected candidates has also been started
which will be completed in September 2014.
For filling up of 17087 vacancies of constables, written examination
and Physical Efficiency Test (PET) has been completed. Viva-voce is
scheduled from 26.05.2014. Further , a notification for filling up of 659
Posts of Ancillary Staff was issued in December 2013, pre-examination
work for which is under process.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee are glad to learn that the implementation of an
Integrated Security System is underway to strengthen security
surveillance mechanism over 202 sensitive stations of the Indian Railways.
The Committee are keen to know the progress made in this direction
and hope the Ministry of Railways will soon implement this system in
the entire Indian Railways, including, of course, in the suburban sections.
Reply of the Government
Work is under progress for installation of the Integrated Security
System over 93 stations of 12 zonal railways. All the zonal railways
have been advised to ensure expeditious implementation of the system
over all the nominated stations.
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
Coming to the security of women passengers in the suburban train
networks, the Committee note with utmost anxiety several issues that
impinge on this critical area. The recommendations of the Committee
in this regard may be applicable not merely to the suburban train
services but to the entire Indian Railway network. While the Railways

25
do not have the exact figures of the number of women commuters in
the suburban trains, a study by NCAER has shown that approximately
12 per cent of the suburban travellers are women which in real terms
is in itself a significant number. That puts an added onus on the Indian
Railways to ensure the safety and security of the women commuters.
Several issues have come to the notice of the Committee which are
examined in the succeeding paragraphs.
Reply of the Government
All Post and Out-Post in-charges have been instructed to deploy
sufficient men to increase visible security presence at the stations and
also advised to make sure that staff attend all trains and ladies coaches
to check the safety of passengers and to instil a sense of security
among the women commuters. All RPF staff have been suitably instructed
to keep special watch on the coaches reserved for women passengers.
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee have observed that different Railway Zones have
separate women HELPLINE numbers which only adds to the confusion
among the commuters. Besides, these numbers are neither properly
displayed nor adequately publicised by the Zones. An emergency number
is an instant rescue for women commuters in distress. Therefore, the
Committee strongly recommend that the Railway Board should expedite
the process of providing a simple and uniform HELPLINE number for the
entire Indian Railways which should be given wide publicity through
both the print and the electronic media. This number should also be
prominently displayed inside and outside the train coaches and at the
stations/platforms and at girls’ schools and colleges, offices and working
women hostels. The number should be printed on the suburban train
tickets and train Time Tables also in English and the respective regional
language. This number should be toll free number and monitored round-
the-clock by professional staff so that immediate assistance could be
provided to women commuters in case of any emergency.
Reply of the Government
A work of “All India Security Help Line ” has been included in the
Pink Book and is being executed by CRIS. A Security Helpline No.
1800111322 from Railway Board made functional with effect from
15.06.2014.
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee observe that the coaches earmarked for ladies in
the EMUs do not have emergency alarms system. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Railways to install an emergency alarm bell or

26
warning bell in the ladies coaches. Further , this emergency alarm bell
must be connected to the Loco Pilot cabin and the Guard ’s cabin
displaying the coach number and, if feasible, also to the RPF booth of
the nearby station.
Reply of the Government
In Mumbai suburban trains, audio-visual alarms are provided in all
ladies coaches. Whenever the emergency alarm chain is pulled from
the ladies compartment, the audio alarm is sounded in Guard cabin and
Loco Pilot, along with flasher light indication outside the ladies coach,
which alerts not only the guard and loco pilot of the train about chain
pulling from the particular ladies coach, but also alerts the RPF staff
and station staff, as the train approaches the next station. Ladies
compartment is generally provided next to the guard ’s compartment.
On getting this audio-visual alarm indication, train is stopped by loco
pilot/guard. This arrangement is working satisfactorily.
Feasibility of providing similar arrangement on other suburban
services will be examined.
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The Committee believe that security vigilance cameras act as a
strong deterrent against anti-social elements. Hence, the Committee
recommend installation of security cameras inside the coaches, at the
platforms and at stations. These CCTVs should be monitored round the
clock by the Railway security personnel. At the same time, the
Committee would caution that such surveillance should not compromise
on the personal privacy of the commuters. The Railways may also
explore the possibility of announcements and electronic displays inside
coaches on station details like which station comes next, etc., as is
done in the case of Delhi Metro. Besides, the Committee feel that
ladies coaches must be properly guarded with one lady guard present
in the coaches all the travelling time. The public address system at
Railway stations should also be used to announce the Helpline Number,
warn against unauthorised entry into women ’s coaches and punishment
that can result there from, and in general to sensitize the travelling
public on gender concerns. Further, the Committee call upon the Railways
to ensure that there is no trespassing either in the ladies coaches or
ladies waiting rooms and that stringent action is taken against any
violators.
Reply of the Government
Instructions have been issued to Zonal Railways for making
announcement through public address systems at railway stations
regarding the punishment/warnings against unauthorized entry into

27
women’s coaches and about the helpline number to redress such
grievances.
Currently, no policy/guidelines are available for provision of security
vigilance cameras inside the coaches. Important stations are being
provided with security cameras under the integrated security system
project covering 202 important stations on the railway network.
A new work of provision of passenger information system having
displays indicating the station/next arriving station details etc. has
been included in the works programme 2013-14 for 300 superfast trains
and the procurement process has been initiated and likely to be
completed in next 1
1/2 years.
Instructions for making announcements at the stations, warning
passengers against unauthorized entry into women ’s coaches and
punishment thereof have already been issued. A copy is enclosed as
Annexure B.
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee are very unhappy with the present security
arrangements onboard and at stations which they witnessed during
their Study Tours. The Committee, thus, strongly recommend that the
Ministry of Railways should ensure visible security presence at the
stations/platforms and on trains, particularly during late hours, to
prevent untoward incidents and to instill a sense of security in the
women commuters.
Reply of Government
All Post and Out-Post in-charges have been instructed to deploy
sufficient men to increase visible security presence at the stations and
also advised to make sure that staff attend all trains and ladies coaches
to check the safety of passengers and to instill a sense of security
among the women commuters. All RPF staff have been suitably instructed
to keep special watch on the coaches reserved for women passengers.
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
The Committee note that women commuters often face difficulties
due to women vendors who generally travel with their belongings (baskets
of vegetables, fruits, etc.) in ladies’ compartment even when there are
separate compartments allocated for vendors. It has also been brought
to the notice of the Committee that beggars, hawkers and anti-social

28
elements manage to board the ladies coaches. The Committee take a
serious note of such unauthorized entry into ladies coaches and
recommend that no beggar or vendor or such other groups should be
permitted to board the ladies compartments. The Committee feel that
intensive and extensive ticket checking drives should be undertaken to
prevent revenue leakage and also entry of unauthorized passengers into
the coaches. The Committee also suggest that combined teams of RPF
personnel and ticket checking staff in the form of Mahila Vahini should
regularly conduct surprise checks in all Railway Zones to deter any
harassment of women commuters.
Reply of the Government
Instructions have already been issued to Zonal Railways to form
special lady ticket checking squads, comprising of lady ticket checking
staff and ladies from RPF to check unauthorized travel of urchins,
beggars and students aged more than 12 years in ladies compartments
and to deploy the same in such a manner that a sense of security is felt
by the lady passengers and the inconvenience caused to them is stopped,
while travelling. Zonal railways have been advised that lady ticket
checking squads functioning over zonal railways be mobilized to intensify
ticket checking drives to prevent entry by urchins, beggars and
unauthorized women vendors and male students aged more than
12 years in ladies compartment, in trains running on Suburban Section,
as a continuous and ongoing process and strict action be initiated
against the unauthorized travellers in ladies compartment as per
Section 162 of Railways Act. Since lady ticket checking squads are
already functioning over zonal railways to deter any harassment to lady
passengers, formation of another team in the name of Mahila Vahini is
perhaps not necessary.
Vendors along with their goods are meant to travel in their allocated
vendor compartments and the same is monitored by the Commercial
Department. Regular drives under the provision of Railways Act are
conducted against the unauthorized vendors, beggars & hawkers in
trains, stations, platforms, FOBs, pathways, etc. Train escorting staff
are instructed to travel in coaches adjacent to ladies compartments
and ensure that the vendors, beggars, hawkers and anti social elements
do not board the ladies coaches. Joint intensive drives with ticket
checking staff are also conducted from time to time to prevent revenue
leakage and also entry of unauthorized passengers into the coaches.
Special Task Force teams have been constituted in Mumbai suburban
section with the object to eradicate the menace of unauthorized
hawkers, beggars, anti social elements, to prevent unauthorized entry
in ladies coaches by lady vendors etc.

29
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
During their interaction with various women ’s groups, a suggestion
was made to the Committee that the Railways should display
advertisements against obscenity inside coaches and in the Station
premises. The Committee would like the Railways to consider the
suggestion and inform them about the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Instructions have been issued to the zonal railways to take necessary
action and display messages against obscenity, inside coaches and in
the station premises in a appropriate manner and locations in the trains
(especially suburban/commuter trains) and at stations.
Recommendation (Para No. 36)
The Committee understand that one ladies compartment is provided
in the front just next to the Motorman coach and one ladies coach next
to Guard cabin in 9/12 car rakes. Further, in 12 car rakes, an additional
ladies coach is provided in the middle of formation to facilitate lady
passengers to entrain and detrain easily. The Committee desire that the
placement of ladies compartment should be examined again in the light
of several incidents of harassment of women commuters. They should
feel safe and secure after they board the train, and they should feel
assured that they will not face difficulty because of unusual placement
of coaches, especially during early mornings or night time, more so
with ill-lit platforms, circulation areas and station premises. The
Committee want the Railways to also consider giving a distinct colour
code to the ladies ’ compartment/coach to make it easily identifiable
by all women commuters, even illiterate or uneducated passengers.
Also, there should be digital/neon display boards/signages on platforms
which would guide and accurately indicate the positioning of ladies
coaches. Moreover , the Railways should consider putting more women’s
coaches during peak hours for their comfortable travel.
Reply of the Government
Ladies compartments are provided with distinct colour of zebra
stripes in green as per the colour scheme for easy identification.
Suggestion of the Standing Committee regarding location of the
ladies compartment, colour code for identification and increasing the
accommodation for ladies will be considered.

30
Recommendation (Para No. 37)
The Committee regret to note that the ordeal of the women suburban
commuters begin with their struggle to purchase tickets. The Ministry
of Railways have clarified that there is no policy for earmarking separate
booking counters for ladies. However, the Committee understand that
few ticket counters for ladies has been earmarked at some stations on
the Eastern and South Eastern Railways. Considering the ever increasing
rush at the platforms, the Committee believe that it is high time for
the Ministry of Railways to issue instructions in the direction of providing
separate booking counters for ladies, elderly and differently abled
commuters at all the suburban stations, near the entrance to the stations
premises.
Reply of the Government
Instructions have been issued to the zonal railways concerned for
making assessment and based on the assessed need, make the provision
for separate ticket counters for ladies, elderly and differently abled
commuters at suburban stations.
Recommendation (Para No. 38)
The Committee are distressed to note that the present representation
of women in the Railway Protection Force is very minimal at only 1.7%.
The Committee feel that such under-representation of the women in
RPF is one of the reasons for lack of security of women passengers. The
Committee have been informed that a policy decision has been taken
to reserve 10% of the notified vacancies for women candidates. The
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Railways must
expedite the process of recruitment of women candidates in RPF . The
Committee have been apprised that a proposal for creation of eight
more companies of women RPF personnel has been forwarded to the
Ministry of Finance for consideration. The Committee urge the Ministry
of Railways to follow up on the proposal and keep the Committee
apprised of its progress.
Reply of the Government
To raise the representation of women in Railway Protection Force
(RPF), steps have already been taken and in this regard a policy decision
to reserve 10% of the vacancies for women candidates has been taken.
The said policy has already been implemented in recruitments presently
undergoing. Further, it is informed that approval for creation of
8 Companies of women RPF personnel has been received from

31
Ministry of Finance and allocation of these companies among Zonal
Railways has also been done. Recruitment of these 08 companies shall
be initiated shortly.
Recommendation (Para No. 39)
The Committee would like to stress that the Indian Railways should
lay greater emphasis on gender sensitization of Railway officials in
general and RPF personnel in particular by organizing seminars and
Workshops with the involvement of various stakeholders. Gender
Awareness Programmes should also be conducted periodically. The
training modules of Railway personnel should also incorporate gender
sensitization as an important component.
Reply of the Government
Keeping in view the importance of sensitizing Railway personnel on
Gender Issues and coming into force of the sexual harassment of women
at workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013, all
Centralized Training Institutes under the Ministry of Railways have been
advised to spread awareness about the Act through workshops and
awareness programmes and develop suitable modules for inclusion in
all the training programmes including the probationary training. Copy
of the aforementioned instructions has been endorsed to GMs of Indian
Railways.
Recommendation (Para No. 40)
The Committee have been apprised that the Indian Railways has a
well-organised Public Grievances Redressal Machinery which takes prompt
action on grievances/complaints registered by the travelling public. At
the Railway Board’s level, Executive Director (Public Grievances) is the
Public Grievances Redressal Officer. At the Zonal Railways ’ level, the
Additional General Managers function as the Directors of Public
Grievances and coordinate. At the Divisional level, the Additional
Divisional Railway Managers have been nominated as Public Grievances
Redressal Officers. They hold periodic meetings with Divisional Officers
and Station Managers in this regard. The Station Managers have been
made personally responsible for public grievances. However , the
Committee have learnt from the experience of common commuters
that proper information about such an elaborate hierarchy of Public
Grievance Redressal Officers is not available in the public domain.
Besides, there is no mechanism of informing the complainant about the
action taken with regard to his/her complaint. The Committee, hence,
suggest to the Ministry to make its complaint redressal mechanism

32
more commuter friendly and more transparent by adopting state-of-
the-art technology and by putting in place an effective follow-up
mechanism. The Ministry should take immediate steps to remove the
various lacunae in its existing grievance redressal system through
discussions with the ZRUCCs, NGOs and Passengers ’ Associations. The
Committee may be updated of the action taken in this direction on a
regular basis.
Reply of the Government
It is stated that information to general public regarding presence
of this Public Grievances Redressal Machinery on Indian Railways is
given through the Time Tables of Zonal Railways and Trains at a Glance.
A copy of page no. 320 of trains at a glance giving information relating
to presence of Public Grievances Redressal Machinery on Indian Railways
is enclosed as Annexure ‘C’.
As regards Committee ’s suggestion regarding making complaint
redressal mechanism more commuter-friendly and more transparent by
adopting state-of-the-art technology and by putting in place an effective
follow-up mechanism, it is submitted that there is already an on-line
complaint redressal mechanism operating on Indian Railways. This
programme is called Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring
System (CPGRAMS), wherein general public lodge their grievances on-
line and it is processed on-line by referring the cases on-line to the
Zonal Railways/PSUs or concerned Directorates of Board ’s office for
examination and sending a report to the P .G. Cell of Board ’s office.
Thereafter, P .G.Cell send on-line replies to the petitioners.
Besides, President ’s Secretariat, Department of Administrative
Reforms and Public Grievance (DOAR&PG), Cabinet Secretariat (DPG),
and Department of Pension & Pensioners ’ Welfare (DoP&PW) also refer
the cases through CPGRAMS to the Ministry of Railways for examination
and for sending reports to them regarding action taken in the matter
by the Ministry of Railways. This programme has been extended upto
Divisional level on the Zonal Railways and is functioning well. However,
improvement in the system is a continuous process and efforts will be
made to improve it further if any suggestion in this regard is received
from any ZRUCC/DRUCC, NGOs or Passengers ’ Associations, the same
will be implemented on Indian Railways, if found feasible.

33
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSEUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee have received numerous requests from the
passengers, particularly women passengers, for increasing the frequency
of suburban trains, to avoid difficulty in boarding and deboarding. The
Committee call upon the Railways to seriously consider increasing the
frequency of suburban trains, particularly during peak hours. This will
not only facilitate smoother boarding and deboarding by daily commuters
but also help security personnel in managing the peak hour rush. In
particular, the Ministry of Railways should consider increasing the
frequency of exclusive ladies special suburban trains, at least during
the peak hours. They should further consider changing timings of train
services to suit passengers ’ convenience, after conducting periodic
surveys and studies. The Railway stations should also be provided with
escalator facilities to ease passenger congestion.
Reply of the Government
Increase in existing frequency is not feasible as services are run at
a saturated level during the peak hours and also, due to non-availability
of path on some sectors. Moreover , any increase in frequency of ladies
special will be at the cost of general service, which will not be desirable
for the general public. Changes in the timings are done whenever
feasible on suggestions/recommendations of passengers/passengers
associations.
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
Regarding onboard toilet facilities, the Committee have been
apprised that toilet facilities have been provided in the new MEMU
rakes and not in the existing coaches since it is not possible to retro-
fit such coaches. The Committee note that the total number of EMU
and MEMU rakes presently in service is 471 and 116, respectively. Thus,
EMU rakes are four times in number than the MEMU rakes. The Committee
desire that the Indian Railways should consider replacement of the
existing EMU rakes with MEMU rakes with toilet facilities in a time-
bound manner. The Committee will like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard.
37

34
Reply of the Government
EMU rakes cannot be replaced with MEMU rakes due to the following
reasons:
➢ EMU is wider stock vis-a-vis of MEMU stock carrying more
number of passengers thus ideal for Metropolitan.
➢ Running of MEMU on EMU corridor has safety implication due
to extra gap between coach & platform.
➢ Technically EMU stock are designed for higher acceleration
vis-a-vis MEMU stock, hence journey time will go up.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
A suggestion was put forth before the Committee that where there
is a designated compartment for differently abled persons, that
compartment should be relocated to the extreme ends, just behind the
Motorman’s cabin and in front of the Guard Cabin. It was submitted to
the Committee that by doing so, boarding and alighting crowds from
the immediate neighbouring coaches will be absent, reducing difficulties
and discomfort to the differently abled commuters. It was further
submitted that the Guard and the Motorman will be in a position to get
the train moving only when the differently abled passengers have safely
boarded/deboarded the coach. The Ministry may like to consider this
suggestion and apprise the Committee of action taken.
Reply of the Government
Railways has planned to provide the facility like provision of standard
ramp, provision of signages, earmarking two parking lots, provision of
non-slippery walkway from parking to station building, provision of at
least one disabled friendly toilet, “may I help you” booths, Inter platform
transfer facility etc. to physically disabled persons in two phases—short
term and long term. In Eastern Railway the short term facility has
already been provided in all A-1, A, B and eight numbers of ‘C’ category
stations. In all suburban rakes, three seats are earmarked in each
motor coach for disabled persons.

35
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee are of the view that the criterion of minimum
traffic for augmentation of coaches is largely met by many suburban
stations, particularly during peak hours. Hence, the Committee strongly
recommend that immediate surveys should be undertaken by all the
Zonal Railways to determine the traffic at all the suburban stations
and to upgrade the infrastructure to accommodate the augmented
coaches. Presently, out of the total 471 EMU rakes in service, only
5 number of rakes have 15 car capacity. The Committee is of the view
that suburban train services have to expand with time because of
spatial factors. Therefore, the Committee advise the Railway Board to
target 15 coach EMUs rather than 12 coach EMUs so that the investment
and development of infrastructure could be more far-sighted. This would
go a long way in enhancing the carrying capacity on the suburban
system, besides easing out on passenger rush, that can be a check on
untoward incidents.
Reply of the Government
The total number of passengers carried on the suburban sector in
Mumbai area during FY 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2013-14 is as follows:
FY Number of passengers booked (in millions)
Central Railway Western Railway
2011-12 1432.82 1276.77
2012-13 1436.00 1294.88
2013-14 1468.46 1278.70
Moreover , there are standing instructions to Zonal Railways to
conduct census on periodical basis.
However , increasing the load of all the EMU rakes to 15 cars is not
feasible due to operational/infrastructural/geographical constraints.

36
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation at Para No. 8 of Chapter-I )
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
Looking into some of the amenities that are of prime importance,
the Committee note that toilet facility is one of the foremost basic
amenities and its absence from a public space like a railway station/
platform will result in serious inconvenience to the commuters. During
their Study Tours, the Committee found that toilets, especially ladies
toilets, were badly maintained, located at the outskirts of the stations
in poorly lit areas, and often remained locked. The Committee desire
that the Zonal Railways take immediate and effective steps to improve
the situation. The Committee earnestly suggest that the Railways should
undertake safety audits of the suburban stations and take necessary
action to tackle issues that crop up in the light of the audit observations.
To promote transparency and public watch, the Committee desire the
Railway authorities to provide/display names and contact numbers of
the maintenance staff and responsible senior officials at specified areas
in the station/platform and at all the toilet entrances. Where facilities
are in disrepair , the Railways should urgently and expeditiously do the
needful.
Reply of the Government
As per extant policy, toilets should be provided only in concourse/
circulating areas in sub-urban stations. Provision of toilets is not preferred
on platforms at sub≤urban stations as the major requirement of sub-
urban passengers is urinal.
The repairs/maintenance of facilities including toilets is undertaken
as per requirement. The names of the stations, where toilet facilities
were observed by the Committee in disrepairs have not been mentioned
in the Report. However, Committee’s observations have been noted and
concerned Zonal Railways shall be advised in this regard.
Policy guidelines exist for ensuring approved lux level for different
category of stations, including suburban stations (C-category) and Foot
Over Bridge (FOB) for adequate lighting arrangements at stations
premises. Accordingly, lighting at suburban stations has also been
provided as per these norms. Any shortcoming/malfunctioning in lighting
arrangement are made good as soon as it comes to the notice.
Further , names and contact numbers of the maintenance staff and
responsible officials are available with Station Manager/Superintendent.

37
Two types of Safety Audits are being conducted by Railways regularly
i.e. one by individual Railway of its own divisions once in two month
period and another inter railway safety audit which is conducted twice
a year i.e. from January to June and July to December. Safety Audit
is conducted by a team of five Senior Administrative Grade (SAG) level
officers of Civil, Mechanical, Signal, Electrical and Safety departments.
The teams carry out audit/inspections and focus on pinpointing
deficiencies found in the system including ancillary activities, staff
training, material supply, availability of funds, system failures, defective
policies/rules etc. Zonal Railways submit their Reports/Action taken
reports to the Ministry of Railways. These reports are analyzed by the
Railway Board which gives them further necessary instructions as and
when necessary.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation at Para No. 11 of Chapter-I )
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The volume of suburban passenger traffic has gone up steadily in
the last decade whereas the facilities at railway stations have remained
more or less stagnant. One crucial issue is the width of the platforms
that should have been increased to accommodate the rapidly increasing
passenger traffic. Where the platforms have been extended to
accommodate twelve coach trains, in certain cases the width of the
platforms has been narrowed to as low as 7 to 8 feet which is indeed
hazardous. Even the Railway bridges are narrow which could lead to
stampede-like situations during peak hours. The Committee, therefore,
desire the Railway Ministry to examine whether the presently prescribed
width of platform is adequate to facilitate easy and unhampered
movement of passengers at suburban stations. The Schedule of
Dimensions prescribed in the Indian Railway Standards may be specifically
looked into. The Committee should be apprised of the steps taken in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
As per Indian Railway Standards, the width of platform is determined
on the basis of clearance specified in Schedule of Dimensions (SOD) and
it should be adequate to permit a free unhampered movement of
passengers. Standard width has not been prescribed for any railway
platform. However , the concern of the Committee has been noted and
concerned Zonal Railways shall be advised to examine and take
appropriate steps in this matter.

38
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation at Para No. 14 of Chapter-I )
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee have received several written complaints regarding
problems relating to the Suburban train time-table. The Committee
suggest that Zonal Railways should regularly publish user-friendly
suburban time-table in consultation with the commuters ’ forums/
associations. These time-tables should be developed in a manner to
serve as a handy guide book for the commuters which must, inter alia,
include such details as railway officials ’ names and phone numbers,
etc. Unauthorised publications of time-tables by private agencies should
be investigated and appropriate action taken by the authorities
concerned. Time-tables should be made available in local languages as
well. Most importantly, the Railways should seriously look into the issue
of shortage of time-tables and ensure their easy availability at all
Railway premises.
Reply of the Government
The suburban time tables are published in consultation with
Commuters’ forums/associations. Also, the addresses, phone numbers
and the name of the officers of public grievances redressal machinery
are provided in the suburban time tables. While Zonal Railways have
not received complaints regarding unauthorized publication of time
table by private agencies, with regard to non-availability of suburban
time tables, at all railway premises, Zonal Railways, based on demand,
make available sufficient quantity of suburban time tables.
Printing of suburban time table in regional language is not
commercially viable.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation at Para No. 23 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No.23)
The Committee find the RDSO standards with regard to the amenities
to be provided at Railway Stations for persons with disabilities (Annexure
B) as part of the fundamental amenities. However, the Committee are
highly disappointed and very critical of the apathetic attitude of the
Railway authorities in giving practical effect to these recommendations.
The Committee desire that the Railways should take expeditious steps
to implement the recommendations of the RDSO guidelines in letter

39
and spirit for the benefit of the differently abled commuters in line
with the provisions of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995. The Committee
also desire that they be informed regularly of the progress achieved in
providing facilities like standard ramps, signages, designated parking
lots, non-slippery walkway, disabled friendly toilets, inter-platform
transfer facility, “May I Help You ” booth, etc., for the benefit of the
differently abled commuters.
Reply of the Government
Based on the RDSO ’s Report, revised guidelines on provision of
amenities at Railway station and other Public Building for Persons with
Disabilities have been issued to Zonal Railways for implementation,
vide Railway Board’s circular No. 2012/LM(PA)/08/04/ Policy. PwDs dated
06.06.2013.
562 stations falling in A1, A & B category have been provided with
following facilities viz. Standard ramp with railing for barrier free entry,
earmarking of at least one parking lot for two vehicles used by disabled
persons, a non-slippery walkway from parking lot to building, Signages
of appropriate visibility, at least one drinking water tap suitable for use
by a disabled person, at least one toilet on the ground floor and “May
I help you ” booth.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation at Para No. 26 of Chapter-I)

40
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; DINESH TRIVEDI,
29 April, 2015 Chairperson,
09 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

41
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RAILWAYS (2014-15)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 29th April, 2015, from
1500 hours to 1600 hours in Committee Room No. ‘62’, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Dinesh Trivedi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri E. Ahamed
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
4. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
6. Shri Gourav Gogoi
7. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
8. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
9. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
10. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
11. Shri Thota Narasimham
12. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
13. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy
14. Shri Ganesh Singh
15. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Mukut Mithi
17. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
18. Shri T . Rathinavel
19. Shri Devender Goud T .
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Raju Srivastava — Additional Director

42
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for
consideration the following draft Reports:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in their 23rd Report
on the ‘Suburban Train Services of Indian Railways, with
particular emphasis on Security of Women Passengers ’.
The Committee adopted the Report *** *** *** at Sl. No.(ii) without
any modification.
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the
Reports and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Not relevant to the report.

43
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
23RD REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) ON “SUBURBAN
TRAIN SERVICES OF INDIAN RAILWAYS, WITH
PARTICULAR EMPHASIS ON SECURITY
OF WOMEN PASSENGERS ”
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations: 40
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35,
36, 37, 38, 39 and 40 32
Percentage of total 80%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view  of the Government ’s
replies:
Para Nos. 4, 12 and 24 3
Percentage of total 7.5%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos. 3, 11, 15, 21 and 23 5
Percentage of total 12.5%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies are still awaited:
Para No. Nil Nil
Percentage of total 0%