24
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2018-2019)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 18th Report of the Standing Committee on
Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Tourism Promotion
and Pilgrimage Circuit’]
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2019/ Magha, 1940 ( Saka)

TWENTY FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2018-2019)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 18th Report of the Standing Committee on
Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Tourism Promotion
and Pilgrimage Circuit’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.02.2019
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 07.02.2019
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2019/ Magha, 1940 ( Saka)


S.C.R. No. 223
Price : ` 36.00
© 2019 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 5
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s reply ....................................... 14
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration .... 16
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited .... 18
ANNEXURE
Copy of Board’s letter to Respective State Tourism
Corporations/Indian Railway Catering and Tourism
Corporation (IRCTC) ............................................... 19
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Railways held on 04.02.2019 .................................... 20
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 18th
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Tourism Promotion and
Pilgrimage Circuit’ ................................................. 22
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2018-2019)@
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Anju Bala
3. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
4. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
5. Shri Sudheer Gupta
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
7. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
8. Shri Kunhalikutty P .K.
9. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
10. Dr. K.H. Muniyappa
11. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
12. Shri A.T . (Nana) Patil
13. Shri Vijayakumar S.R.
14. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
15. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
16. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav
17. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar
18. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddheshwara
19. Shri Ganesh Singh
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
21. Shri Kukade Madhukarrao Yashwantrao
(iii)
@ Constituted w.e.f. 01.09.2018 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II, No. 7332
dated 18.09.2018.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.K. Antony
23. Shri Shwait Malik
24. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
25. Shri Mukut Mithi
26. Ms. Saroj Pandey
27. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
28. Shri T . Rathinavel
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
30. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya
31. Shri Motilal Vora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kavita Prasad — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri R.L. Yadav — Additional Director
4. Dr. Mohit Rajan — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2018-19),
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Twenty Fourth Report on Action Taken by
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in their Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Tourism
Promotion and Pilgrimage Circuit’.
2. The Eighteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid
in the Rajya Sabha on 04.01.2018. The Report contained 12
recommendations/observations besides para 1 which is introductory in
nature and does not contain any recommendation. The Ministry of
Railways furnished their Action Taken Notes on all the recommendations/
observations contained in the Report on 29.06.2018.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken
Report at their sitting held on 04.02.2019. The minutes of the sitting
are given in Appendix-I.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations/
observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report
of the Standing Committee on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given
in Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY ,
4 February, 2019 Chairperson,
15 Magha, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Railways deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Eighteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on “Tourism
Promotion and Pilgrimage Circuit”.
2. The Eighteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid
in Rajya Sabha on 04.01.2018. It contained 11 Recommendations/
Observations excluding para 1 which does not contain recommendation.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of 11 Recommendations/
Observations have been received and categorised as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 2,3,4,5,7,8,11 and 12
Total : 08
Chapter II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Para No. 9
Total :01
Chapter III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Para Nos. 6, 10
Total : 02
Chapter IV
(iv) R ecommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para No. Nil
Total : Nil
Chapter V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
the implementation of the Recommendations accepted by the
Government. The Committee desire that final action taken notes to
the Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this
Report should be furnished to them not later than three months of
the presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations.
A. TOURISM PROMOTION AND PILGRIMAGE CIRCUIT
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
6. The Committee had recommended as under:
“Tirupati and Shirdi are two of the most important and popular
pilgrimage stations in the country and attract a large number of
people from around the country. The Committee note that Tirupati
and Shirdi are connected by only two pairs of mail/express train
services and one weekly special train. Despite the resource and
operational constraints, as specified by the Ministry, for lack of
enough service on the route, the Committee think that it becomes
imperative on the part of Railways to explore the other possibilities
to run more number of trains or look into the alternative route
connecting Tirupati and Shirdi, keeping in view the demand of
passengers and volume of people travelling between these two
stations. They strongly recommended the Ministry to promptly look
at all the possibilities of running more trains between Tirupati and
Shirdi and also widening the connectivity of these stations from
other parts of the country. The Committee would also like to be
apprised on the progress made in this regard from time to time.”
7. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:
“At present, Shirdi is connected to various prominent locations of
the country like Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai, Visakhapatnam, Puri etc.
Shirdi is also connected to Tirupati by a weekly service of 17417/
17418 Tirupati-Sainagar Express. At present, it is not feasible to
introduce train services from Shirdi & Tirupati stations due to
operational and resource constraints. However, introduction of trains
is an ongoing process on Indian Railways.
IRCTC regularly operates tours to Shirdi and Tirupati by rail,
road as well as by air from different parts of the country. IRCTC
also provides holiday packages to Tirupati through its area office

3
at Tirupati. More Rail Tour packages to Shirdi and Tirupati will be
operated to these places as the new policy for VAT blocking has
been issued by Railways.”
8. The Committee had strongly recommended the Ministry to
explore the possibilities of running more trains between Tirupati
and Shirdi and also widening the connectivity of these stations from
other parts of the country. In the reply, the Ministry have submitted
that Shirdi is connected to Tirupati by a weekly service of 17417/
17418 Tirupati-Sainagar Express and at present, it is not feasible to
introduce train services between these two stations owing to
operational/resource constraints. In this regard, the Committee is
not convinced with the reasons furnished by the Ministry expressing
their inability for non-augmentation of train service between two
most important religious places like Tirupati and Shirdi which attracts
the devotees from all over the country. The Committee feel that if
train services are further augmented between these two places, it
will not only facilitate devotees, but also generate revenue for
exchequer. Further, the Committee are dissatisfied to find that
these places are currently connected with only one weekly train
service. They would like to know the occupancy rate of this train
in last one year; revenue generated and expenditure incurred on
this train in last one year. While reiterating their earlier
recommendation, they would like to be apprised of the factors
which are refraining Indian Railways from introduction of more
trains on this route.
B. LUXURY TOURIST TRAINS
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
9. The Committee had recommended as under:
“Regarding the complimentary travel, the Committee are dismayed
to note that the provision of complimentary travel is continuing in
these luxury trains on the recommendation of either Railway Board
or IRCTC or State Tourism Development Corporation. In the years
2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16, a total of 30, 97, 53 and
71 passengers respectively availed the complimentary travel in
Maharaja Express. The Committee fail to understand the need to
provide complimentary travel when these luxury trains have hardly
been generating the revenue to meet their own working expenses.
As a public entity financed by the budget, the Railway, under any
obligation, have no right to misuse the tax payers’ money by
providing advances to some people in the form of complimentary

4
travel in these luxury trains. The Committee desire to know the
reason behind providing the complimentary travel on luxury trains
and strongly recommend the Ministry to discontinue the system of
complimentary travel with immediate effect. They would like to
be apprised of the steps taken in this direction.”
10. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
submitted as under:—
“Senior officers are permitted for complimentary travel on luxury
trains for the purpose of inspecting in details all aspects of train
operations.
Representatives of foreign tour operators/agents, representatives
of Indian agents/tour operators, representatives of print and
electronic media or other influence makers from India and foreign
countries and persons nominated by Ministry of Tourism, Govt. of
India are permitted for complimentary travel with the sole purpose
of promotion of the trains. The travel of such persons is considered
as FAM Travel, which is a marketing tool for promotion of the
train.”
11. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had desired
to know the reason behind providing the complimentary travel on
various Luxury Trains and strongly recommended the Ministry to
discontinue the system of complimentary travel with immediate
effect in view of low occupancy and low revenue generation by the
six Luxury Trains. In response, the Ministry have stated that the
senior officers are permitted for complimentary travel for inspection
purpose while others are permitted for promotion purpose as a
marketing tool. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of
the Government. Inspection and marketing tool are two different
issues and cannot be clubbed together for the purpose of promotion
of tourism etc. The Committee fail to understand that despite using
Complimentary Travel as a marketing tool for promotion of Luxury
Trains since 2012-13 no significant rise/improvement has been
observed either in occupancy or in revenue generation of these
trains. Moreover, the cost of complimentary travel has been borne
by Indian Railways which further adds to the losses of Railways and
is gross wastage of public money. In this regard, the Committee
would like the Ministry to conduct a study on the financial/other
benefits achieved through these complimentary tickets vis-a-vis
the cost involved therein during the last six years. They also
recommend the Ministry to frame stringent guidelines for issue of
these complimentary tickets to prevent the possible misuse of public
money.

5
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC), a
Government owned Public Sector Enterprise under Ministry of Railways,
is an extended arm of the Indian Railways to promote tourism. IRCTC
related matters are looked after by the Tourism and Catering Directorate
which works under Member (Traffic) in Railway Board. The Committee
feel that keeping in view the huge potential emerging out of tremendous
annual growth in tourism sector of the country, the notion of Railway
Board being the apex body of the Ministry of Railway in both
administration and policy making seems incomplete in the absence of
any representation from Tourism and Catering Directorate/IRCTC. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that there should be proper
representation for tourism in the Railway Board so that it gives the
desired acceleration to the promotion of tourism related policies of
the Railway and also help the Ministry to become more sensitive towards
the demands of passengers in general and tourists as well as pilgrims
in particular.
Reply of the Government
Noted.
There is a post of Executive Director looking after Tourism in a
Directorate dealing with Tourism headed by Additional Member (Tourism
& Catering).
FINANCIAL OVERVIEW
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that the budget earmarked by IRCTC for
tourism promotion during the years 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and
2016-17 was to the tune of Rs. 6 crore, Rs. 4.17 crore, Rs. 4 crore and
Rs. 3.65 crore respectively. The Committee feel that the budget
allocation for such a major head is grossly inadequate and with declining
trend. However , the Committee are perturbed to note that the IRCTC
have not been able to fully utilize even these meager funds allocated
for promotion of tourism. The actual utilization ranged from 54.8% to

6
90.48% of the allocated fund for which Ministry have not assigned any
reason whatsoever. Further the Committee note that no funds for
promotion of pilgrim places have been provided separately. The
Committee recommend the Ministry to increase the budget allocation
to IRCTC for promotion of tourism with immediate effect and to create
a separate fund for the promotion of tourism and pilgrimage in India
and ensure optimal utilisation of the same. The Committee understand
that it is the most appropriate time for the Railways to grab the
opportunity as the tourism industry in the country is growing with at
an unprecedented rate. The Committee further desire the due attention,
commitment and focused approach by the Ministry in promotion of
tourism, under intimation to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
Suggestion noted.
IRCTC allocates marketing budget to their respective zones based
on core tourism activities planned for the year , i.e. Bharat Darshan /
Aastha trains, Buddhist circuit trains, Tiger circuit, Desert circuit trains,
Rail Tour packages, Land Tour Packages, Domestic & International Air
Packages etc. Further , for the year 2017-18, IRCTC has allotted marketing
budget of Rs. 302 lakhs for the zones of which Rs. 216 lakhs (71.5%)
has already been spent upto Jan., 2018. Corporate office allots
additional marketing budget over and above already sanctioned amount
based on the requirement of the zones. More Corporate level marketing
and branding activities are being planned.
TOURISM PROMOTION & PILGRIMAGE CIRCUIT
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
Indian Railways promote tourism primarily by connecting various
tourist places across the country. Many tourist/pilgrim destinations are
already connected by rail. However , States having high potential for
tourism like Jammu & Kashmir , Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand,
northern part of Kerala and States of North East region witness minimal
presence of Railways. The Ministry themselves have accepted that
connecting Kashmir Valley and tourist destinations in North-East Region
will give a great boost to the tourism in those areas. The Committee
hold a similar view on expanding the rail network in the Kashmir Valley
and North-East Region and desire the Ministry to include parts of
Central India like Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand, Kerala and Uttarakhand
in their scheme of covering more touristic places. The Committee feel
that if Railways have to increase their revenue, they will have to focus

7
on those areas which possess touristic/historic/religious importance
and are not connected by rail. The Committee feel that the primary
role of Railways in promoting tourism is to provide rail connectivity to
the touristic and pilgrimage places and strongly recommend the Ministry
to put forth their true efforts in order to provide extensive rail
connectivity to the Kashmir Valley, North-East Region and Central India
at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Railway projects are mostly sanctioned keeping economic viability
or socio-economic considerations for upliftment of served area. A railway
line per se results into increased economic activities including tourism.
Many places of religious and tourist importance invariably fall on Railway
Network & alignment of railway links. In Jammu & Kashmir , Udhampur-
Srinagar-Baramulla new line project is under construction and Mata
Vaishno Devi has already been connected through Katra Station.
Construction of new lines in North-East region has been taken up
in big way which will have far reaching impact on connectivity and
also on tourism.
In Central India also important tourist places like Sanchi & Khajuraho
are already on railway map. Ratanpur Temple in Chhattisgarh is also
only 20 Kms. from Bilaspur station which is well connected on railway
network.
The biggest problem in construction of new line is land acquisition
and accordingly it has been decided that work on sanctioned New Line
will be taken up only after complete land acquisition that will act as
hedge against cost inflation also.
Indian Railways constantly endeavours to provide trains connection
between stations, especially those of tourist/pilgrimage importance
and remote locations. It would be appreciated that with this end in
view, Indian Railways have introduced service connecting stations in
North-Eastern region with major locations like Indore, Katra, Delhi,
Jodhpur , Chandigarh, Bengaluru etc. Further extension/introduction of
trains from various important stations for Katra have helped the
passenger of Kashmir valley as well. However , in view of vastness of
the country, it is not always feasible to provide direct connectivity
between every two station of tourist/pilgrimage importance.
IRCTC operates regular train tours like Bharat Darshan, Aastha
Circuit trains, Mukhyamantri special tourist trains as well as launched

8
Rail Tour Packages to those places where ever rail connectivity is
provided. The places include tourist’s spots at Jammu & Kashmir,
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Kerala etc.
IRCTC also operates State special and Aastha Circuit trains from
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Assam to various tourist destinations across
the country.
IRCTC operates Holiday packages and domestic air packages to
those areas where rail connectivity is not presently available such as
North Eastern States, Ladakh etc. to promote tourism at these areas.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The IRCTC runs various tourist and pilgrimage special trains like
Bharat Darshan Train, Pilgrim special tourist train and Buddhist special
train. Railways have introduced around 600 trains in last five years
(2011-16) covering various destinations across the country. The
Committee observe that out of 600, only 7 trains have been dedicated
for promotion of tourism and pilgrimage. Only two more trains namely,
Tiger Express and Astha Circuit trains have been introduced in 2016-17.
However , the IRCTC has reduced the number of trips of Buddhist Circuit
Trains by 50 per cent after reviewing their performance but have not
increased the trips of Bharat Darshan Trains which are performing very
well with 90 per cent occupancy. The Committee feel that frequent
changes in the train trips and introducing the various circuits without
analysing the reasons for closing the previous ones only reveal the
unpreparedness and unconsidered decision on the part of Railways and
reflect a lack of perspective planning. The Committee recommend
that the Ministry should prepare a comprehensive long term plan or
road map for their future actions to evocatively cater the emerging
needs of tourism sector in India and should move forward step by step
through informed decisions rather than rushing into non-sustainable
ventures. They should widely publicise the existence of such trains and
the facilities provided therein. Further , extensive publicity about
Pilgrimage sites like Mata Vaishno Devi Shrine, Golden Temple, Durgiana
Temple (Amritsar), Kurukshetra, Haridwar, Mathura & Vrindavan,
Ayodhya, Varanasi, Belur Math, Kalighat Temple (Kolkata), Gangasagar ,
Kamakhya Temple (Guwahati), Chitrakoot Dham (Uttar Pradesh),
Mahakaleshwar Temple (Ujjain), Maihar (Madhya Pradesh), Ratanpur
(Chhattisgarh), Deoghar , Jagannath Puri, Rameswaram and Kanyakumari
etc. and locations with scenic beauty/observing important festivals
like Onam Festival, Goa Carnival, Cherry Blossom Festival (Meghalaya),
Rann of Kutch, Jaisalmer , Chenab Rail Bridge, Amarkantak, Puducherry,
Allahabad, Araku Valley, Velankanni (Tamil Nadu) and Kerala etc. This

9
would definitely spark the wanderlust and adventure instincts of the
tourists and customers.
Reply of the Government
During the FY 2016-17 IRCTC operated 67 Bharat Darshan Trips,
2 Aastha circuit trains tours, 5 trips of Buddhist special and 3 trips of
semi luxury trains. During the FY 2017-18 till December , IRCTC has
operated 54 trips of Bharat Darshan, 8 trips of Aastha Circuit train
tours, 3 Buddhist special tours. All these train tours are planned well
in advance and is uploaded in our webpage www.irctctourism.com for
the benefit of the passengers. Proper publicity by way of release of
advertisements in newspapers, press releases, participation in trade
fairs etc. is being done on regular basis for all these trips. Brochures
with location/scenic beauty of places being visited through these tours
are made and are displayed at IRCTC offices and its Tourist Facilitation
Centers. More brochures of such tours will be printed and displayed as
and when the new tours are announced. Moreover , banners containing
pictures/scenic beauty of places covered in tours are regularly displayed
in IRCTC portal with prominence.
The decision to introduce semi luxury train tours was not only to
utilise the rake of Buddhist train during the period the tour is not
operated, but also to bridge the gap between the super luxury
Maharajas’ express and the budgeted tours, Bharat Darshan. These
tours were operated on smaller circuits like Tiger Express, Desert
Circuit special, etc. as planning of longer duration tours with the
present charging principle of the train is financially unviable.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note with disappointment that the Ministry do not
have any specific guideline for categorizing a particular station as of
touristic and pilgrimage place even though the concerned Managers of
the Zonal Railways having been given foil powers to do so. The
Committee caution the Ministry not to take the tourism and pilgrimage
sector too lightly as it may be proved a hidden treasure for Railways
to increase revenue if explored judiciously. Further, the Committee
recommend the Ministry to collaborate with Ministry of Tourism for
sharing information/data and also to conduct their own survey. The
Committee advise the Ministry to formulate a Committee at Zonal
level to explore and identify the places of touristic and pilgrimage
importance where Railways’ contribution will be required. This
Committee at Zonal level may include the Members of Parliament of
the concerned zone/representatives of local bodies/civil societies and

10
officials of Railways, District Administration and Tourism Department
also. Such inclusive approach would also bring harmony between the
various sections of the society and Government apart from opening up
growth avenue for Railways.
Reply of the Government
As per the old categorization, General Managers had powers to
categorize a station as B category if it is a place of tourist importance
and/or is an important junction station. Now, as per revised instructions
issued for categorization of stations, General Managers shall have powers
to categorize a station as NSG4 category if it is a place of Tourist
importance and/or is an important junction station.
IRCTC has identified stations of tourists as well as pilgrim importance
and is operating its Tourist Facilitation Centers (TFC) at these stations
for the benefits of tourists/pilgrims. Currently IRCTC operates TFCs at
Bangaluru, Mysore, Thiruvananthapuram, Kozhikode, Ahmedabad,
Mumbai, Indore, New Delhi, Secunderabad, Vijaywada, Hyderabad, etc.
which are of tourists importance and at Madurai, Gaya, Puri, Howrah,
Tirupati, etc. which are of pilgrim importance. Further there are
44 numbers of Tourists Information Centers operated either by State
Tourism bodies/departments or by district tourism organisations all
over Indian Railways. IRCTC also have signed MoU with 20 States for
mutual co-operation and for development of tourism in those regions.
LUXURY TOURIST TRAINS
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
Luxury Tourist Trains are premier luxury products/services being
offered by Indian Railways/IRCTC in collaboration with State Tourism
Development Corporations. The total revenue earned by all these five
trains from 2012-13 to 2016-17 has been Rs. 497.31 crore with an
average of Rs. 99.46 crore per year and Railway’s share has been
Rs. 259.52 crore i.e. 52.18% of the total revenue. The Committee are
dismayed to note such a low revenue generation from these luxury
trains and observe that revenue of Royal Rajasthan on Wheels, Deccan
Odyssey and Golden Chariot have never crossed mark of Rs. 15 crore
per year in last five years. Moreover , in case of Deccan Odyssey, total
haulage charges for the years 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 have been
Rs. 7.71 crore, Rs. 10.25 crore and Rs. 13.15 crore respectively which
are higher than the total revenue earned by these trains i.e. Rs. 5.25
crore, Rs. 5.26 crore and Rs. 9.51 crore for the corresponding years.
At a time when the tourism sector in the country is growing significantly,

11
the Committee are distressed to note such diminutive amount as
revenue generation from these luxury tourist trains puts a question
mark over the operation of such trains. The Committee understand
that Railways are only concerned with the haulage charges and do not
make any loss in the operation of luxury tourist trains but fail to
understand how Railways calculate their profit and loss incurred on
running these luxury trains when Railways do not maintain the record
of expenditure spent on them.
The Committee understand that Railways cannot do away from
their core responsibility by simply arguing that they do not incur any
loss in running luxury trains with their only concern being the haulage
charges. These trains carry the image of Railways all over the world
and are considered as iconic products/services in the luxury segment
of tourism in India. If these trains run into losses where total revenue
has been lower than the haulage charges, it becomes imperative on
the part of Railways to introspect the matter within themselves and
mark/guide the path of augmentation for IRCTC and State Tourism
Departments. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Railways should
probe the possibility of proactive advertisement and publicity with
respect to running of these luxury trains along with State Tourism
Department and also add some more destinations/incentives to make
them more remunerative. The Committee also recommend the Ministry
to maintain the records of all the expenditure incurred on these luxury
trains along with the revenue earned so that real picture could be
clear in terms of profit and loss.
Reply of the Government
Noted.
Instructions have been issued vide Board’s letter No.2017/Tourism/
200/4 dated 26.03.2018 ( Annexure-I) to respective State Tourism
Corporations/ Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC)
advising to maintain records of all expenditures incurred on Luxury
Tourist Trains along with revenue earned.
RETIRING ROOM FACILITY
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note the efforts made by the Railways in providing
retiring room facility at all A1 category stations but make a note that
only 559 stations out of the 8495 stations have the facility of retiring
rooms. They understand that this facility is neither required nor

12
mandatory at all the stations, however , all the A category stations may
be provided with retiring rooms as at present almost one fourth A
category stations do not have retiring rooms. Further , the Committee
feel that since retiring room is one of the essential amenity being
provided at stations, the Railways should identify the stations where
this facility can be extended in view of its utility and for the same,
opinion of public representatives may also be considered. In this regard,
the Committee recommend that all A category stations should be
provided with retiring room facility at the earliest and for rest of the
stations where this facility is not available, selective identification of
stations should be executed in consultation with the concerned public
representatives. The Committee be apprised of the progress in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
As per old comprehensive instructions for passenger amenities,
Retiring rooms are required to be provided at A1, A & B category
stations under Desirable Amenities. There were 75 A1, 332 A & 302 B
category stations i.e. total 709 stations, out of which maximum stations
have been provided with the 73 A1 category stations, 257 A category
stations, and 128 B category stations retiring room facility. Efforts are
being under taken to provide the retiring room facility at rest of the
A1, A & B category stations subject to feasibility for the same.
IRCTC has provided online booking facility for reserving retiring
rooms through our tourism portal. Currently on line booking facility
available at 496 railway stations of Indian Railway.
OTHER INITIATIVES
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note the initiation of the Ministry and successfully
execution of the Value Added Tour Packages which have not only
become a profit making avenue but also have huge demand from
Indian tourists. The Committee observe that launching of new packages
of Gatiman express and removing packages with less than 50% utilization
clearly indicate the move towards professionalism which is gradually
imbibing in the working of Railways. The Committee desire the Ministry
to continue their initiatives like Value Added Tour Packages, introduction
of more reasonably priced tourism packages and Indrail Passes with
innovations and utility based optimization applying the performance
oriented target based approach.

13
Reply of the Government
Noted.
The decision to withdraw packages having less than 50% utilisation
was made for ensuring financial viability of the packages consequent
to the issuance of the revised policy of VAT blocking. IRCTC will launch
and operate more cost effective Value Added Tour packages as the
tourism friendly VAT policy has been issued by Railways. In an effort
to launch more reasonably priced tourism packages, IRCTC has also
started operating Bharat Darshan tours from South Central Zone from
January 2018 which are already in operation in North, South and West
Zones.
Further , Indrail Pass facility has been discontinued from 19.09.2017.

14
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The matter of cancellation of one trip of Palace on Wheels came
as a distressful revelation before the Committee and so they have
further analysed the data being provided by the Ministry regarding the
occupancy status on the luxury trains for last five years. The detailed
analysis exposed a shocking picture before the Committee. The
percentage of vacant seats during 2012 to 2017 has been 63.7, 61.07,
57.76, 45.46 and 45.81 for Maharaja Express, Golden Charriot, Royal
Rajasthan on Wheels, Deccan Odyssey and Palace on Wheels respectively.
What was even more disturbing that in Maharaja Express which is
completely run by Indian Railways without State collaboration, during
2012- 13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, the occupancy has
been 29.86%, 32.22%, 41.8%, 41.58% and 36.03% respectively. Further,
in the same train during 2013- 14, 758 seats were occupied out of 1594
in which 97 seats had been occupied by complementary travellers.
The Committee have taken a very serious note of lack of seriousness
on the part of Ministry towards low occupancy in luxury trains and
expect the Ministry to properly examine and spell out the reasons for
running such trains with as low as 30% occupancy. The Committee feel
that though the idea of compact tour package is a good idea, however ,
the period of 6 to 8 days is very long for many of the tourists, both
domestic and foreigners, who would have preferred a smaller tour
package along different stretches on the route of the train. The
Committee recommend the Ministry to seriously look into the matter
and take immediate steps to prevent the decreasing trend in occupancy
of luxury trains and form a special panel/team which would look into
the various reasons for such low occupancy and advice the Ministry a
mechanism to attract more tourists towards these luxury trains. The
Committee also suggest that the Ministry may also frame a policy of
tariff/tour plan in such a way where tourist can avail the travel /
facilities of these trains for amendable number of night/day not
necessarily for whole journey of 6-8 days as buying whole package
becomes expensive for most of the tourists. T wo or three sub-plans of
shorter duration within the given journey should be chalked out to
offer more acceptability by potential customers.

15
Reply of the Government
Noted.
Offering Shorter duration packages—Maharajas’ Express is also
offering 3 Nights/4 Days packages namely Treasures of India and Gems
of India from 2012-13. However , the performance of the shorter duration
packages is poorer than the performance of the longer 7 Nights/8 Days
packages. Considering the past trend, it is evident that the longer
itineraries are doing better than shorter duration itineraries. Details of
guest numbers and percentage occupancy with other inputs are being
studied by Marketing Team from time to time.
Offering Break journey options on longer duration packages—These
would have to be studied operationally, if such a proposal is considered
in the future. At the initial stage, these seem operationally difficult
as it would be difficult to predict the number of guests on a particular
leg of journey which is required to plan the logistics, meals at venues
etc. accordingly. Since we pay a minimum guarantee of 25 guests for
the entire journey, this may result in operational losses, if guests at
a particular destination are less than 25. It would also be difficult to
plan the transport logistics with varying number of guests at different
destinations. Feasibility with respect to on-board operations, Haulage,
sales and marketing etc. may also be studied.

16
CHAPTER  IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
Tirupati and Shirdi are two of the most important and popular
pilgrimage stations in the country and attract a large amount of people
from around the country. The Committee note that Tirupati and Shirdi
are only connected by two pair of mail/express train services and one
weekly special train. Despite the resource and operational constraints,
as specified by the Ministry, for lack of enough service on the route,
the Committee think that it becomes imperative on the part of Railways
to explore the other possibilities to run more number of trains or look
into the alternative route connecting Tirupati with Shirdi. Keeping in
view the demand of passengers and volume of people travelling between
these two stations. They strongly recommend the Ministry to promptly
look at all the possibilities of running more trains between Tirupati
and Shirdi and also widening the connectivity of these stations from
other parts of the country. The Committee would also like to be
apprised on the progress made in this regard from time to time.
Reply of the Government
At present, Shirdi is connected to various prominent locations of
the country like Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai, Visakhapatnam, Puri etc.
Shirdi is also connected to Tirupati by a weekly service of 17417/17418
Tirupati-Sainagar Express. At present, it is not feasible to introduce
train services from Shirdi & Tirupati stations due to operational and
resource constraints. However , introduction of trains is an ongoing
process on Indian Railways.
IRCTC regularly operates tours to Shirdi and Tirupati by rail, road
as well as by air from different parts of the country. IRCTC also
provides holiday packages to Tirupati through its area office at Tirupati.
More Rail Tour packages to Shirdi and Tirupati will be operated to
these places as the new policy for VAT blocking has been issued by
Railways.
Comments of the Committee
[Please see recommendation Para No. 8 of Chapter-I]

17
Recommendation (Para No. 10]
Regarding the complementary travel, the Committee are dismayed
to note that the provision of complementary travel is continuing in
these luxury trains on the recommendation of either Railway Board or
IRCTC or State Tourism Development Corporation. In the years 2012-
13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16, in total 30, 97, 53 and 71 passengers
respectively availed the complimentary travel in Maharaja Express.
The Committee fail to understand the need to provide complimentary
travel when these luxury trains have hardly been generating the revenue
to meet their own working expenses. As a public entity financed by
the budget, the Railway, under any obligation, have no right to misuse
the tax payers’ money by providing advances to some people in the
form of complimentary travel in these luxury trains. The Committee
desire to know the reason behind providing the complimentary travel
on luxury trains and strongly recommend the Ministry to discontinue
the system of complimentary travel with immediate effect they would
like to be apprised of the steps taken in this direction.
Reply of the Government
Senior officers are permitted for complimentary travel on luxury
trains for the purpose of inspecting in details all aspects of train
operations.
Representatives of foreign tour operators/Agents, Representatives
of Indian Agents/Tour Operators, representatives of print and electronic
media or other influence makers from India and foreign countries and
persons nominated by Ministry of Tourism, Govt. of India are permitted
for complimentary travel with the sole purpose of promotion of the
trains. The travel of such persons is considered as FAM Travel, which
is a marketing tool for promotion of the train.
Comments of the Committee
[Please see recommendation Para No. 11 of Chapter-I]

18
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 -NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY ,
4 February, 2019 Chairperson,
15 Magha, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

19
ANNEXURE
Government of India
Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board)
No. 2017/Tourism/200/4 New Delhi, dt. 26.03.2018
The CMD,
IRCTC, B-148, 11th
Floor , Statesman House,
Barakhamba Road,
New Delhi-110001.
The Managing Director , MTDC
CDO, Hutment, Opposite LIC,
Yogakshsna Building,
Madame Came Road,
Mumbai-400020
Sub.: 18th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways on
“Tourism Promotion and Pilgrimage Circuit”.
Please find enclosed herewith a copy of Recommendation No.8
contained in the 18th Report of Standing Committee on Railways. The
Committee desires lhat the concerned Corporation should probe the
possibility of proactive advertisement and publicity with respect to
nunnig of Luxury Tourist Trains along with State Tourism Department
and also add some more destinations/incentives to make them more
remunerative. The Committee also recommended to maintain records
of all expenditure incurred on Luxury Tourist Trains along with revenue
earned and submitted. The above details may be included in monthly
PCDO/MCDO in this regard.
It is requested the above instructions may be compiled strictly.
DA: as above.
Sd/-
(Pranjalaya Perth Lathe)
Dy. Director (Tourism & Catering)
(Railway Board)
The Managing Director ,
Kamata State Tourism
Development
Corp., 49, 2nd Floor ,
Khanija Bhawan,
Race Course Road
Bengaluru-560001
KARNATAKA.
The Managing Director , RTDC,
Holel Swagatem Campus,
Near Jaipur Railway Station
Road, JAIPUR-302001.

20
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2018-19)
The Committee met on Monday, the 4th February, 2019 from 1500
hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, PHA, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
3. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
4. Shri P .K. Kunhalikutty
5. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
6. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
8. Shri Kukade Madhukarrao Yashwantrao
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
10. Shri Motilal Vora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kavita Prasad — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri R.L. Yadav — Additional Director
Representatives of The Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board)
1. Shri V. K. Yadav — Chairman, Railway Board and
Ex-officio Principal Secretary to the
Government of India
2. Shri Girish Pillai — Member Traffic, Railway Board
and Ex-officio Secretary to the
Government of India

21
3. Shri Vishwesh Chaube — Member Engineering, Railway Board
and Ex-officio  Secretary to the
Government of India
4. Shri Rajesh Agrawal — Member (Rolling Stock), Railway
Board and Ex-officio Secretary to
the Government of India
5. Shri Ghanshyam Singh — Member (Traction), Railway Board
and Ex-officio  Secretary to the
Government of India
6. Shri S.N. Agrawal — Member Staff, Railway Board and
Ex-officio  Secretary to the
Government of India
7. Shri Shailesh Kumar Pathak — Chief Commissioner of Railway
Safety (CCRS)
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for
consideration the following draft Reports:—
(i) Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in their 18th Report
on the ‘Tourism Promotion and Pilgrimage Circuit’;
(ii) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Reports without any
modification.
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the
Reports and present the same to Parliament.
4. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
5. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Committee has
been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
xxxx not related to the Report.

22
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
18th REPORT (16th LOK SABHA) ON “TOURISM
PROMOTION AND PILGRIMAGE CIRCUIT”
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 11
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11 and 12 8
Percentage of total 72.73%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies:
Para No. 9 1
Percentage of total 9.09%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos. 6 and 10 2
Percentage of total 18.18%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para No. NIL NIL
Percentage of total  —