SEVENTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 13th Report of the Standing Committee on
Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ÔDemands for Grants
(2017-18) of the Ministry of Railways Õ]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2017
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 21.12.2017
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2017/Agrahayana, 1939 ( Saka)


S.C.R. No. 212
Price : R 64.00
' 2017 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Aegean Offset Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 16
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies ....................................................... 39
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration .... 40
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ... 42
APPENDIX
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Railways held on 20.11.2017 ................................. 43
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
13th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔDemands for Grants
(2017-18) of the Ministry of Railways Õ ..................... 45
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RAILWAYS (2017-2018)@
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay Ñ  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
3. Shri Sudheer Gupta
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
5. Dr. Ramshankar Katheria
6. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
7. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
8. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
9. Shri P .K. Kunhalikutty
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
11. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
12. Shri A.T . Nana Patil
13. Sadhvi Savitri Bai Phule
14. Shri Vijaya Kumar S.R.
15. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
16. Shri Mekapati Rajamohan Reddy
17. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
18. Shri Rajeev Satav
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri Ganesh Singh
21. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
@Constituted w.e.f. 01.09.2017 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 5837 dated 26.09.2017.
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.K. Antony
23. Shri Shwait Malik
24. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
25. Shri Mukut Mithi
26. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
27. Shri T . Rathinavel
28. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
29. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya
30. Shri Motilal Vora
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan Ñ Committee Officer
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2017-18),
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Seventeenth Report on Action Taken by
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in their Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ÔDemands
for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Railways Õ.
2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid
in the Rajya Sabha on 10.03.2017. The Report contained 14
recommendations/observations. The Ministry of Railways furnished their
Action Taken Notes on all the recommendations/observations contained
in the Report on 05.06.2017.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken
Report at their sitting held on 20.11.2017. The minutes of the sitting
are given in Appendix-I.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirteenth Report of
the Standing Committee on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY ,
07 December, 2017 Chairperson,
16 Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Railways deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Thirteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÒDemands for
Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Railways Ó.
2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid
in Rajya Sabha on 10 March, 2017. It contained 14 Recommendations/
Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations have been received and categorised as follows:Ñ
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:Ñ
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13 and 14
Total : 12
Chapter II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs replies:Ñ
Para No. 10
Total : 01
Chapter III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:Ñ
Para No. 4
Total : 01
Chapter IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies are still awaited:Ñ
Para No. Nil
Total : Nil
Chapter V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
the implementation of the Recommendations accepted by the
Government. The Committee desire that final action taken notes to
the Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this
Report should be furnished to them not later than three months of
the presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations.
Merger of Rail Budget with Union Budget
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
6. The Committee had noted that the Rail Budget had been
presented separately since 1924 following the recommendations of the
Acworth Committee. The representatives of the Ministry of Railways
apprised the Committee that at the time of separation of Accounts in
1924 Railway Budget was almost half the size of the Central Budget
and a substantial cut in Railway Budget to meet the requirement of
General Budget at the time of adversity or drought etc., used to
slowdown the progress of Railways. So at that time, it was felt that
Railways should act as a commercial entity with independent budget
and supplement General Budget from its internal profits by way of a
paying dividend on the capital invested from the General Revenues.
Railways were making profits from their investments at that time.
However , the scenario has changed significantly now and the total
Railway Budget is less than 10% of General Budget and some Ministries
like Defence have larger budget and therefore discussion about merger
began. The Bibek Debroy Committee also submitted the
recommendations for their merger. This year , marking a historic event,
rail budget was presented as a part of General Budget.
The Committee were apprised that Railways will maintain its distinct
identity as departmentally run commercial undertaking, retaining its
full functional autonomy. Railways would meet its Revenue expenditure
including ordinary working expenses, pay and allowance of staff, pension
of their retired employees from Revenue receipts. However , capital at
charge will get wiped out from Railways Õ statement of accounts and
henceforth it will be financed by General Budget so there will not be
dividend liability for Railways. They were also informed that Railways
would continue to get Gross Budgetary Support to meet part capital
expenditure requirement and the Ministry of Finance will present a
single appropriation Bill including estimates of Railways. One of the
contentions of Government of India for the merger is that it should be

3
able to facilitate multimodal transport planning between Highways,
Railways and Waterways etc. The extent of dividend liability relief to
Railways can be deployed for various works of capital expenditure and
it will allow Ministry of Finance more elbow room for better allocation
of resources. The Committee understand that unification of budget
will now give Railways a chance to focus more on their real business,
modernization and safety concerns while the Ministry of Finance will
be responsible for the financial needs of Railways. They, however , had
certain concern areas as follows, which needed to be addressed.
(i) Debroy Committee have made substantial recommendations
with respect to restructuring of Railway Board and other
reforms in the Railways including the need for commercial
accounting principles. The Committee would desire to be
apprised of the roadmap in this regard as well as the onus
of implementing these reforms, if at all.
(ii) The manner in which the Railways will now be structured,
that is, the new organizational structure of Railways. The
Committee desire to know whether it will be Railway Ministry
headed by a secretary or Railway Board in its present form
will continue. The Committee desire that sufficient autonomy
should be retained with the Railways.
(iii) Bearing the part of Capital Expenditure by Railways may
carry inherent risk for financing of the Railway projects and
funding of its huge capital requirement leading inevitably to
privatization of various services. The roadmap for expansion
and modernization be clearly brought out. Towards this end,
sufficient Gross Budgetary Support should be provided to
Railways every year keeping in view their various socio-
economic commitments including strategic lines.
(iv) Need for adequacy of operational revenue to be earned by
Railways to meet the revenue expenditure especially in view
of the fact that 40% of the Railways Staff is above the age
of 50 years and have to be provided Pension.
(v) In absence of dividend, the subsidy on Capital acquisition
through Extra Budgetary Sources would also be done away
with. The responsibility of socio-economic development
especially with respect to strategic railway lines, projects
including non-remunerative lines in backward route, tribal
and hilly areas would lie with the Ministry. The Committee
would like to be apprised about change in priorities in
selecting projects as well as the fate of existing pending
non-remunerative projects in various categories.

4
(vi) The fate of Railway vision plan 2030 in the light of the
GovernmentÕs budgetary reforms viz. discontinuation of Five
Year Plans be clearly brought to the notice of the Committee.
(vii) Apprehension of the Committee about lessening the
Parliamentary control and oversight responsibilities of the
Parliament over the most important public service obligation
i.e. Railways, as the demands of Railways will be like any
other Ministry under the Budget and probably it may not be
discussed in the House every year as was being done hitherto.
(viii) Contention that Railway Budget had started drawing excessive
populism especially in matter of fare fixation and selecting
and funding of projects is not acceptable to the Committee.
They feel that the Members of Parliament represent the
expectations/aspirations of the people and are duty bound
to express and project their genuine demands. Through the
Pink book brought out by the Ministry of Railway, they would
readily know the money allocated for the smallest project in
their constituency which would satisfy the expectations of
local population. The Committee desire that accountability
of Railways towards Parliament should be ensured. Also
detailed documentation of the status, allocation and progress
should be continued.
(ix) R esponsibility of preparation of Budget is of utmost
importance. The Committee are apprehensive that rather
than taking a bottom up approach and projecting needs and
requirements of Railways, there might be directives from
the Ministry of Finance due to fiscal consolidation or fiscal
deficit, they might have to adjust and forego their own
priority areas.
(x) Protection of Railways hitherto autonomous, from direct
interference of Ministry of Finance in terms of financial or
economy cut of 10-15% of the budget across the Ministries
should be ensured.
The aforesaid areas were the concerns of the Committee and way
forward so that the innovative step/reform by merger of Railway budget
with General budget works out successfully. They had liked to be kept
abreast about concrete steps taken in this direction.
7. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:Ñ
Ò(i) The Bibek Debroy Committee had submitted its final report
in June, 2015. The report of the Committee has been
examined. Work on several recommendations such as

5
discontinuation of separate rail budget, Accounting Reform,
setting up of a regulatory mechanism and reorientation of
Railway Board on business objectives has already been
initiated. Reallocation of work among Board Members has
been carried out reflecting functional requirements. Three
new posts of Director Generals (DGs) have been created and
incumbents posted. New Directorates for Non-Fare Revenues,
Environment & Housekeeping Management and Mobility
enhancement have been set up. Further, a Transformation
cell has been created in the Ministry of Railways for further
reforms in railways, which is an ongoing process.
(ii) No decision has been taken for any major restructuring of
the RailwayÕs organizational structure. The merger of Railway
Budget with General Budget does not entail any change in
the present structure of Railway Board or autonomy of
RailwayÕs working.
(iii) The requirement of Budgetary Support for Railways is worked
out on Annual basis during the process of preparation of
Annual Plan and Ministry of Finance is asked and consistently
followed up to provide for the same.
(iv) Railways have all along achieved year-on-year increase in
revenue, though the growth rate has varied from year to
year depending on traffic performance of the Railways in
the relevant years/periods. Total Receipts of Railways have
continuously risen over the years from Rs. 49,047 crore in
2004-05 to Rs. 1,68,380 crore in 2015-16 and in 2016-17 RE
and 2017-18 BE, the same are estimated at Rs.1,72,305 crore
and Rs. 1,89,498 crore respectively. However , since around
95% of RailwaysÕ earnings are from the freight and passenger
transport, the growth in revenue mostly revolves around the
freight and passenger traffic performance. Falling market
share of Railways in freight transportation and gradual decline
in average freight lead are principal reasons for slowing
down of the growth of freight revenue in 2016-17. Due to
expansion of road sector , Railways have also witnessed a
migration of short distance non-suburban passengers to road.
The low cost airlines are also posing steep competition to
the upper class passengers Õ services of Railways.
Nevertheless, Railways are taking short term and long term
measures to enhance revenues which, inter alia,  include
targeting progressively higher traffic throughput, higher
provision for capacity creation, effective marketing strategies

6
to capture more and more traffic, creation of additional
capacity and optimum utilization of the existing rail
infrastructure, enhancement in productivity and efficiency,
improvement of passenger interface, periodic rationalization
of fare and freight rates and focus on increasing the share
of non-fare revenue sources in Railways Õ earnings.
(v) Following are the guiding factors in prioratisation of projects:
(a) Capacity enhancement works
(b) Projects with quick revenue generation potential
(c) Projects which provide alternate routes
(d) Projects which improve safety in train operations
(e) Projects leading to debottlenecking
Railway projects which are remunerative are being funded
through EBR and EBR/IF . Existing pending non-remunerative
projects will be catered to on the basis of availability of
budgetary funds. Various State Governments have come
forward to sign Memorandum of Undertaking (MoU) to form
Joint Ventures (JVs). These projects shall be covered by JVs
and GBS.
(vi) With a view to provide long-term perspective to planning for
augmenting the railway network and to involve all the
stakeholders to facilitate framing of National Rail Plan 2030,
HonÕble Minister for Railways launched a dedicated website
on 08.12.2016. Letters have been written to Ministries/
Departments of Union and State Governments, Public Sector
Units, Zonal Railways and organizations having their stake in
Transport Planning across the country, to contribute on the
website and they have been issued independent User ID and
Password in this regard. National Rail Plan is not connected
with discontinuation of Five Year Plan as a measure of
Budgetary Reforms.
(vii) Despite being merged with Union Budget, the Railway
Demands for Grants 2017-18 were examined by Standing
Committee on Railways. The Railways Detailed Demands for
Grants 2017-18 were also extensively discussed and debated
in both the Houses of Parliament before being passed. Further,
the workings of the Railways are also subject to scrutiny by
other Parliamentary Committees like Public Accounts
Committee, Estimates Committee, Railway Convention
Committee etc. who have been examining various aspects of

7
Railway working. Hence, the Hon Õble Committee may rest
assured that the merger of Railway Budget with Union Budget
would in no way lessen the Parliamentary control and
supervision responsibilities of Railways.
(viii) It is submitted that accountability of Railways toward
Parliament in no way gets diluted consequent upon merger
of Railway Budget with Union Budget. As regards detailed
documentation of status of projects, allocation and progress,
the same would continue as earlier.
(ix) & (x) The Hon Õble Committee may note that despite the merger
of Railway Budget with Union Budget, Ministry of Railways
will continue to function as a departmentally run commercial
undertaking as earlier with functional/financial autonomy
as per existing guidelines in decision making with regard to
operations and investment decisions. It may be appreciated
that the merger has been effected with a larger objective
of bringing the affairs of the Railways to centre stage,
present a holistic picture of the financial position of the
Government, to reduce the procedural requirement and
instead to bring in focus the aspects of delivery and good
governance. Preparation of the Budget of Railways continues
to be the responsibility of the Ministry of Railways with due
consultation with Ministry of Finance as was the case earlier
also.
While deposing before Estimates Committee during examination of
the subject ÔStructural changes in Union BudgetÕ, the representatives
of Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Railways have assured that
there will be no dilution of the operational, functional and financial
autonomy of the Railways and the Railway Board will continue to
prepare the railway components of the Union Budget based on
their professional expertise, proven experience and the need for
constant improvement in the Railways. Hence there appears no
scope of any apprehension in this regard. Ó
8. While noting that unification of Budget will give Railways a
chance to focus more on their real business, modernisation and
safety concerns as the Ministry of Finance will be responsible for
the financial needs of Railways, the Committee had expressed
certain concerns which needed to be addressed. These inter alia
included road map for implementation of Debroy Committee
recommendations, organisational structure of Railways, continuation
of gross budgetary supports to Railways, fate of existing pending

8
non-remunerative projects in various categories, fate of Railway
vision plan 2030, Parliamentary control over Railways etc. In their
action taken reply, the Railways have placed certain facts before
the Committee. While noting the response of the Government to
the apprehensions of the Committee, they hope that the same will
be followed in letter and spirit. Further they will like to re-emphasis
the need for social economic development through Railways with
respect to strategic Railway lines, projects including non
remunerative lines in backward, tribal and in hilly areas.
Subsidy on Dividend and Operating Losses on Strategic Lines and
Railway Lines in Hilly, Coastal and Backward Areas
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
9. The Committee had understood that with the merger of Railway
Budget with General Budget from 2017-18 onwards, Railways will be
exempted to pay dividend to General Revenues but then Railways will
not be given the subsidy on dividend and also operating losses on
Strategic lines and Railway lines in hilly, coastal and backward areas
will not be reimbursed to them. The Committee were aware that
Railways till now play a very vital role in socio-economic development
by developing remunerative projects in strategic, hilly, coastal and
backward areas. While at present (till 2016-17) operational losses on
six strategic lines are being reimbursed to Railways by Ministry of
Finance. Estimate Committee in its 21st Report (16th Lok Sabha) on
Structural Changes in Union Budget has also recommended that the
Railways should get the reimbursement of losses on operation of
strategic lines. The Committee strongly reiterated the recommendation
made by Estimate Committee and think that considering the role of
Railways in nation building, reimbursement to Railways on their
operating losses on strategic lines is justifiable. As these lines mainly
cater to defence movements on border areas and development of
social and backward region, the Committee recommended that
reimbursement of operational losses on strategic lines and Railway
lines in hilly, coastal and backward areas should be continued and
desire the Ministry of Railways to pursue the matter with Ministry of
Finance in this regard. The Committee also recommended separate
fund allocation for National Projects and projects of strategic
significance, social importance in backward and hilly areas and to
explore the possibilities to share the cost of such social obligations
with the Ministry of Finance.
10. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
submitted as under:Ñ
ÒTill 2016-17 Railways have been reimbursed the operating loss on
strategic lines by the Government. However , with the merger of

9
Railway Budget with Union Budget w.e.f. Budget Estimates
2017-18, the capital-at-charge of the Railways has been wiped off
relieving the Railways from any dividend liability. Alongside, the
Government has also decided that subsidy on divided payment
henceforth paid to the Railways and the operating loss on strategic
lines henceforth reimbursed to Railways are done away with w.e.f.
Budget Estimates 2017-18. Pursuant to the recommendations of
HonÕble Committee and the Estimates Committee, Ministry of
Finance is being requested to continue to reimburse the operating
loss on strategic lines to Railways beyond 2016-17.
As regards HonÕble CommitteeÕs recommendation for separate fund
allocation for National Projects and projects of strategic
significance, social importance in backward and hilly areas and to
explore the possibilities to share the cost of such social obligations
with the Ministry of Finance, it is stated that even when the
Railways had a separate budget, the Government was providing
Budgetary Support to the Railways for annual capital expenditure
with earmarked allocation for National Projects. Now in the post
merger scenario also, the Government would continue to provide
Gross Budgetary Support towards meeting part of Railways Õ capital
expenditure.Ó
11. In their report the Committee had recommended separate
fund allocation for National Projects and projects of strategic
significance, social importance in backward and in hilly areas and
to explore the possibility to share the cost of such social obligations
with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee are concerned to note
that instead of having a separate fund allocation for National Projects
and Projects of strategic significance, social importance in backward
and hilly areas, the Government would continue to provide gross
budgetary support towards meeting part of Railways capital
expenditure.
The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that there
should be separate allocation of funds for these projects keeping in
view their importance so that these projects can be completed in
a time bound manner.
Capital Outlay
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
12. The Committee had observed that Railways remain largely
dependent on Gross Budgetary Support or Extra Budgetary Resources.
The contribution of Internal Resources in total Capital Outlay has been

10
16.6% in 2015-16, 12.16% in Revised Estimate 2016-17 and 10.69% is
kept in Budget Estimate 2017-18 which reflects a downward trend. The
Committee had noted the financial dependency of Railways on other
outer resources rather than focusing on internal resources even after
70 years of independence. The main reason stated by Ministry for
tepid growth in freight traffic was burden of the Pay Commission and
down turn in core sector i.e. coal loading, due to change in Government
policy on account of thermal power generation as more emphasis is
put on power generation from the plant which are either on pitheads
or on ports. The Committee had noted with satisfaction that the Ministry
is now expanding their basket size of commodities to 40 instead of
only 10 commodities as of now, so as to reduce dependency on
transportation of few commodities. The Committee felt that the time
has come when Railways need to show the acumen in the field of
resource generation and prove their financial prudence by making
themselves financially independent. The Committee had recommended
that the Ministry should be resilient enough to think on the lines of
exploring all the possibilities to generate revenue by their own. In this
regard, the Committee suggested the Ministry to form a working group
at division level to find the ways through which these assets may be
converted into revenue generating resources. Instead of customary
hike in passenger fare and freight charges and losing out on business,
the Ministry may think of unconventional measures like sale of Railway
souvenir on trains and stations, commercial use of Railway land,
monetization of Railway assets, advertisement on train coaches, stations
and peripheral areas, enhancing the last mile connectivity to enhance
business avenues, better services and business oriented model for IRCTC
like other commercial travelling sites. It would be utmost significance
that the respective Members of Parliament of the concerned Railway
divisions may also be a part of that working group to facilitate the
progress and public acceptance. Further , the Committee desired that
before approving any new project involving capital expenditure, finances
should be identified in advance and tied up as it would facilitate the
completion of project within prescribed time frame without cost
escalation.
13. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:Ñ
ÒMinistry of Railways have issued a Policy related to generation of
Non Fare Revenue in January, 2017 which allows for the
consideration of unsolicited proposals by enabling private and public
sector participation in the conceptualization of an earnings project
or scheme and permitting finalization of the same. This policy is

11
applicable for all departments receiving an unsolicited proposal
for enhancement of revenues of the Railways, especially the non-
fare revenue such as advertising, short term land licensing etc.
where no policy exists.
The policy has also created an empowered committee comprising
of 4 members constituted for assessing the pre-feasibility of an
Unsolicited Proposal and granting approval to the same for further
processing and selection of Agency. The committee will be headed
by AGM/ADRM and will comprise one officer from the department
receiving the project proposal who shall be the convener , one
officer from Finance Department and one or more officer from any
other department, preferably related to project/programme
execution. The committee will be a standing committee nominated
by the Railway Authority for all such proposals received in its
jurisdiction. The Committee Members should be preferably at the
level of JAG/SG/SAG officers.
Members of Parliament are being actively consulted by head of
Zonal and Divisional Railways on a regular basis to ascertain their
views regarding issues related to their concerned jurisdictions.
Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Limited (IRCTC) is
an extended arm of the Indian Railways to upgrade, professionalize
and manage the catering and hospitality services at stations, on
trains and other locations and to promote domestic and international
tourism through development of budget hotels, special tour
packages, information & commercial publicity and global reservation
systems.
IRCTC has been mandated to provide catering services to the
passengers through high-end premium outlet food plaza, fast food
units and food courts. Recently Catering Policy 2017 has been
issued wherein IRCTC has been mandated to manage catering
services on all trains primarily creating distinction between food
production and food distribution for providing better services to
the passengers. IRCTC shall be setting up new kitchens and upgrading
existing ones to upgrade quality of food preparation.
In order to further augment revenues earned by IRCTC and with
the objective of providing better services to passengers, IRCTC has
also been mandated to provide E-catering service on IR wherein
passenger can book meals of their choice. The facility is presently
available at about 357 major stations across Indian Railways. At
present, 4000 to 5000 meals are being provided to passengers

12
through e-catering service by IRCTC. Concerted efforts are being
made to increase the number of meals supplied to 1 lakh meals
per day. Similarly, 1100 Water Vending Machines have already been
commissioned by IRCTC over 350 stations for providing potable
drinking water to the passengers at affordable rates and efforts
are on to further expand the facility. Further, IRCTC has also been
mandated by Ministry of Railways to set up Packaged Drinking
Water (PDW) Plants for production of PDW under the brand name
ÒRail Neer Ó. Six Rail Neer PDW plants are presently operational,
out of which four plants at Nangloi (Delhi) (2003), Danapur (Patna)
(2004), Palur (Chennai) (2011), Ambernath (Maharashtra) (2014)
have been set up by IRCTC from its own funds. Two more plants,
one at Amethi (Uttar Pradesh) (2015) and another one at Parassala
(Trivandrum) (2016) have been set up by IRCTC under Public Private
Partnership (PPP) mode. IRCTC at present produces approximately
7.6 lakh litre of Rail Neer PDW per day.
All these above activities through PPP mode/ licensee model and
are generating revenue for both IRCTC and Railways making Railways
less dependent on Budgetary Support or Extra Budgetary Resources.
Regarding identifying finances before approving new projects
involving Capital Expenditure, it is felt that these recommendation
is already in vogue in Railways where norms/ceilings and
throwforward are taken into account before considering new
proposals for sanction by the competent Authority. Ó
14. The Committee note the steps taken by the Ministry for
increasing the internal resources by issuing a Policy related to
generation of Non Fare Revenue in January 2017 which also
inter alia inherits the guideline for creation of Empowered
Committee for assessing pre-feasibility of unsolicited proposals and
expect for efficient execution of the same without delay. They
hope that these measures will be implemented in letter and spirit
in a time bound manner. They would like to be apprised of the
progress in the matter and the impact of these measures on increase
in share of internal resources in total capital outlay.
New Initiatives
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
15. The Committee had noted that the various new initiatives have
been announced in the Budget 2017-18 which inter alia relates to the
introduction of ÔClean My Coach Õ and ÔCoach Mitra services Õ,

13
Ôredevelopment of stations Õ and Ôfitting of bio-toilets Õ in all existing
broad gauge coaches by 2019. The Committee appreciated such
initiatives of the Ministry and extend their utmost support to them. In
this regard, the Committee suggested the Ministry to integrate the
redevelopment of stations with the Smart city development plans by
applying Build Operate Transfer model. The Committee were of the
view that alongside the modernization of stations, this holistic approach
will help in promulgating Swachhta Abhiyan ensuring the cleanliness
and preventing encroachment of the railway premises. The Committee
recommended the Ministry to ensure continuous uninterrupted flow of
funds for such initiatives along with proper implementation at ground
and regular review of their outcome including their contribution to
passenger satisfaction.
The Committee expected that with the initiation of afore-mentioned
new initiatives, the progress on the announcement made in the Budget
Speech for the year 2015-16 as introduction of e-catering services
should not be compromised in terms of lack of funds or otherwise,
rather expansion of e-catering service should be ensured in all trains
on priority basis, maintaining the quality of food and delivery system.
16. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:Ñ
ÒCleanlinessÓ
Cleanliness on Trains is a high priority area for Indian Railways. It
has always been a mammoth task owing to various factors such as
long lead of trains, environmental conditions, uncontrolled usage
and passenger habits.
Cleaning is also perishable as the place/coach which has been
cleaned can become unclean at any time, hence periodic attention
is required.
Mechanized cleaning of coaches is being carried out in the coaching
depots at both ends. On Board House Keeping Service (OBHS) is
also being provided in all Rajdhani, Shatabdi, Duronto and other
important long distance Mail/Express trains for cleaning of coach
toilets, doorways, aisles and passenger compartments during the
run of the trains.
Clean My Coach
In ÒClean My Coach Ó scheme, for any cleaning requirement in the
coach, passenger sends a message through mobile (SMS) on a
specified mobile number. This is immediately acknowledged by the
backend software along with a ÒsatisfactionÓ code which is sent to
the passenger.

14
A message is also sent by the server to the mobile number of
On Board Housekeeping Service (OBHS) staff travelling on the same
train along with the details of the passenger such as coach number,
berth number. OBHS staff contacts the passengers and carries out
the cleaning work as per demand.
If the passenger is satisfied, he/she discloses the code and OBHS
staff sends the same code through SMS and the complaints is then
treated as closed. If the passenger is not satisfied then he/she will
not disclose the code.
ÒClean My Coach Ó scheme was initially tried in a few Railways.
Subsequently, in HonÕble MRÕs Railway Budget Speech of February,
2016, it was announced that ÒClean My Coach Ó service will be
introduced on Pan-India basis, where a passenger can request
cleaning of his/her coach/toilet Ôon demand Õ through SMS. The
scheme was formally launched on pan-India basis in March, 2016.
Presently ÔClean My CoachÕ service is available in nearly 800 trains.
Coach Mitra
ÒClean My Coach Ó service is now being upgraded to ÒCoach Mitra Ó
facility as announced in Hon Õble Finance Minister Õs Budget Speech,
2017-18.
ÒCoach Mitra Ó will be a single window interface to register all
coach related requirements of passengers travelling in reserved
coaches, such as cleaning, disinfection, linen, train lighting, air
conditioning and watering of coaches. This will warrant provision
of backend support for the additional likely requirements of the
passengers, as stated above, apart from only cleaning service earlier
being provided.
Instructions regarding ÒCoach MitraÓ were issued vide Railway Board
Letter No. 2016/EnHM/15/09 dated 07.02.2017. ÒCoach Mitra Ó
facility has already been introduced in more than 140 trains.
Station Redevelopment
A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been recently entered
into between Ministry of Railways (MoR) and Ministry of Urban
Development (MoUD) for integrated planning of redevelopment of
railway stations in the cities included in the ÔSMART Cities Õ and
AMRUT cities. This would lead to an integrated public transit hub
around the railway stations and encourage Transit Oriented
Development.

15
Each Smart City has incorporated a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)
to execute the Smart City Plan. The SPV may form a joint venture
company with an MoR-designated entity to implement railway
station redevelopment projects in that city and in its suburbs.
Another form of joint venture could be between the MoR designated
entity, the Smart City SPV and the National Building Construction
Corporation Ltd. (NBCC), a Public Sector Undertaking under MoUD.
The redevelopment of stations under the schemes is proposed to
be executed under Build Operate Transfer model.
Bio-Toilets
Ministry of Railways gratefully acknowledges the appreciation and
support of the Committee for the endeavour of Indian Railways
initiatives of ÒFitment of Bio-Toilets in all existing BG Coaches by
2019Ó.
Action Plan for the same has already been drawn up by Ministry of
Railways and the progress of the same is being closely monitored.
The only possible constraint in the speedy implementation of
Bio-Toilets is the supply-chain constraints from the side of
manufacturers of Bio-tanks. This issue too is being resolved with
industry partners.
In 2016-17, against a target of fitment of 30,000 Bio-Toilets, Indian
Railways have fitted approximately 34,000 Bio-Toilets, thereby
surpassing its own target. Ó
17. In their recommendation, the Committee expected the
Ministry to continue with their new initiatives like ÔClean Mitra
ServicesÕ, ÔClean My CoachÕ, Ôredevelopment of stations Õ and Ôfitting
of bio-toilets Õ etc. The Committee note with satisfaction that the
Ministry are putting their efforts in the right direction. Further, the
Committee are hopeful that if the Ministry continues with these
efforts with the same vigor and positive intention with regular
monitoring, they will be able to provide the customer satisfaction
to a great extent.

16
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
An Overview
Indian Railways have come a long way from 34 Kms to 66,687 Kms
over a span of 164 years since 1853. This journey should not be seen
only in terms of covering distance rather it should be understood in
different perspective in bringing the people of India closer and
connecting them through fast and economic mode of transport. Giving
connectivity coverage to the seventh largest country of the world,
managing a vast volume of manpower and continuously preparing the
system to fulfil the expectations of the people is really appreciable.
The Committee think that for India, the growth of Railways has a
larger connotation beyond measuring or accessing it merely in numeric
and economic terms. This year Railways had undergone a paradigm
shift in terms of their budgetary process. Discontinuing the decades
long Victorian legacy of presenting a separate budget for Railways,
Railway Budget for 2017-18 was merged with the Union Budget and
was presented to Lok Sabha with the Union Budget by the Finance
Minister on 1 February, 2017.
With aforesaid broader outlook, the Committee undertook a detailed
scrutiny of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Railways
2017-18 which were tabled in the House on 3 February, 2017. During
the deliberations by the representatives of Railway Board before the
Committee and the written replies submitted by the Railways, the
Committee had a sense of core issues of Indian Railways. The Major
areas of focus for Railways are as under:
¥ Unification of Rail Budget with Union Budget from 2017-18
¥ Capital and Development works
¥ Passenger safety
¥ Cleanliness
¥ Finance and accounting reforms
¥ Station redevelopment

17
The Committee understand that the success of the Indian Railways
system lies in the manner in which they maintain a balance between
its existence as a commercial entity and as a vehicle of social
engineering and sustainable development. The Committee note that
the Ministry have prepared a Vision 2030 keeping their long term goal
in mind. However, having done away with Five year planning, a
perspective annual plan should also be formulated to cater the short
term objectives in consonance with the long term goals.
In the light of the above, the Committee will now delve into some
of the specific components of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry
of Railways for 2017-18.
Reply of the Government
Noted. The practice of preparing the Annual Plan for Railways is
in vogue.
Merger of Rail Budget with Union Budget
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that the Rail Budget had been presented
separately since 1924 following the recommendations of the Acworth
Committee. The representatives of the Ministry of Railways apprised
the Committee that at the time of separation of Accounts in 1924
Railway Budget was almost half the size of the Central Budget and a
substantial cut in Railway Budget to meet the requirement of General
Budget at the time of adversity or drought etc., used to slowdown the
progress of Railways. So at that time, it was felt that Railways should
act as a commercial entity with independent budget and supplement
General Budget from its internal profits by way of a paying dividend
on the capital invested from the General Revenues. Railways were
making profits from their investments at that time. However , the
scenario has changed significantly now and the total Railway Budget
is less than 10% of General Budget and some Ministries like Defence
have larger budget and therefore discussion about merger began. The
Bibek Debroy Committee also submitted the recommendations for their
merger. This year , marking a historic event, rail budget was presented
as a part of General Budget.
The Committee were apprised that Railways will maintain its distinct
identity as departmentally run commercial undertaking, retaining its
full functional autonomy. Railways would meet its Revenue expenditure
including ordinary working expenses, pay and allowance of staff, pension

18
of their retired employees from Revenue receipts. However , capital at
charge will get wiped out from Railways Õ statement of accounts and
henceforth it will be financed by General Budget so there will not be
dividend liability for Railways. They were also informed that Railways
would continue to get Gross Budgetary Support to meet part capital
expenditure requirement and the Ministry of Finance will present a
single appropriation Bill including estimates of Railways. One of the
contentions of Government of India for the merger is that it should be
able to facilitate multi-modal transport planning between Highways,
Railways and Waterways etc. The extent of dividend liability relief to
Railways can be deployed for various works of capital expenditure and
it will allow Ministry of Finance more elbow room for better allocation
of resources. The Committee understand that unification of budget
will now give Railways a chance to focus more on their real business,
modernization and safety concerns while the Ministry of Finance will
be responsible for the financial needs of Railways. They, however,
have certain concern areas as follows, which need to be addressed.
(i) Debroy Committee have made substantial recommendations
with respect to restructuring of Railway Board and other
reforms in the Railways including the need for commercial
accounting principles. The Committee would desire to be
apprised of the roadmap in this regard as well as the onus
of implementing these reforms, if at all.
(ii) The manner in which the Railways will now be structured,
that is, the new organizational structure of Railways. The
Committee desire to know whether it will be Railway Ministry
headed by a secretary or Railway Board in its present form
will continue. The Committee desire that sufficient autonomy
should be retained with the Railways.
(iii) Bearing the part of Capital Expenditure by Railways may
carry inherent risk for financing of the Railways projects and
funding of its huge capital requirement leading inevitably to
privatization of various services. The roadmap for expansion
and modernization be clearly brought out. Towards this end,
sufficient Gross Budgetary Support should be provided to
Railways every year keeping in view their various socio-
economic commitments including strategic lines.
(iv) Need for adequacy of operational revenue to be earned by
Railways to meet the revenue expenditure especially in view
of the fact that 40% of the Railways Staff is above the age
of 50 years and have to be provided Pension.

19
(v) In absence of dividend, the subsidy on Capital acquisition
through Extra Budgetary Sources would also be done away
with. The responsibility of socio-economic development
especially with respect to strategic railway lines, projects
including non-remunerative lines in backward route, tribal
and hilly areas would lie with the Ministry. The Committee
would like to be apprised about change in priorities in
selecting projects as well as the fate of existing pending
non-remunerative projects in various categories.
(vi) The fate of Railway vision plan 2030 in the light of the
GovernmentÕs budgetary reforms viz. discontinuation of Five
Year Plans be clearly brought to the notice of the Committee.
(vii) Apprehension of the Committee about lessening the
Parliamentary control and oversight responsibilities of the
Parliament over the most important public service obligation
i.e. Railways, as the demands of Railways will be like any
other Ministry under the Budget and probably it may not be
discussed in the House every year as was being done hitherto.
(viii) Contention that Railway Budget had started drawing excessive
populism especially in matter of fare fixation and selecting
and funding of projects is not acceptable to the Committee.
They feel that the Members of Parliament represent the
expectations/aspirations of the people and are duty bound
to express and project their genuine demands. Through the
Pink book brought out by the Ministry of Railway, they would
readily know the money allocated for the smallest project in
their constituency which would satisfy the expectations of
local population. The Committee desire that accountability
of Railways towards Parliament should be ensured. Also
detailed documentation of the status, allocation and progress
should be continued.
(ix) R esponsibility of preparation of Budget is of utmost
importance. The Committee are apprehensive that rather
than taking a bottom up approach and projecting needs and
requirements of Railways, there might be directives from
the Ministry of Finance due to fiscal consolidation or fiscal
deficit, they might have to adjust and forego their own
priority areas.
(x) Protection of Railways hitherto autonomous, from direct
interference of Ministry of Finance in terms of financial or
economy cut of 10-15% of the budget across the Ministries
should be ensured.

20
The aforesaid areas are the concerns of the Committee and way
forward so that the innovative step/reform by merger of Railway budget
with General budget works out successfully. They would like to be kept
abreast about concrete steps taken in this direction.
Reply of the Government
(i) The Bibek Debroy Committee had submitted its final report in
June, 2015. The report of the Committee has been examined. Work on
several recommendations such as discontinuation of separate rail
budget, Accounting Reform, setting up of a regulatory mechanism and
reorientation of Railway Board on business objectives has already been
initiated. Reallocation of work among Board Members has been carried
out reflecting functional requirements. Three new posts of Director
Generals (DGs) have been created and incumbents posted. New
Directorates for Non-Fare Revenues, Environment & Housekeeping
Management and Mobility enhancement have been set up. Further , a
Transformation cell has been created in the Ministry of Railways for
further reforms in Railways, which is an ongoing process.
(ii) No decision has been taken for any major restructuring of the
RailwayÕs organizational structure. The merger of Railway Budget with
General Budget does not entail any change in the present structure of
Railway Board or autonomy of Railway Õs working.
(iii) The requirement of Budgetary Support for Railways is worked
out on Annual basis during the process of preparation of Annual Plan
and Ministry of Finance is asked and consistently followed up to provide
for the same.
(iv) Railways have all along achieved year-on-year increase in
revenue, though the growth rate has varied from year-to-year depending
on traffic performance of the Railways in the relevant years/periods.
Total Receipts of Railways have continuously risen over the years from
Rs. 49,047 crore in 2004-05 to Rs. 1,68,380 crore in 2015-16 and in
2016-17 RE and 2017-18 BE, the same are estimated at Rs. 1,72,305 crore
and Rs. 1,89,498 crore respectively. However , since around 95% of
RailwaysÕ earnings are from the freight and passenger transport, the
growth in revenue mostly revolves around the freight and passenger
traffic performance. Falling market share of Railways in freight
transportation and gradual decline in average freight lead are principal
reasons for slowing down of the growth of freight revenue in 2016-17.
Due to expansion of road sector, Railways have also witnessed a
migration of short distance non-suburban passengers to road. The low
cost airlines are also posing steep competition to the upper class
passengersÕ services of Railways.

21
Nevertheless, Railways are taking short term and long term measures
to enhance revenues which, inter alia, include targeting progressively
higher traffic throughput, higher provision for capacity creation,
effective marketing strategies to capture more and more traffic,
creation of additional capacity and optimum utilization of the existing
rail infrastructure, enhancement in productivity and efficiency,
improvement of passenger interface, periodic rationalization of fare
and freight rates and focus on increasing the share of non-fare revenue
sources in Railways Õ earnings.
(v) Following are the guiding factors in prioritisation of projects:Ñ
(a) Capacity enhancement works
(b) Projects with quick revenue generation potential
(c) Projects which provide alternate routes
(d) Projects which improve safety in train operations
(e) Projects leading to de-bottlenecking
Railway projects which are remunerative are being funded through
EBR and EBR/IF . Existing pending non-remunerative projects will be
catered to on the basis of availability of budgetary funds. Various
State Governments have come forward to sign Memorandum of
Undertaking (MoU) to form Joint Ventures (JVs). These projects shall
be covered by JVs and GBS.
(vi) With a view to provide long-term perspective to planning for
augmenting the railway network and to involve all the stakeholders to
facilitate framing of National Rail Plan 2030, Hon Õble Minister for
Railways launched a dedicated website on 08.12.2016. Letters have
been written to Ministries/Departments of Union and State Governments,
Public Sector Units, Zonal Railways and organizations having their stake
in Transport Planning across the country, to contribute on the website
and they have been issued independent User ID and Password in this
regard. National Rail Plan is not connected with discontinuation of
Five Year Plan as a measure of Budgetary Reforms.
(vii) Despite being merged with Union Budget, the Railway Demands
for Grants 2017-18 were examined by Standing Committee on Railways.
The Railways Detailed Demands for Grants 2017-18 were also extensively
discussed and debated in both the Houses of Parliament before being
passed. Further, the workings of the Railways are also subject to scrutiny
by other Parliamentary Committees like Public Accounts Committee,
Estimates Committee, Railway Convention Committee etc. who have

22
been examining various aspects of Railway working. Hence, the HonÕble
Committee may rest assured that the merger of Railway Budget with
Union Budget would in no way lessen the Parliamentary control and
supervision responsibilities of Railways.
(viii) It is submitted that accountability of Railways towards
Parliament in no way gets diluted consequent upon merger of Railway
Budget with Union Budget. As regards detailed documentation of status
of projects, allocation and progress, the same would continue as earlier.
(ix) & (x) The HonÕble Committee may note that despite the merger
of Railway Budget with Union Budget, Ministry of Railways will continue
to function as a departmentally run commercial undertaking as earlier
with functional/financial autonomy as per existing guidelines in decision
making with regard to operations and investment decisions. It may be
appreciated that the merger has been effected with a larger objective
of bringing the affairs of the Railways to centre stage, present a
holistic picture of the financial position of the Government, to reduce
the procedural requirement and instead to bring in focus the aspects
of delivery and good governance. Preparation of the Budget of Railways
continues to be the responsibility of the Ministry of Railways with due
consultation with Ministry of Finance as was the case earlier also.
While deposing before Estimates Committee during examination of
the subject ÔStructural Changes in Union Budget Õ, the representatives
of Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Railways have assured that there
will be no dilution of the operational, functional and financial autonomy
of the Railways and the Railway Board will continue to prepare the
railway components of the Union Budget based on their professional
expertise, proven experience and the need for constant improvement
in the Railways. Hence there appears no scope of any apprehension in
this regard.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation Para No. 8 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that one direct financial fallout in the post
merger scenario is the exemption in payment of dividend to the General
Exchequer to the extent of Rs. 9731.29 crore for the year 2016-17 to
the Railways. Since, an amount of Rs. 4301 crore which was expected
to be received from the Ministry of Finance as subsidy on payment of
dividend, would not be given now, the net benefit of waiving the

23
dividend for the year 2016-17 has been only Rs. 5,430 crore. The
Committee are dismayed to note that this benefit of Rs. 5,430 crore
would be utilized to partly meet the shortfall in traffic earnings of
Railways assessed at Rs. 12,665 crore in the Revised Estimates during
2016-17. The Committee find that the very purpose of removing the
dividend liabilities is defeated when they are not utilized in creating
assets or increasing net revenue of Railways. The Committee expect
the Ministry to judiciously spend the amount on capital or asset
formulation of Railways so that the utility of these savings will be
enhanced exponentially in order to cater to the financial needs of
other deficit areas of Railways.
Reply of the Government
The net benefit of Rs. 5,434 crore to Railways emanating from
waiver of dividend payment in 2016-17 enabled Railways to maintain
their capital expenditure envisaged for the year from internal resources
i.e. DRF & DF . Hence the net benefit from the waiver of dividend has
been fruitfully utilised for Railways Õ capital expenditure which would
otherwise have been adversely impacted in the absence of this benefit.
Capital Outlay
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that Capital section of demand is for
expenditure on assets, acquisition, construction and replacement,
whether met out funds to be obtained from the general exchequer or
internal resources of the Railway viz. Depreciation Reserve Fund,
Development Fund, Capital Fund, Railway Safety Fund and Rashtriya
Rail Sanraksha Kosh. The Actual Capital Expenditure during 2015-16
was Rs. 93519.80 crore, in the Revised Estimates for 2016-17, it was
Rs. 1,21,000 crore and in Budget Estimates for 2017-18 it is estimated
at Rs. 1,31,000 crore. The Committee perceive a positive trend in the
capital outlay of the Railways as a regular growth has been expected
of Rs. 27,480 crore (almost 27%) in 2016-17 from 2015-16 and again
the outlay has been increased by Rs. 10,000 crore at BE for the year
2017-18. The Committee expect that this increase in Capital Outlay
should be best utilized, keeping in view the financial prudence, in
areas/projects which would start remuneration to the Railways at
earliest such as last mile projects and bridging the incomplete small
sections of rail networks etc.
Reply of the Government
The steadily increasing capital outlay of Railways is already getting
deployed to priority projects from operational point of view, the last
mile projects as also long pending projects. Such projects are being

24
provided ring-fenced allocations so that they get completed in time
and contribute to the revenues of the system. This approach has resulted
in acceleration in commissioning of new lines, electrification etc. in
last two years. Capacity enhancement projects under Doubling, Traffic
Facilities and Electrification are also getting priority allotments for
their early completion so that they contribute towards enhancement
of throughput as also revenue.
A major part of the Capital Outlay is being utilized for capacity
enhancement works like Doubling/Tripling/Quadrupling and Traffic
Facility works besides Rolling Stock acquisition. Funds are also allocated
for last mile projects and projects which are in the last leg of completion
with a view to increas carrying capacity of the system.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee observe that Railways remain largely dependent on
Gross Budgetary Support or Extra Budgetary Resources. The contribution
of Internal Resources in total Capital Outlay has been 16.6% in 2015-
16, 12.16% in Revised Estimate 2016-17 and 10.69% is kept in Budget
Estimate 2017-18 which reflects a downward trend. The Committee
note the financial dependency of Railways on other outer resources
rather than focusing on internal resources even after 70 years of
independence. The main reason stated by Ministry for tepid growth in
freight traffic was burden of the Pay Commission and down turn in
core sector i.e. coal loading, due to change in Government policy on
account of thermal power generation as more emphasis is put on
power generation from the plant which are either on pitheads or on
ports. The Committee note with satisfaction that the Ministry is now
expanding their basket size of commodities to 40 instead of only 10
commodities as of now, so as to reduce dependency on transportation
of few commodities. The Committee feel that the time has come when
Railways need to show the acumen in the field of resource generation
and prove their financial prudence by making themselves financially
independent. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should be
resilient enough to think on the lines of exploring all the possibilities
to generate revenue by their own. In this regard, the Committee
suggest the Ministry to form a working group at division level to find
the ways through which these assets may be converted into revenue
generating resources. Instead of customary hike in passenger fare and
freight charges and losing out on business, the Ministry may think of
unconventional measures like sale of Railway souvenir on trains and
stations, commercial use of Railway land, monetization of Railway
assets, advertisement on train coaches, stations and peripheral areas,

25
enhancing the last mile connectivity to enhance business avenues,
better services and business oriented model for IRCTC like other
commercial travelling sites. It would be utmost significance that the
respective Members of Parliament of the concerned Railway divisions
may also be a part of that working group to facilitate the progress and
public acceptance. Further, the Committee desire that before approving
any new project involving capital expenditure, finances should be
identified in advance and tied up as it would facilitate the completion
of project within prescribed time frame without cost escalation.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways have issued a Policy related to generation of
Non-Fare Revenue in January, 2017 which allows for the consideration
of unsolicited proposals by enabling private and public sector
participation in the conceptualization of an earnings project or scheme
and permitting finalization of the same. This policy is applicable for
all departments receiving an unsolicited proposal for enhancement of
revenues of the Railways, especially the non-fare revenue such as
advertising, short term land licensing etc. where no policy exists.
The policy has also created an empowered committee comprising
of 4 members constituted for assessing the pre-feasibility of an
Unsolicited Proposal and granting approval to the same for further
processing and selection of Agency. The committee will be headed by
AGM/ADRM and will comprise one officer from the department receiving
the project proposal who shall be the convener , one officer from
Finance Department and one or more officer from any other department,
preferably related to project/programme execution. The committee
will be a standing committee nominated by the Railway Authority for
all such proposals received in its jurisdiction. The Committee Members
should be preferably at the level of JAG/SG/SAG officers.
Members of Parliament are being actively consulted by head of
Zonal and Divisional Railways on a regular basis to ascertain their
views regarding issues related to their concerned jurisdictions.
Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Limited (IRCTC) is
an extended arm of the Indian Railways to upgrade, professionalize
and manage the catering and hospitality services at stations, on trains
and other locations and to promote domestic and international tourism
through development of budget hotels, special tour packages,
information & commercial publicity and global reservation systems.
IRCTC has been mandated to provide catering services to the
passengers through high-end premium outlet food plaza, fast food
units and food courts. Recently Catering Policy, 2017 has been issued

26
wherein IRCTC has been mandated to manage catering services on all
trains primarily creating distinction between food production and food
distribution for providing better services to the passengers. IRCTC
shall be setting up new kitchens and upgrading existing ones to upgrade
quality of food preparation.
In order to further augment revenues earned by IRCTC and with
the objective of providing better services to passengers, IRCTC has
also been mandated to provide e-catering service on IR wherein
passenger can book meals of their choice. The facility is presently
available at about 357 major stations across Indian Railways. At present,
4000 to 5000 meals are being provided to passengers through e-catering
service by IRCTC. Concerted efforts are being made to increase the
number of meals supplied to 1 lakh meals per day. Similarly, 1100
Water Vending Machines have already been commissioned by IRCTC
over 350 stations for providing potable drinking water to the passengers
at affordable rates and efforts are on to further expand the facility.
Further , IRCTC has also been mandated by Ministry of Railways to set
up Packaged Drinking Water (PDW) Plants for production of PDW under
the brand name ÒRail Neer Ó. Six Rail Neer PDW plants are presently
operational, out of which four plants at Nangloi (Delhi) (2003), Danapur
(Patna) (2004), Palur (Chennai) (2011), Ambernath (Maharashtra) (2014)
have been set up by IRCTC from its own funds. T wo more plants, one
at Amethi (Uttar Pradesh) (2015) and another one at Parassala
(Trivandrum) (2016) have been set up by IRCTC under Public Private
Partnership (PPP) mode. IRCTC at present produces approximately
7.6 lakh litre of Rail Neer PDW per day.
All these above activities through PPP mode/licensee model and
are generating revenue for both IRCTC and Railways making Railways
less dependent on Budgetary Support or Extra Budgetary Resources.
Regarding identifying finances before approving new projects
involving Capital Expenditure, it is felt that these recommendation is
already in vogue in Railways where norms/ceilings and throwforward
are taken into account before considering new proposals for sanction
by the competent Authority.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation Para No. 14 of Chapter-I)
Financial Performance
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note that target for Gross Traffic Receipts (GTR)
for the year 2017-18 has been kept at Rs. 1,88,998.37 crore involving

27
an increase of Rs. 16,843.37 crore (9.8%) over the Revised Estimates
of 2016-17. However , Budget Estimate of GTR for the year 2016-17 has
been revised downward by Rs. 12,664.8 crore (6.85%) to Rs. 1,72,155
crore. Also, the actual Gross Traffic Receipts for the year 2015-16 was
at Rs. 1,64,333.51 crore, Rs. 3,500.49 crore less than the revised
estimate of Rs. 167834 crore. Further , in the year 2016-17, the total
passenger earnings were revised downward from Rs. 51012 crore at BE
to Rs. 48000 crore and has been kept at Rs. 50125 crore at BE
2017-18. Goods earnings were also revised downward by 7.65% from
Rs. 117932.75 crore at BE 2016-17 to Rs. 108900 crore at RE 2016-17
and has been targeted at Rs. 118156.50 crore at BE 2017-18. The
Committee observe that there has hardly been any growth in both
passenger and goods earnings. The Ministry have attributed the less/
negative growth to improvement in road connectivity and slow down
of the demand from core sector.
The Committee note that the Ministry have not been able to achieve
the desired targets in Gross Traffic Receipts which has direct bearing
on the total Railway Receipts. The Committee feel that losing revenue
on the core activities of the Railways is a matter of concern for which
Railways need to find a sustainable solution as early as possible. The
Committee also feel that at the time when Government is thinking of
initiating multimodal integrated transport system, the Ministry should
review their passenger and freight services in order to attract more
business in the face of severe competition from other modes of
transportation as informed by the representatives of the Ministry during
deliberation. The Committee think that providing better services in
terms of value for money and punctuality of services has the potential
to bring back the business to the Railways. The Committee desire that
the Ministry should take advantage of their vast network and create a
niche in their area of expertise and suggest that the Ministry should
put forth their sincere efforts in this direction. They desire that an
integrated Rail Development Policy should be brought out with effective
parameters and explore possibilities to enhance the revenues through
alternative avenues such as modernizing technology, punctuality and
safe travel along with capping of leakages in Railway resources. They
should mobilize and also strive for operational utilization of their own
resource well integrated with other modes of transport. They would
like to be apprised of the steps taken in this direction.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways have initiated steps to monetize various non
fare revenue opportunities which utilize digital technologies. The Rail

28
Display Network will create a digital stream network of nearly 2 lakh
screens across nearly 2000 stations which will be cloud controlled.
These cloud controlled screens will display information required by
passengers as well as advertising which is likely to generate substantial
revenue for Railways. Ministry of Railways have also issued a Policy for
provision of digital content on demand on personal devices of
passengers. This policy will generate non-fare revenue by utilizing the
spare time passengers have during train journeys by providing, both
free and paid, content.
Enhancing Railways Õ internal resource generation is a continuous
endeavour which is achieved by way of revenue enhancement alongside
minimization of revenue expenditure.
Passenger revenue has seen a slight upward trend in 2016-17
compared to 2015-16.
Revenue enhancing measures like
➢ Key Customer Management officers.
➢ Freight liberalization
➢ New initiatives in passenger areasÑtickets, catering, new
types of trains/coaches.
Cabinet has approved the proposal for creation of a Rail
Development Authority.
Social services obligations of Railways need to the transparently
computed and compensated so that Railways Õ long term ability to take
care of essential tasks is made sustainable.
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that Net Revenue for the year 2017-18 has
been targeted at Rs. 8,948.37 crore while it has been revised downward
to Rs. 7,695 crore at RE 2016-17 by Rs. 10,515.6 crore (57.74%) from
BE 2016-17 of Rs. 18,210.64 crore. The Committee note that such a
huge reduction in Net Revenue to the extent of more than 50% has
never occurred except for the year 2016-17. The Committee strongly
feel that there is an urgent need to arrest the declining net revenue.
The Committee agree with the Ministry that the focus on increasing
the share of non-fare revenue resources, strict austerity measures to
control expenditure, improved man-power planning, better asset
utilization, inventory management and optimizing fuel consumption

29
are some of the measures to bring the Railway finances in right shape.
The Committee recommend the Ministry to act upon these measures
immediately without any delay and set up a monitoring committee to
have continuous watch over the progress in this direction.
Reply of the Government
HonÕble Committee may appreciate that Net Revenue is a derived
figure which depends on the receipts and expenditure of the Railways.
During 2016-17, downward revision in Net Revenue at RE stage is
primarily attributable to downward revision of Traffic Earnings emanating
from a negative growth in freight earnings. Coal which constitutes
about 50% of Railways Õ total loading, reported a drop of around
20 million tonne to end of February, 2017 compared to corresponding
period last year. This was due to a policy decision of the Government,
which is beyond the control of Railways, to have new power houses
near pitheads to reduce transportation cost as also cost of power and
also due to over capacities in the power sector. Besides, another
important factor adversely impacting the freight traffic throughput
and earnings is the continuous drop in average freight lead which was
562 km. to end of February, 2017 vis--vis 598 km. in corresponding
period last year. Further, discontinuation of subsidy receivable from
Ministry of Finance and higher appropriation to DRF also adversely
impacted Net Revenue. This Ministry is of the view that in situations
where Railways suffer revenue loss due to broader policy changes by
the Government which are beyond the control of Railways, Railways
need to be suitably compensated by the General Exchequer. In BE
2017-18, the Net Revenue has been estimated at a moderate level of
Rs. 8948.37 crore based on a moderate growth of 9.8% in Traffic
Earnings and moderate growth in working expenses.
Measures to enhance Net Revenue of Railways are by way of
enhancement of revenue and control of revenue expenditure. The
Ministry is taking all possible measures, short term and long term, to
enhance revenues as also to minimize avoidable revenue expenditure.
As regards, the recommendations for setting up a monitoring
committee to have continuous watch over the progress in this direction,
it is submitted that there are functional directorates in Railway Board
for implementation of the measures in this regard which are monitored
by Board Members at the highest level. Moreover , certain multi-
disciplinary directorates like Non-fare Revenue Directorates and
Transformation Cell have been created in Railway Board to accelerate
decision making and implementation of decisions. Hence, no separate
monitoring committee is considered necessary.

30
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that passenger earnings target is revised to
Rs. 48,000 crore at RE 2016-17 from Rs. 51,012 crore at BE 2016-17
while till end of January, 2017, the actual revenue from passenger
earnings has been only Rs. 34,535.72 crore (i.e. only 72% of RE 2016-17).
The Committee observe that the Railways have not been able to achieve
the required earnings in passenger as well as goods segment in the
year 2015-16 and may not achieve the targets for the year 2016-17.
The Committee were apprised that there was a shortfall of Rs. 3000
crore on account of passenger earnings while they were 5-6% more
than last year and a decline to the extent of Rs. 9000 crore in freight
revenue. On freight side cost is only 99 paise/10 Km. against the
charges of Rs. 1.60/10 Km. which is substantially high while on the
passenger side charges are around 50% of the cost of service i.e. cost
comes to 73 paise/10 Km. against the charges of 36 paise/10 Km. The
Committee understand that cost of service on passenger traffic is
more than the cost on freight service and so the earnings from freight
service are used for cross-subsidising passenger traffic. The Ministry
have submitted before the Committee that this trend of cross-subsidising
the revenues from goods to passenger traffic is not good for economy
as it would lead to increase in logistic of goods which is already one
of the highest in India at around 13 percent of cost of goods. The
Committee is in agreement with the view of the Ministry that providing
cross-subsidy is neither good for the health of economy nor is it
sustainable for Railways and much of their business shifts to other
modes of transport. Further , some of the notification(s) of the Ministry
of Railways such as the whole wagon is to be booked by one person
also hampers the business of Railways. The Committee feel the Ministry
should review some of their steps to drawback business and the same
should be rigorously implemented and publicized such as lower freight
charges for empty haulage path etc. In this regard, the Committee
recommend the Ministry to conduct a detailed study and draft a
medium/long term plan to eliminate the provisions of cross-subsidy in
a gradual manner. The Committee advise the Ministry to constitute an
independent authority/body for fixation of passenger fare and freight
charges depending on cost involved so that it brings both rationality
and flexibility in pricing considering the financial health of Railways
and the current market scenario.
Reply of the Government
The Government has initiated various freight rationalisation
measures to prevent decline in freight revenue. Some of these steps
are as under:
(i) Withdrawal of Port Congestion Charge from 13.04.2016.

31
(ii) Extension of Liberalized Automatic Freight Rebate scheme
for traffic loaded in empty flow direction upto 31.03.2018.
(iii) Withdrawal of Busy Season Charge for traffic loaded in BCN
group and BCNHL wagons w.e.f. 01.05.2016 till 30.06.2016.
(iv) W ithdrawal of dual freight policy for iron ore w.e.f.
10.05.2016.
(v) Re-introduction of short lead concession and reduction of
minimum distance for charge from 125 km. to 100 km. w.e.f.
15.07.2016
(vi) Rationalisation of Coal Tariff has been done with reduction
in freight for long lead power houses w.e.f. 22.08.2016.
(vii) BCN group permitted for two point booking and mini rake
w.e.f. 15.03.2016.
(viii) Distance for mini rake increased from 400 km. to 600 km.
w.e.f. 15.03.2016.
(ix) A liberalised policy with delegation of power to Zonal Railways
introduced for two point booking of covered wagons in which
any two stations within a distance of 200 km. in busy season
and 400 km. in lean season have been permitted for two
point booking w.e.f. 22.07.2016.
(x) Rationalisation of Merry-Go-Round (MGR) system w.e.f.
01.04.2016, which has led to reduction in freight rate to the
extent of 80%.
(xi) Proliferation of Roll-on Roll-off (RORO) service launch on
ECR from 25.05.2016 and subsequently on other Zonal
Railways.
(xii) Permission to notify Group I and Group II station/goods sheds
as CRTs for lift-on lift-off operations w.e.f. 12.07.2016.
(xiii) Charging of commodities for transportation by containers
has been liberalized. 43 additional commodities de-notified
for charging at FAK rates w.e.f. 02.09.2016.
(xiv) Guidelines for Station to Station Rate policy issued on
29.09.2016.
(xv) Class of various commodities have been rationalized and
new commodities have been added in Goods Tariff.
(xvi) Instruction for movement of HSD Oil in BTPN rates from
Numaligarh refinery siding (NRSR) to Parbatipur, Bangladesh
has been issued w.e.f. 13.03.2016.

32
(xvii) The system of transportation to Bangladesh through ÔDumpÕ
and Ôload adjustment Õ has been discontinued.
(xviii) Withdrawal of levy of congestion charge for stone traffic
transported from Eastern Railway to Bangladesh via Darsana/
Benapole.
(xix) Weighment of Standard Bagged consignment policy has been
rationalized.
(xx) Discount on loading of bagged consignment in open and flat
wagons w.e.f. 24.10.2016.
(xxi) Policy on Long Term Contracts with key freight customers
launched.
(xxii) Besides following measures are being planned for 2017-18:
(a) New delivery models like Ñ Running of double stack
dwarf container under-wire.
(b) Expansion of freight basket.
Ministry of Railways proposes to set up Rail Development Authority
& regulatory mechanism as an advisory body initially to suggest
principles/models on tariff determination apart from other functions.
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee are contented to note the progress made by the
Railways with regard to Road Safety Works and Road Over Bridge/Road
Under Bridge. For the years 2014-15 and 2015-16, the Railways have
crossed the targets while progress upto January, 2017 for the year
2016-17 has been satisfactory. In the Budget Speech on 1 February,
2017, the elimination of all Unmanned level crossings on Broad Gauge
lines by 2020 has been announced. In this regard, the Committee note
that 1000 Unmanned Level Crossings have been eliminated as on January,
2017 against 6,388 Unmanned Level Crossings on Broad Gauge as on
01.04.2016. The expected remaining Unmanned Level Crossings on Broad
Gauge as on 01.04.2017 is 5,000 Nos. which will be eliminated in the
number of 1,500, 1,500 & 2,000 during 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20
respectively. The Committee note the efforts made by the Ministry in
order to remove unmanned level crossing in phased manner but at the
same time express their apprehensions regarding its progress as the
highest target achieved in last three years has been 1,253 in the year
2015-16. The Committee recommend the Ministry to keep this target
on priority basis as the matter of unmanned level crossing is directly
connected with the safety of human life and progress in this regard

33
should be reviewed on quarterly basis while ensuring the strict
adherence to the targets. Further , the Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation made in their 9th Report (16 LS) on Demands for
Grants (2016-17) wherein the Ministry was urged to pursue the matter
of making provision for construction of Road Under Bridges/Subways,
wherever necessary, as a part of project of construction of roads under
the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) as the labour used
would help in asset creation and desire the Ministry to follow up the
same with concerned Authorities/Departments/Ministries on urgent
basis. In this regard, the Committee note that despite pursuation by
the Ministry of Railways the matter is yet to be considered by the
Ministry of Rural Development. Further , the Committee recommend
the Ministry to meticulously pursue the inclusion of Railway works in
the list of works to be done through MGNREGA and to amend the
guidelines to the extent that the ratio of material cost to the labour
cost should be revised to 60:40 and would like to be apprised about
the progress made therein.
Reply of the Government
¥ The progress of elimination of Unmanned Level Crossings
(UMLCs) is being reviewed regularly.
¥ Chairman, Railway Board has also requested to Rural
Development Ministry that road alignment should either be
linked to the existing Level Crossings (LCs) or necessary funds
for a Road Over Bridges/Road Under Bridges on deposit term
should be provided under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
(PMGSY). Response in this regard is awaited from Ministry of
Rural Development.
¥ HonÕble Minister for Railways had made a reference to HonÕble
Minister of Rural Development with a request to make
provision for construction of ROBs/RUBs/Subways wherever
necessary as a part of the proposal of the road under PMGSY .
¥ As regards for inclusion of Railway work through MGNREGA
and to amend the guidelines of ratio of material cost to the
labour cost is concern, this is a policy matter and the subject
should be dealt with by the Ministry of Rural Development.
Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee in their 12th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔSafety
and Security in RailwaysÕ had urged the Ministry to approach the Ministry
of Finance for creation of another special Railway Safety non-lapsable

34
fund which could cater to this long impending and urgent need in
order to ensure safety of train operations. The Committee appreciate
the priority accorded to safety in Rail travel by the Ministry by creation
of dedicated fund for the passenger safety namely Rashtriya Rail
Sanraksha Kosh. The Fund has been created with a corpus of Rs. 1 Lakh
crores over a period of 5 years which will fund track renewals/safety,
strengthening of bridges, elimination of unmanned level crossings,
upgradation of maintenance facilities, signaling improvement and
complete switchover to LHB/coaches/retro fitment of CBC couplers in
ICF coaches. The total outlay for capital expenditure from RRSK for
the year 2017-18 is Rs. 20,000 crore out of which, Rs. 5000 crore from
Budgetary support, Rs. 10,000 from Railway Safety Fund (Railway Õs
share out of the Central Road Fund), Rs. 4,000 crore from Depreciation
Reserve Fund and remaining Rs. 1000 crore from Revenue surplus.
The Committee note that multiple factors may influence the
financing of the RRSK in future. The Committee apprehend that
considering the financial health of Railways, in case of lesser budgetary
support or less revenue surplus, appropriation to RRSK will be hampered.
The Committee are of the opinion that rather than appropriating
separate funds to RRSK, diverting the amount already appropriated to
two different funds i.e. Central Road Fund and Depreciation Reserve
Fund is not a matter of financial prudence but jugglery of finances.
The Committee recommend the Ministry to ensure the dedicated
financing of RRSK which should preferably be non-fungible as suggested
in their 12th Report. Further , the Committee urge the Ministry to
ensure the optimal utilization of the fund strictly on the works it has
been assigned to, along with regular financial and physical scrutiny
and monitoring of the progress thereof. The Committee are sanguine
that with the help of this new fund, the Ministry, within shortest
possible time, would be able to replace older coaches with LHB coaches
with anti-climbing protection facility and install Train Protection Warning
System (TPWS) on locomotives to prevent head-on collisions.
Reply of the Government
An announcement by Hon Õble Minister of Finance in his Budget
Speech for 2017-18, a Fund namely ÔRashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh
(RRSK)Õ has been created with a corpus of Rs. 1 lakh crore over a
period of five years for critical safety related works. Accordingly, a
provision of Rs. 20,000 crore has been made in BE 2017-18 out of
ÔRRSKÕ to fund essential works for ensuring safety, which includes
Rs. 5,000 crore from Budgetary Support, Rs. 10,000 crore from Central
Road Fund and Rs. 5,000 crore out of Railway Õs internal resources.

35
The Committee Õs concerns regarding financing of ÔRRSKÕ in future
are noted. As regards budgetary support for ÔRRSKÕ, it has been decided
that Ministry of Finance will provide additional support towards RRSK
annually, for 5 years. This will be in addition to the GBS/CRF funds.
The CommitteeÕs concerns regarding dedicated financing of ÔRRSKÕ
are appreciated and the Railways will make all efforts to ensure
adequate funding of ÔRRSKÕ through all possible sources. Planning
Directorate of Railway Board has been assigned the task of regularly
monitoring physical and financial progress of works funded through
ÔRRSKÕ. In addition, NITI Aayog has also submitted its report on
deployment of ÔRRSKÕ funds. All efforts would be made to ensure
sustained funding for RRSK works in next 5 years in consultation with
the Ministry of Finance.
Operating Ratio
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee note that Operating Ratio for the year 2015-16
remained at 90.50 and it has been revised to 94.9 at RE 2016-17 from
92 at BE 2016-17. The reason for poor operating ratio for the year
2016-17 has been stated to be downward revision of traffic earnings
in RE and higher appropriation to DRF . Further , Operating Ratio for the
year 2017-18 has been targeted at 94.57 at BE. This has been done
considering the moderate growth in traffic earnings and a much higher
appropriation to Pension Fund. The Committee understand that the
Operating Ratio is a function of total working expenditure to total
traffic earnings and any effort to improve the same revolves around
maximizing the traffic earnings and minimizing the controllable working
expenses. Since, Operating Ratio is a direct indicator of the working
of Railways, the Committee urge the Ministry to bring discipline in
their finances by enhancing their revenue and reducing expenses.
Further , the Committee expect that the Ministry would look into the
various innovative ways for revenue generation and be extra cautious
on the expenditure side.
Reply of the Government
It is a continuous endeavour of the Railways to achieve progressively
better Operating Ratio. However , such efforts are hamstrung by sudden
spurt in revenue expenditure, particularly on pay, allowances and
pension based on recommendations of Central Pay Commission and
occasional slowdown in growth of traffic earnings particularly in goods
due to variation of market conditions. Further , the social service

36
obligations borne by Railways which are on the rise year after year and
have reached a level of around Rs. 35,000 crore in RE 2016-17 have
a huge impact on Railways Õ Operating Ratio.
Nevertheless, Railways are taking measures for revenue
enhancement and expenditure control which would help to improve
the Operating Ratio in the post 7th CPC implementation period.
New Initiatives
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note that the various new initiatives have been
announced in the Budget 2017-18 which inter-alia relates to the
introduction of ÔClean My Coach Õ and ÔCoach Mitra services Õ,
Ôredevelopment of stations Õ and Ôfitting of bio-toilets Õ in all existing
broad gauge coaches by 2019. The Committee appreciate such initiatives
of the Ministry and extend their utmost support to them. In this regard,
the Committee suggest the Ministry to integrate the redevelopment of
stations with the Smart city development plans by applying Build Operate
Transfer model. The Committee think that alongside the modernization
of stations, this holistic approach will help in promulgating Swachhta
Abhiyan ensuring the cleanliness and preventing encroachment of the
railway premises. The Committee recommend the Ministry to ensure
continuous uninterrupted flow of funds for such initiatives along with
proper implementation at ground and regular review of their outcome
including their contribution to passenger satisfaction.
The Committee expect that with the initiation of afore-mentioned
new initiatives, the progress on the announcement made in the Budget
Speech for the year 2015-16 as introduction of e-catering services
should not be compromised in terms of lack of funds or otherwise,
rather expansion of catering service should be ensured in all trains on
priority basis, maintaining the quality of food and delivery system.
Reply of the Government
Cleanliness
Cleanliness on Trains is a high priority area for Indian Railways. It
has always been a mammoth task owing to various factors such as long
lead of trains, environmental conditions, uncontrolled usage and
passenger habits.
Cleaning is also perishable as the place/coach which has been
cleaned can become unclean at any time, hence periodic attention is
required.

37
Mechanized cleaning of coaches is being carried out in the coaching
depots at both ends. On Board House Keeping Service (OBHS) is also
being provided in all Rajdhani, Shatabdi, Duronto and other important
long distance Mail/Express trains for cleaning of coach toilets, doorways,
aisles and passenger compartments during the run of the trains.
Clean My Coach
In ÒClean My Coach Ó scheme, for any cleaning requirement in the
coach, passenger sends a message through mobile (SMS) on a specified
mobile number. This is immediately acknowledged by the backend
software along with a ÒsatisfactionÓ code which is sent to the passenger.
A message is also sent by the server to the mobile number of On
Board Housekeeping Service (OBHS) staff travelling on the same train
along with the details of the passenger such as coach number , berth
number. OBHS staff contacts the passengers and carries out the cleaning
work as per demand.
If the passenger is satisfied, he/she discloses the code and OBHS
staff sends the same code through SMS and the complaints is then
treated as closed. If the passenger is not satisfied then he/she will not
disclose the code.
ÒClean My Coach Ó scheme was initially tried in a few Railways.
Subsequently, in Hon Õble MR Õs Railway Budget Speech of February,
2016, it was announced that ÒClean My CoachÓ service will be introduced
on Pan-India basis, where a passenger can request cleaning of his/her
coach/toilet Ôon demand Õ through SMS. The scheme was formally
launched on pan-India basis in March, 2016.
Presently ÔClean My CoachÕ service is available in nearly 800 trains.
Coach Mitra
ÒClean My Coach Ó service is now being upgraded to ÒCoach Mitra Ó
facility as announced in Hon Õble Finance Minister Õs Budget Speech,
2017-18.
ÒCoach Mitra Ó will be a single window interface to register all
coach related requirements of passengers travelling in reserved coaches,
such as cleaning, disinfection, linen, train lighting, air conditioning
and watering of coaches. This will warrant provision of backend support
for the additional likely requirements of the passengers, as stated
above, apart from only cleaning service earlier being provided.

38
Instructions regarding ÒCoach MitraÓ were issued vide Railway Board
Letter No. 2016/EnHM/15/09 dated 07.02.2017. ÒCoach Mitra Ó facility
has already been introduced in more than 140 trains.
Station Redevelopment
A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been recently entered
into between Ministry of Railways (MoR) and Ministry of Urban
Development (MoUD) for integrated planning of redevelopment of
railway stations in the cities included in the ÔSMART CitiesÕ and AMRUT
cities. This would lead to an integrated public transit hub around the
railway stations and encourage Transit Oriented Development.
Each Smart City has incorporated a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)
to execute the Smart City Plan. The SPV may form a joint venture
company with an MoR-designated entity to implement railway station
redevelopment projects in that city and in its suburbs.
Another form of joint venture could be between the MoR designated
entity, the Smart City SPV and the National Building Construction
Corporation Ltd. (NBCC), a Public Sector Undertaking under MoUD.
The redevelopment of stations under the schemes is proposed to
be executed under Build Operate Transfer model.
Bio-Toilets
Ministry of Railways gratefully acknowledges the appreciation and
support of the Committee for the endeavour of Indian Railways
initiatives of ÒFitment of Bio-Toilets in all existing BG Coaches by
2019Ó.
Action Plan for the same has already been drawn up by Ministry of
Railways and the progress of the same is being closely monitored.
The only possible constraint in the speedy implementation of Bio-
Toilets is the supply-chain constraints from the side of manufacturers
of Bio-tanks. This issue too is being resolved with industry partners.
In 2016-17, against a target of fitment of 30,000 Bio-Toilets, Indian
Railways have fitted approximately 34,000 Bio-Toilets, thereby surpassing
its own target.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation Para No. 17 of Chapter-I)

39
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLIES
Physical Performance
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee note with satisfaction that in 2015-16, total 2,828
km of broad gauge track have been commissioned which includes 813
Km of New line, 1,043 Km of Gauge conversion and 972 Km of doubling
against the target of 500 Km in New Lines, 800 Km in Gauge Conversion
and 1200 Km in Doubling. For the year 2016-17, likely achievements
are almost at the level of revised targets. Further , in Rolling stock,
track renewals and electrification, the Ministry have gone beyond the
targets. The Committee note with satisfaction the improved
performance of the Railways in meeting the targets in the year
2015-16 and expect the same pace of accomplishment for the year
2016-17 and 2017-18. The Committee observe that a target of
3,500 km of network expansion (broad gauge) has been kept for the
year 2017-18 translating commissioning of around 10 Km track per day
against the announcement of 13 Km per day in the Rail Budget
2016-17. However, the Committee desire the Ministry to strive hard to
meet the preferred target of commissioning 13 Km broad gauge track
per day without compromising on safety and quality of travel.
Considering the past record of commissioning the tracks for last two
years, the Committee are pretty sure that the Ministry would be able
to achieve the anticipated targets for the year.
Reply of the Government
For the year 2017-18, a target of 3500 km Broad Gauge network
expansion has been kept. This includes 800 km of new line, 1100 km
of gauge conversion and 1600 km of doubling which includes 400 km
of Dedicated Freight Corridors.

40
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee understand that with the merger of Railway Budget
with General Budget from 2017-18 onwards, Railways will be exempted
to pay dividend to General Revenues but then Railways will not be
given the subsidy on dividend and also operating losses on Strategic
lines and Railway lines in hilly, coastal and backward areas will not be
reimbursed to them. The Committee are aware that Railways till now
play a very vital role in socio-economic development by developing
remunerative projects in strategic, hilly, coastal and backward areas.
While at present (till 2016-17) operational losses on six strategic lines
are being reimbursed to Railways by Ministry of Finance. Estimate
Committee in its 21st Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Structural Changes
in Union Budget has also recommended that the Railways should get
the reimbursement of losses on operation of strategic lines. The
Committee strongly reiterate the recommendation made by Estimate
Committee and think that considering the role of Railways in nation
building, reimbursement to Railways on their operating losses on
strategic lines is justifiable. As these lines mainly cater to defence
movements on border areas and development of social and backward
region, the Committee recommend that reimbursement of operational
losses on strategic lines and Railway lines in hilly, coastal and backward
areas should be continued and desire the Ministry of Railways to pursue
the matter with Ministry of Finance in this regard. The Committee also
recommend separate fund allocation for National Projects and projects
of strategic significance, social importance in backward and hilly areas
and to explore the possibilities to share the cost of such social
obligations with the Ministry of Finance.
Reply of the Government
Till 2016-17 Railways have been reimbursed the operating loss on
strategic lines by the Government. However, with the merger of Railway
Budget with Union Budget w.e.f. Budget Estimates 2017-18, the capital-
at-charge of the Railways has been wiped off relieving the Railways
from any dividend liability. Alongside, the Government has also decided

41
that subsidy on divided payment henceforth paid to the Railways and
the operating loss on strategic lines henceforth reimbursed to Railways
are done away with w.e.f. Budget Estimates 2017-18. Pursuant to the
recommendations of HonÕble Committee and the Estimates Committee,
Ministry of Finance is being requested to continue to reimburse the
operating loss on strategic lines to Railways beyond 2016-17.
As regards HonÕble CommitteeÕs recommendation for separate fund
allocation for National Projects and projects of strategic significance,
social importance in backward and hilly areas and to explore the
possibilities to share the cost of such social obligations with the Ministry
of Finance, it is stated that even when the Railways had a separate
budget, the Government was providing Budgetary Support to the
Railways for annual capital expenditure with earmarked allocation for
National Projects. Now in the post merger scenario also, the Government
would continue to provide Gross Budgetary Support towards meeting
part of Railways Õ capital expenditure.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation Para No. 11 of Chapter-I)

42
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY ,
07 December, 2017 Chairperson,
16 Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

43
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RAILWAYS (2017-18)
The Committee met on Monday, the 20th November , 2017 from
1130 hrs. to 1310 hrs. in Committee Room No. Ô2Õ, Parliament House
Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay Ñ Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
4. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
5. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu
6. Shri A.T . Nana Patil
7. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar
8. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy
9. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
10. Shri Rajeev Satav
11. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri A.K. Antony
13. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
14. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
15. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav Ñ Deputy Secretary

44
*** *** *** ***
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee took up for consideration
the draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations of the Committee contained in their 13th Report on
ÒDemands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of RailwaysÓ and adopted
the same without any modification. The Committee, then, authorized
the Chairperson to finalise the Reports and present the same to the
Parliament.
3. *** *** *** ***
4. *** *** *** ***
5. *** *** *** ***
6. *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
***Not relevant to the Report.

45
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
13TH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) ON ÒDEMANDS FOR
GRANTS (2017-18) OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS Ó
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 14
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government—
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13 and 14 12
Percentage of total 85.71%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies—
Para No. 10 1
Percentage of total 7.14%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration—
Para No. 4 1
Percentage of total 7.14%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies are still awaited-
Para No. NIL NIL
Percentage of total Ñ