STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RAILWAYS
(2014-2015)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 3rd Report of the Standing Committee on Railways
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants - 2014-15 of the
Ministry of Railways']
7
SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2015/ Shravana, 1937 (Saka)


SCR NO. 196
SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2014-15)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 3rd Report of the Standing Committee on Railways
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants - 2014-15 of the
Ministry of Railways']
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2015
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka)


????
Price : ` ???
© 2015 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. India Offset Press,
A-1 Mayapuri Ind. Area, Phase 1, New Delhi 110 064. INDIA

CONTENTS
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE
INTRODUCTION
PART I
CHAPTER I Report
CHAPTER  II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government
CHAPTER  III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways
held on 06.08.2015
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 3rd Report
(16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants - 2014-15 of the
Ministry of Railways'
PAGE

(ii)
Blank

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RAILW AYS (2014-15)
Shri Dinesh Trivedi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri E. Ahamed
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
4. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
6. Shri Gourav Gogoi
7. Shri Rajen Gohain
8. #Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
9. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
10. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
11. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
12. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
13. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
14. Shri Thota Narasimham
15. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
16. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
17. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy
(iii)
* Constituted vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No.623 dated 01.09.2014
# Sh. Bandaru Dattatreya ceased to be a Member on his appointment as Minister  w.e.f.
09.11.2014. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi was nominated as Member vide LSS Bulletin
Part No.783 dt.14.11.2014

(iv)
18. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
19. Shri Ganesh Singh
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
21. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.K. Antony
23. Shri Mukut Mithi
24. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
25. $Shri Parimal Nathwani
26. Shri Ambeth Rajan
27. Shri T. Rathinavel
28. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
29. Shri Devender Goud T.
30. Shri Alok Tiwari
31. Shri Motilal V ora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
$ Smt. Kusum Rai retired on 25.11.2014 vide R.S.S. I.d. No..1(2)2014-coord. dt.20.11.14
Shri Parimal Nathwani nominated as Member w.e.f. 19.12.2014 vide LSS Bulletin Part
II No.1212 dated 31.12.2014

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2014-15), having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Seventh Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their Third
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants - 2014-15 of the
Ministry of Railways'.
2. The Third Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 18.12.2014
and was laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2014. The Report contained 23
recommendations/observations. The Ministry of Railways furnished their
Action Taken Notes on all the recommendations/observations contained in
the Report on 20.04.2015.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken
Report at their sitting held on 06.08.2015. The minutes of the sitting is
given in Appendix-I.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observation and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Third Report of the
Standing Committee on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.
 N
EW D ELHI; DINESH TRIVEDI,
6 August , 2015 Chairperson,
15 Shravana , 1937  (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

REPORT
CHAPTER I
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations and observations contained in the 3rd
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants 2014-15 of the Ministry
of Railways'. The Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 18.12.2014
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2014.
1.2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government on
all the 23 recommendations/observations contained in the Report. These
have been broadly categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the
Government:-
Para Nos. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, and
23
Total: 16
Chapter II
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the Government's replies:-
Para No. 5, 10 and 17
Total: 03
Chapter III
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:-
Para Nos. 3, 4, 11 and 18
Total: 04
Chapter IV
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies are
still awaited:-
Para No. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter V

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given
to implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted by
the Government. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on
the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter-I of this
Report should be furnished to them not later than three months of
the presentation of this report.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations.
A Shortfall in Extra Budgetary Resources
Recommendation (Para No.3)
1.5 The Committee were perturbed to note that the target for Extra
Budgetary Resources fixed at Rs. 21,103 crore for 2013-14 had fallen
short by Rs. 6,018 crore (provisional). The main reason for shortfall in
target for Extra Budgetary Resources, was the non-materialisation of funding
models under PPP to the tune envisaged. As stated by the Ministry, the rail
infrastructure projects are highly capital intensive with long gestation period
and have generally a low rate of return and, hence, general investors have
not shown adequate interest in making investments under PPP. The
Committee had noted that the very same reasons were furnished by the
Ministry of Railways year after year for not achieving the PPP targets and
recommended that the Ministry should find out ways and means to provide
a conducive environment for private investors for PPP in Railways and
explore other avenues of the railway sector which have comparatively low
gestation period, which are less capital intensive and where investors could
expect a reasonable rate of return.
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated
as under:
"Ministry of Railways have framed new Model Concession Agreements
for Build Operate Transfer (BOT), Joint Venture and Private line
model. Sectoral Guidelines for Domestic/ Foreign Direct Investment
have also been framed under which certain permissible areas have
been identified for investment.

3
An Investors Meet was also organised on 5th December 2014 to
share the Policies of Ministry of Railways. The new Agreements/
Sectoral Guidelines provide better framework to investors under which
risks and responsibilities are balanced and will enable exploration of
investment avenues by investors."
1.7 The Committee note that the Railways have taken some
steps to attract private investment, viz., preparation of new Model
Concession Agreements for Build Operate Transfer (BOT), Joint
Venture and Private line models, framing of Guidelines for Domestic/
Foreign Direct Investment and organizing an Investors Meet. However,
the Committee feel that these measures are not adequate to meet
various targets. They would like to be informed of the status of
achievement of PPP targets during 2014-15 as result of these measures
and the targets set for the financial year 2014-15. The Committee
find that specific steps for providing a conducive environment for
private investors for PPP in Railways have not been spelt out. The
Committee urge the Ministry to identify specific areas suitable for
PPP investment and enumerate measures for providing a conducive
environment for private investors for PPP, besides giving wide publicity
about such incentives for enhancing investments. They will like to be
informed of the measures taken in this regard and the results achieved
from time to time.
B Implementation of PPP Projects
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
1.8 The Committee had observed that during 2013-14, against a
target of Rs. 6,000 crore for PPP, the achievement remained to the tune
of Rs. 1,520 crore (approx.) only, which is too meagre. The Committee
further learnt that the Ministry, in December, 2012, had announced a
participative policy to strengthen capacity augmentation and building rail
connectivity projects. Under the policy 16 projects amounting to Rs. 8,000
crores approximate have been given 'in principle' approval/have been
sanctioned. Since new PPP projects have been sanctioned, the Committee
called upon the Ministry to ensure that the implementation started soon and

4
the target for 2014-15 is realized. The Committee also liked to be apprised
of the strategy planned by the Railways to achieve the huge target of Rs.
1 lakh crore for the 12th Plan to attract private investment through PPP.
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated
as under:
"Under the Participative Policy, the financial commitments received
from investors are likely to be achieved in next few years. Ministry
of Railways has no role in implementation of such projects which are
implemented by private developer/Concessionaire. The target of 12th
Plan includes certain projects like Elevated Rail Corridor in Mumbai,
High Speed and Station Development. Most of these projects depend
on active participation of State Government which is not forthcoming
in many of the cases. However, the targets for Rail Connectivity to
Ports/Mines will be achieved."
1.10 The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways in their
action taken reply, have stated that the financial commitments
received from investors are likely to be achieved in the next few
years. The Committee, however, find that the Ministry have chosen
to remain silent about their line of action, ways and means and
strategy adopted to achieve implementation of the 16 projects
amounting to Rs.8000 crore. Mor eover, the Committee are unhappy
with the routine response of the Ministry that most of these projects
depend on active participation of State Governments which is not
forthcoming in many of the cases. The Ministry have also not spelt
out any concrete strategy planned by them to achieve the huge target
of Rs.1 lakh crore for the Twelfth Plan to attract private investment
through PPP. The Committee strongly reiterate that the Ministry
should proactively persuade the State Governments to seek their
active participation in implementation of the targets set for 2014-15.
Further, the Committee desired to be apprised of the concrete action
plan adopted by the Ministry to achieve the target of Rs.1 lakh crore
for the 12th Plan to attract private investment through PPP.
The Committee stress that the Ministry cannot shirk their

5
responsibility by merely suggesting that they have no role in
implementation of such projects which are implemented by private
developer/concessionaire. The Committee emphasize that it is the
prime responsibility of the Railways to ensure that such projects are
implemented within the stipulated timeframe and they should adhere
to the given timelines without fail.
C North East Region Rail Development Fund
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
1.11 The Committee drew some satisfaction from the fact that for
implementation of National Projects in the Northeast Region, the Cabinet
Committee for Economic Affairs (CCEA) has approved creation of a non-
lapsable fund, viz., North East Region Rail Development Fund (NERRDF)
wherein funds to the tune of 25 percent of yearly requirement are to be
provided by the Railways through GBS and 75 percent funds are to be
provided by the Ministry of Finance dividend-free as an additionality to
GBS. The Committee, however, learnt that till date the fund could not be
created due to an objection of the Controller General of Accounts (CGA)
of the Ministry of Finance. The Committee had recommended that the
Ministry of Railways should pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance
and resolve the issue so that the NERRDF is created at the earliest.
1.12 In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:
"Based on the Cabinet Committee decision, a reference was made to
Controller General of Accounts (CGA), Ministry of Finance (MOF)
for introduction of Account head in the list of Major & Minor heads
of Accounts of Government. However, the same was not agreed to
by that office on the ground that capital investments are meant for
creation of Assets and transfer of budgetary support to proposed
Fund would not result in actual creation of assets. It has also been
stated that the office of Controller & Audit General (C&AG) of India
has not agreed to such accounting adjustments. They had, thus,
suggested to create the proposed fund from revenue surplus instead

6
of budgetary support. A back reference was again made referring to
the Cabinet decision. However, MOF reiterated their earlier stand.
Creation of a new fund from railway revenue surplus has not been
found feasible. As recommended by the Standing Committee, another
reference has been made to Controller General of Accounts, Ministry
of Finance to reconsider the proposal."
1.13 The Committee stress that the issue of creation of the non-
lapsable fund viz., North-East Region Rail Development Fund (NERRDF)
should be pursued with utmost diligence as the Committee strongly feel
that the creation of this Fund will act as a catalyst of growth for the
Northeast region. The Committee, therefore, emphatically reiterate that the
Ministry should pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance and resolve
the issue so that the NERRDF is created at the earliest.
D Signalling & Telecommunications (S & T)
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
1.14 The Committee had noted that in the 12th Plan, Rs.10,000 crore
was finalised for allotment for Signalling and Telecommunication (S&T)
works.
Accordingly, Rs.2000 crore was required to be allocated every year.
However, allocations were reduced before regular revised allocations in the
last three years, i.e, Rs.904 crore from Rs.1101.8 crore in the year 2011-
12, Rs.1012 crore from Rs.2006.6 crore in the year 2012-13 and Rs.915
crore from Rs.1107 crore in the year 2013-14. Again, a lower allocation of
Rs.966 crore has been made during 2014-15. The Committee had been
informed that due to reduced allocation, S&T works had to be prioritised
and outlay was mainly restricted to those works which were in the last leg
of completion. Many other works which were important for enhancing the
level of safety like Train Management System (TMS) and Train Protection
Warning System (TPWS) had to be deferred due to scarcity of funds. The
targets for replacement of S&T equipment as required could also not be
fully met during 2013-14. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry
of Railways should coordinate with the Ministry of Finance/Planning

7
Commission so that they receive sufficient funds as per the 12th Plan
targets for such an important head as it directly relates to the safety and
security of the travelling public.
1.15 In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:
"Noted."
1.16 The Committee, taking note of the fact that many works
which were important for enhancing the level of safety like Train
Management System (TMS) and Train Protection Warning System
(TPWS) were hindered as allocations were reduced before regular
revised allocation in the last three years, had recommended that the
Ministry of Railways should coordinate with the Ministry of Finance/
Planning Commission so that they receive sufficient funds under the
12th Plan for such an important head as it directly relates to the
safety and security of the travelling public. The Committee are
surprised to note that the Ministry of Railways has merely responded
as having 'Noted', without specifying the efforts made by them in
persuading the Ministry of Finance for more funds. Keeping in view
the seriousness of safety in the Railway system, the Committee will
like to be apprised of the modalities and concrete action plan worked
out by the Ministry in this regard.
E Computerisation
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
1.17 The Committee were distressed to note that the funds allocated
for computerisation in Railways were not optimally utilised during the first
two years of the 12th Plan. Out of the allocation, of Rs.346 crore and
Rs.362 crore during 2012-13 and 2013-14, respectively, only Rs.97 crore
and Rs.141.22 crore, respectively were utilised. Regarding gross
underutilisation of funds, the Committee have been apprised that the
computerization in Railways involve a total change of age old processes of
doing things and involving various stake holders from top to bottom, while

8
conceptualisation itself takes time. Further, a number of changes also come
in at the stage of finalisation and actual implementation in the field. There
are also very quick technological changes which are occurring every day
in the Information Technology field; as such, any computerisation project
is quite complex and undergoes several changes before it actually fructifies.
The Committee were not convinced with the reasons given by the Ministry
for underutilisation of funds for computerisation. The Committee were
unhappy to note that more than 50 per cent of the allocated funds have not
been utilized by the Ministry. The Committee were of the firm opinion that
full computerisation would change the work culture of the Railways and
provide better delivery of services to the common man of the country.
They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Railways should take
effective steps to fully utilize Rs.339 crore allocated for computerisation
during 2014-15.
1.18 In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:
"Committee's observation have been examined however it is observed
that actual expenditure has increased from Rs. 97.00 cr. in 2012-13
to Rs.141.22 cr. in 2013-14. Actual Expenditure stated above is
indicative of increasing expenditure in comparison to the previous
years. This is due to the fact that Railways are making an all out
effort for optimum utilization of resources. During the current year,
detailed Estimate of a large number of works have been sanctioned
which lead to more fund utilization. Till the end of January, 2015,
funds to the tune of Rs. 99.02 cr. have already been utilized which
will further increase by end of current financial year. However, the
Committee's observations have been noted for further enhancing the
level of expenditure and its utilization for IT implementation."
1.19 The Committee note that their recommendation has not
been taken in right earnest as Rs. 239.98 crore amounting to 70.79
% of the total fund was still left unutilized till the end of the January,
2015. The Committee also find that the Ministry have failed to
enumerate concrete steps being taken for more utilization of funds.

9
While expressing their unhappiness over this attitude of the Ministry,
the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire
that the allocated funds should be gainfully and meaningfully deployed
in a time bound manner as under-utilization of funds defeats the very
purpose of allocation.
F Train Services
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
1.20 The Committee had noted that in their effort to take care of the
increased travelling needs of passengers, the Indian Railways, in the Railway
Budget 2014-15, have proposed introduction of 138 new train services,
extension of 15 train services and increase in frequency of 5 existing train
services. They, however, regretted to note that out of 126 new train
services which were proposed to be introduced during 2013-14, 10 train
services are yet to be started due to various constraints like sanction of the
Commissioner for Railway Safety, non-completion of gauge conversion
work, etc. The Committee were of the view that these issues involved in
the introduction of proposed trains should be taken into consideration
before making such an announcement. Even after more than one and a half
years, the Ministry still are not in a position to indicate the time by which
these 10 train services will be introduced. The Committee, therefore, had
liked the Ministry to ensure the introduction of the all train services proposed
during 2014-15 within the definite time frame.
1.21 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated
as under:
"In Railway Budget 2014-15, introduction of 138 new trains, extension
of 15 train services and 5 train services has been announced. As on
date, 100 new trains, 14 extension of existing train services and 5
increase in frequency of existing train services has been implemented.
Of the remaining 38 new train services and 1 extension of train
service, 10 new train services are now ready for implementation and
29 train services are pending introduction due to various constraints
like non-completion of gauge conversion/infrastructural works, non-

10
receipt of Commissioner for Railway Safety (CRS) sanction,
non-availability of Rolling stock etc. In regard to train services
announced in Railway Budget 2013-14, out of 10 train services 4 train
services are now ready and remaining 6 train services are pending due
to various constraints like non-completion of gauge conversion works,
non-receipt of necessary clearance from the Commissioner of Railway
Safety (in case of newly opened and gauge converted sections), etc.
These trains will be introduced as soon as the constraints are
overcome."
1.22 The Ministry, in their action taken reply, has inter alia
stated that 29 new train services are pending due to non-completion
of gauge conversion/infrastructural works and non-receipt of sanction
of the Commissioner for Railway Safety (CRS). The Ministry have
further stated that with regard to the train services announced in
Railway Budget 2013-14, 10 train services are pending due to various
constraints like non-completion of gauge conversion works, non-receipt
of necessary clearance from the Commissioner of Railway Safety
(CRS) (in case of newly opened and gauge converted sections), etc.
and that 'these trains will be introduced as soon as constraints are
overcome'. However, no definite time frame can be given for
implementation. The Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation and urge the Government to inform them of the
specific steps taken in this regard.
G Status of Reports of Dr. Kakokdar Committee and Shri Sam
Pitroda Committee
Recommendation (Para No.21)
1.23 The Committee had noted that a committee headed by Dr. Anil
Kakodkar to examine the safety standards on Indian Railways and to suggest
suitable benchmarks and safety protocols, had submitted its report on 17
February 2012. Also an expert group headed by Shri Sam Pitroda on
modernization and resource mobilization had submitted its report on 27
February, 2012. The Committee were disappointed to note that even after
a lapse of more than two and a half years, the recommendations of the said

11
committees are still being examined and awaiting final acceptance by the
Ministry. The Committee had urged the Ministry to take a decision on the
recommendations of the two committees without further loss of time so
that the very purpose of setting up of these committees is well served.
1.24 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated
as under:
"Efforts are being made by the Ministry to expedite decision on the
recommendations of the High Level Safety Review Committee. As
already advised, action has been initiated for implementation of some
of the recommendations of the Committee.
In respect of the Sam Pitroda Committee recommendations also, action
has been initiated for implementation of various key recommendations.
Recommendations pertaining to organisational restructuring/Reforms, etc.
are being separately considered by an Expert Group. The financial projections
given in the Report including the total investment of Rs.8.39 lakh crores
during the 12th Plan and the Gross Budgetary Support and Internal Generation
going up by 2.5 times and 5.3 times respectively are, considering the
actuals of the first three years of the 12th Plan, not practicable. The Annual
Plans take into account the investment requirements for modernization and
technology upgradation."
1.25 The Committee had urged the Ministry to take decisions on
the recommendations of two Committees, i.e. Dr. Anil Kakodakar to
examine safety standards on Indian Railways and an expert group
headed by Shri Sam Pitroda on modernization and resource mobilization
without further loss of time so that the very purpose of setting up of
these committees is well served. The Committee are disappointed to
note that the Ministry, in their action taken reply, has not informed
them of the specific action initiated with regard to implementation of
the recommendations contained in these two reports. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier stand and strongly recommend to
the Ministry to implement the recommendations of these two
Committees. They will like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard within three months.

12
H Utilisation of Funds under MGNREGA for Railway Works
Recommendation (Para No.23)
1.26 The Committee had noted that the Ministry of Railways have
requested the Ministry of Rural Development to include a few railway
works under MGNREGA, as this would not only open up more options for
gainful employment of the rural population but also would make a significant
contribution to the development of infrastructure of the Indian Railways.
So far, the Ministry of Rural Development has identified only the work of
construction and maintenance of approach roads for level crossings under
the MGNREGA scheme. However, the work of construction of subways
under the MGNREGA scheme is yet to be included by the Ministry of Rural
Development. The Committee desire that the matter should be pursued with
the Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the progress in this matter.
1.27  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated
as under:
"Noted."
1.28 The Committee had desired that the Ministry of Rural
Development may be persuaded to include Railways works under
MGNREGA as it would open up more options for gainful employment
of the rural population and make a significant contribution to the
development of infrastructure of Indian Railways. While the Ministry
has informed that the recommendation of the Committee has been
'Noted', no specific proposals have been provided to show that this
aspect has been taken up by them with all the seriousness it deserves.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate that it is necessary to chalk out
a time bound strategy to achieve the intended objective. The
Committee will like the Ministry to furnish details of progress in a
structured manner, encompassing targets and efforts to achieve them.
They also call upon the Ministry to give specific response to Committee
recommendations instead of merely stating "Noted" which does not
give any indication about the Ministry's follow-up of Committee
recommendations.

13
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Railway's Annual Plan 2013-
14 targeted at Rs.63363 crore has fallen short by Rs.10011 crore at Rs.53352
crore (provisional). During 2012-13 too, the trend was similar, with the
Annual Plan targeted at Rs.60100 crore falling short by Rs.9717 crore at
Rs.50383 crore. The major cause of the shortfall during 2012-13 and
2013-14 had been on account of less generation of Internal and External
Budgetary Resources to the tune of Rs.9849 crore and Rs.11044 crore,
respectively. The Committee find that repeated shortfalls in Annual Plans
have an adverse effect on Railway Finances, resulting in cut in expenditure
on critical planned works. The Committee, therefore, would like that serious
efforts be made by the Ministry of Railways to fully achieve the Annual
Plan targets for 2014-15 pegged at Rs.65445 crore in all sectors. They
urge the Ministry to closely monitor resource mobilization from every
sector periodically and any shortfall in achieving targets should be looked
into seriously and remedial measures taken
Reply of the Government
The classification of consequential train accidents issued vide Board's
letter No. 2000/Safety(A&R)/19/20 dated 13.12.2000 has been reviewed by
the Ministry of Railways from time to time to meet the requirements and
to make these classifications relevant. Necessary amendments have
accordingly been incorporated from time to time. Indian Railways strictly
comply with the classification of consequential train accidents issued vide
Board's letter referred above. Recommendations of the Standing Committee
for further review of the above classification have since been noted.

14
Annual Plan Financing components
(Rs. in cr.)
BE Actual V ariation BE Actual V ariation
2012-13 2012-13 2013-14 2013-14
Gross Bud. Support:
Capital 24000 24132 132 26000 27072 1072
RSF 2000 1578 -422 2000 1983 -17
Internal 18050 9531 -8519 14260 9709 -4551
Resources
Extra Bud. Resources:
Market 15000 15142 142 15103 15225 122
Borrowing
PPP etc 1050 -1050 6000 -6000
T
OTAL P LAN 60100 50383 -9717 63363 53989 -9374
OUTLAY
As is seen from the above tables, the shortfall in Annual plan targets
during 2012-13 and 2013-14 were mainly on account of shortfall under
internal resource (combined provision under Capital Fund, Depreciation
Reserve Fund & Development Fund) and extra budgetary resource
components (under investment from PPP).
Internal resource component of the plan has however increased from
Rs. 9531 cr in 2012-13 to Rs. 9709 cr in 2013-14 and further to Rs. 15728
cr. in 2014-15 (RE). As regards, the EBR Component, all out efforts are
being made to attract extra budgetary resources in selected sectors of
Railway plan. Internal Resource Generation:-
(Rs. in cr.)
BE Actual V ariation BE Actual V ariation
2012-13 2012-13 2013-14 2013-14
25117 15144 -9973 20707 1 1668 -9039

15
Reasons for shortfall are:
• Shortfall in passenger earning due to major roll back of passenger fare
hike proposed in BE and short achievement of passengers booked
than targeted in BE;
• Shortfall in goods earnings mainly due to short achievement of loading
target;
• Less receipt under subsidy from General revenues and net accrual in
traffic outstandings;
• Higher provision for pension.
• Shortfall in passenger earning due to negative growth in passengers
booked over previous year specially in non-suburban (non-PRS)
segment;
• Net accrual in traffic outstandings;
• Higher provision for pension, OWE & DRF.
• Higher dividend outgo consequent on enhancement in dividend rate to
5% in 2013-14 from 4% in 2012-13.
Progressively higher internal resource generation necessitates Railways'
revenues to grow at a higher pace than the expenditure. It is a continuous
endeavour of the Railways to increase revenues and control expenditure.
Steps taken to maximize the traffic earnings, inter-alia, include periodic
rationalization of fare and freight tariff, introduction of Fuel Adjustment
Component in fare and freight, effective marketing strategies to capture
more and more traffic both in passenger(like augmentation of capacity of
popular trains & introduction of premium trains etc.) and goods, creation
of additional capacity and optimum utilization of the existing rail
infrastructure, improved throughput by steps to increase productivity and
efficiency, improvement of passenger interface etc.
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The committee note that against the Annual Plan target for internal
resource generation for 2013-14 of Rs. 15158 crore, the actual internal

16
resource generation was only Rs. 10132 crore (provisional). The Committee
are apprised that the shortfall in respect of the target for Internal Budgetary
Resouces was largely due to slow growth in the core sector of the economy
since the Railways is primarily a bulk carrier of sector. The Committee,
however, note that to increase freight traffic in non-core sector, the Ministry
of Railways have taken many steps like Freight Incentive Schemes, Special
Freight Train Operators, Automobile Freight Train Operators and Kisan
Vision Yojana, which have paid rich dividends. In the current year, upto
September, 2014, freight traffic in non-core sector has achieved a substantial
growth. Growth in loading for 'Container traffic' and 'Balance other goods'
has been 16.26 and 14.65 percent, respectively. The Committee are convinced
that such initiatives can generate more freight business and, as such, urge
the Ministry to intensify their efforts in this direction.
Reply of the Government
A slew of Freight Incentive Schemes namely; Incentive Scheme for
loading of bagged consignment in open and flat wagons, Freight Forwarder
Scheme, Incentive Scheme for Incremental Traffic and Incentive Scheme
for traffic booked in traditional empty flow directions were launched with
a view to garner additional volume of traffic and revenue. With effect from
01.10.2014, an Automatic rebate in freight scheme for traffic loaded in
specified inter-zonal empty flow direction has been launched as a pilot
project. Initially this scheme has been launched from (i) N. F. Railway to
Eastern, South Eastern, West Central, Northern Railways and (ii) Southern
Railway to South Central Railway for BCN group of rakes. Under the
scheme, the traffic is being charged automatically once the benchmark
NTKM is crossed, irrespective of the customer and commodities.
In addition to the above, the following objectives of policy are being
adopted to generate more freight business:
1. Special Freight Train Operators (SFTO): The objective of the
policy is to increase railway share in transportation of non-conventional
traffic in High Capacity or Special Purpose Wagons, thereby increasing
commodity based railway traffic. This provides an opportunity to logistics
service providers to invest in wagons for transportation of selected

17
commodities. Approval has been given for 3 rakes for movement of caustic
soda, 3 rakes of Special steel wagons for movement of long welded rails.
One proposal for movement of alumina is awaiting clearance.
2. Automobile Freight Train Operators (AFTO): this policy
provides an opportunity to logistics service providers and road transporters
to invest in wagons for transportation of automobiles. Two operators have
registered as AFTO. Two rakes of M/s Maruti Udyog Limited are running
since March 2014 and one of M/s APL Vascor has also been inducted in
August 2014.
3. Kisan Vision Project: This scheme provides for investment in
transportation of perishable traffic. Central Railside Warehouse Company
Ltd. (CRWC), Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) and CONCOR
have been entrusted with the responsibility of developing perishable cargo
centers over Indian Railways through Public Private Partnership (PPP)
mode.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee are unhappy to learn that during 2013-14, the Ministry
of Railways could not achieve their target in respect of traffic receipts. As
against the BE of Rs.146626.00 crore for Total Traffic Receipt, the actual
has decreased by Rs.3412.11 crore to Rs.143213.89 crore (provisional).
The reasons for decline in traffic receipts are stated to be the lower RE
target for passenger earnings over BE due to reduction in advance reservation
period from 120 days to 60 days w.e.f. May 2013 onwards and downward
revision in passenger traffic plan, keeping in view the persistent negative
growth in originating passengers upto December 41 2013. The Chairman,
Railway Board, informed during evidence that passenger traffic has dropped
mainly in the 0-50 kms segment due to increase in train fare compared to
bus journey in some areas. While expressing their apprehension over the
drop in originating passengers as one of the main reasons for downward
revision of the traffic receipt during 2013-14, the Committee desire that the
precise reasons for less realisation of total receipt than the projected level
should be looked into and remedial measures taken to contain the decline
in traffic receipt. They advise that the Ministry should closely monitor the

18
total receipt on a monthly basis to ensure that the target fixed at BE during
2014-15 is achieved.
Reply of the Government
Shortfall of Rs. 3412.11 cr in total receipts of the Indian Railways in
2013-14 vis-a-vis the BE target is solely on account of lesser passengers
booked by the year end than estimated at BE stage and a net accrual of
traffic outstandings by about Rs. 330 cr. The drop in passengers booked
than estimated in the BE was seen not only in the sub-urban segment but
also in the Non-suburban (Non-PRS) segment. Railways are targeting to
achieve progressively higher traffic earnings through various initiatives namely
augmentation of the length of the passenger trains, special trains, premium
trains, levy of port congestion on charge on freight traffic, increased focus
on ticket checking etc. Railways are also exploring alternate sources of
revenue like commercial exploitation of surplus railway land, advertisement
and publicity on railway assets etc. to augment their resources.
While the progress of Railways' earnings vis-a-vis the targets is captured
on a 10 day approximate basis, the freight data as also the expenditure
trends are collected and analysed on a monthly basis for continuous &
close review. Further, periodic reviews are conducted at the Zonal and the
Board level for monitoring the trends and for necessary intervention for
meeting the targets.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that during 2013-
14, the expenditure of the Ministry was enhanced in order to allocate higher
provision under Ordinary Working Expenses (OWE) and to increase
appropriation to Pension Fund. The Committee also observe that during
2014-15, BE for total expenditure is kept on a higher side at Rs.149175.56
crore as compared to Rs.127230.00 crore during 2013-14(BE). The
Committee are of the opinion that there is an urgent need for increasing
revenue earnings of the Railways in order to compensate the likely rise in
expenditure in the coming years. The Committee hope that the Railways
would take effective measures to increase their revenue, besides making
strenuous efforts to control their overall expenditure.

19
Reply of the Government
While the Railways have tried to contain working expenditure under
controllable heads to the barest minimum, Hon'ble Committee may appreciate
that working expenditure on heads like salary, DA, allowances, pension,
fuel expenditure which constitute 77.5% of total Working Expenses. On the
other hand, Railways being a public utility service, the pricing policy has
been based on the principle of what the traffic can bear. Nevertheless,
Railways have been taking steps to maximize the traffic earnings which,
inter-alia, include rationalization of fare and freight tariff, introduction of
Fuel Adjustment Component in fare and freight, effective marketing strategies
to capture more and more traffic both in passenger(like augmentation of
capacity of popular trains & introduction of premium trains) and goods,
creation of additional capacity and optimum utilization of the existing rail
infrastructure, improved throughput by steps to increase productivity and
efficiency, improvement of passenger interface etc. Some specific initiatives
to achieve this are running of more special and premium trains, innovative
schemes for traditional empty flows, increased focus on ticket checking,
improvement in ticket dispensation through ATVM's, & JTBS, etc. Railways
are also exploring alternate sources of revenue like commercial exploitation
of surplus railway land, advertisement and publicity on railway assets etc.
to augment their resources. Besides these the stringent efforts has been
made to control the expenditure by:-
• Imposing spending limits on zonal Railways
• Exchequer control
• Not permitting zonal railways to re-appropriate money from staff PUs
to non-staff PUs, from fuel to non-fuel and from stores to non-
stores.
• Tight inventory control
• Economy & austerity measures and
• Monthly reviews at Board level and periodical review meetings with
the General Managers and FA&CAOs of zonal railways.

20
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that the Ministry have taken certain steps to raise
their revenue. The Railways have effected a flat 10 per cent increase in
Passenger fares in all classes from 25 June, 2014. Inclusive of 4.2 per cent
Fuel Adjustment Component (FAC), the increase in Passenger fares was
around 14.2 per cent for different classes of travel. The Monthly Season
Ticket (MST) fares have also been revised by applying 14.2 per cent
increase over the existing fares. Besides, it has been stated that in order to
increase passenger earnings, efforts are being made by the Ministry to meet
the additional demand and augment revenue through various measures like
introduction of new trains, enhancement of the composition of more popular
trains, attachment of extra coaches in the existing trains, etc. The Committee
have been informed that special trains are run for clearance of extra passenger
traffic during peak seasons, festivals and special events. Further, premium
special trains are also being operated on certain high-demand sectors with
dynamic pricing which is resulting in higher passenger revenues. The
Committee hope that all the measures taken by the Ministry of Railways
would yield desired results and passenger earnings would show an upward
trend so as to ensure higher revenue generation. The Committee, however,
desire that with increase in train fares, attention be also paid in augmenting/
improving passenger amenities and facilities in trains and at Railway stations.
Reply of the Government
In addition to rationalization of fare and freight periodically, Railways
has undertaken Fuel Adjustment Component (FAC) linked revision in fare
and freight to recover the expenditure incurred on account of increase in
prices of fuel. The latest rationalization has been implemented with effect
from 25.06.2014 wherein freight rates have been increased by 6.5%
(inclusive of 1.4% on account of FAC) and passenger fares have been
increased by 14.2% (inclusive of 4.2% on account of FAC).
Present day passengers expect visible, qualitative and effective
improvements on each and every item of public utility provided at the
stations/platforms. In view of the increased expectations of the passengers/
daily commuters, Indian Railways are making all out efforts to provide
various facilities at the stations.

21
Indian Railways has more than 8,500 stations. It has always been the
endeavour of the Railways to provide adequate amenities to the passengers
at the stations. Passenger amenities at stations are provided in accordance
with comprehensive guidelines issued to Zonal Railways which specify the
level of amenities to be provided at each category of stations. Upgradation
of passenger amenities at stations is a continuous process and the norms
for provision of passenger amenities at various categories of stations,
which includes Minimum Essential Amenities, Recommended Amenities and
Desirable Amenities, are reviewed and revised periodically. Accordingly,
Zonal Railways have been advised to upgrade the amenities at stations. In
addition, identification of stations has also been done for development
under the Adarsh station Scheme. Adarsh station Scheme prescribes
conforming to ethnic ethos, quick entry and exit of passengers, smooth
entry from the civil road to station premises, better signage, wider foot-
over-bridges, etc. However, there is no connection between increase in
passenger fares and provision of passenger facilities/amenities at stations.
Regarding Passenger amenities in trains, augmenting/improving
passenger amenities and facilities is an ongoing process irrespective of fare
structure.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee are further informed that in order to contain expenditure
during 2014-15, the Ministry have imposed a spending limit 43 of Rs.108499
crore for the Zonal Railways by keeping a reserve of Rs.4150 crore for
better financial management. Also, economy and austerity instructions issued
by the Ministry of Finance in September, 2013, have been adopted and
conveyed to the Zonal Railways and other railway units for strict compliance.
Further, Railways have been permitted to recover the expenditure incurred
on account of increase in prices of fuel by imposing a Fuel Adjustment
Component (FAC). The Committee trust that these measures would help
the Ministry to contain the rise in expenditure.
Reply of the Government
In 2014-15, with the financial management measures mentioned in
reply to para above and gains due to lower HSD prices under Ordinary

22
Working Expenses, apart from lower inventory balances, it enabled Railways
on the one hand to allocate more funds towards operational and essential
maintenance activities and also more to DRF and Pension requirements,
and at the same time help to improve operating ratio over B.E. 2014-15.
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee are very disappointed to learn that in the last ten
years, out of the sanctioned 99 New Line projects worth Rs.60000 crore,
the Ministry have been able to complete only one project. There are four
projects which are as old as 30 years and are still not completed. The
Committee consider it to be a matter of grave concern which does not
reflect positively on the performance of the Indian Railways. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that an action plan be prepared to expedite completion
of these projects. The Committee desire to know the detailed reasons for
their pendency and the Railways' efforts for expeditious implementation of
these projects.
Reply of the Government
Primary reason for delay in projects is huge throwforward and non-
availability of commensurate resources. The Gross Budgetary Support (GBS)
being extended to Ministry of Railways by Ministry of Finance is not only
inadequate but also not sufficient enough even to neutralize escalation in
cost of the project. Other reasons for delay in execution of projects are,
delay in land acquisition, forestry clearances, law & order issues etc. In
order to tide over the problem, Ministry of Railway are encouraging State
Governments to share cost of the projects in their States, invite private
player to take up project through various participative models enunciated by
Ministry of Railways form SPV with beneficiary industries etc. All ongoing
projects of Indian Railways have been reviewed and railway has carried out
the prioritization to give pointed & focused attention to projects to ensure
optimal utilization of meager Gross Budgetary Support and to avoid thin
spread of funds. Priority has been accorded to National Projects, Cost
sharing projects, last mile project & last connectivity projects, projects
enhancing throughput, decongesting saturated sections, providing alternate
route etc.

23
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee are also unhappy to note that as on 1st April, 2014,
the Ministry of Railways have a throw-forward of 362 projects (154 New
Lines, 42 Gauge Conversion and 166 Doubling projects). Further, the
financial throw-forward is Rs.182224 crore (Rs.121118 crore for New
Lines, Rs.21496 crore for Gauge Conversion and Rs.39610 crore for
Doubling projects). The Committee are told that the total throw-forward
indicated by the Ministry is the cost of the project as sanctioned and the
completion cost of the project would have to be worked out by factoring
in the escalation which depends upon period of completion. The Committee
understand that there would be cost over-run in these projects due to
delayed completion and are disappointed to note that a meagre allocation of
Rs.13494 crore has been made as against the throw-forward of Rs.182224
crore which is less than 10 per cent of the amount required. The Committee
observe that there has been a tendency for the past many years to keep
unrealistic targets which ended up in a slow and tardy progress of the
projects due to non-availability of sufficient resources, which has adversely
affected the performance of the Railways. The Committee, therefore, desire
that more funds should be made available for throw-forward projects so
that these projects are completed expeditiously. To this end, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry should review all the pending projects
considering their economic viability, critical importance, etc., and prepare
an action plan to implement them in a definite time frame. Requisite funds
should also be made available for these projects as per the action plan.
Reply of the Government
Total allocation for New Line, Gauge Conversion and Doubling for
the year 2014-15 is only Rs. 13494 crs as against the throwforward of Rs
1,82,224 crs. With the prevailing system of funding, which itself is inadequate,
wherein there is no financial closure of the project, it would be difficult to
give a reasonable timeline for completion of project Projects are funded by
Gross Budgetary Support which is extended on yearly basis by Ministry of
Finance at the beginning of the year. Projects are taken up in phases and
efforts are made to complete reasonable portion of the project and put to

24
use within the overall availability of funds. Accordingly yearly target are
fixed at the beginning of the year. Committee suggestion has been noted in
this regard. Ministry of Railways has reviewed all ongoing & prioritized.
Within this also 30 projects have been accorded highest priority to complete
them in a time-bound manner.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note that in the 12th Plan, Rs.10,000 crore was
finalised for allotment for Signalling and Telecommunication (S&T) works.
Accordingly, Rs.2000 crore was required to be allocated every year.
However, allocations were reduced before regular revised allocations in the
last three years, i.e, Rs.904 crore from Rs.1101.8 crore in the year 2011-
12, Rs.1012 crore from Rs.2006.6 crore in the year 2012-13 and Rs.915
crore from Rs.1107 crore in the year 2013-14. Again, a lower allocation of
Rs.966 crore has been made during 2014-15. The Committee have been
informed that due to reduced allocation, S&T works had to be prioritised
and outlay was mainly restricted to those works which were in the last leg
of completion. Many other works which were important for enhancing the
level of safety like Train Management System (TMS) and Train Protection
Warning System (TPWS) had to be deferred due to scarcity of funds. The
targets for replacement of S&T equipment as required could also not be
fully met during 2013-14. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of
Railways should coordinate with the Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission so that they receive sufficient funds as per the 12th Plan
targets for such an important head as it directly relates to the safety and
security of the travelling public.
Reply of the Government
Noted.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no.1.16 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways have laid special
emphasis on safety, and plan to eliminate 10,797 level crossings during the

25
12th Plan. The Committee, however, note that during 2012-13 and 2013-
14, only 2,265 unmanned level crossings had been eliminated. If the target
set for the year 2014-15 to eliminate 730 unmanned LCs is fully achieved,
7802 LCs [10797-(2265+730)] would still remain pending for elimination
in the last two years of the 12th Plan. Therefore, it is evident that the steps
taken by the Ministry in this direction are not adequate. It is pertinent to
note that 40 percent of consequential rail accidents and 60 percent of
fatalities are accounted for by level crossings. Hence, recognising the
paramount need to eliminate the level crossings to improve the safety
performance of Railways, the Committee urge the Ministry of Railways to
gear up its efforts to address their constraints while paying focused attention
to the work related to elimination of railway level crossings.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways endeavors to eliminate all unmanned level
crossings. The work of elimination is being carried out to the extent
possible based on the availability of funds. Ministry of Railway requires
approximately Rs.20,700/- crores for the elimination of these unmanned
level crossings. It is possible to eliminate these unmanned level crossing
within the 12th Five Year Plan provided funds to the tune of Rs.20,700/-
crore are made available for this purpose.
Funding for these works comes from Central Road Fund out of the
cess collected on petrol and diesel. At present, Rs.2/- per litre each is
collected as cess on Petrol and High Speed Diesel (HSD) Oil. The accrued
fund is distributed for development and maintenance of National Highways,
state roads, rural roads and for railway over bridges/under bridges and
other safety features as provided in Central Road Fund Act, 2000. Railway
gets a share of 4.6875% of entire diesel and 9.375% of petrol cess. The
average annual allocation to Railways is Rs.1,100 crore which is extremely
inadequate.
In the past, Ministry of Railways has made numerous efforts to
arrange additional funds to liquidate arrears of Road Safety Works including
the work of elimination of Unmanned level crossings as under:
(a) In February'2013, the then Hon'ble MR has written letter to the

26
Hon'ble Finance Minister for enhancement of Railway's share from Central
Road Fund by suitably amending the provisions.
(b) Ministry of Railways has moved a Cabinet Note in the month of
January 2013 for enhancement of allocation for Railways from Central
Road Fund (CRF) by suitably amending the CRF Act. In this Cabinet Note,
approval of CCEA was solicited for enhancement of cess on Diesel &
Petrol each by Rs.0.20 per litre to take it to Rs.2.20 per litre against the
existing Rs.2.00 per litre and to make available additional fund to Ministry
of Railways for time-bound elimination of Level Crossings/ROBs/RUBs.
However, PMO asked, vide their note dated 04.03.2013, Ministry of
Railways to withdraw the Cabinet Note. As such, above efforts have not
materialized.
But inspite of that Ministry of Railways is again approaching Ministry
of Finance for enhancing the share of Ministry of Railways from Central
Road Fund and allocate assured funding to the tune of Rs.20,700/-crore for
the elimination of unmanned level crossings.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee are distressed to note that the funds allocated for
computerisation in Railways were not optimally utilised during the first two
years of the 12th Plan. Out of the allocation, of Rs.346 crore and Rs.362
crore during 2012-13 and 2013-14, respectively, only Rs.97 crore and
Rs.141.22 crore, respectively were utilised. Regarding gross underutilisation
of funds, the Committee have been apprised that the computerization in
Railways involve a total change of age old processes of doing things and
involving various stake holders from top to bottom, while conceptualisation
itself takes time. Further, a number of changes also come in at the stage
of finalisation and actual implementation in the field. There are also very
quick technological changes which are occurring every day in the
Information Technology field; as such, any computerisation project is quite
complex and undergoes several changes before it actually fructifies. The
Committee are not convinced with the reasons given by the Ministry for
underutilisation of funds for computerisation. The Committee are unhappy

27
to note that more than 50 per cent of the allocated funds have not been
utilized by the Ministry. The Committee are of the firm opinion that full
computerisation would change the work culture of the Railways and provide
better delivery of services to the common man of the country. They,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Railways should take effective
steps to fully utilize Rs.339 crore allocated for computerisation during
2014-15.
Reply of the Government
Committee's observation have been examined however it is observed
that actual expenditure has increased from Rs. 97.00 cr. in 2012-13 to
Rs.141.22 cr. in 2013-14. Actual Expenditure stated above is indicative of
increasing expenditure in comparison to the previous years. This is due to
the fact that Railways are making an all out effort for optimum utilization
of resources. During the current year, detailed Estimate of a large number
of works have been sanctioned which lead to more fund utilization. Till the
end of January, 2015, funds to the tune of Rs. 99.02 cr. have already been
utilized which will further increase by end of current financial year. However,
the Committee's observations have been noted for further enhancing the
level of expenditure and its utilization for IT implementation.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no.1.19 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee note that in order to clear extra rush of passengers
during peak summer season, the Railways have operated 8,778 trips of
special trains and attached 25,452 extra coaches on temporary basis, which
is in addition to attachment of 40 extra coaches on permanent basis on the
existing trains. It is pertinent to note that in spite of the claims of adequate
arrangements being made by the Railways to tackle the extra rush of
passengers on special occasions, there have several unfortunate incidents
during such peak times. The Committee do realise that the Ministry faces
a big challenge ahead of the festivals and also during peak seasons, as a
number of passengers board trains without reservation. The Committee

28
suggest that the Railways should proactively coordinate with the State
Governments to assess the requirements of extra services required and
accordingly make necessary arrangements. Besides, adequate publicity should
be given well in time of the special arrangements proposed to be made by
the Railways regarding special trains, extra coaches, etc., to effectively
deal with the extra rush of passengers at Railway Stations.
Reply of the Government
Instructions have been issued to all Zonal Railways vide Board's letter
No.2015/TG-I/20/Spl. Train/Publicity dated 11.03.2015 regarding adequate
publicity of special trains/extra coaches for clearing rush during peak seasons
(copy enclosed).
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee observe that the punctuality performance for Mail/
Express trains over the Indian Railways during the period 1 April, 2014 to
27 October, 2014 has been 81.85 percent. Punctuality for passenger trains
for the same period is 77.5 percent. The Committee have been apprised
about various constraints/difficulties which are being faced by the Railways
to bring the level of punctuality to the optimal level, viz. line capacity
constraints on account of increasing passenger and freight traffic due to
economic development and growth; adverse weather conditions (fog during
December-February period in Northern parts; intermittent natural calamities
such as floods, cyclones, heavy rains, etc.; heavy road traffic on level
crossing gates across the Indian Railway network; law and order problem,
including public agitations and bandh calls and other miscreant activities
such as theft of Railway assets (over head equipment wires, signalling
cables and other equipment); mid-section run over cases involving cattle
and humans due to no-fencing of Railway tracks, etc. The Committee are
of the view that while these factors may affect punctuality level, these
alone cannot be responsible for the substantial delays that regularly occur
on the Indian Railway network. Hence, the Committee strongly recommend
that the Ministry should take concrete steps to inculcate a new work
culture, where more focused attention should be given to punctuality
performance of trains.

29
Reply of the Government
Committee's recommendation for inculcating a new work culture for
improvement in punctuality performance has been well taken.
In order to inculcate a new work culture for improving punctuality
performance over Indian Railways, the following steps have already been
initiated by the Railways: Sensitization of staff involved in train operations
towards importance of punctuality.
• Prioritization of preventive maintenance of assets to minimize asset
failures and rectification of failures in shortest possible time.
• Better co-ordination with Civil and Police authorities of states to
minimize delays arising out of law & order problems.
• Stress on timely completion of Capacity enhancement projects such
as construction of additional loop lines, Doubling, Third line corridors,
automatic signaling, RUB's, ROB's etc which are already sanctioned
and in progress.
• Time table of identified bad runners are being revisited.
• Proactive approach for better punctuality performance through rewards
and punishment to staff.
It is pertinent to mention here that the punctuality performance of
Mail/Express trains traversing through quadrilateral routes such as Delhi-
Howrah, Delhi-Mumbai, Delhi-Chennai and Howrah-Mumbai have been
adversely impacted as these sectors are facing severe capacity constraint
due to saturated line capacity.
To ease off decongestion of traffic on the Indian railway network,
Eastern and Western dedicated freight corridors have already been sanctioned
and their execution is in progress. While the eastern corridors runs from
Ludhiana to Dankuni covering the highly saturated route of Khurja-Allahabad-
Mughalsarai, the Western corridor will extend from Dadri to JNPT (Mumbai).
Once these corridors become operational, punctuality performance of
passenger carrying trains are likely to improve.

30
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee note that a committee headed by Dr. Anil Kakodkar
to examine the safety standards on Indian Railways and to suggest suitable
benchmarks and safety protocols, had submitted its report on 17 February
2012. Also an expert group headed by Shri Sam Pitroda on modernization
and resource mobilization had submitted its report on 27 February, 2012.
The Committee are disappointed to note that even after a lapse of more
than two and a half years, the recommendations of the said committees are
still being examined and awaiting final acceptance by the Ministry. The
Committee urge the Ministry to take a decision on the recommendations of
the two committees without further loss of time so that the very purpose
of setting up of these committees is well served.
Reply of the Government
Efforts are being made by the Ministry to expedite decision on the
recommendations of the High Level Safety Review Committee. As already
advised, action has been initiated for implementation of some of the
recommendations of the Committee.
In respect of the Sam Pitroda Committee recommendations also, action
has been initiated for implementation of various key recommendations.
Recommendations pertaining to organisational restructuring/Reforms, etc.
are being separately considered by an Expert Group. The financial projections
given in the Report including the total investment of Rs.8.39 lakh crores
during the 12th Plan and the Gross Budgetary Support and Internal Generation
going up by 2.5 times and 5.3 times respectively are, considering the
actuals of the first three years of the 12th Plan, not practicable. The Annual
Plans take into account the investment requirements for modernization and
technology upgradation.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no.1.25 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways' had mooted a
proposal in January, 2013 for enhancement of the Railways' share from the

31
Central Road Fund (CRF) towards the Railway Safety Fund for their road
safety works, from the existing Rs.1100 crore to Rs.5000 crore for the
next seven years by suitably amending the CRF Act; however, this has not
been acceded to by the Government. The Committee have been informed
that the Ministry of Railways are planning to approach the Ministry of
Finance again for enhancement of the Railway's share from the Central
Road Fund. Since adequate availability of funds is crucial for road safety
works especially to eliminate level crossings, the Committee desire that the
Ministry pursue the 53 proposal purposively with the Ministry of Finance.
The Committee desire that they should be kept informed of the progress
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Noted. Ministry of Finance is being requested to enhance the Railway's
share from the Central Road Fund (CRF) towards Railway Safety Fund for
Road Safety Works so that all unmanned level crossing can be eliminated.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways have requested the
Ministry of Rural Development to include a few railway works under
MGNREGA, as this would not only open up more options for gainful
employment of the rural population but also would make a significant
contribution to the development of infrastructure of the Indian Railways.
So far, the Ministry of Rural Development has identified only the work of
construction and maintenance of approach roads for level crossings under
the MGNREGA scheme. However, the work of construction of subways
under the MGNREGA scheme is yet to be included by the Ministry of Rural
Development. The Committee desire that the matter should be pursued with
the Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the progress in this matter.
Reply of the Government
Noted.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no.1.28 of Chapter I)

32
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the Railways require
around Rs.50000 crore every year for the next 10 years for their ongoing
projects alone, leaving a huge gap between the availability of funds and the
requirements. They are further constrained to note that in the present
scenario when the Ministry of Railways had projected an 40 amount of Rs.
719671 crore for the 12th Five Year Plan, the Planning Commission has
approved only Rs.519221 crore. Further, during 2012-13, 2013-14 and
2014-15, against the projected outlays of Rs.77645 crore, Rs.72500 crore
and Rs.72000 crore, respectively, the Planning Commission had approved
only Rs.60100 crore, Rs.63363 crore and Rs.65445 crore, respectively.
The reduced outlays have adversely affected the Railways' projects of new
line, gauge conversion, doubling, traffic facility works, signaling & telecom
works, new rolling stock acquisition and work for workshops, etc. The
Committee are unhappy with the reduced outlays for the Ministry of Railways
by the Planning Commission. They recommend that the projected funds
should not be curtailed as these funds are absolutely necessary to implement
crucial railway projects in the country.
Reply of the Government
This is a direction by the Standing Committee to Planning Commission
and Railways agree with this. It is pertinent to mention that Railways have
been consistently requesting the erstwhile Planning Commission in the last
three years for increased outlays (including but not limited to enhanced
Gross Budgetary Support) in the absence of which capacity augmentation
efforts of Railways like new line, gauge conversion, doubling, traffic facility

33
works, signaling & telecom works, new rolling stock acquisition and work
for workshops, etc are suffering badly.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee take a serious note of the fact that though the Ministry
of Railways had sought a modest Gross Budgetary Support of Rs. 3,16,842
crore for the 12th Five Year Plan for meeting their stipulated plan Targets,
the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance approved outlay of Rs.
1,94,221 crore only. It is pertinent to note that even the year -wise allocation
of funds during the first three years of the 12th Plan is not proportionate.
Although pro-rata allocation during the first three years should have been
1,16,533 crore, the actual allocation is Rs. 84,965 crore only and therefore
there is a shortfall of around 27 per cent. The reduced plan size has
adversely affected Railways' New Line, Doubling, Gauge Conversion and
electrification works. Because of reduced GBS, the Ministry of Railways
have projected very modest targets for their important projects. Thus they
will now be able to achieve a target of 1392 km for New Lines (including
327 kms. of National Projects) against Planning Commission Target of
4000 Kms., 2000 Kms for Gauge Conversion( including 993 kms of National
Projects) against Planning Commission Targets pf 7653 km. The Committee
earnestly desire that the Gross Budgetary Support in the 12th Plan outlay
should be suitably stepped up in line with the targets set by the Planning
Commission.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted and the matter of
increasing actual outlays/ Gross Budgetary Support during the Plan period
would be taken up with the Planning Commission.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee learn that the Railways have proposed to introduce
bullet train on the already identified Mumbai-Ahmedabad sector, for which
a number of studies have been done. As informed, the bullet train projects
are highly capital intensive and require substantial financial support from
the Government for their implementation. Besides, all possible funding

34
options with bilateral/ multilateral agencies and PPP mode are also being
explored. The Ministry has justified this project even though it is financially
unviable stating that as compared to other big railway projects, bullet train
project has additional unique feature contributing to improved economic
rate of return in terms of value of time saved of passengers, environmental
benefits, appreciation in real estate value and residual value of infrastructure,
besides enhancing the country's prestige internationally. The Committee are
not fully convinced with the above justifications given by the Ministry. The
Committee feel that if the amount equivalent to that proposed to be expended
for bullet trains is used for execution of the long pending railway projects,
the benefits to the general public would be much more. The Committee,
therefore, desire that before going ahead with the bullet train project, the
Ministry should conduct a cost benefit analysis for the project vis-a-vis
other pending railway projects so that the scarce resources of the Railways
are utilized optimally and judiciously. However, the proposal for introduction
of the high speed train on the Mumbai-Ahmedabad sector is laudable.
Reply of the Government
The essence of the bullet train project is expressed in the Hon'ble
MR's Budget Speech, July 2014, as "It is the wish and dream of every
Indian that India runs a bullet train as early as possible. Indian Railways is
on its way to fulfill that long cherished dream".
The bullet train project finances are proposed to be separated from
the finances of Indian Railways. It is to be funded through an appropriate
mix of Gross Budgetary support, bilateral/ multilateral funding, PPP etc.
Cost Benefit analysis of big Railway projects are always carried out
in terms of Rate of Return (ROR). Since the bullet train project has several
indirect benefits, and is expected to bring about big ticket boost to economic
activity in the country, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) has
been calculated.
Bullet Trains have additional advantage that they compete with the
Airlines in terms of running time and, therefore, a good amount of time of
the user is saved which results in greater manpower productivity. On the
other hand, conventional trains take much more time than the airlines.

35
Also in terms of carbon-dioxide emission Bullet Trains are more
environment friendly than airplanes & cars.
Bullet trains are also more efficient i.e. a double track rail line has
much more passenger carrying capacity than a six lane highway, and
requires less than half the land. So, it is clear that conventional trains does
not give the same benefits as are derived from Bullet Trains. Due to this
reason, economic rate of return (EIRR) is not calculated for conventional
railway projects.
In view of all the above, it is submitted that the benefits of Bullet
Train projects cannot be compared to other Railway projects.

36
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee are perturbed to note that the target for Extra Budgetary
Resources fixed at Rs. 21,103 crore for 2013-14 has fallen short by 6,018
crore (provisional). The main reason for shortfall in target for Extra Budgetary
Resources, was the non-materialisation of funding models under PPP to the
tune envisaged. As stated by the Ministry, the rail infrastructure projects are
highly capital intensive with long gestation period and have generally a low
rate of return and, hence, general investors have not shown adequate
interest in making investments under PPP. The Committee note that the
very same reasons are furnished by the Ministry of Railways year after
year for not achieving the PPP targets and recommend that the Ministry
should find out ways and means to provide a conductive environment for
private investors for PPP in Railways and explore other avenues of the
railway sector which have comparatively low gestation period, which are
less capital intensive and where investors can expect a reasonable rate of
return.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways have framed new Model Concession Agreements
for Build Operate Transfer (BOT), Joint Venture and Private line model.
Sectoral Guidelines for Domestic/ Foreign Direct Investment have also
been framed under which certain permissible areas have been identified for
investment.
An Investors Meet was also organised on 5th December 2014 to
share the Policies of Ministry of Railways. The new Agreements/Sectoral
Guidelines provide better framework to investors under which risks and

37
responsibilities are balanced and will enable exploration of investment avenues
by investors.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no.1.7 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Standing Committee observe that during 2013-14, against a target
of Rs. 6,000 crore for PPP, the achievement remained to the tune of Rs.
1,520 crore (approx.) only, which is too meagre. The Committee further
learn that the Ministry, in December, 2012, had announced a participative
policy to strengthen capacity augmentation and building rail connectivity
projects. Under the policy 16 projects amounting to Rs. 8,000 crores
approximate have been given 'in principle' approval/have been sanctioned.
Since new PPP projects have been sanctioned, the Committee call upon the
Ministry to ensure that the implementation starts soon and the target for
2014-15 is realized. The Committee also would like to be apprised of the
strategy planned by the Railways to achieve the huge target of Rs. 1 lakh
crore for the 12th Plan to attract private investment through PPP.
Reply of the Government
Under the Participative Policy, the financial commitments received
from investors are likely to be achieved in next few years. Ministry of
Railways has no role in implementation of such projects which are
implemented by private developer/Concessionaire. The target of 12th Plan
includes certain projects like Elevated Rail Corridor in Mumbai, High Speed
and Station Development. Most of these projects depend on active
participation of State Government which is not forthcoming in many of the
cases. However, he targets for Rail Connectivity to Ports/Mines will be
achieved.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no.1.10of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee draw some satisfaction from the fact that for
implementation of National Projects in the Northeast Region, the Cabinet

38
Committee for Economic Affairs (CCEA) has approved creation of a non-
lapsable fund, viz., North East Region Rail Development Fund (NERRDF)
wherein funds to the tune of 25 percent of yearly requirement are to be
provided by the Railways through GBS and 75 percent funds are to be
provided by the Ministry of Finance dividend-free as an additionality to
GBS. The Committee, however, learnt that till date the fund could not be
created due to an objection of the Controller General of Accounts (CGA)
of the Ministry of Finance. The Committee recommend that the Ministry
of Railways should pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance and
resolve the issue so that the NERRDF is created at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Based on the Cabinet Committee decision, a reference was made to
Controller General of Accounts (CGA), Ministry of Finance (MOF) for
introduction of Account head in the list of Major & Minor heads of Accounts
of Government. However, the same was not agreed to by that office on
the ground that capital investments are meant for creation of Assets and
transfer of budgetary support to proposed Fund would not result in actual
creation of assets. It has also been stated that the office of Controller &
Audit General (C&AG) of India has not agreed to such accounting
adjustments. They had, thus, suggested to create the proposed fund from
revenue surplus instead of budgetary support. A back reference was again
made referring to the Cabinet decision. However, MOF reiterated their
earlier stand.
Creation of a new fund from railway revenue surplus has not been
found feasible. As recommended by the Standing Committee, another
reference has been made to Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of
Finance to reconsider the proposal.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no.1.13 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee note that in their effort to take care of the increased

39
travelling needs of passengers, the Indian Railways, in the Railway Budget
2014-15, have proposed introduction of 138 new train services, extension
of 15 train services and increase in frequency of 5 existing train services.
They, however, regret to note that out of 126 new train services which
were proposed to be introduced during 2013-14, 10 train services are yet
to be started due to various constraints like sanction of the Commissioner
for Railway Safety, non-completion of gauge conversion work, etc. The
Committee are of the view that these issues involved in the introduction 50
of a proposed train should be taken into consideration before making such
an announcement. Even after more than one and a half years, the Ministry
still are not in a position to indicate the time by which these 10 train
services will be introduced. The Committee, therefore, would like the
Ministry to ensure the introduction of the all train services proposed during
2014-15 within the definite time frame.
Reply of the Government
In Railway Budget 2014-15, introduction of 138 new trains, extension
of 15 train services and 5 train services has been announced. As on date,
100 new trains, 14 extension of existing train services and 5 increase in
frequency of existing train services has been implemented. Of the remaining
38 new train services and 1 extension of train service, 10 new train
services are now ready for implementation and 29 train services are pending
introduction due to various constraints like non-completion of gauge
conversion/infrastructural works, non-receipt of Commissioner for Railway
Safety (CRS) sanction, non-availability of Rolling stock etc. In regard to
train services announced in Railway Budget 2013-14, out of 10 train services
4 train services are now ready and remaining 6 train services are pending
due to various constraints like non-completion of gauge conversion works,
non-receipt of necessary clearance from the Commissioner of Railway
Safety (in case of newly opened and gauge converted sections), etc. These
trains will be introduced as soon as the constraints are overcome.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no.1.22 of Chapter I)

40
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDA TIONS/ OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH FINAL REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
 N EW D ELHI; DINESH TRIVEDI,
6 August , 2015 Chairperson,
15 Shravana , 1937  (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

41
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILW AYS (2014-15)
(SEVENTEENTH SITTING)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 6th August, 2015, from 1500
hours to 1530 hours in Committee Room No.'62', Parliament House, New
Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Dinesh Trivedi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
3. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
8. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
9. Shri Thota Narasimham
10. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy
11. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
12. Shri Ganesh Singh
13. Shri Uday Pratap Singh

42
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Mukut Mithi
15. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
16. Shri Ambeth Rajan
17. Shri T. Rathinavel
18. Shri Devender Goud T.
19. Shri Motilal V ora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri K Vijayakrishnan — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
the draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
of the Committee contained in their 3rd Report on "Demands for Grants
- 2014-15 of the Ministry of Railways" and adopted the same without any
modification.
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the
Report and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

43
APPENDIX-II
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the 3rd Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands
for Grants - 2014-15 of the Ministry of Railways'
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 23
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government–
Para Nos. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21,
22, and 23 16
Percentage of total 69.57%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies–
Para Nos. 5, 10 and 17 3
Percentage of total 13.04%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration–
Para Nos. 3, 4, 11 and 18 4
Percentage of total 17.39%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies are still awaited–
Para Nos. Nil Nil
Percentage of total 100%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”