25
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2018-2019)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 21st Report of the Standing Committee
on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘New Railway
Catering Policy, 2017’]
TWENTY-FIFTY REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2019/ Magha, 1940 ( Saka)

TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2018-2019)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 21st Report of the Standing Committee
on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘New Railway
Catering Policy, 2017’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.02.2019
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 07.02.2019
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2019/ Magha, 1940 ( Saka)


S.C.R. No. 224
Price : ` 56.00
© 2019 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by
Anupam Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 9
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................... 31
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ... 32
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ... 33
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Standing Committee on
Railways held on 04.02.2019 .................................... 36
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 21st
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘New Railway Catering
Policy, 2017’ ........................................................ 38
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2018-2019)@
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Anju Bala
3. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
4. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
5. Shri Sudheer Gupta
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
7. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
8. Shri Kunhalikutty P .K.
9. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
10. Dr. K.H. Muniyappa
11. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu
12. Shri A.T . (Nana) Patil
13. Shri Vijayakumar S.R.
14. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
15. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
16. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav
17. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar
18. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddheshwara
19. Shri Ganesh Singh
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
21. Shri Kukade Madhukarrao Yashwantrao
(iii)
@ Constituted w.e.f. 01.09.2018 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 7332 dated
18.09.2018.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.K. Antony
23. Shri Shwait Malik
24. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
25. Shri Mukut Mithi
26. Ms. Saroj Pandey
27. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
28. Shri T . Rathinavel
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
30. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya
31. Shri Motilal Vora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kavita Prasad — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri R.L. Yadav — Additional Director

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2018-19),
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Twenty Fifth Report on Action Taken by
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in their Twenty First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘New Railway Catering Policy, 2017’.
2. The T wenty First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid
in the Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2018. The Report contained
25 Recommendations/Observations besides Paras 1 and 2 which were
introductory in nature and did not contain any recommendation. The
Ministry of Railways furnished their Action Taken Notes on all the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report on 30.11.2018.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken
Report at their sitting held on 04.02.2019. The minutes of the sitting
are given in Appendix-I.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observation and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report
of the Standing Committee on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given
in Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY ,
4 February, 2019 Chairperson,
15 Magha, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Railways deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their T wenty First Report (16th Lok Sabha) on “New
Railway Catering Policy, 2017”.
2. The Twenty-First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and
laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2018. It contained 25 Recommendations/
Observations besides Paras 1 and 2 which were introductory in nature
and did not contain any recommendation.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all Recommendations/
Observations have been received and categorised as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27
Total : 23
Chapter II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
NIL
Total :00
Chapter III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
NIL
Total : 00
Chapter IV
(iv) R ecommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies are still awaited:
Para No. 6 and 7
Total : 02
Chapter V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
the implementation of the Recommendations accepted by the
Government. The Committee desire that final action taken notes to
the Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapters-I & V of
this Report should be furnished to them not later than three months
of the presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations.
A. MANAGEMENT OF MOBILE AND STATIC UNIT
Recommendation (Para No.5)
6. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have been informed that the Catering Policy,
2010 had aimed a paradigm shift with regard to the whole approach
towards railway catering. Whereas earlier policy sought to treat
catering as an independent profit centre, the Policy of 2010
acknowledged catering as a passenger service. The New Catering
Policy, 2017 mandates that Zonal Railways will prepare the plan in
coordination with Divisions and IRCTC at each station. In the Policy
of 2017, the Ministry has categorically demarcated the areas of
service providers of Food Preparator (who shall prepare the food)
and the Distributor (who will distribute the prepared foods). The
Committee have been informed that the system of train based
contracts prevailing in earlier Catering Policy, 2010 has now been
done away with in new Catering Policy, 2017 and instead IRCTC run
state-of-the-art kitchens of various sizes would be provided at
locations across the country. IRCTC would be responsible for catering
services through mobile catering units, Base Kitchens, Cell Kitchens,
Refreshment Rooms at A1 and A category stations, Food Plazas,
Food Courts, Train Side Vending, Jan Ahaars as defined in the
Policy. All mobile units will be handed over to IRCTC along with
existing contracts. The contracts which were awarded in 2013-14
and still continuing, will gradually be short terminated or continued
till expiry and re-allotted afresh after expiry of term. Further ,
Mega Base Kitchens will be constructed by IRCTC and the existing
four Mega Base Kitchens of Ahmedabad, Howrah, Mumbai and Delhi
will be upgraded by IRCTC on PPP mode. Mega Kitchens will be
provided with the provisions that there should be a Base Kitchen
on every 300 Km. The Committee are unhappy to note that out of

3
80 number of Mega Kitchens proposed to be constructed, only 16
have been planned to be constructed in 2017. Further , to their
dismay, only 5 Mega Kitchens have been completed so far. The
Committee feel that if Railways intend to provide good quality
hygienic foods to their passengers, they will have to focus on
timely construction of base kitchens. The Committee emphasize
the need of expeditious completion of remaining Base Kitchens to
satisfy the need of growing number of passengers by way of
providing good quality hygienic food. Further , the Ministry have
claimed that out of 272 static units, 255 static units have been
taken over by IRCTC and remaining 17 static units are still pending
with Zonal railways. Likewise, as on 17.1.2018, all mobile units
(Pantry and Mini pantry) have been taken over by IRCTC except
01 (one) train which is under litigation. The Committee have taken
note of lack of seriousness on the part of the Ministry and are of
the view that if proper preparedness were made to settle the
issues before launch of such a prioritized Scheme of public
importance, there would have no scope of any litigation and all
units would have been transferred to IRCTC smoothly. The
Committee are apprehensive that such incomplete transition of
catering services may cause considerable inconvenience to the
travelling passengers as it will hamper IRCTC in facilitating smooth
and unhindered catering services. They, therefore, desire that with
a view to implement the new Catering Policy, 2017 in letter and
spirit, the Railways should hand over remaining catering services
immediately to IRCTC to make them responsible for supply of
quality, wholesome and hygienic food to passengers. They, therefore,
desire the Ministry to take the remedial measures immediately to
hand over all units including Food Plazas and Food Courts to IRCTC
urgently.”
7. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:—
“In compliance of above, management of 377 mobile units (pairs
of trains with pantry Cars) out of 378 has been transferred to
IRCTC. Further , management of 262 static units (168-Refreshment
Rooms, 53-Jan Ahaar , 27-Cell Kitchen & 14-Base Kitchens) out of
275 nos. of static units has also been transferred to IRCTC. Only
1 mobile unit and 13 static units remain to be transferred to IRCTC
which is pending due to litigation/matter being sub-judice.
However , all out efforts are being made to pursue the matter
before the Hon’ble Court so as to enable smooth transfer of
remaining units to IRCTC.

4
Upgradation of Base Kitchens:
• 30 Kitchen Units have been upgraded till 30th September
2018 entailing civil works, electrical works and heavy duty
kitchen equipments.
• 15 more Kitchen Units are planned to be upgraded by IRCTC
during 2018-19.
• 9 Green Field Base Kitchens to be set up by IRCTC during
2018-19.”
8. The Committee had recommended that with a view to
implement the New Catering Policy, 2017 in letter and spirit, the
Railways should hand over all the mobile and static units which
remained with Railways. In compliance of their recommendation,
the Committee noted that out of 378 mobile units and 275 static
units, 01 mobile unit and 13 static units respectively are yet to be
transferred to IRCTC and is still pending with Railways. Likewise,
out of 80 mega kitchens proposed to be constructed, only 16 were
planned in 2017 itself out of which only 5 were completed. The
Committee are happy to find that all out efforts are being made by
the Ministry for smooth transfer of remaining units to IRCTC,
upgradation of Base Kitchens and setting up of Green Field Base
Kitchens. While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the
Committee would like to emphasize on the Ministry to vigorously
pursue the matter for speedy transfer of the remaining units to
IRCTC. The Committee also like to know the current status of
construction of Mega Kitchens.
B. NEW MENU AND TARIFF COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
9. In their Report, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are happy to note that in new Catering Policy,
2017, a New Menu and Tariff Committee has been constituted by
the Ministry to study the workability of the rates in catering
contracts and to recommend/report upon the fixation of tariff for
standard menu/food items on the list of menu items given by
IRCTC and calculation of empirical formulae so as to calculate
annual or periodical escalation with respect to increase in prices
of the components leading to preparation of meal. The committee
will submit its report shortly. The Committee, therefore, desire
that while implementing the new Catering Policy, 2017, the Railways

5
should closely examine the recommendations of the New Menu and
Tariff Committee and implement them in letter and spirit to avoid
difficulty and demotivation to the parties concerned in the
endeavour for the betterment of catering services over Indian
railways. The Committee would like to be apprised of its
recommendations vis-a-vis status of their implementation.”
10. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:—
“It is intimated that the Menu and Tariff Committee, constituted
by the Ministry of Railways to study the workability of the rates
in catering contracts and to recommend/report upon the fixation
of tariff for standard menu/food items has already submitted its
report which is under examination.
Further , IRCTC has already been advised by Railway Board to take
necessary action for rationalisation and standardisation of the
existing menu and number of services undertaken for catering in
trains. In addition Railway Board has also directed that while
undertaking the said review exercise, IRCTC shall ensure that the
hygiene and quality of catering services is maintained to the highest
level within the framework of tariff notified. IRCTC accordingly
has revised and implemented new meals based on menu
rationalization on 35 pairs of Shatabdi, Rajdhani and Duronto Trains.”
11. The Committee had noted that a New Menu and Tariff
Committee was constituted by the Ministry of Railways to report
upon the fixation of tariff of menu/food items given by IRCTC and
calculation of empirical formulae for calculating cost escalation and
increase in prices of components of food items. The Committee had
desired to closely examine the recommendations of this Committee
and implement them in letter and spirit to avoid difficulty and
demotivation to the parties concerned for the betterment of catering
services over Indian Railways. The report of the above Committee
is stated to be under examination. The Committee have noted that
the Ministry (Railway Board) has advised the IRCTC to take necessary
action for rationalization and standardization of the existing menu
and number of services undertaken for catering in trains and
accordingly, IRCTC has revised and implemented new menu on 35
pair of trains in Shatabdi, Rajdhani and Duronto trains. However,
The Committee desire the Ministry to examine the recommendation
of the New Menu and Tariff Committee in depth expeditiously and
take appropriate action to rationalize the catering services over
Indian Railways.

6
C. CONTRACT AWARDING, MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING SYSTEM
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
12. In their Report, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have been informed that in the Catering Policy,
2010, Zonal Railways had a contract awarding, management and
monitoring system which was effective and transparent. The
allotment of all major units and General Minor Units at A, B and
C categories stations were done through open, competitive and
two-packet tendering system based on Standard Bid Document (SBD)
and duly following all the procedures/instructions issued by
Government of India/Railway Board from time to time. Allotments
of static Special Minor Units (SMUs) at A, B and C categories of
stations and all GMUs and SMUs at D,E and F categories stations
were done by calling applications through press notification. The
Ministry have informed that tenure of all major units being handed
over to IRCTC will be governed as per catering Policy, 2010 and
continue till the expiry of the contracts. IRCTC shall further manage
these units as per the provisions of the new Catering Policy, 2017.
Tenure of all other catering units (major units and minor units) will
be for a period of 5 years only. The contracts awarded by zonal
railways for kitchen units viz. Refreshment Rooms at A1 and A
category stations, Jan Ahaar , Cell Kitchens shall be reassigned to
IRCTC on the same terms and conditions with sharing of license
fee between IR and IRCTC in the ratio of 40:60 in all cases other
than departmentally managed units by IRCTC wherein revenue shall
be shared in the ratio of 15:85. The allotment of Refreshment
Room (at B and below category stations), a stall or a trolley is
deemed as one unit and shall be awarded through a single license.
No new license for khomcha/Dallah/Chhabba/Wheel Barrow/Hand
Barrow/Tray/Table/Tea Balta (or any other similar unit by a different
name) shall be awarded by Zonal Railways. The Committee, however,
note that though the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure)
has mandated all Ministries/Departments of Central Government,
their attached and subordinated offices, Central Public Sector
Enterprises and Autonomous/Statutory bodies to commence
e-procurement through E-tendering in respect of all procurements
with estimated value of Rs. 2 lakhs or above w.e.f. 1.4.2016 vide
Office Memorandum dated 30.03.2012, 09.01.2014 and 21.01.2016
by selecting e-Procurement service provider of their own choice,
the Railways are still continuing awarding contracts by following
old systems even after unification of Railways Budget with Union

7
Budget. The reasons for opting E-tendering process has been stated
to be more transparent for awarding contracts. In this regard, the
Ministry have informed that they have constituted a committee
for preparation/modification in the Standard Bid Document for
allotment of static catering units and development of e-tendering
module for Zonal Railways which has submitted its report on E-
tendering module for catering tenders along with draft SBDs
(Standard Bid Documents). The SBDs are under examination. The
Committee desire that the examination of SBDs may be expedited
and E-tendering module may be implemented over Indian Railways
in letter and spirit. A monitoring mechanism be evolved to enable
that all contracts may be awarded commensurate to this E-tendering
module.”
13. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
submitted as under:—
“The Standard Bid Documents (SBD) for various types of minor
static catering units  viz. General Minor Units, Special Minor Units
(SMU) have already been issued by Ministry of Railways as per the
following details:
(i) SBD for GMUs at A-1, A, B & C category stations vide letter
No.2017/TG-III/600/09/Pt. 1 dated 10.01.2018.
(ii) SBD for SMUs at A-1, A, B & C category stations vide letter
No.2017/TG-III/600/09/Pt.2 dated 06.02.2018.
(iii) SBD for GMUs at D, E & F category stations vide letter
No.2017/TG-III/600/09/Pt.3 dated 31.01.2018.
(iv) SBD for SMUs at D, E & F category stations vide letter No.2017/
TG-III/600/09/Pt.4 dated 07.02.2018
(v) SBD for Milk Stalls at all category stations vide letter No.2017/
TG-III/600/09/Pt. 5 dated 28.05.2018.
As regards to issuance of E-tendering module for tendering of
minor static catering units, it is stated that the recommendations
regarding same has been received from the committee and presently
under examination in Board’s office. It will be issued after approval
of the competent authority”
14. The Committee had desired from the Railways to expedite
Standard Bid Documents (SBDs) and commencing e-tendering module
for awarding contract of catering units by following the procedures
and instructions as mandated by the Ministry of Finance (Department

8
of Expenditure) for all the Ministries and Departments of Government
of India, their attached and subordinated offices, Central Public
Sector Enterprises (CPSEs), all autonomous/statutory bodies. As such
all the procurements with estimated value of Rs.2 lakhs or above
had to commence through e-procurement w.e.f. 21.01.2016. The
Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry regarding
issuance of e-tendering module for tendering of static catering units.
The manner in which the Ministry has strived to evade its
accountability by stating that the same are still under examination
in Board’s office for approval of the competent authority, is not
acceptable to the Committee. They note that even after lapse of
several years of unification of Railway Budget with that of Union
Budget, Ministry has not cared to implement Government of India
policy of e-tendering. The Committee find that a committee in the
Railways had already submitted its Report on SBDs and e-tendering.
The Committee wish to remind the Ministry that e-tendering—being
more transparent, should be effectuated in Railways immediately at
par with other Departments of Government of India to commence
e-procurement with estimated value of Rs.2 lakhs or above. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and
desire that the Railways should implement e-tendering module in
letter and spirit and award contracts only through e-tendering.

9
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that catering services had undergone frequent
changes which have adversely impacted the catering over Indian
Railways. The Catering Policy of 2005 mandated IRCTC to manage
catering services which was subsequently transited to Zonal Railways
in Catering Policy, 2010 on the grounds that the IRCTC focused to
revenue generation instead of improving the catering services. The
Indian Railways Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) was restricted
to management of Food Plazas, Food Courts, Fast Food Units and
tourist activities. The Committee are distressed to note that the
Catering Policy, 2010 too could not bring fruitful improvement in catering
services and complaints were flooding from all corners over Indian
Railways. The Committee further note that C&AG in its Report No. 13
of 2017 has pointed out that preceding to new Catering Policy, 2017,
the management of catering services was with Zonal Railways wherein
cleanliness and hygiene were not maintained properly at catering units
at stations and in trains. Unpurified water straight from taps and at
times toilets was used in preparation of beverages, waste bin were not
found covered/emptied regularly and not washed, food stuff were not
covered to protect them from flies, insects and dust. Rats and
cockroaches were found in Kitchens, Station Kitchens and Train Pantries.
Besides, unfair practices were followed in execution of catering services
at stations and in trains. Bills were not provided for the food items
served in mobile units. Printed menu cards with tariff for the list of
food items sold in the mobile units were not available with waiters
and Catering Managers in trains. Less than prescribed quantity of food
stuff were served, unapproved packaged drinking water was sold,
Proprietary Article Depot (PAD) items were sold at the Railway Stations
at maximum retail price (MRP) with weight and prices different from
open market and per unit price of food articles sold in railway premises
was significantly higher. Deficiencies in respect of quality of food
served were noticed. Articles unsuitable for human consumption,
contaminated food stuff, recycled food stuff, shelf life expired packaged
and bottled items, unauthorized brands of water bottles etc. were
offered for sale on stations. The Committee have been apprised by the
Ministry that in new Catering Policy, 2017, these problems would be

10
removed and IRCTC would be responsible for catering services through
mobile units and static units viz. Base Kitchens, Cell Kitchens,
Refreshment Rooms at A1 and A category of stations, Food Plazas,
Food Courts, Train Side Vending, Jan Ahaars. In order to upgrade quality
of food preparation, IRCTC shall set up new Kitchens and upgrade
existing ones which shall comply all statutory guidelines of food safety.
The Committee are of the view that unless the basic problems and
deficiencies which the railways and IRCTC have experienced in the
past such as supply of quality and hygienic foods and beverages including
purified water to their customers are addressed, nothing is going to
happen for betterment of catering services. Mere bringing a new policy
and blaming the concerned agencies to be responsible for the lapses
will not solve the problem. They hope that the railways would endeavour
in this direction so that the new Catering Policy, 2017 could bring a
paradigm shift in catering business on Indian Railways to provide healthy,
wholesome and hygienic food to the passengers through closely
monitored units by creating a distinction between food preparation
and food distribution and removing all the deficiencies experienced
earlier.
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The new Catering Policy, 2017 has again mandated IRCTC to take
over the management of catering services in a slightly modified way
of carrying out the unbundling of catering services by creating a
distinction primarily between food preparation and food distribution.
The Committee are of the view that not only the Catering Policy of
2005 lacked professional, practical and futuristic vision but also the
Catering Policy, 2010 was not well planned in a professional and scientific
way to cater to the needs of the commuters of Indian Railways which
have necessitated to introduce new Catering Policy, 2017 in a very
short span of time. Besides, frequent changes in Catering Policy for an
undertaking of the size of the Indian Railways where 23 million
passengers travel daily, have adversely impacted the catering services
leaving the travelling passengers in lurch and switch over to other
means of catering resulting into intrusion of unauthorized vendors.
The Committee fail to understand as to how it was decided to frequently
change the responsibility of such an important service of catering of
a vast organization like Indian Railways from IRCTC, which was
incorporated on a decision of the Cabinet, as an extended arm of
Indian Railways. Frequent changes in policies not only affect the
efficiency of the system due to time slag in dealing with teething

11
problem of implementation but also hits the morale of the employees
of the organization. The Committee hope that the new Catering Policy,
2017 has been designed in a more scientific manner. They hope that
it will be implemented effectively in letter and spirit with no further
change in the system.
Reply of the Government
The White Paper on Indian Railways brought in 2009 observed
several shortcomings in the Catering Policy being followed then from
the standpoint of quality and affordability. Accordingly a New Catering
Policy 2010 was formulated to bring improvements in catering by shifting
the task of managing and monitoring quality of service from IRCTC to
the Zonal Railways and to leverage Zonal Railways’ vast and elaborate
all-India network in order to effect a thorough supervision and control
over catering activities.
Further , Ministry of Railways in November , 2014, set up Sreedharan
Committee which suggested that all catering related services should
be transferred back to IRCTC. To examine the feasibility of transfer of
catering services to IRCTC, Ministry of Railways constituted a CCM
level committee in October , 2015 which also suggested management of
mobile units by IRCTC in a phased manner wherein IRCTC should be
permitted to outsource only its back end operations.
Provision of catering services to such large number of passengers
having diverse tastes and a choice on such a gigantic scale is an
onerous task. As discussed above, over the years not only an in-depth
analysis has been undertaken to identify the root causes of deficiency
in Catering Services but also structural reforms have been initiated to
solve the problem institutionally. The in-depth analysis revealed that
unless the quality of food at source is not controlled, onboard quality
would not change.
Therefore in view of above dialectics in order to professionalise
catering services and in order to bring about a tangible change in
Catering Services on Indian Railways, New Catering Policy 2017 was
decided to be formulated.
Accordingly Hon’ble MR in his Budget Speech 2016-17 announced as
under:—
“IRCTC would begin to manage catering services in a phased manner.
IRCTC would unbundle catering services by creating distinction
primarily between food preparation and food distribution.”

12
With respect to implementation of Catering Policy 2017, it is
submitted that transfer of catering units to IRCTC has already been
completed (with the exception of one mobile unit and 13 static units
which are under court case).
IRCTC has upgraded 30 Base Kitchens/Kitchen Units till
30th September 2018. 15 more Kitchen Units are planned to be upgraded
by IRCTC during FY 2018-19. 9 Green Field Base Kitchens is to be set
up by IRCTC during FY 2018-19. IRCTC is closely monitoring the quality
of food preparation through various modalities, e.g. CCTV , Food safety
supervisors, IRCTC supervisor , food sampling in NABL accredited labs.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee have been informed that the Catering Policy, 2010
had aimed a paradigm shift with regard to the whole approach towards
railway catering. Whereas earlier policy sought to treat catering as an
independent profit centre, the Policy of 2010 acknowledged catering
as a passenger service. The New Catering Policy, 2017 mandates that
Zonal Railways will prepare the plan in coordination with Divisions and
IRCTC at each station. In the Policy of 2017, the Ministry has
categorically demarcated the areas of service providers of Food
Preparator (who shall prepare the food) and the Distributor (who will
distribute the prepared foods). The Committee have been informed
that the system of train based contracts prevailing in earlier Catering
Policy, 2010 has now been done away with in new Catering Policy, 2017
and instead IRCTC run state-of-the-art kitchens of various sizes would
be provided at locations across the country. IRCTC would be responsible
for catering services through mobile catering units, Base Kitchens, Cell
Kitchens, Refreshment Rooms at A1 and A category stations, Food
Plazas, Food Courts, Train Side Vending, Jan Ahaars as defined in the
Policy. All mobile units will be handed over to IRCTC along with existing
contracts. The contracts which were awarded in 2013-14 and still
continuing, will gradually be short terminated or continued till expiry
and re-allotted afresh after expiry of term. Further , Mega Base Kitchens
will be constructed by IRCTC and the existing four Mega Base Kitchens
of Ahmedabad, Howrah, Mumbai and Delhi will be upgraded by IRCTC
on PPP mode. Mega Kitchens will be provided with the provisions that
there should be a Base Kitchen on every 300 Km. The Committee are
unhappy to note that out of 80 number of Mega Kitchens proposed to
be constructed, only 16 have been planned to be constructed in 2017.
Further , to their dismay, only 5 Mega Kitchens have been completed
so far. The Committee feel that if Railways intend to provide good
quality hygienic foods to their passengers, they will have to focus on

13
timely construction of base kitchens. The Committee emphasize the
need of expeditious completion of remaining Base Kitchens to satisfy
the need of growing number of passengers by way of providing good
quality hygienic food. Further , the Ministry have claimed that out of
272 static units, 255 static units have been taken over by IRCTC and
remaining 17 static units are still pending with Zonal railways. Likewise,
as on 17.1.2018, all mobile units (Pantry and Mini pantry) have been
taken over by IRCTC except 01 (one) train which is under litigation.
The Committee have taken note of lack of seriousness on the part of
the Ministry and are of the view that if proper preparedness were
made to settle the issues before launch of such a prioritized Scheme
of public importance, there would have no scope of any litigation and
all units would have been transferred to IRCTC smoothly. The Committee
are apprehensive that such incomplete transition of catering services
may cause considerable inconvenience to the travelling passengers as
it will hamper IRCTC in facilitating smooth and unhindered catering
services. They, therefore, desire that with a view to implement the
new Catering Policy, 2017 in letter and spirit, the Railway should hand
over remaining catering services immediately to IRCTC to make them
responsible for supply of quality, wholesome and hygienic foods to
passengers. They, therefore, desire the Ministry to take the remedial
measures immediately to hand over all units including Food Plazas and
Food Courts to IRCTC urgently.
Reply of the Government
In compliance of above, management of 377 mobile units (pairs of
trains with pantry Cars) out of 378 has been transferred to IRCTC.
Further, management of 262 static units (168-Refreshment Rooms,
53-Jan Ahaar , 27-Cell Kitchen & 14-Base Kitchens) out of 275 nos. of
static units has also been transferred to IRCTC. Only 1 mobile unit and
13 static units remain to be transferred to IRCTC which is pending due
to litigation/matter being sub-judice.
However , all out efforts are being made to pursue the matter
before the Hon’ble Court so as to enable smooth transfer of remaining
units to IRCTC.
Upgradation of Base Kitchens:
• 30 Kitchen Units have been upgraded till 30th September
2018 entailing civil works, electrical works and heavy duty
kitchen equipments.
• 15 more Kitchen Units are planned to be upgraded by IRCTC
during 2018-19.

14
• 9 Green Field Base Kitchens to be set up by IRCTC during
2018-19.
Comments of the Committee
[Please see Recommendation Para No. 8 of Chapter-I]
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that after the Catering Policy 2010, Zonal
Railways were required to prepare a Master Plan (Blue Print) of catering
services to be provided at each station and on-board trains which was
not prepared in Zones like ECR, ER, NFE, NWR, SER, SWR and ECOR.
They are of the considered view that making a master plan (Blue Print)
as per given mandate, was important for planning catering services
over Indian Railways. The Ministry failed to submit any reasons for not
making plan/blueprint by these Zonal Railways. Also, the Ministry could
not take effective steps to bridge the gap to provide necessary
infrastructure in terms of base kitchens, Static Catering units, train-
side vending arrangements and Automatic Vending Machines etc. to
ensure adequate catering facilities available to the travelling public.
Even, in the new Catering Policy, 2017, the Zonal Railways are required
to prepare plan in coordination with Divisions and IRCTC at each station
taking into consideration bans notified from time to time as making
master plan is considered important for planning catering services.
The Committee desire the Ministry to ensure that the required plan/
blue print for each station are prepared in a time bound manner and
be implemented in all Zonal Railways in letter and spirit.
Reply of the Government
As per the Catering Policy 2017, Station-wise Master Plans/Blue
Prints have already been prepared in all 16 Zonal Railways and the
same is currently under implementation over Indian Railways.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that during earlier catering policies, the
catering services was used to shift from IRCTC to Zonal Railways and
vice versa  but the basic problems were not addressed. The same set
of contractors who were in Railway catering, went to IRCTC and came
back to Railways. Then, with the change in policy, the contractor with
their same products and services remained the same. Based on the
feedback, complaints and other information that the Railways got

15
from time to time, they brought in the new Catering Policy, 2017
which aims to remove anomalies which the earlier policies had over
looked. The Committee appreciate this move of the Ministry and hope
that the new Catering Policy, 2017 will be implemented efficaciously
to benefit the passengers at large.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee has been noted
for compliance.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee have been given to understand that in new Catering
Policy, 2017, IRCTC was required to submit Business Plan to Railway
Board within 30 days from issuance of the Policy. The IRCTC is stated
to have submitted the business plan to Railway Board which has been
sent back to IRCTC for rectification/modification. They wonder that
even after lapse of one year of issue of the Policy, the Business Plan
is still at scrutiny stage reflecting lack of preparedness and lackadaisical
approach on the part of the Railways. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Railway should take effective steps to support IRCTC
to finalize concrete Business Plans urgently so that vested responsibilities
of IRCTC aiming at improvement in catering services are not hampered
due to non-implementation of the new Catering Policy, 2017.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for
implementation.
IRCTC had furnished Business Plan after the issue of Catering Policy,
2017 which was found to be not in accordance with some of the
provisions of Catering Policy, 2017. Accordingly, vide letters dated
22/09/2017, 12/01/2018 & 12/04/2018 issued by Railway Board, IRCTC
was advised to submit a modified Business Plan in line with framework
envisaged in Catering Policy, 2017. IRCTC in view of above have
submitted a revised Business Plan in September , 2018. The revised
Business Plan submitted by IRCTC talks about PPP model for operation
of Base Kitchens, changes in principles of Revenue sharing model and
aggregation of contracts which are substantial issues and core areas of
Catering Policy, 2017 and may involve modifications in policy thereof.
The entire issue is under examination, however this has not affected
discharge of catering business by IRCTC in any way.

16
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee are happy to note that with a view to uplift
socially and economically backward people of the society, a provision
for reservation in award of contracts has been made in favour of the
underprivileged and marginalized sections of society in the new Catering
Policy, 2017. Indian Railways follow the reservation criteria in allotment
of catering units except the major units wherein no reservation is
applied. They find that in allotment of minor units at A1, A, B and C
categories of stations, twenty five percent (25%) reservation has been
provided wherein 6%, 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 4% and 3% reservation is earmarked
to SCs, STs, OBCs, Minorities, Divyang, Freedom Fighters/war-widows/
widows of railway employees/persons displaced due to their land taken
over by the Railways for its own use and People Below Poverty Line
respectively. Among minorities, Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists,
Zoroastrians (Parsis) and Jain are covered. Likewise, 49.5 percent
reservation has been made for allotment of Minor Units at D, E, and
F category stations wherein SCs are provided 12%, STs 8%, OBCs 20%
and minorities 9.5%. The Committee desire that a uniform policy of
reservation should be followed in all catering units at all stations/
trains. They, therefore, recommend that the existing reservation policy
of the Government of India should be strictly followed and complied
with. The Committee note that the issue of reservation is, at present,
sub-judice in the Hon’ble Supreme Court and as a result, all allotments/
extensions in the case of reservations are subject to the final order
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 7513 of 2005 and
analogous cases referred to the Constitutional Bench. They would like
the Ministry to pursue the matter expeditiously so that catering need
of passengers met appropriately.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation/Observation of the Committee has been noted
for compliance.
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that preceding to new Catering Policy, 2017,
the Zonal Railways did not ensure provision of pantry cars in a number
of long distance trains. It was seen that in nine trains having a run of
more than 24 hours, no pantry car was provided. No Train-Side Vending
services were facilitated by NCR, SECR and SR for the trains which run
for more than 12 hours during the day time. They are not convinced
with Ministry’s attribution that non-attachment of pantry cars in long
distance trains was due to capacity constraints of trains as 360 trains

17
are already running with pantry cars and 232 mail/express trains have
sectional train side vending. The Committee are of the view that
wherever the Indian Railways do not attach pantry cars to trains, they
should arrange adequate number of catering static units on stations
en-route, Train Side Vending and e-catering facility available to
passengers. They hope that in new Catering Policy, 2017, these anomalies
would be removed and the trains having run of 12 hours or more will
be facilitated with pantry cars and trains having run of 12 hours,
where no pantry car is attached, shall be provided proper catering
services like catering static units on stations en-route, train side vending
and e-catering facilities available to passengers.
Reply of the Government
Presently there are 378 pairs of trains running with Pantry Cars.
Out of these, 235 pairs of long distance trains having more than 24
hours of travel time have been provided with pantry cars on priority.
Attachment of pantry car in any train depends upon various factors
such as order of priority with respect to category of train viz. Rajdhani/
Shatabdi/Duronto/Mail/Express trains etc., load limitation and journey
time of train, availability of Pantry Cars et al.  However , passengers
travelling in trains have the facility to order food of their choice
through e-Catering which is available at all major stations en-route
and also through static catering units located at all en-route stations.
Catering services are also being provided to onboard passengers
through Train Side Vending (TSV) model in 393 number of trains which
do not have pantry cars. Further , e-catering services have been extended
to all A-1 and A category stations of Indian Railways, thus providing
vast scope and coverage to all trains passing through those stations.
Further , Zonal Railways have been empowered to permit platform
vending through static units to meet the demand of passengers.
Continuous supervision and monitoring is done through regular
inspection by the railway officials and supervisors to check and ensure
that adequate and hygienic catering services, as per the needs of
passengers travelling in trains without pantry cars, are available at
stations.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee note that the new Catering Policy, 2017 envisages
for setting up of base kitchens in the Railway premises to monitor and
control the quality and hygiene of food served in trains. Earlier , foods

18
were prepared in kitchens most of them located outside railway premises
and carriage of foods from the kitchen to the serving destination used
to take much time and as such prepared foods could not reach to the
customers in time resulting into decline in quality of foods. Besides,
the quality of foods prepared in base kitchens located outside railway
premises could not be easily monitored and controlled unlike the foods
prepared in kitchens located in railway premises. The Committee are
satisfied to find that in new Catering Policy, 2017, foods will be prepared
in modern, mechanized and state-of-the-art kitchens developed by
IRCTC located in railway premises only under the direct supervision of
IRCTC and no food will be picked from kitchens located outside the
rail premises. The quality of foods so prepared will be monitored
easily. The Committee emphasize the need of narrowing the time gap
of food preparation and its distribution and development coordination
between the agencies of food preparation and food distribution so as
to ensure that the prepared foods could remain as fresh as possible
and reach the customers within the shortest time gap.
Reply of the Government
As per Catering Policy, 2017, IRCTC has been mandated for setting
up of modern & mechanized Base Kitchens over entire Indian Railways.
In order to implement this policy of unbundling, IRCTC has developed/
upgraded 30 Kitchen Units with state-of-the-art kitchen equipments.
15 more Kitchen Units are planned for up gradation during 2018-19.
Further to ensure quality and hygiene of food products produced
in these Base Kitchens, Food Safety Supervisor (FSS) have been deployed
and regular sampling for testing in NABL (National Accreditation Board
for Testing and Calibration Laboratories) accredited labs is being carried
out for meals produced in these Base Kitchens. Also third party audits
are also being undertaken as per schedule over different catering
units. CCTV cameras have been installed in 16 Base Kitchens and
control centre has also been setup for real time monitoring of activities
undertaken in these Base Kitchens. The CCTV recording has net
connectivity for sharing of live streaming of the operations inside Base
Kitchens through website of IRCTC.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note that the Ministry has made arrangements for
Third Party Audit of catering services to be conducted at periodic
intervals by independent and reputed auditing agencies. For this
purpose, IRCTC has already selected an agency to conduct Third Party
Audit for 96 number of trains and 206 number of Food Plazas and Fast

19
Food Units. The Committee are of the considered view that these
issues require continuous surveillance of the Railways. They desire
that frequent surveys should be conducted and feedback taken from
passengers and deficiencies noticed, may be eliminated immediately.
The complaints and suggestions should not be ignored rather than
should be the basis for better service.
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee find that in the new Catering Policy, 2017, the
Ministry has taken measures for Third Party Audit of Catering Services
to be conducted at periodic intervals by independent and reputed
auditing agencies accredited by National Accreditation Board for
Certification Bodies (NABCB) as empanelled by the Zonal Railways. The
parameters for Audit of catering services have been enumerated to be
personal hygiene of service providers, infrastructure facilities, cleaning
and sanitation, food safety, storage facilities, implementation of
regulatory, statutory and safety regulations, quality of presentation
etc. IRCTC has already selected an agency to conduct Third Party Audit
for 96 trains and 206 Food Plazas and Fast Food Units. The Committee
desire that all mobile and static units within the jurisdiction of IRCTC,
may be brought under the third party audit. They hope that the audit
will be conducted in details, regularly and shortcomings, if any, will be
removed immediately.
Reply of the Government
To ensure quality of the meal items being prepared at IRCTC Base
Kitchens, Food Safety Supervisor (FSS) have been deployed and regular
sampling for testing in NABL accredited labs are being done through
engagement of reputed agency. IRCTC has also engaged the services of
professional independent agency empanelled by NABCB (National
Accreditation Board for Certification Bodies) and FSSAI to conduct
Third Party Audit of catering services being provided on mobile and
static catering units. IRCTC conducted Third Party Audit of 96 mobile
units and 205 Food Plazas during FY 2017-18. M/s TUV India Ltd., an
agency approved by FSSAI, has been engaged by IRCTC to conduct
Third party Audit.
Apart from this IRCTC conducted Customer satisfaction survey
through M/s Karvy Insights, a reputed agency in survey research, in
205 static units & 128 Mobile units during 2017-18. The report of third
party audit & Customer Satisfaction Surveys is examined and accordingly

20
remedial and punitive action is taken against the defaulting service
provider as per the terms & condition of the contact.
In addition there is a Catering Services Monitoring Cell in Railway
Board which analyses complaints/feedbacks received from passengers
and strives to carry out redressal of complaints on real time basis,
while also following up on the action taken by concerned Zones/
IRCTC.
FSSAI certification is mandatory at all catering units and further
the Food Safety Inspectors carry out checks.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee note that New Catering Policy, 2017 mandates
IRCTC to supply low cost Janta Meals through static catering units,
including the units handed over to IRCTC at the rates decided by
Railway Board. In this regard, instructions have already been issued to
Zonal Railways and IRCTC for sale of Janta Meals at Static Units. The
Zonal Railways would endeavour to make efforts to improve the sale/
availability of ‘Janta Meals’ of good quality at affordable rates to
railway passengers. The Committee find that in Catering Policy, 2010,
Zonal Railways were required to provide Jan Ahaar units to facilitate
passengers which could not materialize in letter and spirit. Even, the
C&AG, in their audit observation, revealed that out of 74 stations
where joint inspections were conducted, Jan Ahaar units were not
provided on 46 stations. Further , share of Janta meals to the overall
meals sold in six Zonal Railways was declining in the last three years.
The reasons explained by the Ministry that Janta Meals were sold not
only at Jan Ahaars but also at other static units as per Board’s
instructions and thus, absence of Jan Ahaar outlets does not mean no
sale of Janta Meal at any station as other outlets were also mandated
to sell Jan Ahaars in all static units. However , this is not acceptable
to the Committee as the passengers may not be even aware the
availability of Jan Ahaar at other outlets. They feel that lack of
preparedness in ensuring sale of Janta meals at stations as mandated
in the Policy resulting into slippages and depriving the passengers from
availing good quality catering services at affordable rates at designated
places. The Committee urge the Ministry for regular monitoring of
availability of Janta Meals at Stations and ensure that the concerned
agencies at the stations are alert towards their duties and
responsibilities. They also urge the Ministry to take up the work in
right earnest so that both the passengers and the Railways are benefitted
from the scheme.

21
Reply of the Government
Jan Ahaar items are low cost affordable meals that are provided
from a Jan Ahaar outlet or any other major or minor outlet. These are
food items comprising of economy combo meals costing from Rs. 5/- to
Rs. 50/-. Janta meal is a meal that costs Rs 15/-on stations and
Rs. 20/-on trains and consists of 7 puris (175 gm), dry potato curry
(150gm) and pickle sachet (15gm). Janta meals are sold not only at
Jan Ahaars but also at other static units as per Board’s instructions.
Instructions have been issued to all Zonal Railways for ensuring
availability of Janta meals/Jan Ahaar items on trains/stations for sale
to passengers.
Availability of Janta Khana is being ensured through regular
monitoring and inspections/checks etc. Wide publicity is given in leading
newspapers regarding menu and tariff of standard items notified by
Railway Board. Catering licensees have been directed to keep sufficient
quantity of Janta Khana at their stalls.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee are concerned to note the mushroom growth of
unauthorized vending in trains and at stations. They are aware that
the Railways have taken measures to refrain unauthorized vending in
trains and at stations including inspections to check the menace of
unauthorized vending. The Ministry have issued instructions to service
providers to provide prescribed uniforms along with name badge and
logo of IRCTC to their working staff on board for creating distinction
from unauthorized vendors inside the trains. Despite these efforts,
unauthorized vendors are predominating in trains and at stations in
selling adulterated and simulated food items, beverages and water
bottles. Prosecution of 4,43,193 cases of unauthorized vending in 2016
and 2017 (upto December), by Railway Protection Force and imposition
of fine and realization of Rs. 21,45,73,139/-towards fine imposed as
such, substantiate the volume of menace of unauthorized vending and
disclose inadequacy of penal provisions and precautionary measures of
Railways. The Committee note that the strengthening of the penal
provisions of the Railways Act, 1989 including section 144 is underway.
Railways are also constructing boundary wall at vulnerable locations
over Railway Network and 425 KM of boundary wall has been put at
different locations. However , the Committee apprehend that unless
and until stringent penal provisions are provided in the Act /Rules and
action is taken accordingly against the defaulters, no tangible
improvement can take place. Further , the probability of connivance of

22
railway officials with the unauthorized vendors should also be looked
into. According to C&AG Report, Audit para (Para No. 3.9) tabled in
Parliament on 21st July, 2017 has also observed activities of a number
of unauthorized vendors on platforms and in trains which they detected
during joint inspections in selected trains. The Committee strongly
feel that unauthorized vending not only causes loss of revenue to
Railways but also poses a health hazard to the passengers. They,
therefore, urge the Ministry to immediately work out appropriate
remedial measures to check unauthorized vending both in mobile units
and at stations.
Reply of the Government
Continued and ongoing efforts are made to check unauthorized
vending on trains and platforms with the help of RPF . Punitive as well
as legal action is taken against unauthorized vendors/hawkers under
Section 144 of Indian Railway Act 1989 which includes imprisonment,
fine or both.
Drives against unauthorized vending are organized constantly by
Commercial Department and RPF . During the year 2017-18, 238269
offenders were prosecuted for unauthorized vending & Rs. 127208190/-
was realized as fine. In the current year , 161367 offenders have been
prosecuted and Rs. 92716209/- realised as fine. Along with this Special/
Decoy Checks have also been conducted and 4511 unauthorised hawkers
were detected, on which fine of amount Rs. 2213415/- was imposed
between April, 2017 to September 2018.
Further to prevent unauthorised vending, IRCTC is taking necessary
action to put in place a system for roll out of TSV services covering
all 173 sections in the country. Also, Zonal Railways have been delegated
powers to accord platform vending permissions to licensees from the
existing static units so as to enable continuance of only authorised
hygienic vending.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee appreciate to note that in new Catering Policy,
2017, the Railways have planned to effectively check and control
unfair practices of overcharging, issue of quality as well as quantity of
food articles. The Ministry have informed that the Railways have
introduced optional catering facilities as a pilot project in mail/express
trains to enable travelling passengers to pay for the meals and Packaged
Drinking Water (PDW) in advance at the time of booking of journey
tickets. While appreciating the same, the Committee desire the Ministry

23
to cover foods of diverse varieties of different choice in their menu/
list of foods for sake of those passengers who have to de-opt foods at
the time of booking ticket on the grounds of health, ailments or need
to have fresh food during long journey, in general, and delay of trains,
in particular. In this regard, an option of ‘specific food need’ on the
cost over and above the general food can be asked to be exercised
from these passengers and differential cost, if any, may be charged
from them. The Committee note that many a times food servers
refuse to give bill to passengers even when asked to do so. In such
cases, Railways should make sure to put a policy in place. They are
satisfied to note that a policy of zero tolerance is being adopted in
new Catering Policy, 2017 for bad quality of food served to passengers,
overcharging of food articles sold and making issue of electronic receipt
mandatory for sale of every item over Indian Railways. Through the
use of Bar and QR Codes, each food item would be closely monitored.
The Committee are of the view that these measures be implemented
in all mobile and static units, Food Plazas and Food Courts with proper
monitoring from time to time with stringent penal provisions for
defaulters. They also desire that a policy of ‘No Food Bill, No Payment’
may be adopted to do away with overcharging.
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee note that the new Catering Policy 2017, mandates
IRCTC to be responsible for catering services through mobile catering
units, Base Kitchens, Cell Kitchens, Refreshment Rooms at A1 and A
category of stations, Food Plazas, Food Courts, Train Side Vending, Jan
Ahaar . There would be no train based contracts. The catering activity
would be done in close supervision by IRCTC on stations where kitchens
are located. The Committee are glad to note that the new initiatives
taken by the Ministry for ensuring computerized billing for the items
sold in mobile and static units will go a long way in yielding desired
results besides bringing in transparency in catering services over Indian
Railways apart from strengthening the trust of railway passengers.
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Ministry have informed that new Catering Policy, 2017 envisages
for cashless transaction and ensuring computerized billing in a phased
manner to the extent feasible for all the items sold in mobile and
static units under the management of IRCTC. Apart from this, passengers

24
would be facilitated for cashless transaction through usage of Point of
Sale (POS)/swipe machine etc. in all the mobile and static units. IRCTC
and the licensees are in the process of procurement of these machines.
The Committee desire that concrete measures may be taken to ensure
that POS/swipe machines are available with the catering serving
personnel with regular monitoring thereof to ascertain that these
machines are in working condition so that passengers could not face
any hardships in making payment and catering services remain
transparent and passenger friendly.
Reply of the Government
In compliance of Railway Board’s instructions, awareness campaign
regarding “No Bill-The Food is for Free” is being taken up by IRCTC to
ensure issuance of bills to passengers. Accordingly, IRCTC has launched
a campaign by instructing its Zones and licensees for strict compliance
of above.
In order to prevent overcharging on meal items by vendors in
mobile units, as on date, IRCTC have implemented the 498 nos. of POS
machines in 185 nos. of mobile units. The remaining trains are also
being brought under POS progressively. 235 Food Plazas & Fast Food
Units, and 95 Refreshment Rooms/Jan Ahaar/Cell Kitchens have facility
of payments through digital platforms like BHIM app. To incentivize
cashless transactions a discount of 5% on the bill is being offered on
use of POS machine.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
Quantity and quality of food items and safe drinking water supplied
to the travelling passengers are the matters of utmost concern for the
Committee. Though quality control is of paramount importance in any
concern dealing with food and beverages as it is directly linked with
the health and safety of the passengers. Quantity control of items
supplied to passengers is in no way lesser than the quality. Every
travelling passenger has right to get accurate quantity of items against
payment of the given cost of that item. But things are happening not
like that. It is seen that items are sold over and above the MRP prices
mentioned thereon. Even in open market, these items are available
below the MRP . Sometimes, prices indicated on items are got erased
and overwritten to charge extra from the passengers. No bills are
provided for the items sold to passengers. The Committee while
commending the initiative of the Ministry to make computerized billing
mandatory in mobile trains as well as at static units desire the Ministry
to ensure its implementation in letter and spirit with proper monitoring.
Stringent penal provisions may also be put in place for adherence.

25
Reply of the Government
If any such violation of the provision of the policy or deficiencies
is noticed in the provision of catering service, suitable penal action as
decided by Zonal Railways is taken in accordance with the provisions
of agreement.
Awareness campaign regarding “No Bill-The Food is for Free” is
also being taken up by IRCTC to ensure issuance of bills to passengers.
Accordingly, IRCTC has launched a campaign by instructing its Zones
and licensee for strict compliance of above. It has also been strictly
instructed that all food boxes served in mobile (post-paid) and static
units will bear all details including MRP , name of contractor , weight,
date of packing etc. In line with efforts to curb overcharging, a “Rate
App” has also been launched by IRCTC, wherein passengers can have
instant view of the existing rates of catering items sold over Indian
Railways.
Further , IRCTC takes other suitable action including termination of
license in case of repeated and persistent overcharging complaints in
Mail/Express trains.
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee find that the Railways have launched e-catering
facilities to travelling passengers which is presently available on 357
railway stations. They note that only F and B operators, having valid
FSSAI license, are allowed to take and serve orders through e-catering.
The average supply of meals under this scheme is around 6000 meals
per day which was 400 meals per day in 2015. The Ministry have
informed that e-catering services are being managed by IRCTC on
stations where travelling passengers can avail e-catering facilities for
all trains halting at and originating from those stations. Booking of
meals is facilitated through specified phone number (1323)/website/
SMS/Mobile Apps etc. and passenger can pre-order the meal from the
different options available as per choice for delivery at the opted
stations. The mode of payment is both pre-paid as well as Cash on
Delivery (CoD). After the meal is ordered, the same is communicated
to the concerned vendor immediately and also again at about 2 hours
in advance of delivery time where the delivery time is the train arrival
time on a particular station. The shortlisted vendor delivers the pre-
ordered meal to customer on stationary train at the opted station. The
Committee are glad to note that the Railways have taken steps to
reorganize and revamp marketing strategies to popularize e-catering
so as to achieve the target of 1 (one) lakh meals per day from 6000

26
per day, as at present, but they would like to caution the Ministry not
to supply stale or unhygienic meals to passengers as the time of
delivery of pre-ordered food is train arrival time and trains usually run
late. In such cases, quality of pre-ordered meal packed for delivery as
per train’s scheduled arrival time may deteriorate and there is no
option for passengers but to complain. The Committee find that even
in a short period between September , 2015 to January, 2018, 21992
complaints were lodged. The Committee are, therefore, of the
considered view that there should be a close coordination between the
agencies concerned to share the information pertaining to running of
train and supply of meal as any communication gap may result into
health hazard to passengers arising out of supply of unhygienic meals
to passengers. The Committee note that Railways have provided for a
penal provision to impose fine of Rs. 100/-per order for non-delivery
of an order by the vendor. In such cases, customer is provided full
refund of non-delivered order along with a voucher of Rs. 100/-which
is redeemable in his next order with e-catering. The Committee think
that this redeemable amount is very low and is redeemable in next
order only. They, therefore, desire that the redeemable amount may
be increased at least to Rs. 250/- with the options to redeem the
same either during on-going journey or in his next journey as per his/
her convenience. The Committee also desire that stringent penal
provisions should be provided for defaulting companies with imposition
of fines, de-activation from website and de-listing from empanelment
from the services for non-adhering to the orders of passengers.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation has been noted and same shall be considered
for implementation.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee note that to augment e-catering services, the
Railways have initiated to bring more and more Food Aggregators
within the ambit of E-catering and they will soon implement an online
mechanism for vendors to get registered with IRCTC and start taking
orders for supply of foods to passengers. The Committee note that
quality control of food items supplied to the travelling passengers is
a matter of the utmost concern and paramount importance as it is
directly linked with the health and safety of the customers. The Ministry
have informed that E-catering services allows as many vendors to join
the platform and provide ample choice to customers to order and
create an environment of competition amongst vendors for maintaining
quality and value of money. Vendors will then not be required to visit

27
IRCTC office in person or fill up any empanelment document. The
Committee are of the considered view that apart from coverage of as
many number of Food Aggregators under the aegis of e-catering Service
to provide food of ample choice and taste to customers, a strong
mechanism of quality control of foods supplied under e-catering services
may also be put in place.
Reply of the Government
With a view to proliferate e-Catering services and to bring good
restaurants under the e-Catering umbrella, the traditional time taking
convoluted methodology of empanelment has been simplified and
streamlined by replacing it with online process. This new online
registration process has significantly reduced the time consumed in
empanelment of vendors in the e-Catering project. The new online
vendor registration module developed by IRCTC is enabling new entrants
to upload necessary information/documents on the e-Catering portal
and if documents are found suitable the successful applicant is
empanelled as vendor for e-Catering project in a transparent and time
bound manner.
All empanelled vendors have to submit their FSSAI certificate which
is verified by e-Catering team of IRCTC on website https://
foodlicensing.fssai.gov.in. The copy of FSSAI is being uploaded on
E-Catering portal as well. Once the validity of FSSAI expires, the said
vendor is automatically deactivated on e-Catering portal.
Another innovative functionality and tool developed by IRCTC
enables its E-catering website to register feedback from customers
directly. All orders marked delivered/non-delivered qualifies for feedback
from customers.
A penal provision has been implemented on e-Catering vendor
against various defaults. The vendors if found guilty are fined and in
severe cases deactivated from the panel.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Ministry have informed that IRCTC has started sale of Ready-
to-Eat (RTE) food packets at some of the railway stations @ Rs. 40/-
per packet for all items and in Firozpur Shatabdi and Special Rajdhani
trains on trial basis. RTE is being served in pre-paid trains either as a
distressed meal or as an option to regular lunch/dinner meal. The
Committee note that the feedback of passengers not opting for RTE
food discouraged the railways to arrive at that RTE is not much tasty,

28
refreshing, flavourful and appealing as fresh food. Also, some passengers
avoid RTE food under the impression that it may not be good and
nutritious as fresh food. The Ministry have informed that to make RTE
a success, IRCTC has signed a MoU with Defence Food Research
Laboratory (DFRL), Mysore and DRDO for transfer of technology of
Retort Pouch Processed Foods so that Ready-To-Eat food can be warmed
and eaten straight out of the packet. The IRCTC has also signed a MoU
with Central Food Technology Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysore for
transfer of technology to provide hygienic food products and services
to train passengers. The IRCTC and CFTRI will mutually finalize the list
of products and services to be provided to passengers. The Committee
find the initiatives of the Ministry laudable and hope that the synergize
activities of IRCTC, Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore, DRDO
and CFTRI may facilitate in getting fresh and hygienic foods over
Indian Railways. They, therefore, desire the Ministry to finalize the
proposals for RTE food technology which is pending with CFTRI, DRDO,
and DFRL for implementation. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the same.
Reply of the Government
IRCTC has signed MOU with DFRL for transfer of Retort packaging
technology. But, the technology transfer was not successful as IRCTC
do not have its own retort packaging machines. Few thousands of RTE
(with retort tech) were initially manufactured at DFRL. To promote
RTE, IRCTC has empanelled 09 manufacturers/brands in India for supply
of RTE.
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Ministry have informed that the new Catering Policy 2017,
envisages for empanelment of Self Help Groups (SHGs) for betterment
of catering services over Indian Railways by way of providing healthy,
wholesome regional cuisine at an affordable cost to the travelling
public through e-catering. In this regard, 9 SHGs have been empanelled
at 10 stations. Out of this number , one is in Karnataka, 2 in Kerala,
3 in M.P . and one each in Maharashtra and West Bengal. The remaining
are in Andhra Pradesh. The Committee note with concern that the
Ministry have taken steps to empanel more SHGs by creating a portal
on its website for sale of catering items, handicrafts, artefacts etc.
which will not only synergise catering services but also contribute in
revenue generation. The only need is to closely monitor them to
ensure that the items supplied by SHGs are of good quality and available
to passengers at affordable rates with computerized billing.

29
Reply of the Government
SHG’s are supplying good quality food items to e-Catering customers
at reasonable prices. Inspections, checks and the complaint redressal
mechanisms are in place to monitor quality.
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee note that as per the new Catering Policy, 2017,
emphasis has been laid on ensuring quality foods to the rail customers
by unbundling of catering services by creating a distinction primarily
between food preparation and food distribution. The Committee
appreciate the contention of the Ministry to make catering services
ISO certified and FSSAI approved as per latest norms, but at the same
time, they would like to caution the Railways to not to compromise
with the hygiene and quality of food provided to the passengers of
Indian Railways having a vast network stretching from Jammu & Kashmir
in North to Kanyakumari in South and from Bhuj in the West to Agartala
in the East with each region having its distinct regional cuisines.
Therefore, it becomes imperative on the part of Indian Railways to
ensure availability of regional cuisines depending upon the area. The
Committee hope that in new Catering Policy, 2017, railway will ensure
these concerns to optimize good catering services for their passengers
over the network.
Reply of the Government
Pursuant to clause no. 14.1.1 of Catering Policy, 2017 and Board’s
instructions dated 26.04.2018, IRCTC has revised the menu which is
under implementation on the 21 identified Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto
trains.
IRCTC conducted a third party passenger feedback survey through
a reputed agency in Rajdhani, Duronto & Shatabdi trains in which it
has been found that most of the passengers of Rajdhani & Duronto
trains prefers traditional meal. However , in case of Shatabdi trains,
passengers prefer combo meal in place of existing Rice, Chapati, Dal,
Vegetable meal. Accordingly, IRCTC has designed the menu of meal
items for Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto trains, within the existing tariff
notified by Railway Board.
Further , under the provision of a la carte menus, regional cuisines
are being provided.

30
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee note that the most of the complaints of passengers
mainly pertain to catering services specifically hygiene and quality of
foods served to them on board and in static units. The Ministry have
informed that the Railways have set up Catering Monitoring Cells at
Zonal and Division levels for real time assistance to travelling passengers,
all Zonal Railways have also a detailed institutionalized mechanism for
monitoring of quality and hygiene of catering services through regular ,
surprise and periodical inspections. Besides, a Centralized Catering
Services Monitoring Cell (CSMC) is also operational at national level
having toll free number 1800-111-321 excluding operationalization of
an all India helpline number 138 for all rail users in the mobile trains.
Though the Committee appreciate the initiatives of the Ministry for
providing real time assistance to passengers and prompt disposal of
their grievances through social media and for this needful, they have
established a twitter handle with address of @IRCATERING to cater to
the complaints/suggestions of passengers, they are distressed to note
that despite all these mechanisms the complaints of passengers are
not decreasing. The attribution of the Ministry that flooding of
complaints is due to twitter , social media etc., is not acceptable to
the Committee as prior to twitter and social media, plenty of complaints
did not reach to the Railways. They, therefore, desire that stringent
measures should be taken in new Catering Policy, 2017 to contain the
grievances by complying all statutory guidelines/norms for food safety
and quality control from preparation level to its distribution. Also,
strict penal provisions should be in place and adhered to in letter and
spirit in respect to those who flout and default the provisions.
Reply of the Government
While the total number of complaints in 2017-18 have shown a
marginal decline as compared to 2016-17, the number of complaints
with respect to quality has also shown a decline over last two financial
years in terms of both absolute numbers and percentage of total
complaints. It is the continuous endeavour of Indian railways to bring
about tangible improvements in quality of food served on trains through
IRCTC and in the overall catering services on Railways. The penal
provisions in place have also been utilized to improve quality.

31
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL -

32
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
-NIL -

33
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee are happy to note that in new Catering Policy,
2017, a New Menu and Tariff Committee has been constituted by the
Ministry to study the workability of the rates in catering contracts and
to recommend/report upon the fixation of tariff for standard menu/
food items on the list of menu items given by IRCTC and calculation
of empirical formulae so as to calculate annual or periodical escalation
with respect to increase in prices of the components leading to
preparation of meal. The committee will submit its report shortly. The
Committee, therefore, desire that while implementing the new Catering
Policy, 2017, the Railways should closely examine the recommendations
of the New Menu and Tariff Committee and implement them in letter
and spirit to avoid difficulty and demotivation to the parties concerned
in the endeavour for the betterment of catering services over Indian
railways. The Committee would like to be apprised of its
recommendations vis-a-vis status of their implementation.
Reply of the Government
It is intimated that the Menu and Tariff Committee, constituted by
the Ministry of Railways to study the workability of the rates in catering
contracts and to recommend/report upon the fixation of tariff for
standard menu/food items has already submitted its report which is
under examination.
Further , IRCTC has already been advised by Railway Board to take
necessary action for rationalisation and standardisation of the existing
menu and number of services undertaken for catering in trains. In
addition Railway Board has also directed that while undertaking the
said review exercise, IRCTC shall ensure that the hygiene and quality
of catering services is maintained to the highest level within the
framework of tariff notified. IRCTC accordingly has revised and
implemented new meals based on menu rationalization on 35 pairs of
Shatabdi, Rajdhani and Duronto Trains.

34
Comments of the Committee
[Please see  recommendation Para No. 11 of Chapter-I]
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee have been informed that in the Catering Policy,
2010, Zonal Railways had a contract awarding, management and
monitoring system which was effective and transparent. The allotment
of all major units and General Minor Units at A, B and C categories
stations were done through open, competitive and two-packet tendering
system based on Standard Bid Document (SBD) and duly following all
the procedures/instructions issued by Government of India/Railway
Board from time to time. Allotments of static Special Minor Units
(SMUs) at A, B and C categories of stations and all GMUs and SMUs at
D,E and F categories stations were done by calling applications through
press notification. The Ministry have informed that tenure of all major
units being handed over to IRCTC will be governed as per catering
Policy, 2010 and continue till the expiry of the contracts. IRCTC shall
further manage these units as per the provisions of the new Catering
Policy, 2017. Tenure of all other catering units (major units and minor
units) will be for a period of 5 years only. The contracts awarded by
zonal railways for kitchen units viz. Refreshment Rooms at A1 and
A category stations, Jan Ahaar , Cell Kitchens shall be reassigned to
IRCTC on the same terms and conditions with sharing of license fee
between IR and IRCTC in the ratio of 40:60 in all cases other than
departmentally managed units by IRCTC wherein revenue shall be shared
in the ratio of 15:85. The allotment of Refreshment Room (at B and
below category stations), a stall or a trolley is deemed as one unit and
shall be awarded through a single license. No new license for khomcha/
Dallah/Chhabba/Wheel Barrow/Hand Barrow/Tray/Table/Tea Balta (or
any other similar unit by a different name) shall be awarded by Zonal
Railways. The Committee are, however , note that though the Ministry
of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure) has mandated all Ministries/
Departments of Central Government, their attached and subordinated
offices, Central Public Sector Enterprises and Autonomous/Statutory
bodies to commence e-procurement through e-tendering in respect of
all procurements with estimated value of Rs. 2 lakhs or above w.e.f.
1.4.2016 vide Office Memorandum dated 30.03.2012, 09.01.2014 and
21.01.2016 by selecting e-Procurement service provider of their own
choice, the Railways are still continuing awarding contracts by following
old systems even after unification of Railways Budget with Union Budget.
The reasons for opting e-tendering process has been stated to be more
transparent for awarding contracts. In this regard, the Ministry have

35
informed that they have constituted a committee for preparation/
modification in the Standard Bid Document for allotment of static
catering units and development of e-tendering module for Zonal Railways
which has submitted its report on e-tendering module for catering
tenders along with draft SBDs (Standard Bid Documents). The SBDs are
under examination. The Committee desire that the examination of
SBDs may be expedited and e-tendering module may be implemented
over Indian Railways in letter and spirit. A monitoring mechanism be
evolved to enable that all contracts may be awarded commensurate
to this e-tendering module.
Reply of the Government
The Standard Bid Documents (SBD) for various types of minor static
catering units viz. General Minor Units, Special Minor Units (SMU) have
already been issued by Ministry of Railways as per the following details:—
(i) SBD for GMUs at A-1, A, B & C category stations vide letter
No.2017/TG-III/600/09/Pt.1 dated 10.01.2018.
(ii) SBD for SMUs at A-1, A, B & C category stations vide letter
No.2017/TG-III/600/09/Pt.2 dated 06.02.2018.
(iii) SBD for GMUs at D, E & F category stations vide letter
No.2017/TG-III/600/09/Pt.3 dated 31.01.2018.
(iv) SBD for SMUs at D, E & F category stations vide letter No.2017/
TG-III/600/09/Pt.4 dated 07.02.2018
(v) SBD for Milk Stalls at all category stations vide letter No.2017/
TG-III/600/09/Pt. 5 dated 28.05.2018.
As regards to issuance of e-tendering module for tendering of
minor static catering units, it is stated that the recommendations
regarding same has been received from the committee and presently
under examination in Board’s office. It will be issued after approval of
the competent authority.
Comments of the Committee
[Please see recommendation Para No. 14 of Chapter-I]
   N
EW D ELHI; SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY ,
4 February, 2019 Chairperson,
15 Magha, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

36
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RAILWAYS (2018-19)
The Committee met on Monday, the 4th February, 2019 from
1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, PHA, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay— Chairperson
MEMBERS
 Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
3. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
4. Shri P .K. Kunhalikutty
5. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
6. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
8. Shri Kukade Madhukarrao Yashwantrao
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
10. Shri Motilal Vora
 S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kavita Prasad — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri R.L. Yadav — Additional Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
1. Shri V. K. Yadav — Chairman, Railway Board and
Ex-officio Principal Secretary to the
Government of India
2. Shri Girish Pillai — Member Traffic, Railway Board and
Ex-officio Secretary to the
Government of India

37
3. Shri Vishwesh Chaube — Member Engineering, Railway Board
and Ex-officio Secretary to the
Government of India
4. Shri Rajesh Agrawal — Member (Rolling Stock) , Railway
Board and Ex-officio Secretary to the
Government of India
5. Shri Ghanshyam Singh — Member (Traction) , Railway Board
and Ex-officio Secretary to the
Government of India
6. Shri S.N. Agrawal — Member Staff, Railway Board and
Ex-officio Secretary to the
Government of India
7. Shri Shailesh Kumar Pathak — Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety
(CCRS)
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for
consideration the following draft Reports:-
(i) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
(ii) Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in their 21st Report
on the ‘New Railway Catering Policy, 2017’.
The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Reports without any
modification.
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the
Reports and present the same to Parliament.
4. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
5. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Committee has
been kept.
The Committee, then adjourned.
xxxx not related to the Report.

38
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
21st REPORT (16th LOK SABHA) ON “NEW RAILWAY
CATERING POLICY , 2017”
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 25
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,  23
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27
Percentage of total 92%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Para No. NIL --
Percentage of total 0%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para No. NIL --
Percentage of total 0%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies are still awaited:
Para No. 6 & 7 2
Percentage of total 8%