FOURTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 10th Report of the Standing
Committee on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on Pending Projects]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2017
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 03.08.2017
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2017/Shravana, 1939 ( Saka)


S.C.R. No. 207
Price : R 56.00
' 2017 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 10
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies ....................................................... 28
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration .... 30
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ... 35
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Railways held on 31.05.2017 ................................. 36
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 10th
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔPending ProjectsÕ .......... 38
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RAILWAYS (2016-2017)@
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay Ñ  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P .K. Kunhalikutty*
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
4. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
5. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav
#
6. Shri Sudheer Gupta
7. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
8. Shri Ramesh Kaushik
9. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
11. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
12. Shri A.T . Nana Patil
13. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
14. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
15. Shri Lakhanlal Sahu
16. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shanker
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ganesh Singh
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
20. Shri Narasimham Thota
21. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar
(iii)
@Constituted w.e.f. 01.09.2016 vide Lok Sapbha Bulletin Part II No. 4105 dated 15.09.2016
* Shri E. Ahmed passed away on 01.02.2017 (Ref.: Lok Sabha Sectt. Notification No. 24/
4(1)/2017/T(B) dated 01.02.2017). Shri P .K. Kunhalikutty was nominated w.e.f.
19.07.2017  (Ref.: LS Bulletin Part II No.5526 dated 19.07.2017)
# Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav was nominated in place of Shri Gaurav Gogoi vide
LS Bulletin Part II No. 5163 dated 28.03.2017.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.K. Antony
23. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev
24. Shri Shwait Malik
25. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
26. Shri Mukut Mithi
27. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
28. Shri T . Rathinavel
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
30. Shri Alok Tiwari
31. Shri Motilal Vora
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Geeta Parmar Ñ Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2016-17),
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Fourteenth Report on Action Taken by
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in their Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ÔPending
ProjectsÕ.
2. The Tenth Report was presented to Hon Õble Speaker , Lok Sabha
on 31.08.2016 and presented to the Lok Sabha and was laid in
Rajya Sabha on 25.12.2016. The Report contained 19 recommendations/
observations. The Ministry of Railways furnished their Action Taken
Notes on all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report
on 18.11.2016.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken
Report at their sitting held on 31.05.2017. The minutes of the sitting
is given in Appendix-I.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Fourteenth Report of
the Standing Committee on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY ,
26 July, 2017 Chairperson,
04 Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Railways deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Tenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject ÒPending
ProjectsÓ.
2. The Tenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
25 November , 2016 and laid in Rajya Sabha, the same day. It contained,
inter alia, 19 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations have been received and categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted
by the Government:-
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 18
Total : 14
Chapter II
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs replies:-
Para No. 4
Total : 01
Chapter III
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:-
Para Nos. 7, 12, 17 and 19
Total : 04
Chapter IV
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies are still awaited:-
Para No. NIL
Total : NIL
Chapter V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
implementation of the Recommendations accepted by the
Government. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report
should be furnished to them not later than three months of the
presentation of this report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations.
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
A. LONG PENDING PROJECTS
6. The Committee in their Report on ÒPending Projects Ó had
expressed their displeasure for the inordinate delays in completion of
long pending railway projects. One such which was sanctioned 40 years
ago, 3 projects sanctioned 30 years ago, 27 projects sanctioned
20 years ago and 30 projects sanctioned 15 years ago, were still awaiting
completion. Moreover, the Ministry had failed to give any assurance for
completion of such projects in the near future in view of inadequate
GBS and less internal generation of resources. The Committee had,
therefore, strongly urged the Ministry of Railways to focus on their
long pending projects in the light of their avowed objective of providing
rail services in various parts of the country through alternative funding
mechanisms.
7. In their Action Taken Reply to this recommendation of the
Committee, the Ministry of Railways have submitted as follows:Ñ
ÒHuge throw-forward of ongoing projects and limited availability
of funds at disposal of Railways has led to thin spread of funds
impacting progress of projects. This has also constrained Railways
in overcoming bottlenecks and congestion in the network. To
overcome the problem of low throughput and congestion, Indian
Railways have made efforts to arrange Extra Budgetary Resources
through Institutional Financing. Indian Railways have entered into
an MoU with Life Insurance Corporation of India in 2015 for extending
loan of Rs. 1.5 Lakh Crore to be disbursed over a period of five
years. These funds are being utilised for funding of Throughput
Enhancement and debottlenecking projects such as Doubling,
Railway Electrification and other projects which are giving Rate of
Return over the hurdle rate of 12%. Consequent to this, the fund
availability for other unremunerative projects taken up on socio-
economic considerations have marginally improved. Moreover , to

3
optimally utilise the fund, prioritisation exercise has been carried
out and projects such as last mile, those providing alternate route,
last mile connectivity, State sharing, National Projects etc. have
been accorded higher priority and efforts are made to give maximum
allotment of funds to these projects to the extent possible. In
addition, Ministry of Railways have launched a scheme of project
development, financing and monitoring through Joint Venture/SPV
with State Governments. MoU in this regard has been signed with
7 States and Joint Venture Agreements have been signed with
5 States. In addition, seeking investment from private partners as
per PPP initiatives, joint funding of important projects with State
Governments, development of important railway stations with
funding from private participants etc. are some of the steps being
taken by Ministry of Railways towards project implementation and
resource generation. Ó
8. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry
as it does not mention about concrete plans, if any, being taken by
the Ministry, to give focussed attention to long pending railway
projects, with respect to projects pending beyond 15 years, as
desired by the Committee in their recommendation. Therefore, the
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire to be
apprised of the steps being taken by the Ministry of Railways relating
to funding for speedy execution of their long pending projects viz.
projects pending for more than 15 years along with completion
timelines and schedules.
B. SOCIALLY DESIRABLE PROJECTS
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
9. The Committee in their Report had noted that out of the
432 New Line, Doubling and Gauge Conversion ongoing/pending projects,
292 projects (67.6%) were socially desirable projects and were having
ROR of less than 12%. Out of those 292 projects, 222 had negative ROR
and the rest 70 projects had ROR less than 12%. Further , socially
desirable projects were funded from GBS and not by taking loan from
outside where the Railways had to pay market rate because the return
from those lines would not be substantial enough to reimburse the
cost of borrowing. Taking cognizance of the difficulties, the Committee
had desired the Ministry to come up with viable plans to fund the
socially desirable projects in order to work as a proactive facilitator.
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have
submitted as under:Ñ
ÒIn order to meet the growing demands for new projects and also
to expedite ongoing projects including those taken up on socio-

4
economic considerations, Ministry of Railways initiated the scheme
of project development, financing and monitoring through formation
of Joint Ventures/SPVs with State Governments. This, inter alia,
involves surveys, preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) and
getting requisite approvals, processing for sanctioning and monitoring
of identified projects including last mile connectivity, capacity
enhancement and station redevelopment projects. Many State
Governments were requested for signing of MoUs in this regard.
The role of Joint Venture Company, inter-alia, is to choose projects,
identify and collaborate with its stakeholders, mobilize resources,
form project specific Special Purpose Vehicle (if required). The
Joint Venture can mobilize resources in the form of debt from
banks/multi-lateral agencies/Financial Institutions as debt funding
by leveraging the equity or in the form of financial support from
various stakeholders of the projects through the formation of project
specific Special Purpose Vehicle. The project specific Special Purpose
Vehicle will have equity participation of Ministry of Railways and
the State Government through the Joint Venture. The Special Purpose
Vehicle shall be at the liberty to arrange investment from other
Stakeholders, Public Sector Undertakings, raise debt from Banks or
Financial Institutions for undertaking a project.
As per the Shareholding Pattern approved by Cabinet, Ministry of
Railways can have the equity participation upto 50% in the Joint
Venture & State Government to have the balance equity
participation.
Formation of JV Company will help in mobilization of additional
resources for execution of railway projects resulting in expansion
of Railway Network in the country.
Consequently, Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for setting up
JV (Joint Venture) Companies have been signed with Maharashtra,
Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Chhattisgarh and Telangana. A
similar JV Company is already in place for Karnataka State & Joint
Venture Agreement has been signed with five States viz. Odisha,
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Gujarat, Kerala. Ó
11. The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways, in order
to meet the growing demands for new projects and also to expedite
ongoing projects including those taken up on socio-economic
considerations have initiated the scheme of project development,
financing and monitoring through formation of Joint Ventures (JVs)/
SPVs with State Governments. Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)

5
for setting up JV Companies have been signed with Maharashtra,
Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Chhattisgarh and Telangana. A JV
Company is already in place for Karnataka State & JV Agreement
has been signed with five States viz. Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Haryana,
Gujarat, Kerala. Undoubtedly, the steps taken by the Ministry, are
in the right direction, however, the Committee desire the Ministry
of Railways to be more specific in their reply about their plans to
expedite completion of their 292 socially desirable ongoing projects
(as on 01.04.2016) having ROR less than 12 percent and therefore
reiterate their earlier recommendation to the Ministry to devise
some viable plans to fund their socially desirable projects so as to
work as a proactive facilitator. The Committee would like to be
kept informed of the progress in this regard.
C. SOCIAL SERVICE OBLIGATION
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
12. The Committee had noted that during 2012-13, 2013-14 and
2014-15, the quantum of social obligation borne by the Indian Railways,
a commercial public undertaking was to the tune of Rs. 20083 crore,
Rs. 24886 crore and Rs. 25347 crore, respectively. Ministry of Railways
had approached the Ministry of Finance in January, 2016, May, 2016
and then in July, 2016, for constitution of an Inter-Ministerial Body for
evaluation of Public Service Obligations borne by them. However , the
response from the Ministry of Finance was awaited. The Committee
had desired to kept them updated in this regard. They had further
desired a need to relook at the very definition attached to Railways
of it being a commercial undertaking like in the case of Defence and
Roadways.
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have
submitted as under:
ÒThe reply from Ministry of Finance is still awaited. The tariff
policy on Indian Railways has been to keep passenger fares low
especially in the lower classes so that even the poorest segment of
the people can travel by rail. Indian Railways has traditionally been
one of restraint with regard to increase in passenger fares and
moderation in case of periodic increases in freight rates.
Conventionally, the losses incurred in passenger and other coaching
services have been compensated through a process of Ôcross-
subsidizationÕ from revenues generated in the freight segment. This
cross-subsidization out priced railways especially in freight segment
in comparison to alternative mode of transportation.

6
In 2015-16 (RE), total net Social Service obligation on Coaching
and freight services stands at Rs. 341.07 crore. The Committee Õs
suggestion for treating railways at par with Defence and Roadways
instead of treating railways as pure commercial entity seems to be
justified. Steps have already been initiated in this regard by way
of merging Railway Budget with General Budget. Ó
14. The Committee note that the reply of the Ministry of Finance
in response to the communications of the Ministry of Railways, in
January, 2016, May, 2016 and then in July, 2016, with regard to
constitution of inter-Ministerial body for evaluation of Public Service
Obligation borne by the Ministry of Railways, is still awaited. The
Committee desire the Ministry of Railways to keep them apprised of
the progress in this regard.
D. FUNDS FOR LEAST PRIORITY PROJECTS
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
15. In their Report on ÔPending ProjectsÕ, the Committee had noted
that in order to avoid thin spread of funds in view of meagre GBS,
Railways had prioritised the projects to give them focused attention.
However , they found to their dismay that out of 87 Least Priority
Projects(C), 83 were socially desirable projects. Further , 29 socially
desirable projects were not even categorised. According to the Ministry,
the projects which did not fall in any of the proposed categories and
had not made any significant progress were accorded the lowest priority.
The Committee, were not convinced with the reasoning of the Ministry
and therefore desired that they should review and reassess the
usefulness of such projects in consultation with the State Governments
concerned as pendency of these projects without any progress would
add to the frustration of the citizens settled in those under-developed,
and unconnected far-flung corners of the country.
16. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:
ÒIndian Railway is executing number of projects and providing
services which have direct impact on socio-economic development
of the country. A number of these projects are national projects,
border area projects and backward areas connectivity projects;
however, there is need to supplement resources of Indian railways
in form of GBS, cost sharing by State Governments. As regard GBS,

7
Ministry of Railways is constantly pursuing with Ministry of Finance
for enhancement of Gross Budgetary Support to expedite all projects
including socially desirable projects. Simultaneously, Ministry of
Railways have taken a number of steps to ensure increased
availability of funds for ongoing projects specially socially desirable
projects. Funding of remunerative projects which are primarily
doubling & electrification projects is being done through loan taken
from LIC as a result, the balance GBS available for socially desirable
projects have increased marginally. In addition, Ministry of Railways
have launched a scheme of project development, financing and
monitoring through Joint Venture/SPV with State Governments.
MoU in this regard have been signed with 7 number of States and
Joint Venture Agreements have been signed with 5 number of
States.Ó
17. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry
as it has not mentioned about any review/proposed review of 29
socially desirable projects which have been accorded the lowest
priority, for reassessing their usefulness, so as to avoid frustration
among the people of those under-developed and unconnected far
flung areas. Though, several measures are being taken by the Ministry
to ensure increased availability of funds for socially desirable
projects, the Committee are still apprehensive of the availability of
required funds and will for 29 least prioritised socially desirable
projects. While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the
Committee desire the Railways to prepare a road map for execution
of these socially desirable projects.
E. LEVEL CROSSINGS
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
18. The Committee learnt that as per the Memorandum of
Understanding signed on 10.11.2014 between the Ministry of Railways
and the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) to eliminate
Level Crossings on National Highways, the MoRTH/NHAI would be
replacing all Level Crossings (LCs) on the National Highway Corridors
by ROBs/RUBs in the next five years, subject to availability of funds.
As more than one and a half years had elapsed, the Committee had
desired that they should be apprised of the exact number of LCs on
National Highways, yearly targets and LCs eliminated so far by MoRTH/
NHAI.

8
19. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:
ÒAfter the signing of MoU between Ministry of Railways and Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways, 13 LCs have been eliminated by
MoRTH/NHAI by constructing ROBs/RUBs. Numbers of Level Crossings
on National Highways keep on changing as new National Highways
are being declared by MoRTH. MoRTH is carrying out detailed survey
to access the exact number of level crossings existing on National
Highways.Ó
20. The Committee note that after signing of MoU between
Ministry of Railways (MoR) and Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways (MoRTH) on 10.11.2014, 13 Level Crossings (LCs) have
been eliminated by constructing ROBs/RUBs. However, this is only
a part reply to the information desired by the Committee. The
submission that the number of LCs on NHs keep on changing as new
NHs are being declared by MoRTH cannot be disputed. However, the
information which the Committee had desired was with regard to
the exact number of LCs on NHs and yearly targets for elimination
of LCs in the next five years since 10.11.2014, the date for signing
of MoU between MoR and MoRTH. They, therefore, desire to be
informed accordingly. The Committee would further like to be
apprised of the outcome of the detailed survey being carried out by
MoRTH to know the exact number of LCs existing on NHs.
F. NATIONAL PROJECTS
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
21. The Committee had noted that the Railways intended to propose
all the projects in the hilly regions of J&K, Uttarakhand and North
Eastern States as National Projects. However , the proposal of the
Railways was dropped and not processed further. The Ministry of Finance
had not separated the funding of National Projects through GBS but it
started to ring fence a substantially chunk out of GRS proportionately
and as a result the availability of funds for other Railway projects got
further reduced. The Committee had desired that the National Projects
should be fully funded by Union Government separately, instead of ring
fencing of funds out of GBS. The Committee had asked that the Ministry
of Railways should urgently take up this matter again with the Ministry
of Finance in this regard.
22. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways has stated
that Ôsuggestion of the Committee has been noted Õ.

9
23. The Committee are unhappy with the reply of the
Government. Instead of spelling out the action taken by the Railways
to the suggestion of the Committee, they have simply stated that
the suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The Committee
would like the Railways to be more serious while replying to the
recommendations of the Committee. They reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire the Ministry of Railways to take up the
matter with the Ministry of Finance regarding fully funding of National
Projects, without any further delay under intimation to the
Committee.

10
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
Railways are the most economic and environment friendly mode of
transport and therefore, there is a huge demand for expansion of its
network in remote and other under-developed areas which are hitherto
unconnected by rail. That being so, the demand outstrips the supply
side of the Railways, i.e. the capacity of the Railways to take up such
projects. Besides demands for new rail connectivity, there are competing
demands for removing bottlenecks, enhancing throughput, technological
upgradation, requirement of rail stock, etc. The Ministry of Railways
are unable to generate adequate internal resources while the Gross
Budgetary Support (GBS) extended by the Ministry of Finance is not
enough in comparison to the throw-forward of the ongoing projects. It
is the endeavour of the Railways to fill up such huge demand and in
the process, they have sanctioned a large number of projects, carrying
the burden of the huge throw-forward on the ongoing projects. The
Committee, therefore, feel that the Railways have to face the challenge
of striking a balance between the competing demands of new rail
connectivity and enhancing capacity and efficiency while ensuring that
no region is deprived of its genuine demands. The Committee are also
of the view that the Ministry of Railways have to activate all their
resources for optimum utilization and put in place a well-planned
strategy to meet this daunting task.
Reply of the Government
Huge throwforward of ongoing projects and limited availability of
funds at disposal of Railways has lead to thin spread of funds impacting
progress of projects. This has also constrained Railways in overcoming
bottlenecks and congestion in the network. To overcome the problem
of low throughput and congestion, Indian Railways have made efforts
to arrange Extra Budgetary Resources through Institutional Financing.
Indian Railways have entered into an MoU with Life Insurance
Corporation of India in 2015 for extending loan of Rs. 1.5 Lakh Crore
to be disbursed over a period of five years. These funds are being
utilised for funding of Throughput Enhancement and debottlenecking
projects such as Doubling, Railway Electrification and other projects

11
which are giving Rate of Return over the hurdle rate of 12%. Consequent
to this, the fund availability for other unremunerative projects taken
up on socio-economic considerations have marginally improved.
Moreover , to optimally utilise the fund, prioritisation exercise has been
carried out and projects such as last mile, those providing alternate
route, last mile connectivity, state sharing, National Projects etc. have
been accorded higher priority and efforts are made to give maximum
allotment of funds to these projects to the extent possible. In addition,
Ministry of Railways have launched a scheme of project development,
financing and monitoring through Joint Venture/SPV with State
Governments. MoU in this regard have been signed with 7 States and
Joint Venture Agreements have been signed with 5 States. In addition,
seeking investment from private partners as per PPP initiatives, joint
funding of important projects with State Governments, development
of important railway stations with funding from private participants
etc. are some of the steps being taken by Ministry of Railways towards
project implementation and resource generation.
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
As per the existing procedure in the Indian Railways for sanctioning
a project, proposals for various projects received from the Zonal
Railways are first examined by the Railway Board. The firmed up
proposals are then sent for Ôin principle Õ approval of the National
Institution for Transforming India (NITI) Aayog. After obtaining the
requisite approvals, projects are included in the Budget and, thereafter,
the Railways carry out final location survey and prepare detailed
estimates. Generally, the tenders are floated after the sanction of the
Detailed Estimates. The Committee are informed that the entire process
between the initiation of proposal for a project and the final award
of tender which earlier used to take 2-2
1/2 years now takes 9-12 months.
The Committee appreciate that the process of examination of the
proposal for finally awarding a contract has now been fast tracked.
They, however , emphasise that the procedures involved at each stage
of execution of projects should also be expedited through proper
management and timely action to complete projects, as scheduled.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways is grateful to the Committee for having
appreciated the efforts made by the Ministry towards system
improvement with regard to expeditious examination of proposals, its
final approval and eventual award of contract in a period of 9 to 12
months as against the earlier period of 2 to 2
1/2 years. The suggestion

12
of the Committee to expedite execution of projects through proper
management and timely action has been noted. Ministry of Railways
are making all out effort to strengthen and make the existing monitoring
system very rigorous. The review meetings at the level of General
Managers are being held more frequently and follow up actions are
taken expeditiously.
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee would like the Ministry of Railways to recall the
recommendation of their predecessor Committees in regard to long
pending projects in the Indian Railways. In this context, what worries
the Committee is that the inordinate delays in timely completion of
projects continue to be a bane of the Indian Railways. The Committee
have noted with dismay that one project which was sanctioned
40 years ago, 3 projects sanctioned 30 years ago, 27 projects pending
for 20 years and 30 projects sanctioned 15 years ago have still not
reached completion. Further , the Committee feel that the inadequate
GBS and internal generation of resources resulting in meagre allocation
for the pending projects fail to give any assurance of completion of
these Projects in the near future. The Committee, therefore, strongly
urge the Ministry to focus on these long pending projects in the light
of their avowed objective of providing rail services in various parts of
the country through alternative funding mechanisms.
Reply of the Government
Detailed reply to the suggestion of the Committee has been given
in reply to recommendation No. 1.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation Para No. 8 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee are constrained not to accept the justifications
given by the Ministry of Railways for the piling up of as many as
495 projects. As per their submission, huge demands are being received
for expansion of network in under developed, remote areas and in
other far flung areas hitherto unconnected by Rail and in the pursuit
of fulfilling such demands, the Railways have had to sanction a large
number of projects. The Ministry were well aware of the fact that they
would be unable to generate internal resources and the GBS that they
get from the Ministry of Finance was hugely inadequate for executing

13
the already sanctioned projects. The Railway Õs submission that within
the limited availability of funds, they have to strike a balance between
competing demands of new Rail connectivity and enhancing capacity
and efficiency is again unconvincing, more so because of the increasing
number of pending projects year after year. The number of New Lines,
Doubling and Gauge Conversion projects which was 368 as on 01.04.2013
has increased to 432 as on 01.4.2016. On the one hand, they have not
been able to get the demand of the under-developed areas to provide
rail connectivity fulfilled; on the other , this has led to thin spread of
funds among various projects, resulting in the inability of the Railways
to complete the sanctioned projects at the desired pace. As on date,the
throw-forward of 495 ongoing/pending projects is Rs. 4,36,586 crore
which can never be completed, if the Railways were to proceed with
the present mode of funding. The Committee are rather sure that this
method of funding the ongoing/pending projects will never see the
light of the day. The Committee are deeply distressed that many of
the sanctioned projects which had raised hope of rail connectivity to
the remote and under-developed areas have not been completed, in
the process further disillusioning the intended beneficiaries in most
areas. The Committee stress that the Ministry should sanction only
those projects in future for which financial arrangements have been
tied up in advance.
Reply of the Government
The suggestion of the Committee that Ministry should sanction
only those projects in future for which financial arrangements have
been tied up in advance has been noted.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee are very disturbed to note that the GBS provided
to the Ministry of Railways for its infrastructure development is
substantially less than the actual requirement. The 12th Five Year Plan
size of Rs. 5,48,802 crore involving GBS of Rs. 3,16,842 crore proposed
by the Railways was downsized by the Planning Commission to
Rs. 5,19,221 crore with GBS of only Rs. 1,94,221 crore. Further , GBS
of Rs. 1,94,221 crore includes a loan of Rs. 52,000 crore from JICA/
WB and Railways equity of Rs. 28,000 crore for Dedicated Freight
Corridor , with the other Railway projects being left with GBS of only
Rs. 1,14,221 crore. During 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and
2016-17, against the proposed allocation of Rs. 48,855 crore, Rs. 39,500
crore, Rs. 37,500 crore, Rs. 48,044 crore and Rs. 55,000 crore,
respectively, funds were allocated to the tune of Rs. 25,234 crore,

14
Rs. 28,174 crore, Rs. 31,596 crore, Rs. 41,646 crore and Rs.45000
crore, respectively. It is distressing to note that the actual GBS for
Railway projects for annual plans in the 12th Plan is only 20% of the
proposed plan by Railways and 36% of the approved GBS for the plan.
The Committee take a serious note of the fact that the GBS allocated
to Railways each year is much less than that proposed by them.
Considering the huge number of projects pending with the Railways,
such drastic reduction in the annual plan outlays is totally uncalled
for. In fact, the Committee are of the opinion that Plan Outlay
2016-17 requires to be stepped up substantially in consonance with the
needs of the Ministry. Accordingly, the Ministry of Railways should take
up the matter with the Ministry of Finance.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways have been repeatedly requesting for higher
budgetary support to the Railways for timely completion of projects in
progress and other critical and important capacity augmentation and
safety related works necessary for provision of improved Railway
services. Ministry of Railways have been highlighting the need to
augment Budgetary Support at various fora, including several letters
written at the highest level.
Request for allocation of the higher GBS to implement the
development projects of the Railways was made to the Ministry of
Finance/NITI Aayog during the preparation of the Railway Budget for
2016-17. There has been a constant dialogue with the Ministry of
Finance to increase budgetary support to Indian Railways within the
overall financial position of the Government of India. Budgetary support
was enhanced from Rs. 35000 crore in 2015-16 to Rs. 45000 crore in
2016-17. This includes funds from Central Road Fund have also been
provided by Ministry of Finance towards expenditure on New Lines and
Gauge Conversion projects under Railway Safety fund, apart from other
safety related works.
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
RESOURCE CRUNCH IN RAILWAYS
The Committee understand that resource crunch is the primary
reason for delay in completion of projects. RailwayÕs internal generation
is almost negligible and they have been dependent upon GBS which is
a loan from General Exchequer for their projects. However , to their
dismay, the Committee find that against a total financial throw-forward
of Rs. 4,36,586 crore for all the sanctioned railway projects, the GBS

15
(including Diesel Cess) extended to Ministry of Railways during the
12th Five Year Plan is Rs. 1,71,650 crore only. The Committee are
aware that the Railways had to pay 4 percent dividend to the General
revenues i.e about Rs.10,000 crore from their internal generation in
2015-16, severely restricting expenditure on creation/renewal of assets.
Thus, insufficient funds have adversely affected the targets of the
projects of the Railways, physical as well as financial, resulting in
their time overrun as well as cost overrun. Moreover, the Committee
are aware that the implementation of the 7th Pay Commission Report
will impact the Railway finances to a great extent. The Committee
observe that the Railways is an organisation which is a national
transporter and have to, not only cater to far-flung and remote areas
and Strategic Lines, but also fulfil related social obligations. It directly
and indirectly contributes significantly to the GDP through development
of economy and in creating infrastructure and helps in national
integration. The Committee feel that the Railways are capable of
achieving their intended goal, however , due to resource crunch, their
hands are tight and they are unable to move ahead at a desirable
pace. In view of the above, the Committee recommend that the Ministry
of Railways and Ministry of Finance should revisit the issue of the
practice of payment of dividend by the Ministry of Railways to the
general revenues keeping in mind that no other department like
Defence/Roadways, etc., pay any dividend on their budgetary grants.
Further , the money thus saved could be utilised on their infrastructural
development projects which are already starved of funds.
The Committee recommend that the Railways should not only
scrupulously adhere to financial discipline in various segments of their
activity but also look for alternative ways to boost their resource
generation which they could utilise for timely completion of projects
so that these projects, in return, start remunerating. To illustrate, the
Ministry of Railways should take steps to control the leakages/pilferages
in different activities, including sale of Railway scrap, optimum
utilisation and commercialisation of Railway resources, continuous
monitoring at every stage, recovery of outstanding dues from other
Ministries/Departments/Organization/Agencies, etc.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways are extremely grateful to the Committee for
bringing out in the above point, the responsibility of the Railways as
the National Transporter , its role in development and the financial
difficulties that are being faced by them.

16
The Railways receive Capital as Budgetary Support from Ministry of
Finance for financing of various projects. The Budgetary Support
extended by MoF is in the nature of a loan in perpetuity, carrying a
specific rate of dividend, which is decided by the Parliamentary Railway
Convention Committee. In addition to funds received through Budget,
Railways have taken up mobilization of funds from alternate sources
like Market Borrowings, Public Private Partnership and Institutional
Financing by tapping low cost long term funds from insurance and
pension funds, multi-lateral and bilateral agencies which can be serviced
through incremental revenues. Apart from the above, there is a major
thrust on areas for enhancement of Non-fare revenue like Earnings
from Railway Land Development Authority/Indian Railway Catering &
Tourism Corporation, Rent toll on Building, Land lease for Building
Purpose and other purposes, Property development of land/air space,
Right of way for Optical Fiber Cable laid by/for RailTel, Right of way/
way leave for others, Advertisement & Publicity, Sale of damaged
goods, unserviceable revenue scrap etc. Continuous monitoring of
recovery of outstanding dues from other Ministries/Departments/
Organisations/Agencies, etc., are being done.
The issue regarding doing away with the practice of dividend
payment and subsidy thereon has been taken up at length with the
Ministry of Finance in the context of the major issue of merger of
Railway Budget with the General Budget. Government while deciding
the said merger w.e.f. the fiscal 2017-18 has also decided to do away
with the practice of dividend payment by the Ministry of Railways. As
per the Budget Estimates for 2016-17, this will save Railways about
Rs.5400 crore net of subsidy which is paid back by the Ministry of
Finance on payment of dividend.
The recommendation of the Committee regarding scrupulously
adhering to financial discipline and for looking for alternative ways to
boost resource generation has also been noted for compliance please.
Well organised procedure and systems exist on the Railways for the
disposal of scrap, so as to maximise the earnings of the railways using
high degree of transparency and competition with adequate controls
at different stages of disposal of scrap. The following measures are in
place to ensure proper accountable of scrap generated and obviate the
possibility of leakage of revenue are as under:Ñ
(i) All scrap are received in the depot on prescribed proforma.
(ii) The items proposed to be sold as scrap are examined by a
survey committee consisting of officers from User , Stores

17
and Accounts departments and approved competent authority,
before being put up for sale in Auction.
(iii) The disposal of scrap is proposed in suitable lots with
appropriate disposable quantities. With complete information
auction catalogue is prepared and uploaded on railway public
website i.e. IREPS and wide publicity of auction is given
through newspapers also.
(iv) E-Auction has been introduced in all Railways/Production
Units from 01.06.2013 to bring total transparency in scrap
disposal.
(v) The delivery of scrap is given to the purchasers jointly by
representatives of three different departments, viz.
Stockholder , Accounts and Security departments which
eliminates errors in weighment.
(vi) Electronic weigh bridges have been installed in all the scrap
depots thereby eliminating errors in weighment.
(vii) P eriodical/surprise checks are conducted by the Departmental
organization and the Vigilance organization during the entire
process of scrap disposal.
(viii) CCTV cameras have been installed in many depots in vital
areas to keep surveillance of scrap depots.
(ix) Regular stock verification is done to ensure ground balance
tally with book balance.
(x) The periodical transfer of officials associated with scrap
disposal activity is followed.
There has been constant endeavour on the part of Railways to
augment internal resources for Plan financing. Some of the steps being
taken to increase earnings and raise funds include:Ñ
¥ Continuous efforts to capture more and more traffic.
¥ Expenditure control involving increased productivity &
efficiency and optimum utilization of existing capacity.
¥ Simplification & rationalization of tariff. Market responsive
and dynamic tariff policies. Tariff policy to exploit empty
flow direction and lean season traffic.
¥ Introduction of new trains, increase in frequency and
extension to existing trains to capture more passenger traffic.
¥ Rail-side warehousing terminals and private freight terminals
through Public Private Partnership.

18
¥ Alternative resources like higher sundry earnings through
advertisements, catering and commercial exploitation of land
etc.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee were informed that the service tax on specified
classes of passenger travel and freight was introduced w.e.f. 01.10.2012,
resulting in increase of cost of transportation affecting the business of
the Ministry of Railways. The tax were to the tune of Rs. 1478.10 crore
and Rs. 3449.34 crore during 2012-13 and 2013-14, respectively. The
Ministry of Railways had made several requests to the Ministry of
Finance for exemption from payment of service tax on freight and fare
any thing, inter alia,  that this would increase the overall cost of
transportation. This, however, was not agreed to by the Ministry of
Finance. However , the Committee understand that reimbursement of
the service tax has not ever been sought by the Indian Railways for
themselves. The Committee strongly feel that the service tax thus
collected by the Ministry of Finance through Railways Õ freight and fare
and other services should be shared with the Ministry of Railways. As
such, they recommend that the Railways should pursue the matter
vigorously with the Ministry of Finance. Further, the matter of
reimbursement relating to various concessions given by the Railways to
various categories should also be taken up with the Ministry(ies)
concerned. The Committee are of the considered view that the Railways
should be reimbursed such amounts.
Reply of the Government
Service Tax on Passenger fare and Freight rate was introduced
from 01.10.2012. Presently, service tax (along with Education Cess,
Swachh Bharat Cess and Krishi Kalyan Cess @ 4.5 is levied on freight
and passenger services (First Class and all AC Classes). Apparently, this
makes transportation by rail costlier. Since service tax is not shared by
Ministry of Finance with Railways, Railways is facing limitations in
giving relief to its customers in Fare and Freight rates. If the same is
shared with railways, as suggested by Standing Committee, Railway
can certainly pass on some benefit to its customers.
Several matters as regards to Service Tax have been flagged to be
taken up with Ministry of Finance. The above items will also be
incorporated in the consolidated queries raised by Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee note that the Railways have been able to arrange
a loan of Rs. 1,50,000 crore from the LIC and that the funding would
be given for identified projects having requisite ROR. As per the decision

19
of the Ministry of Railways, Doubling and Railway Electrification projects
sanctioned prior to 2015-16 will be completed in the next 4-5 years
and those sanctioned in 2015-16 have been targeted for completion in
the next 5-6 years. The Committee find that a loan from LIC is an out
of the box idea for funding a project. However , they are apprehensive
that this would lead to higher burden on Railways in terms of servicing
of loans. Furthermore, this mode will be of utility to the extent of
bankable projects only. They are, however , of the firm view that
Railways cannot be expected to take funds on loan basis and pay
interest especially on their social obligations. The Ministry of Railways
should, therefore, depend on this mode of funding only in exceptional
cases as it may affect the repayment capability of Railways. The
Committee trust that the targets set by the Railways would be adhered
to through all means especially regular and strict monitoring, at the
same time, the Committee would like the Ministry to make serious
efforts for activating and strengthening their executive and monitoring
wings for timely completion of the projects so that these projects
start getting returns at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways (MoR) has constituted a Committee of Additional
Members of the Railway Board to monitor the physical and financial
progress of works which are being financed from funds drawn from the
Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC).
It has been decided that Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) will
be entered into by Railway Board with General Managers of each of
the Zonal Railways for implementation of the projects in a time bound
manner.
In view of the fact that Doubling and Electrification projects as a
group constitute the more remunerative of the sanctioned projects of
IR and are also justified from operational point of view, it has been
decided that all works under these Plan Heads, with a few exceptions,
may be financed out of LIC funds. These projects would be provided
with funds on an assured basis so that they are completed quickly and
can start generating revenue, rather than allowing time and cost
overruns due to paucity of funds and deteriorating viability.
It has also been decided that as far as projects other than Doubling
and Electrification are concerned, only such projects which are
remunerative will be considered for financing out of LIC funds.

20
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that in the Indian Railways which is termed
as a commercial public undertaking, the social service obligations over
the years have shown an increasing trend. During 2012-13, 2013-14 and
2014-15, quantum of social obligation was to the tune of Rs. 20083
crore, Rs. 24886 crore and Rs. 25347 crore, respectively. The Committee
feel that the real quantum of the social obligation borne by the Railways
should be assessed accurately. They find that in this regard, the Ministry
of Railways have approached the Ministry of Finance in January, 2016,
May, 2016 and July, 2016, for constitution of an Inter-Ministerial Body
for evaluation of Public Service Obligations borne by them. The Ministry
have apprised the Committee that the response from the Ministry of
Finance on the same is still awaited. The Committee would like to be
kept updated in this regard. The Committee find that at present the
Railways is a departmental commercial undertaking of the Government
of India. They, however, feel this concept was all right as long as it
was under the British regime. Whatever penny the Britishers invested,
they wanted return out of it. The Committee desire the Ministry to
have a relook now at the very definition attached to Railways as a
commercial undertaking like in the case of Defence and Roadways as
it gives a spurt to the overall GDP indirectly, besides direct earnings.
Reply of the Government
The reply from Ministry of Finance is still awaited.
The tariff policy on Indian Railways has been to keep passenger
fares low especially in the lower classes so that even the poorest
segment of the people can travel by rail. Indian Railways has
traditionally been one of restraint with regard to increase in passenger
fares and moderation in case of periodic increases in freight rates.
Conventionally, the losses incurred in passenger and other coaching
services have been compensated through a process of Ôcross-
subsidizationÕ from revenues generated in the freight segment. This
cross-subsidization out priced railways especially in freight segment in
comparison to alternative mode of transportation.
In 2015-16 (RE), total net Social Service obligation on Coaching
and freight services stands at Rs. 341.07 crore. The Committee Õs
suggestion for treating railways at par with Defence and Roadways
instead of treating railways as pure commercial entity seems to be
justified. Steps have already been initiated in this regards by way of
merging Railway Budget with General Budget.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation Para No. 23 of Chapter I)

21
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
PROJECTS ON COST SHARING BASIS/THROUGH JOINT VENTURES
The Committee are apprised that the Railways have gone in for an
arrangement with different State Governments for 42 ongoing projects
being executed on cost sharing basis at an estimated cost of around
Rs. 61,000 crore. With industries, including NTPC, Coal India, etc.,
Railways have 7 projects costing around Rs. 6200 crore. Further , a
proposal to set up Joint Venture Companies (JVCs) with State
Governments has been approved by the Cabinet. The Ministry of Railways
have approached all State Governments to form JVCs with them to
undertake mutually identified rail infrastructure projects for project
development, financing and monitoring. 13 projects (12 New Lines &
one Doubling) proposed to be taken up through Joint Venture with
State Governments, have been included in the Railway Budget
2016-17 at an anticipated cost of Rs. 33092 crore, subject to requisite
approval. The Committee, have been apprised that 17 States have
come forward for tying up with the Railways to form such Joint Ventures;
out of the same, only the Government of Jharkhand has given consent
in respect of three projects to be taken up through Joint Venture.
Further , in anticipation of various State Governments coming forward
to take up projects through Joint Ventures, 30 projects (25 New Lines,
2 Doublings and 3 Gauge Conversions) have been included in the Capital
Investment programme of 2016-17 at a cost of Rs. 58,274 crore. The
Committee understand that the Railways are taking these steps with
the objective of increasing participation of the States in the
implementation of railway projects, besides helping them to mobilise
resources for various rail infrastructure projects. However , the
Committee apprehend that the economically weaker States may not
be able to contribute their share of funds and therefore, are likely to
be deprived of the investment by the Railways as per the JVs proposal.
In view of this apprehension, while the Committee desire that the
Ministry should work out ways and means to expedite various statutory
clearances required by the State(s) and ensure timely completion of
the ongoing and new projects, so that people are benefited by better
rail connectivity in their region, they urge the Ministry of Railways to
have a relook at the proportion/share of funds to be contributed by
the backward, underdeveloped, hilly and far-flung States expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
Railways have been receiving demands for expansion of Network in
under developed and remote areas which do not have rail connectivity.

22
The demand outstrips the capacity of the railways to take up such
projects. In the pursuit of fulfilling such demands Railways have
sanctioned large number of projects and accordingly it is saddled with
huge throw forward on ongoing projects. Consequently, the Gross
Budgetary Support have not been adequate enough to fund these
projects to achieve desired level of progress as a result the project
financing and its execution has entered into a Vicious cycle of cost and
time overrun. Further, this is resulted in under investment in throughput
and capacity enhancement projects such as doubling, tripling, 4th line
projects which are essential to de-bottleneck existing over utilized
sections. This has greatly impacted the capacity of railways to capture
new traffic and to increase the percentage share of existing traffic. To
come out of this saviour bottleneck Ministry of Railways have decided
to finance capacity enhancement projects through Extra Budgetary
recourses in form of loan from Financial Institutions. Despite, financing
throughput enhancement project through EBR-IF , the Gross Budgetary
Support (GBS) still remains inadequate compared to the throw forward
of the projects. To overcome this, Ministry of Railways have requested
the State Governments to come forward and share 50% cost of the
projects in the State as primary beneficiary of the expansion network
in State. So far, 9 State Governments have come forward to finance
40 projects to the tune of 50% of cost in addition to some of the State
Governments given land free. However , this effort also did not help in
tiding over of the problem of financial crunch for execution of projects
in the problem of languishing of projects for want of resources still
persist. Accordingly, Ministry of Railways has taken one more innovated
steps to garner resources by involving all stakeholders and launch the
scheme of project development, financing and formation of Joint
Ventures with State Governments.
The role of Joint Venture Company, inter alia, is to choose projects,
identify and collaborate with its stakeholders, mobilize resources, from
project specific Special Purpose Vehicle (if required).
The Joint Venture will be a company under companies Act to be
formed with equity participation of Ministry of Railways (Maximum
50%) and concerned State Government. The JV will have initial paid up
Capital of Rs. 100 crores which can be enhanced subsequently. The
Joint Venture can mobilize resources in the form of debt from Banks/
multi-lateral agencies/Financing Institutions as debt funding by
leveraging the equity or in the form of financial support from various
stakeholders of the projects through the formation of project specific
Special Purpose Vehicle. The project specific Special Purpose Vehicle
will have equity participation of Ministry of Railways and the State

23
Government through the Joint Venture. The Special Purpose Vehicle
shall be at the liberty to arrange investment from other Stakeholders,
Public Sector Undertakings, raise debt from Banks of Financial
Institutions for undertakings a project. It is evident that the participation
of State Government is to the extent of the equity share which is of
a nominal amount. The remaining funds requires for execution of the
projects will be to arrange loan through the JV . This is totally different
from mobilization of resources by way of sharing the cost of entire
projects by both Ministry of Railways and State Government accordingly
none of the State Government will be at a disadvantage even though
some of the State Governments may be low on the financial health.
This scheme of mobilization of resources through formation of Joint
Venture will open up new vistas/avenues of resources mobilization
without meagre/negligible financial strength on the State Government.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
METROPOLITAN PROJECTS (MTPs)
The Committee observe that the progress with respect to the
execution of the 12 MTPs has been extremely unsatisfactory. Out of
the 7 Metro Projects in Kolkata, 2 projects, viz. Baranagar-Noapara
and Noapara-NSCB Airport (8.33 km) and Noapara-Barasat via Bima
(18 km), sanctioned in the year 2009-10 and 2010-11, respectively, are
expected to be completed in 40 months, subject to early resolution of
issues; and 2 projects, viz. Dum Dum Airport to New Garia  via Rajarhat
and Joka-Binoy Bandal Dinesh Bagh, sanctioned in the year 2010-11,
are expected to be completed in 30 months, again subject to early
resolution of issues. The Committee have been informed that for two
of the projects, viz. Remount Rd.—Santoshpur via Garden Reach and
Baranagar-Barrackpore and Dakshineswar , sanctioned in the year
2010-11, the targets will be fixed after resolution of the issues involved.
The remaining one project, viz. East-West Corridor from Howrah Maidan
to Salt Lake, sanctioned in 2008-09, is expected to be completed in
2019, again subject to early resolution of issues. The pace of work is
equally dismal in the case of execution of the rest of the 5 MTPs as
well. Thus, the Committee understand that in respect of three of the
projects, viz. Hyderabad/Secunderabad Multi Modal Transport System,
Belapur-Seawood-Uran-electrified double line and Chennai-Extension
of Mass Rapid Transit System, sanctioned in the years 2012-13,
1996-97 and 2006-07, respectively, the target dates of completion
would be fixed only after resolution of issues. For two other projects,
viz. Mumbai Urban Transport Project, Phase-II, and CSTM-Panvel/
Andheri-Running of 12 coach EMU train on Harbour Corridor , which

24
were sanctioned in 2008-09 and 2012-13, respectively, the targets are
2020-21 and 2018-19, respectively, again subject to early resolution of
issues.
The Committee find that in all MTPs, the Railways have submitted
that the completion of projects, even on extended targets, is subject
to Ôearly resolution of issues Õ. The Committee further find that in
almost all the projects, the issues involved are shifting of utilities,
acquisition of land, clearances from Ministry of Environment & Forests,
Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Defence, etc. The
Committee have been apprised by the Ministry of Railways that these
issues have been taken up with the State Government/Ministries
concerned at the highest level and that meetings have been held from
time to time at Zonal Railway levels to resolve all issues and also at
the Ministry level. Most recently, meetings have been held by Hon Õble
Minister of Railways with the Hon Õble Chief Minister of Maharashtra on
21.04.2016, with Hon Õble Chief Minister of West Bengal on 09.06.2016
and with the HonÕble Minister of Defence on 13.07.2016. The Committee
trust that after such high level meetings, the pace of work in different
MTPs would pick up and that issues involved will be expeditiously
sorted out. In this context, the Committee recommend that the project
implementation and monitoring wings in Railways should be streamlined
and the deadlines are met, with a view to completing the projects
within the fixed time-frame so that promises made to the travelling
public do not remain only on paper. A well laid out, step by step
procedure should be worked out and in case of non-achievement of
targets, the matter should be examined and issues should be resolved
at the appropriate level, this is an absolute imperative if the Railways
have to complete these already much delayed MTPs .
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways has a well-established system of monitoring of
works by way of monthly reporting the progress and issues of the
projects by Zonal Railways that are executing the projects. Problems
faced by Zonal Railways/PSUs for implementation of the projects are
referred to the concerned Ministry/Department for resolution of the
issues. MTP Projects generally involve construction of new lines in
heavily congested urban/suburban areas of the cities, involving issues
mainly of shifting of utilities and getting encumbrance free land. Thus,
it involves the local authorities/agencies which are not under Ministry
of Railways. The issues involved also vary from project to project.
Apart from monitoring of the progress and targets on a monthly basis
and pursuing of the issues involved regularly at the highest level, the
issues have also been taken up in Project Monitoring Group (PMG)

25
portal and PRAGATI Portal of PMO for early resolution of issues with
other Ministries/Departments.
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
ROAD OVER BRIDGE(ROB)/ROAD UNDER BRIDGE(RUB) PROJECTS
The Committee note that as on 01.04.2016, there were 1,592 ROBs
and 6,065 RUBs Projects. The anticipated cost of these projects is
Rs. 64,431 crore wherein the Railways Õ share is Rs. 34,596 crore and
that of the State Government is Rs. 29,835 crore. It is most unfortunate
that allocation for ROBs/RUBs for 2016-17 is only Rs. 2,443 crore,
especially when the throw-forward of all ROB/RUB works is Rs. 30,959
crore. As ROBs/RUBs seek to reduce accidents at Level Crossings where
around 60% of the casualties occur, the annual plan allocation is quite
meagre and needs to be enhanced.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways has already requested Ministry of Finance for
the additional allotment of funds for Road Safety Works (Level Crossing,
ROB/RUB). The response on the same is awaited from Ministry of
Finance.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee further note that 157 ROB works are such where
the Railway portion has been completed but work is still in progress
in the State Government Õs portion. In that regard, the Committee call
upon the Ministry to take up the matter with the State Government(s)
concerned on top priority basis, so that the State Government portion
of ROB is completed and the ROB can be used by the public. The
Committee also stress that the North-Western Railway, Western Railway,
Northern Railway and North-Central Railway should gear up themselves
to meet their huge targets to construct 1412, 603, 590 and 538 RUBs,
respectively.
Reply of the Government
Bi-monthly meetings are being held by Zonal Railways with all
State Governments to solve all interface issues to expedite the progress
of ROBs including the completion of approach portions.
Probably the Committee has mentioned that balance RUBs
sanctioned in Pink Book which are yet to be completed in NWR, WR,

26
NR & NCR. Targets for construction of RUBs by NWR, WR, NR and NCR
in 2016-17 were fixed on the basis of availability of funds and are
much less than the total sanctioned RUBs. All Zonal Railways are being
persuaded to achieve the targets for construction of RUBs fixed for the
current year.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
NATIONAL PROJECTS
The Committee are seriously distressed to note the unacceptable
delays in the execution of some of the National Projects. Four of these
projects are the (i)Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramula (290 km.) sanctioned
in 1994-95 at the cost of Rs. 1500 crore which has escalated to
Rs. 19565 crore (1204.33% increase); (ii) Lumding-Badarpur-Silchar,
including Migrendisa-Dittockchera, Arunachal-Jiribam & Badarpur-
Kumarghat (369.45 km.) & MM for GC of Baraigram-Dulabchera
(29.40 km.), Karimganj-Maishashan & Karimganj bypass line (13.50 km.)
sanctioned in 1996-97 at a cost of Rs. 648 crore which has escalated
to Rs. 5186 crore (700.31% increase); (iii) Kumarghat-Agartala
(109 km.) sanctioned in the year 1996-97 at a cost of Rs. 575 crore
which has escalated to Rs. 1242.25 crore (116.04% increase); and
(iv) the Bogibeel bridge with linking lines between Dibrugarh and North
Bank line (46 km.) sanctioned in 1997-98 at the cost of Rs. 1000 crore
which has escalated to Rs. 4996 crore (399% increase). The Committee
express their strong displeasure at this inordinate delay in the
completion of these National Projects which has caused both time and
cost overrun, especially when funds was not an issue in the case of
National Projects. As submitted, the Railways Õ constant dialogue with
the State Governments concerned/MHA for tackling law and order
problems have yielded results in the completion of the Lumding-Silchar
gauge conversion project. Taking this into consideration, the Committee
are of the opinion that the Ministry should identify the factors
responsible for the delays in execution of these National Projects and
take immediate corrective steps. In this context, the Committee would
like to stress that the very purpose behind the concept of a ÔNational
ProjectÕ is defeated if such project is not completed within the
prescribed time schedule, whatever be the reasons. The Railways should
proactively involve themselves with the Ministries/Governments/
Agencies and ensure that no impediment stands in the way of timely
completion of a ÔNational Project Õ.
Reply of the Government
Main reason for delay in execution of National Projects has been
shortage of resources. Ever since 12 projects were declared as National
Projects, Ministry of Railways have been impressing upon NITI Aayog

27
and Ministry of Finance for giving additional funds over and above GBS
for financing of National Projects. However , no such fund was
forthcoming. 2014-15 onwards, Ministry of Finance started earmarking
substantial fund, out of GBS, for National Projects. This lead to
allocation of adequate funds for the National Projects, but consequently,
balance funds left for remaining projects reduced significantly. Since
2014-15, ring-fencing of funds for National Projects, it has resulted in
its expeditious execution. As regard the issues of coordination with
State Governments, regular meetings are held at appropriate level
with State Government and Central Government. In addition, any hold-
up with regard to National Project are also taken up in PRAGATI meeting
which is coordinated by PMO. Wherever Law & Order is not conducive
for timely execution of projects, State Govt./MHA is requested to
provide adequate security at project sites. Though security cover has
been provided by State Govt., but the extra expenditure charged for
the security arrangement affects the funding of projects. Being a Law
& Order issue, the expenditure incurred on the same should be borne
by concerned State Govt. being a State subject. Also in North-Eastern
regions there are long delays due to forest and wild life clearances and
related legal orders from time to time changing the level of clearances.
Coordination at appropriate level is done for speedy clearances. Regular
meetings are being held at appropriate level in both Central and State
Government. The process of clearances from Ministry of Environment
& Forest has become speedier on account of regular follow-up and
regular coordination meeting be Project Management Group set up
under Cabinet Committee on Investment.

28
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
ONGOING/PENDING RAILWAY PROJECTS
The Committee note with concern that, as on 01.04.2016, there
were 495 New lines, Gauge Conversion, Doubling and Electrification
ongoing/pending projects with the Railways at an anticipated cost of
Rs. 4,54,876 crore with throw-forward of Rs. 3,61,721 crore. Besides,
there are 525 Workshop, including Production Unit Projects at an
anticipated cost of Rs. 27,832 crore with a throw-forward of Rs. 18,157
crore; 2215 Road Safety Works at an anticipated cost of Rs. 39,543
crore with a throw-forward of Rs. 31,700 crore; 619 Signalling and
Telecom projects at an anticipated cost of Rs. 11,338 crore with a
throw forward of Rs. 5,848 crore; and 17 Metro Projects (MTP) at an
anticipated cost of Rs. 29,022 crore, with a throw-forward of
Rs. 19,160 crore. The Committee underscore the fact that these projects
are important to meet the major challenges being faced by Railways
relating to lack of capacity as it results in increasing load/pressure on
railway infrastructure, compromise safety and lowers speed. The Ministry
have submitted that the speed of the freight trains has largely remained
stagnant and improved only marginally from 25 to 29 kmph over the
last three decades. On the trunk routes, which constitute 16% of the
network and carries close to 60% of the freight, the average speed of
goods trains is still lower. Further , predominantly freight carrying routes
are over congested. As a result the growth rate (of Originating Loading)
has stagnated at around 4.5% since 2011. In the process, the share of
Railways in overall traffic, i.e. Railways vis--vis Road Traffic has
declined from 62% in 1980 to 36% in 2012.
The Committee further note that in case of 155 New Line projects
valued at Rs. 2,34,406 crore, expenditure of Rs. 61,702 crore has been
incurred upto 31.03.2016. However, allocation for these 155 projects
during 2016-17 is to the tune of only Rs. 14,026 crore. Similarly, for
42 gauge conversion projects valuing Rs. 50,476 crore, expenditure
upto 31.03.2016 has been Rs. 24,526 crore and allocation for various
projects during 2016-17 is to the tune of only Rs. 4,161 crore. For 235
Doubling projects, valuing Rs. 1,57,089 crore, expenditure upto

29
31.03.2016 has been Rs. 26,516 crore and allocation for various projects
during 2016-17, is to the tune of only Rs. 22,240 crore. The Committee
strongly feel that the provision of Rs. 14,026 crore for 155 New Line
projects, Rs. 4161 crore for 42 Gauge Conversion projects and
Rs. 22,240 crore for 235 Doubling projects is grossly inadequate and
will not even partially meet their requirements. The Committee are of
the view that building the infrastructure for Railways should be the
responsibility of the Government as in many other countries while the
onus of running the Railways should lie with the Ministry of Railways.
The Committee suggest that the Railways should also probe the
possibility of funding modernisation of stations, etc. through PPP Mode.
The Committee would desire the Ministry of Railways to analyse the
basic reasons for the piling up of ongoing projects causing undue delay
in completion of projects and try to resolve the same in coordination
with all authorities/stakeholders concerned at the highest level. Further,
the Ministry of Railways should take other corrective measures, including
pursuing the matter of more financial support for expeditious completion
of projects with the Ministry of Finance (MoF).
Reply of the Government
Indian Railway is focusing on capacity and throughput enhancement
works. These works will result in improved speed of freight trains on
the network. By ensuring timely delivery and congestion free seamless
movement, it is expected that railway traffic share will notably improve
in coming years.
The Railway projects are highly capital intensive and are primarily
financed through Capital advanced as Budgetary support from General
Exchequer. Ministry of Railways have been highlighting the need to
augment Budgetary Support at various fora, including several letters
written at the highest level. In 2016-17, funds from Central Road Fund
have also been provided by Ministry of Finance towards expenditure on
New Lines and Gauge Conversion projects under Railway Safety fund,
apart from other safety related works. Railways Õ internal resources are
utilized for replace/renewal of assets, un-remunerative works relating
to improvement of operational efficiency and development.
In addition, seeking investment from private partners as per PPP
initiatives, joint funding of important projects with State Governments,
development of important railway stations with funding from private
participants etc. are some of the steps being taken by Ministry of
Railways towards project implementation and resource generation.

30
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
SOCIALLY DESIRABLE PROJECTS
The Committee have been informed that projects which offer a
ROR of less than 12% are socially desirable Projects. The Committee
are concerned to note that out of the 432 New Lines, Doubling and
Gauge Conversion ongoing/pending projects, only 140 projects (32.4%)
(New Lines-20, Gauge Conversion-8 & Doubling-112) are having ROR
12% and above. The remaining 292 projects (67.6%) are socially desirable
projects. Out of these 292 projects 222 have negative ROR and the
rest 70 projects have ROR less than 12%. The Ministry of Railways has
apprised that socially desirable projects can be funded only from GBS
and not by taking loan from outside where the Railways have to pay
market rate because the return from those lines will not be substantial
enough to reimburse the cost of borrowing. The Committee, while
taking cognizance of the concern of the Railways in this regard, are
of the view that the Government should come up with viable plans to
fund the socially desirable projects in a phased manner so as to address
issues in perspectives and remove hindrances and work as a proactive
facilitator of connectivity.
Reply of the Government
In order to meet the growing demands for new projects and also
to expedite ongoing projects including those taken up on socio-economic
considerations, Ministry of Railways initiated the scheme of project
development, financing and monitoring through formation of Joint
Ventures/SPVs with State Governments. This, inter alia, involves surveys,
preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) and getting requisite
approvals, processing for sanctioning and monitoring of identified
projects including last mile connectivity, capacity enhancement and
station redevelopment projects. Many State Governments were
requested for signing of MoUs in this regard. Consequently, Memorandum
of Understanding (MoU) for setting up of JV (Joint Venture) Companies
have been signed with Maharashtra, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala,

31
Chhattisgarh and Telangana. A similar JV Company is already in place
for Karnataka State & Joint Venture Agreement has been signed with
five States  viz. Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Gujarat and Kerala.
The role of Joint Venture Company, inter alia, is to choose projects,
identify and collaborate with its stakeholders, mobilize resources, form
project specific Special Purpose Vehicle (if required). The Joint Venture
can mobilize resources in the form of debt from banks/multi-lateral
agencies/Financial Institutions as debt funding by leveraging the equity
or in the form of financial support from various stakeholders of the
projects through the formation of project specific Special Purpose
Vehicle. The project specific Special Purpose Vehicle will have equity
participation of Ministry of Railways and the State Government through
the Joint Venture. The Special Purpose Vehicle shall be at the liberty
to arrange investment from other Stakeholders, Public Sector
Undertakings, raise debt from Banks or Financial Institutions for
undertaking a project.
As per the Shareholding Pattern approved by Cabinet, Ministry of
Railways can have the equity participation upto 50% in the Joint Venture
& State Government to have the balance equity participation.
Formation of JV Company will help in mobilization of additional
resources for execution of railway projects resulting in expansion of
Railway Network in the country.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation Para No. 11 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
CATEGORISATION OF PROJECTS
The Committee are told that in order to optimally utilise the
available meagre GBS and to avoid thin spread of funds, the Railways
have prioritised the projects to give them focused attention. The
prioritised projects have been categorised as A-1: National Projects;
A-2: Cost Sharing Projects; A-3: Immediate Critical Projects; A-4: Medium
Critical Projects; A-5: Important Projects Not Critical; B: Other Projects;
and C: Least Priority Projects. The Committee find that out of the
432 New Lines, Doubling and Gauge Conversion ongoing/pending
projects,11 are National Projects (A-1), 58 are Cost Sharing Projects
(A-2), 169 are Immediate Critical Projects (A-3), 52 are Medium Critical
Projects (A-4), 17 are Important Projects Not Critical (A-5), 38 are

32
other Projects (B) and the 87 are Least Priority Projects(C). However,
the Committee find to their dismay that out of 87 Least Priority Projects,
83 are socially desirable projects. Further , there are 29 socially desirable
projects which have not been categorised. According to the Ministry,
projects which do not fall in any of the proposed categories and not
made any significant progress have been accorded the lowest priority.
Therefore, these 29 socially desirable projects are lowest priority
projects which have not made any significant progress. The Committee
are very perturbed at the treatment meted out to the socially desirable
projects as they feel that the very purpose and objective of
conceptualising these projects have been lost due to such an approach
which defy logic and reason. They are of the opinion that the Railways
should sincerely look into the possibility of reviving them. The
Committee are of the firm opinion that the Government should review
and reassess the usefulness of such projects in consultation with the
State Governments concerned and take firm decisions in respect of
each such project. It will not be prudent to keep them pending for
long without any progress as it would add to the frustration of those
citizens settled in under-developed, and unconnected far-flung corners
of the country.
Reply of the Government
Indian Railway is executing number of projects and providing services
which have direct impact on socio-economic development of the country.
A number of these projects are national projects, border area projects
and backward areas connectivity projects; however , there is need to
supplement resources of Indian railways in form of GBS, cost sharing
by State Governments. As regard GBS, Ministry of Railways is constantly
pursuing with Ministry of Finance for enhancement of Gross Budgetary
Support to expedite all projects including socially desirable projects.
Simultaneously, Ministry of Railways have taken a number of steps to
ensure increased availability of funds for ongoing projects specially
socially desirable projects. Funding of remunerative projects which
are primarily doubling & electrification projects is being done through
loan taken from LIC as a result, the balance GBS available for socially
desirable projects have increased marginally. In addition, Ministry of
Railways have launched a scheme of project development, financing
and monitoring through Joint Venture/SPV with State Governments.
MoU in this regard have been signed with 7 number of States and Joint
Venture Agreements have been signed with 5 number of States.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation Para No. 17 of Chapter I)

33
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee further learn that as per the Memorandum of
Understanding signed between the Ministry of Railways and the Ministry
of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) on 10.11.2014 to eliminate
Level Crossings on National Highways (NHAI), the MoRTH/NHAI will be
replacing all level crossings on the National Highway Corridors by ROBs/
RUBs, at their cost, in the next five years, subject to availability of
funds. As already more than one and a half years have elapsed after
the signing of this MoU, the Committee would like to be apprised of
the facts and figures with regard to the exact number of Level Crossings
on National Highways, yearly targets and level crossings so far eliminated
by MoRTH/NHAI.
Reply of the Government
After the signing of MoU between Ministry of Railways and Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways, 13 LCs have been eliminated by
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH)/NHAI by constructing
ROBs/RUBs. Numbers of Level Crossings on National Highways keep on
changing as new National Highways are being declared by MoRTH.
MoRTH is carrying out detailed survey to access the exact number of
level crossings existing on National Highways.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation Para No. 20 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee note that the Railways intend to propose all the
projects in the hilly regions of J & K, Uttarakhand and North-Eastern
States as National Projects and had prepared a Cabinet Note in this
regard. They, however, observe to their dismay that the proposal of
the Ministry of Railways was dropped and not processed further . The
Committee are given to understand that the Ministry of Finance had
not separated the funding of National Projects through GBS but it
started to ring fence a substantial chunk out of GBS proportionately
and, as a result, the availability of funds for other railway projects got
further reduced. The National Projects are being funded by Ministry of
Finance to the extent of 75%, and 25% cost of the project is being
funded from the GBS of the Ministry of Railways. Looking at the
requirements and the growing expectations of the people of the hilly
regions of the country, the Committee share the view of the MoR that
all the Railway projects in hilly regions of J&K, Himachal Pradesh,

34
Uttarakhand and North Eastern region should be declared as National
Projects. Also, in view of the meagre allocation of GBS over the years
and the long list of pending projects with the Railways, the Committee
earnestly desire that the National Projects should be fully funded by
Union Government separately, instead of ring fencing of funds out of
GBS. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Railways should urgently
take up this matter again with the Ministry of Finance in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Suggestion of the Committee has been Noted.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation Para No. 23 of Chapter I)

35
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
   N EW D ELHI; SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY ,
26 July, 2017 Chairperson,
04 Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

36
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON RAILWAYS (2016-17)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 31st May, 2017, from 1100
hours to 1323 hours in Committee Room ÔCÕ, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ganesh Singh Ñ In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
3. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary
4. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav
5. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
6. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
8. Shri A.T . Nana Patil
9. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy
10. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
11. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shanker
12. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
13. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev
15. Shri T . Rathinavel
16. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
17. Shri Alok Tiwari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun Kumar Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Geeta Parmar Ñ Deputy Secretary

37
XXX XXX XXX
2. In the absence of Chairperson, the Committee chose Shri Ganesh
Singh to act as Chairperson for the sitting under the provision of Rule
258(3) of ÔRules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha Õ
which inter alia states as under:Ñ
Ò258(3) If the Chairperson is absent from any sitting, the Committee
shall choose another member to act as Chairperson for that sitting.Ó
3. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the following draft Reports:Ñ
(i) Action Taken Report on the recommendations of the Standing
Committee on Railways contained in their 10th Report on
ÔPending ProjectsÕ.
(ii) *** *** ***
The Draft Report at serial number (i) above was adopted with
slight modifications ***                  ***                    ***.
4. The Committee appreciated the excellent work done by the
Committee Secretariat in drafting the Reports. The Committee, then,
authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports and present the
same to the Parliament.
5. *** *** ***
6. *** *** ***
7. *** *** ***
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.***Not related to the Report.

38
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
10TH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) ON THE SUBJECT
ÒPENDING PROJECTS ÕÕ
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations: 19
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:Ñ
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 14
15, 16 and 18
Percentage of Total 73.68%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies:Ñ
Para No. 4 1
Percentage of Total 5.26%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:Ñ
Para Nos. 7, 12, 17 and 19 4
Percentage of Total 21.05%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies are still awaited:Ñ
Para No. NIL 0
Percentage of Total 0