gg`   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
       (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 9th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants – 2016-17 of the Ministry of Railways’] 
 
 
 ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
               
           
             
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
DECEMBER, 2016/ AGRAHAYANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS 
(2016-17) 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
11 

 
SCR NO. 205 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
                  MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
               (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 9TH Report of 
the Standing Committee on Railways ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants – 2016-17 of the Ministry of Railways’] 
 
 
 
 
 
    Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2016 
 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.12.2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2016/ AGRAHAYANA, 1938 (Saka)              

 
      CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE................................................................ (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v) 
 
PART-I 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government………………………………………… 
 
11 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of th e Government’s 
reply…………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
59 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require 
reiteration…………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
66 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited………………………………………………………………………. 
 
67 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 I.      Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on    
08.12.2016...................................................................................... 
 
 
68 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the      
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 9th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants – 2016-17 of the Ministry of Railways’ 
 
70 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON  RAILWAYS (2016-17) 
 
 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay  - Chairperson 
      MEMBERS 
      LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri E. Ahamed 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
5. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
6. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
7. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
8. Shri Ramesh Kaushik 
9. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
11. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
12. Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
13. Shri R. Radhakrishnan 
14. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy 
15. Shri Lakhanlal Sahu 
16. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shanker 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri Ganesh Singh 
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20. Shri Narasimham Thota 
21. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar 
  
     RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri A.K. Antony 
23. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
24. Shri Shwait Malik 
25. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
26. Shri Mukut Mithi 
27. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao 
28. Shri T. Rathinavel 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
30. Shri Alok Tiwari 
31. Shri Motilal Vora 
 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Constituted w.e.f. 01.09.2016 vide Lok Sabha Secretariat Bulletin Part II No.4105 dated 
15.09.2016 

 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik - Director 
3. Dr. Mohit Rajan - Committee Officer 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2016 -17), having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Eleventh 
Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants – 2016-17 of the Ministry of Railways’. 
 
 
2. The Ninth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and was laid in Rajya Sabha on 
25.04.2016.  The Report contained 42 recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of 
Railways furnished their Action Taken Notes on all the recommendations/observati ons 
contained in the Report on 29.08.2016. 
 
 
3. The Committee considered  and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 08.12.2016.  The minutes of the sitting is given in Appendix-I. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observation and recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.  
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee 
on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  SHRI SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY 
8 December, 2016  CHAIRPERSON 
17 Agrahayana 1938 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Railways deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
their Ninth Report (16thLok Sabha) on "Demands for Grants 2016-17 of the Ministry 
of Railways".  
 
2. The Ninth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
25 April, 2016. It contained, inter alia,  40 Recommendations/Observations along 
with 2 paras (nos. 1 and 6) of overview statements.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of 40 Recommendations/Observations have 
been received and categorised as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
  
 Para Nos.2,3,4,5,7,8,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,25,26,27,29, 
32, 33,34,35,38,39,40,41 and 42 
         Total :32 
         Chapter II 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies:- 
Para No. 9,23,24,28,30,36 
         Total :6 
   Chapter III 
          
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:- 
Para No.31 
        Total : 1 
          Chapter IV  
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies are still 
awaited:-  
Para No. 37                              Total :1 
                   Chapter V 
 

 
 
2 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to 
implementation of the Recommendations accepted by the Government.  
The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report 
should be furnished to them not later than three months of the 
presentation of this report. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations/observations.  
 
A. Demand for Grants (2016-17) - An Overview 
 
(Recommendation Para No.3) 
6. The  Railway Min ister, in his Budget Speech, had  stated that the Railways 
must provide to the citizens a rail system free from capacity constraints and 
inefficiency, and that it should be a system that is   capable of taking care of its 
own needs - financial and otherwise.  The theme of the R ailway Budget 2016-17 is 
overcoming challenges – Reorganise, Restructure, Rejuvenate Indian Railways.  
The Railway Minister further highlighted the three cornerstones of his strategy  
reflecting a new thought process: (i) Nav Arjan – New receipts, i.e., exploiting new 
sources of revenue so that every asset tangible or                  non-tangible  gets 
optimally monitised; (ii) Nav Manak – New norms, i.e., each rupee that gets 
expended will be re examined to ensure optimal productivity (the endeavour would  
be to improve Railways' efficiency yardsticks and procurement practices to bring 
them in line with the international best practices); and (iii)  Nav Sanrachana  - New 
Restructures, i.e., need to re-imagine the conventional ways of solving issues.  Co -
operation, Collaboration, Creativity  and Communication should be the hallmark of 
decision making and actions, with a need to revisit all processes, rules and 
structures to enable this transformation of Indian Railways.  The  Railway Minister 
further stressed the Hon'ble Prime Minister’s vision to convert into specific reality 
with speed, efficiency and total transparency.  The Railway Minister also informed 
the House that bankable railway projects are now assured  of funding and should 
be completed within the next 3 -4 years and a new way of funding the projects 
would be through institutional financing.  The Life Insurance Corporation (LIC) 

 
 
3 
 
alone has agreed to invest Rs.1.5 lakh crore over a span of 5 years on extremely 
favourable terms.  He inter -alia stated th at departmental orientation, absence of 
cross functional collaboration and lack of business focus have held back the 
Railways from realising the commanding heights which it is capable of achieving.  
Although there is no set pattern regarding the format of the Budget Speech of the 
Railway Minister, the Minister has annexed the details of the implementation of the 
budget announcements 2015 -16 as Annexure -II of the Speech.  The Budget 
Speech refers to the tepid growth of core sector as the primary reason for 
unprecedented slippages. The Committee feel that it would have been appropriate 
if the initiatives, plans and performance of the Railways were corroborated and 
highlighted with specific details in the Budget Speech itself.   The Railway Minister 
has further  proposed to reorganise the Railway Board along business lines and 
suitably empowering the Chairman, Railway Board, to lead the organization 
effectively.  He also emphasised on sasaktikaran, i.e., improving planning practices.  
According to the Railway Bud get 2016 -17, a Railway Planning and Investment 
Organization for drafting medium and long term corporate plans will be set up.  
Further, to provide long term perspective to planning for augmenting railway 
network, the National Rail Plan NRP -2030 would be developed in consultation with 
various stakeholders, including State Governments / representatives and other 
relevant Central Ministries.  NRP -2030 will endeavour to harmonise and integrate 
the rail network with other modes of transport and cross energy for achieving a 
seamless multi -modal transportation network across the country.  This will also 
achieve the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision of the integrated planning and cost 
optimization of the transportation network.  The Committee appreciate d the 
innovative steps taken and the proactive measures for systemic improvement 
announced in the Railway Budget, 2016 -17.  They, however, emphasize d that 
these be implemented with a clean perspective in a time bound manner, keeping in 
mind the imperative to mobilize and optimally utilize the resources needed for most 
of these initiatives.   
 
 
 
 

 
 
4 
 
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:  
 
 "Railways have started to arrange Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) from 
financial institutions including Life Insurance Corporation of India for executing 
ongoing and new capacity enhancement projects to overcome severe capacity 
constraints.  Life Insurance Corporation of India has agreed to extend a loan of Rs 
1.5 lakh Crore over next five years and a MOU in this regard has been signed. All 
the Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) from financial institutions will be channelized 
through IRFC. During 2015 -16, Rs 94 32 Crore have been arranged from Extra 
Budgetary Resources.  During 2016 -17, Rs. 20,985 Crore is expected to be 
arranged from Institutional Financing. The process for formulation of National Rail 
Plan-2030 has been initiated. To apprise all concerned Ministries of Railway’s intent 
and for soliciting their views, a Kick -off meeting was held in Rail Bhavan on 
20.05.2016.  Apart from Ministry of Railways, representatives from NITI Aayog, 
Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways, Development of North Eas tern 
Region, Statistics & Programme Implementation, Coal, Power, Heavy Industries & 
Public Enterprises, Defence, External Affairs alongwith representatives from Inland 
Waterways Authority of India, The Land Ports Authority of India/MHA & M/s RITES 
participated in the meeting.  Terms of Reference of the study for formulation of the 
plan is under finalization. A Committee has been set up by Board (CRB) to 
deliberate upon various issues. The deliberations are being held by the Committee.  
As soon as the Report  of the Committee is finalised the same will be submitted to 
Board." 
 
8. The Committee note the steps taken by the Ministry of Railways in 
the direction of formulation of National Rail Plan -2030 and hope the 
Ministry will continue with their consistent tim e-bound efforts in future.  
They, however, desired that the National Rail  Plan 2030 be formulated 
expeditiously. Further the Committee note that the Ministry has 
remained silent on setting up Railway Planning and Investment 
Organisation for drafting mediu m and long term corporate plans  which 
intends to improve planning practices .  The Committee reiterate their 
previous observation on corroborating initiatives, plans and 
performances of the Railways  announced in the Budget Speech .  They 

 
 
5 
 
would like to be intimated of the initiatives taken by the Government in 
this regard.  
 
B. Financial Performance during 2015-16 and Budgetary Allocation  for 
2016-17 
 
(Recommendation Para No.13) 
 
9. The Committee had noted that during 2015-16, the Ministry of Railways have 
fallen short of their target in respect of Gross Traffic Receipts (GTR) wherein 
Rs.183578 crore (BE) has been revised downward to Rs.167834 crore (RE), leading 
to a shortfall of Rs.15,744 crore, i.e. 8.57 %. When compared with the GTR of Rs. 
156710.54 crore (Actuals) during 2014 -15, then GTR during 2015 -16 has been 
missed by a margin of nearly 10%,  i.e., there was mere 7% growth at RE level in 
2015-16  against the targeted growth of 17% at BE level in 2015 -16. It is indeed a 
matter of concern for the Committee that this situation, when the percentage gap 
between RE growth over BE growth was more than 5 percent, has happened only 
twice previously, i.e. in 2001 -02 and in 2012 -13 when the same was -6.4% and -
6.6%, respectively. Similarly, the expected shortfall on account of freight loading 
would be around 80 MT ( -10.1 % growth over BE level in 2015 -16).   Here again, 
there is a gap of 11% between growth at RE over BE of NTKMs during   2015 -16 if 
compared to actual 2014-15.  Such a situation had happened only twice in the last 
20 years when the targets were missed by more than 5%, i.e., in 1998 -99 and 
2012-13 at 9.1% and 5.1%, respectively.  
 The reason for the shortfall during the year 2015 -16 has been attribut ed to 
less realisation of both freight loading and passenger traffic .  The Committee inter-
alia felt that sharp deterioration in the competitive strength of Railways in its AC -I 
and AC -II passenger business, and in finished products like  Petroleum, Oil an d 
Lubricants (POL), Cement, Steel etc. are also the factors for falling volumes in 
Railways' passenger and freight segments. For example, in early 2000 domestic air 
travel used to be a small fraction of Railways AC business, but over the last 15 
years, it has left Railways far behind. Now, number of domestic air travellers is 
over 50 times the number of AC -I and 6 times AC -II passengers of Railways. In 
fact, now the combined AC business (of all the 4 classes i.e. AC-I, AC-II, AC-III and 
AC Chair Car) is smaller by 20% as compared to domestic air travel business. While 

 
 
6 
 
domestic air travel has grown by double digits over the last few years and 15% 
during 2015-16, Railways AC passengers of all the 4 classes registered a negative 
growth last year. The Committee  had felt that the Ministry should maintain data 
about domestic air travel which they do not maintain right now as submitted by 
them. From a commercial point of view, the Railways should look into this since it 
impacts its health in a highly competitive mar ket place. Similarly, cement BTKMs 
declined by 8%, food grains BTKMs by 4% and container BTKMs by 1% in 2015 -16 
RE as against actuals of 2014 -15. In the finished products segment of freight 
business also the competitiveness of Railways is under serious thr eat from road 
transport as Railways is a ‘Station to Station’ transporter rather than ‘Point to Point’ 
transporter like trucks and therefore, the incidental cost of Rail transportation is 
very high.    In respect of freight loading, as stated, there had be en a tepid growth 
of the core sector, which was only 1.9 percent upto January 2016 for the year 
2015-16 as compared to 5 percent in the corresponding period of the previous 
year.  The Ministry have apprised the Committee that the freight basket of 
Railways which is dominated by 10 bulk commodities will be expanded to increase 
the revenue base.  The freight tariff policy will be reviewed to rationalise freight 
tariffs and make them more competitive as compared to other modes of transport.  
The Committee had called upon the Ministry to chalk out a clear and time -bound 
road map for the manner in which the Railways will enhance their freight basket 
and pursue the same.  They also emphasised that the freight tariff policy should be 
reviewed with specified timelin es and rationalisation of tariffs so as to inspire 
confidence in the intended segment, thus making the Railways more competitive 
as compared to other modes of transport.  The Committee were of the opinion that 
this is one area which requires focused attent ion of the Ministry; they have 
conducted an in -depth study based on which they should take appropriate 
measures with a view to curbing the effect of negative growth of the core sector of 
the economy in respect of demand of coal, cement, iron, steel and foo dgrains, on 
the Indian Railways. The progress in their efforts should be intimated to the 
Committee. 
 
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
 "The government has initiated various steps so as to increase the share o f 

 
 
7 
 
Rail in transportation market. The strategy adopted to increase share of Railways 
in freight movement is multi-pronged. It include directed and focussed investments 
to increase transportation capacity in congested sections and also tariff and non -
tariff policy initiatives aimed at attracting more traffic ( including new traffic) 
streams to Railways. Some of these are as under:   
i) The originating traffic tonnage is likely to increase in the coming year because of 
the impact of budget announcement such as expansion of the freight basket of IR, 
expansion of container sector to all traffic (barring Coal & specified Mineral Ores) 
and access to container traffic for all existing terminals/sheds. Moreover all efforts 
would be made to increase the share of high value commodities in total loading.  
ii) The freight rates are being rationalized further to make it more competitive with 
other modes of transportation. Certain steps have already been initiated in this 
direction to attract more traffic to rail which includes:  
• Permitting all covered wagons for booking of traffic to two -point/multi-point 
combinations, mini rake.  
• Distance restriction applicable for mini rake has been relaxed from 400 to 600 
kms.,   
• Automatic freight rebate scheme for traffic loaded in empty flow direction. 
• Withdrawal of Port Congestion charge,  
• Withdrawal of Busy Season Charge,  
• Discontinuance of dual freight policy for Iron Ore traffic,  
• Introduction of Roll-on-Roll-off policy,   
• Merry -Go-Round (MGR) scheme has been further rationalised to attract short 
lead traffic.  
• Classification of Red Mud has been reduced from Class-150 to Class-120. 
        It is expected that the above mentioned initiatives would spur growth in 
various s ectors of the economy and generate additional revenue for Railways. 
Rationalisation of tariff is an on -going process and in future also various initiatives 
would continue to be taken as per the need and demand of the IR and Economy. 
In Addition to this, certain ‘Digital India Initiatives’ have been taken like  
• Electronic Registration of Demands & Electronic Transmission of Railway Receipt.  
• SAMVAD – A process of structured dialogue between customers and top Railway 
authority has been initiated at Railwa y Board as well as zonal level to take 

 
 
8 
 
continuous feedback from customers. Ten key customer Managers at Railway 
Board level have been nominated to liaison with major freight stake holders." 
 
11.  In their recommendation, the Committee drew the attention of  the 
Ministry of Railways towards the sharp deterioration in the competitive 
strength of Railways both in passenger and freight business.  The 
Ministry in their reply has elaborated on their efforts towards increase in 
transportation capacity in congested sections and tariff and non -tariff 
policy initiatives.  While appreciating the various attempts put forth by 
the Ministry in the direction of expanding their freight earnings , the 
Committee express their concerns over the silence of the Ministry 
regarding passenger business of Railways  in their replies .  Passenger 
earnings has been a major source of income for Railways and the 
Committee are afraid if Railways continue to lose their business to other 
mode of transportation, the impact may surface out in the form of major 
financial trouble before Railways.    
 
12. However, t he Committee are dismayed to note that  in their reply,  
the Ministry have not explained the various initiatives towards ensuring 
the competitiveness and restoring the passenger business.  As such, the  
Committee apprehend that for Railways , passenger business is either a 
non-priority sector or the Ministry have not realized the essence of the 
recommendations of the Committee.  While reiterating their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee expect the Ministry to take a serious 
note of the recommendations/observations made by the Committee and  
spell out some concrete steps taken in this direction. 
  
C. Non-achievement of PPP Targets 
(Recommendation Para No.19) 
13. The Committee observe that the Railways had not been able to achieve their 
targets in respect of PPP during 2012 -13, 2013-14 and 2014-15. The achievement 
all these years was NIL, where the targets of Rs. 1050 crore,       Rs. 6000 crore 
and Rs. 6005 crore,  respectively were kept.  Further, during 2015 -16, BE of Rs. 
5781 crore has been revised upward to Rs. 27269 crore. As stated, the estimated 

 
 
9 
 
figures at the final modification estimate (FME) stage of Extra Budgetary Resources 
(EBR) (partnerships) is Rs.15,081 crores, which includes the estimated 
investments/financial commitments in sanctioned rail connectivity PPP projects, 
investments in private freight terminals and wagon investment/leasing schemes, 
investments from State Governments in ROB/RUB work s and in other rail line cost 
sharing projects, investment by container operators in rolling stock and terminals, 
cost sharing projects with Central Ministries, capital investments made in rail sector 
by railway PSUs and external direct funding for Eastern  DFC project, etc. The 
Committee note that final modification estimate (FME) in 2015 -16, indicates a 
shortfall vis-a-vis RE, 2015 -16 for PPP. It matters that the under -achievement in 
targets for PPP could result in lowering of the Annual Plan size of Rs. 1 ,00,000 
crore, substantially during 2015 -16. The Committee call upon the Ministry to be 
extra cautious in their efforts to fulfill their targets of Rs.18340 crore in respect of 
PPP during 2016-17. 
 
14. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
 "All efforts will be made to achieve the target of 2016-17." 
15. The Committee call upon the Ministry to be extra cautious in 
accomplishing their targets with respect to PPP during 2016 -17.  In this 
regard, the reply of the Ministry seems to be  very super fluous and 
evasive.  One line reply of the Ministry clearly indicates the level of 
seriousness of the Ministry towards the concerns of the Committee 
contained in their recommendation/observation.  The Committee 
understand that just sta ting that all efforts will be made to achieve the 
target of 2016 -17 expresses the casual attitude of the Ministry of 
Railways which may have larger implication on the finances of the 
Railways.  The Committee expect from the Ministry to take their 
observations in full letter and spirit  act and report upon it .  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire 
the Ministry to update/inform the Committee regar ding the specific 
steps taken in this direction.   
 
  

 
 
10 
 
D. Adarsh Stations 
(Recommendation Para No.31) 
16.  The Committee were further apprised that out of 106 railway stations 
targeted to be developed during 2015 -16 as Adarsh Stations, only 29 railway 
stations could so developed up to February, 2016. The works for the remaining 
stations are stated to be in progress and at advanc ed stage. The Committee 
expressed their apprehension about the completion of the work of the remaining 
77 railway stations to be developed as Adarsh Stations by March, 2016. That being 
so, they urge the Ministry to complete the pending work expeditiously. The 
Committee further desire d that the projects taken up during a year should be 
completed in a given time frame, as delays affect the physical and financial targets 
for the next year, besides leading to cost escalation and time overruns.   
 
17. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
 "1052 stations were identified upto 2014 -15 for development under Adarsh 
station scheme. Out of these, 946 stations had been developed upto 31.03.2015.  
Balance 106 stations were targeted f or development, out of these, 40 stations had 
been developed during 2015 -16.  Further, 200 stations have been identified for 
development under Adarsh Station Scheme during 2015 -16 which are planned for 
development by 2017-18." 
18.   The Committee observe t hat the Ministry of Railways have not 
submitted a proper response to the recommendations of the Committee 
and have simply provided the status of 40 out of 106 Adarsh Railway 
Station,  which were developed during 2015-16.  The Ministry is silent on 
the development of remaining 66 stations.  The Committee reiterate that 
the Ministry should complete the pending work expeditiously and a time 
schedule may be worked out to check the progress on monthly basis as 
delay of every single day would result into cost esc alation and time 
overruns.  Further, the progress in this regard should be monitored 
regularly at the highest level and the Committee be kept informed in this 
regard at regular intervals.  

 
 
11 
 
  
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED           
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
 The Committee note that the Railway Budget for 2016 -17 has  been presented 
under difficult situations. The revenue targets for 2015 -16 of the Indian Railways were 
missed, while the revised estimates for the same period, including gross traffic receipts, 
passenger earnings, freight earnings and internal resource ge neration showed a 
downward trend.  These shortfalls have been mainly attributed to the global economic 
downturn and meagre domestic investment by the Railways which have adversely affected 
their resources.  The additional pay out of Rs.28,500 crore as part  of the 7th Central Pay 
Commission’s recommendations has further impacted the financial condition of the 
Railways. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Hon’ble Committee’s observations on the financial condition of Indian Railways are 
factual in nature. Despite missing the  BE 2015 -16 targets of originating passenger, 
goods NTKMs, Gross Traffic Receipts and internal resource generation in 2015 -16, the 
Indian Railways finances have shown a consistent improvement over those in previous 
years. 
The Operating Ratio has improved to 90.6% (Approx.) vis -à-vis 91.3% in 2014-15 
and 93.6% in 2013 -14. Fund balances (excluding RSF) have improved from Rs 5220 
crore in 2013 -14 to Rs 6776 crore in 2014 -15 and to Rs 10950 crore (provisional) in 
2015-16. Internal Resource Generation for plan outlay has also increased from Rs 11668 
crore in 2013 -14 to Rs 15440 crore in 2014 -15 to Rs 15520 crore (provisional) in 2015 -
16. 
However, the declining trend in traffic and the impact of 7th CPC implementation 
presents a very difficult year ahe ad, despite a provision of Rs 20,000 crore towards the 

 
 
12 
 
likely liability of pay and pension and target set for non -fare revenue generation to 
augment and supplement traditional traffic earnings. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3) 
 The  Railway Minister, in his Bud get Speech, has clearly stated that the Railways 
must provide to the citizens a rail system free from capacity constraints and inefficiency, 
and that it should be a system that is   capable of taking care of its own needs - financial 
and otherwise.  The th eme of the Railway Budget 2016 -17 is overcoming challenges – 
Reorganise, Restructure, Rejuvenate Indian Railways.  The Railway Minister further 
highlighted the three cornerstones of his strategy  reflecting a new thought process: (i) 
Nav Arjan – New receip ts, i.e., exploiting new sources of revenue so that every asset 
tangible or          non -tangible  gets optimally monitised; (ii) Nav Manak – New norms, 
i.e., each rupee that gets expended will be re examined to ensure optimal productivity 
(the endeavour w ould be to improve Railways' efficiency yardsticks and procurement 
practices to bring them in line with the international best practices); and (iii)  Nav 
Sanrachana  - New Restructures, i.e., need to re -imagine the conventional ways of 
solving issues.  Co-operation, Collaboration, Creativity  and Communication should be the 
hallmark of decision making and actions, with a need to revisit all processes, rules and 
structures to enable this transformation of Indian Railways.  The  Railway Minister further 
stressed the Hon'ble Prime Minister’s vision to convert into specific reality with speed, 
efficiency and total transparency.  The Railway Minister also informed the House that 
bankable railway projects are now assured  of funding and should be completed within 
the next 3-4 years and a new way of funding the projects would be through institutional 
financing.  The Life Insurance Corporation (LIC) alone has agreed to invest Rs.1.5 lakh 
crore over a span of 5 years on extremely favourable terms.  He inter -alia stated that 
departmental orientation, absence of cross functional collaboration and lack of business 
focus have held back the Railways from realising the commanding heights which it is 
capable of achieving.  Although there is no set pattern regarding the format  of the 
Budget Speech of the Railway Minister, the Minister has annexed the details of the 
implementation of the budget announcements 2015 -16 as Annexure -II of the Speech.  
The Budget Speech refers to the tepid growth of core sector as the primary reason f or 
unprecedented slippages. The Committee feel that it would have been appropriate if the 
initiatives, plans and performance of the Railways were corroborated and highlighted with 

 
 
13 
 
specific details in the Budget Speech itself.   The Railway Minister has further proposed to 
reorganise the Railway Board along business lines and suitably empowering the 
Chairman, Railway Board, to lead the organization effectively.  He also emphasised on 
sasaktikaran, i.e., improving planning practices.  According to the Railway  Budget 2016-
17, a Railway Planning and Investment Organization for drafting medium and long term 
corporate plans will be set up.  Further, to provide long term perspective to planning for 
augmenting railway network, the National Rail Plan NRP -2030 would b e developed in 
consultation with various stakeholders, including State Governments / representatives 
and other relevant Central Ministries.  NRP -2030 will endeavour to harmonise and 
integrate the rail network with other modes of transport and cross energy for achieving a 
seamless multi-modal transportation network across the country.  This will also achieve 
the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision of the integrated planning and cost optimization of the 
transportation network.  The Committee appreciate the innova tive steps taken and the 
proactive measures for systemic improvement announced in the Railway Budget,       
2016-17.  They, however, emphasize that these be implemented with a clean perspective 
in a time bound manner, keeping in mind the imperative to mobi lize and optimally utilize 
the resources needed for most of these initiatives.   
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 Railways have started to arrange Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) from financial 
institutions including Life Insurance Corporation of India for executing ongoing and new 
capacity enhancement projects to overcome severe capacity constraints.  Life Insurance 
Corporation of India has agreed to extend a loan of Rs 1.5 lakh Crore over next five 
years and a MOU in this regard has been signed. All the Extra Budgetary Resources 
(EBR) from financial institutions will be channelized through IRFC. During 2015 -16, Rs 
9432 Crore have been arranged from Extra Budgetary Resources.  During 2016 -17, Rs. 
20,985 Crore is expected to be arranged from Institutional Financing.  
The process for formulation of National Rail Plan -2030 has been initiated. To 
apprise all concerned Ministries of Railway’s intent and for soliciting their views, a Kick -
off meeting was held in Rail Bhavan on 20.05.2016.  Apart from Ministry of Railways, 
representatives from NITI Aayog, Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways, 
Development of North Eastern Region, Statistics & Programme Implementation, Coal, 

 
 
14 
 
Power, Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, Defence, External Affairs alongwith 
representatives from Inland Waterways Authority of India, The Land Ports Authority of 
India/MHA & M/s RITES participated in the meeting.   
 Terms of Reference of the study for formulation of the plan is under finalization. 
A Committee has been set up by Board (CRB) t o deliberate upon various issues. 
The deliberations are being held by the Committee.  As soon as the Report of the 
Committee is finalised the same will be submitted to Board. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4) 
 The Committee note that one of the important steps proposed to be taken 
through the Railway Budget 2016 -17 is the setting up of the Railway Planning and 
Investment Organization for drafting medium term (5 years) and long term (10 years) 
corporate plans for the Railways.  The Organisation will conduct independent studies and 
propose the  financing mechanism for identified projects.  The other significant steps, the 
National Rail Plan NRP 2030, will seek to integrate the Railways wit h other modes of 
transport and help develop a model transportation system for the country.  The 
Committee note with satisfaction the aforesaid proposals of the Railways, which can go a 
long way in addressing affordable means of transportation across the na tion.  However, 
they feel that the effective implementation of these initiatives will be extremely 
challenging at the ground level, especially in the context of the huge financial investment 
required.  The Committee, therefore, desire that a detailed roadm ap be worked out with 
farsightedness, specifically looking into the possible hindrances and bottlenecks that may 
emerge overtime.  These issues should be clearly addressed at the time of preparation of 
the roadmap and wide consultations with all stakeholde rs, including State Governments.  
The Committee would desire to be kept abreast  of the progress in the matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

 
 
15 
 
A Committee has been set up by Board (CRB) to deliberate upon various issues. 
The deliberations are being held by  the Committee.  As soon as the Report of the 
Committee is finalised the same will be submitted to Board. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5) 
 As per its mandate, the Committee undertook a detailed scrutiny of the Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry of Railways 2016 -17.  The major constraints facing the Indian 
Railways are enumerated below, the primary one being resource crunch.   
 Downward trend i n respect of Gross Traffic Receipts, both on account of 
passenger as well as freight loading. 
 Deteriorating position in respect of Operating Ratio due to the impact of the 7th 
Central Pay Commission. 
 Shortfall in meeting the 12th Plan Projections due to in adequate Gross Budgetary 
Support. 
 Growing dependence of Indian Railways on Gross Budgetary Support and Market 
Borrowingsfor substantially higher capital expenditure. 
 Interest burden on Market Borrowings for augmented financing of bankable 
projects. 
 Piling up of throwforward Railway projects. 
 Thrust on joint venture with States, with problems with States having poor 
financial health. 
 Delay in execution of Strategic Lines. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Hon’ble Committee’s observations on the financial constraints being faced by 
Indian Railways are factual in nature.  
In B.E. 2016 -17 the GTR kept at Rs 184820 crore is more than the BE and RE 
target for 2015-16. 
Originating Passenger target in BE 2016 -17 is higher than that of RE 2015 -16, 
though lower than BE 2015-16. 
Freight NTKMs in BE 2016 -17 is higher than that of RE 2015 -16, though lower 
than BE 2015-16. 

 
 
16 
 
The Operating Ratio target in BE 2016 -17 is kept at 92% which is a deterioration 
over that of 2015 -16. This is due to the provisioning made in working exp enses for 7th 
CPC impact for salary and pension. 
The 12th Plan had pegged the GBS at Rs 1,94,221 crore while the the GBS 
received in the period from 2012 -13 to 2016-17 (B.E.) comes to Rs 1,67,533 crore. This 
is a shortfall of about 13.7% over the plan target. 
The proportion of GBS and market borrowings in the total annual plan expenditure 
is tabulated below.  
 
Financing of bankable projects had been resorted to in 2011 -12 from market 
borrowing when Rs 2078 crore was borrowed and invested in doubling and el ectrification 
projects. After 2011 -12, it was only in 2015 -16 that investment in certain key 
infrastructure projects was funded under Institutional Financing (IF) arrangement by LIC 
through IRFC. These allocations are also on certain identified projects of  doubling, 
electrification etc. with a view to augmenting capacity. These borrowings for projects 
under IF arrangement has a 10 year moratorium on principal repayment and also 
provides for capitalization of interest for initial 5 years. It is expected that  with assured 
funding under IF arrangement, the potential of the projects would benefit the system 
apart from preventing cost overruns due to chronic time overruns in completion and 
commissioning of projects. These capacity augmentation projects would cont ribute 
further to railway finances. 
The building up of throw -forward of railway projects only establishes the gap 
between the funds required and investment made. Low capital investment and thin 
spread of resources are leading to slow capacity creation and cost-overruns in the 
projects, depriving the system to reap the benefits of the investments. Thus the thrust 
has been laid from 2015 -16 onwards on increasing the plan outlay with assured funding 
under IF and EBR. 
It is a fact that the throw forward of Rail way Projects have been piling up 
primarily on account of sanction of large number of projects to meet the people’s 
aspiration translating in the form of demand for rail connectivity. Sanction of large 
2012-13 80%
2013-14 80%
2014-15 73%
2015-16 82%
2016-17 86%
12th Plan avg. 81%

 
 
17 
 
number of unremunerative projects without commensurate funding has created a vicious 
cycle of thin spread of resources resulting in time and cost overrun consequently leading 
to piling up of huge throwforward. 
Plan expenditure of Indian Railways is financed through a combination of internal 
generation; money f rom the general exchequer i.e. gross budgetary support (GBS) and 
market borrowings. As Railway’s internal generation is almost negligible, Railways has 
been dependent upon Gross Budgetary Support which is a loan from General Exchequer 
for its projects. Even the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) provided to Ministry of Railways 
(MOR) for its infrastructure development is substantially less than the actual 
requirement. MOR had proposed plan size of Rs. 5,48,802 Crore involving  Gross 
Budgetary Support (GBS) of Rs . 3,16,842 Crore for the XII plan. Actual plan size 
approved by Planning Commission was Rs.5,19,221 Crore with GBS  of only Rs. 1,94,221 
Crore. The approved GBS of Rs.1,94,221 Crore  also includes a loan of  Rs. 52,000 Crore 
from JICA/WB & Railways equity of Rs.28,000 Crore for Dedicated Freight Corridor. 
Actual GBS given during the 12th Plan has been substantially less than the approved 
GBS. Against the approved GBS of Rs. 1,94,221 Crore. GBS actually given is Rs. 1,67,511 
Crore. Details of GBS demanded and actually given are as under:- 
Figure in Rs. Crore 
Year GBS demanded by 
Railway 
GBS (incl. Diesel cess) 
Actual 
2012-13 48,855 25,234 
2013-14 39,500 28,174 
2014-15 37,500 31,596  
2015-16 48,044 37,507 
2016-17 55,500 45,000 
 
Further, Ministry of Finance has been ring fencing certain funds out of Gross 
Budgetary Support exclusively for 12 National Projects without increasing the gross 

 
 
18 
 
budgetary support proportionately. As a result over the years funds available for 
remaining New Line, Gauge Conversion and Doubling projects have effectively reduced. 
However, following measures have been taken by Indian Railways to garner funds 
for its capital investments:  
1. Railways have started to arrange Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) from f inancial 
institutions including Life Insurance Corporation of India for executing ongoing and new 
capacity enhancement projects to overcome severe capacity constraints.  Life Insurance 
Corporation of India has agreed to extend a loan of Rs 1.5 lakh Crore o ver next five 
years and a MOU in this regard has been signed. All the Budgetary Resources (EBR) from 
financial institutions will be channelized through IRFC. During 2015 -16, Rs 9432 Crore 
have been arranged from Extra Budgetary Resources.  During 2016 -17, Rs. 20,985 Crore 
is expected to be arranged from Institutional Financing.  
2. Ministry of Railways have been requesting State Governments to share cost of projects 
falling in their State.  Measures to generate additional resources like funding by other 
beneficiaries, execution of projects through Special Purpose Vehicle basis etc. have also 
been taken up. So far, 10 State Governments have come forward to share the cost of the 
41 projects in the respective States. Various industries & stake holders have come  
forward to share cost of 7 Projects.  
3. Ministry of Railways have launched a scheme of project development, financing and 
monitoring through Joint Ventures/SPVs with State Governments.  17 State 
Governments, viz., Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Guj arat, Haryana, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh & West Bengal have accorded ‘in principle’ approval to 
form such JVCs.   MoU with seven States have been signed in thi s regard viz. Odisha, 
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Chhattisgarh, Haryana and Telangana.      
4. In order to attract private capital for Railways projects a new participative policy has 
been issued by Railways, i.e. Non -Government Private line model , Joint Venture Model, 
BOT Model, capacity augmentation through funding by customer model.  
5. Railways has also come up with allowing Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) to the extent 
of 100% in seventeen areas including Suburban Corridor projects through PPP , High 
Speed train projects, Dedicated freight lines, Rolling Stock including train sets, 
locomotive or coaches manufacturing and maintenance facilities, Railway Electrification, 
Signalling System, Freight Terminals/Logistic Park, Passenger Terminals, Rail way 

 
 
19 
 
Technical Training Institutes, Testing Facilities and Laboratories, Concessioning of 
standalone passenger corridors (branch lines, hill railways etc.), Non - Conventional 
Sources of Energy, Mechanized Laundry, Rolling Stock procurement, Bio -toilets, 
Technological solutions for manned and unmanned level crossings, Technological 
solutions to improve Safety and reduce accident.  
The thrust on joint venture with States is only for the willing States who want to 
speed up certain projects for their socio -economic development. There is no policy that 
the railway project selection and financing will be on this mode only.  
Ministry of Railways have launched a scheme of forming Joint Venture with 
various States.  Basic purpose of creation of JVs with State Governme nts is to arrange 
resources for fast tracking ongoing projects which are languishing for want of fund and 
to take up new projects to serve  their core sector  industries, ports, mines, industrial 
corridors, station redevelopment etc.,  which cannot be take n up by MoR at present at 
desired pace. The Joint Venture so formed with equity participation from Ministry of 
Railways to the extent of 49% and rest by respective State Governments will leverage 
the equity in raising funds for those projects. In doing so,  the JV will also seek 
participation by various stakeholders such as Industries, Ports, Mines etc. The role of 
Joint Venture Company, inter alia, is to choose projects, identify and collaborate with its 
stakeholders, mobilize resources, form project specif ic Special Purpose Vehicle (if 
required).  The Joint Venture can mobilize resources in the form of debt from 
banks/multi-lateral agencies/Financial Institutions as debt funding by leveraging the 
equity or in the form of financial support from various stake holders of the projects 
through the formation of project specific Special Purpose Vehicle.  The project specific 
Special Purpose Vehicle will have equity participation of Ministry of Railways and the 
State Government through the Joint Venture.  The Special Purpose Vehicle shall be at the 
liberty to arrange investment from other Stakeholders, Public Sector Undertakings, raise 
debt from Banks or Financial Institutions for undertaking a project.  The repayment of 
the loan will be out of the earning from the pr oject after its completion. The participation 
of the State Government will be limited to their equity contribution.  The initial paid -up 
capital as approved by the Cabinet is Rs. 100 Crore, therefore, the initial liability on 
respective State Government will be limited to only Rs. 51 Crore.      

 
 
20 
 
The strategic lines discussed by the Committee would be funded by the Ministry of 
Defence and the execution therefore would commensurate with the target set and funds 
provided. 
The four strategic lines identified to  be taken up in the first phase are in 
Himalayan region involving large scale tunneling and bridging Hence, to have reasonably 
accurate cost estimates, Final Location Survey have to be carried out involving detailed 
study of Topographic features, detailed Geological, Geophysical, Geo -Technical 
Investigation etc. Accordingly, Ministry of Railways has requested Ministry of Defence to 
convey approval to carry out Final Location Survey at a cost of Rs. 345 Crore and deposit 
the  same with Ministry of Railways, which has not yet been received.  Only on receipt of 
funds from Ministry of Defence, can Railway carry out the FLS, which will take about 2 ½ 
Years.  Only thereafter can detailed estimate be prepared and project sanctioned. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
 The Committee observe that the Annual Plan for the year 2016 -17  for the 
Ministry of Railways has been pegged at Rs. 1,21,000 crore comprising Gross Budgetary 
Support of Rs. 34220 crore, Railway Safety Fund of Rs. 10780 crore, internal resources 
of Rs. 16675 crore and Extra Budgetary Resources(EBR) of Rs. 59325 crore, consisting of  
Marketing Borrowings of Rs. 20000 crore and Public Private Partnership (PPP) of          
Rs. 18340 crore.  During examination of the Demands for Grants (2015 -16) of the 
Ministry of Railways last year, the Committee had cautioned the Ministry about their 
growing dependence on GBS and market borrowings. This time also, the Annual Plan 
2016-17 is financed through GBS, (37.2%) and through EBR (49%) to be funded by PPP, 
Institutional Financing and lease as had been done in the previous years.  Internal 
Resource is only 13.8 percent of the Annual Plan, which is not a positive indicator for a 
healthy organisation. The Ministry has not been able to generate enough internal 
resources becau se of the tepid growth of the core sector of the economy, global 
economic slowdown and certain factors that are not under the control of Indian Railways, 
and they will be compelled to go in for more and more market borrowing to relieve the 
strain on intern al resources. As is obvious, with the burden of the 7th Central Pay 
Commission, the situation on internal resources would be more acute. The Committee 
would, therefore, urge the Ministry to explore and review all possible areas where 

 
 
21 
 
resources can be mobil ized to meet their growth plans.  The Committee further stress 
that the Ministry should prioritise completion and commissioning of last mile projects and 
projects where investments would be remunerative at an early date, besides exploring 
other commercial viable avenues that would not put the Railways under financial duress. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Rate of growth of the economy has had a bearing on the generation of internal 
resources. In order to mitigate the effect of this, Railways have created a Non Fare 
Revenue (NFR) Directorate whose mandate is to explore all possible avenues for revenue 
maximization through non fare box initiatives. Also, Railways have taken up the route of 
Institutional finance for funding its capital investment requirements. Seek ing funding 
through Life Insurance Corporation of India is the first step in this regard. Apart from the 
above, new participative models for rail connectivity and capacity augmentation projects 
are being considered. This will encourage outside investment i n the Railways thus 
reducing the reliance on in -house and government funding. Also, Railways will again be 
making a fervent request to Ministry of Finance/NITI Aayog for a substantial increase in 
GBS allocation to take care of needs of critical and importa nt capacity augmentation and 
safety related works. 
Notwithstanding the severe resource crunch, Railways have undertaken an 
exercise of prioritization of work not only for augmenting the network capacity and 
throughput enhancement, but also to pay focused a ttention to important and urgent 
projects which are either in the final stages of their completion or are connected to 
capacity enhancement and debottlenecking of the network.  Also, enhanced focus is 
being accorded to last mile connectivity projects. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
 The Ministry, in their Budget, have brought out that resources are expected to be 
generated from institutional reforms that would generate savings monetisation of assets 
and defraying project costs with other stakeholders.  The proposals for improving the non-
tariff sources as brought out in the Budget are redevelopment of stations, monetisation of 
land along tracks, monetisation of soft assets such as PNR enq uiry, e-commerce activities 

 
 
22 
 
on IRCTC website, etc., advertisement at st ations and land adjacent to track near big 
stations/functions, overhauling of parcel business and improving manufacturing activities.  
The Committee agree with the Indian Railways that such avenues are necessary for 
earning revenues and that these steps ar e in the right direction, move -away from the 
conventional practice of passing on the financial burden on Indian Railways only through 
frequent increases in freight tariffs.  They, however, emphasise that the Ministry should 
ensure that these measures are e xecuted and implemented at the ground level in letter 
and spirit.  While stressing that the Ministry should be vigilant on execution of these 
measures on field, the Committee desire that they be kept abreast of the progress in this 
regard.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Monetization of land along tracks 
The vacant land is mostly in the form of narrow strips along tracks and is also 
essential for servicing and maintenance of track and other infrastructure.  The vacant 
railway land is utilized for execution of various infrastructural projects for meeting future 
growth needs of Railways and include projects like doubling, traffic facilities, etc.  The 
vacant land, which is not required by Railways for its immediate operational needs, is 
utilized for commercial de velopment, wherever feasible, in order to mobilize additional 
financial resources through Rail Land Development Authority, set up through the Railway 
(Amendment) Act, 2005. 
           Earning from land by Railways for the years 2013 -14, 2014 -15 & 2015 -16 i s 
Rs.1090 crores, Rs.1313 crores and Rs.1682 crores respectively. 
 
Station Redevelopment 
       General Guidelines for  redevelopment of stations on ‘as is where is’ basis, by 
inviting open bids from interested parties with their designs and business ideas  duly 
providing for amenities and other requirements of the Railways have been issued to 
Zonal Railways in September 2015.  Model Tender Documents have been prepared and 
uploaded on Railway’s website for stakeholders’ consultations. 
         In addition, o ut of eight stations viz., Anand Vihar, Bijwasan, Chandigarh, 
Gandhinagar, Habibganj (Bhopal), Shivaji Nagar (Pune), Surat and SAS Nagar (Mohali) 

 
 
23 
 
entrusted to Indian Railway Stations Development Corporation Ltd. (IRSDC) for 
redevelopment, letter of intent for one station (Habibganj) has been issued and RFQ for 
two stations (Anand Vihar & Bijwasan) have been opened. 
Improvement of non-tariff sources 
       A separate Non Fare Revenue (NFR) Directorate has been set up in the Ministry of 
Railways to step up non tariff revenue as announced in the Railway Budget 2015-16. The 
Ministry of Railways have engaged a Professional Media Market Evaluation Agency 
(PMMEA) viz. Ernst & Young through Rail India Technical and Economic Service (RITES) 
Limited., for improving th e non tariff revenue. With the creation of NFR Directorate, the 
task of improving of non fare revenue has been initiated. 
 
Overhauling of parcel business and improving manufacturing activities.   
In order to mobilise resources, Non -fare revenue Directorate  has recently been 
created and it is functioning. 
Regarding revamping of parcel business, Policy for leasing of parcel space for all 
the brake vans, parcel vans as well as entire parcel special train has been reviewed 
thoroughly and power has been delegate d  to the zonal railways  to revise the  reserve 
price downwardly wherever considered necessarily with finance concurrence. Further  
duration of leasing contracts of brake vans has been increased to 3 to 5 years.  In case 
of Parcel cargo express trains it has been increased from 3 to 6 years and more 
loading/unloading points has been permitted at en-route stations.  
With a view to provide hassle free transparent service to the rail-customers, parcel 
leasing tenders  are being invited through e -tendering system  as pilot project  on Delhi 
division and it is being explored in other zonal railways. 
     Parcel capacity of  brake vans of disabled persons (SLRD) is being enhanced from 
existing 4 tonnes to 5 tonnes. 
     During Railway budget 16 -17 Hon’ble MR has announced that containerised 
movement will be opened for parcel traffic. Accordingly, Container train operators (CTO)s 
are being allowed to load parcel traffic. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
24 
 
Recommendation (Para No.10) 
 
 The Committee are aware that the Railway Safety Fund (RSF) was set up to 
finance safety works at level crossings. In view of the lower annual share of the Railways 
from the Central Road Fund (CRF) of Rs.1100 crore against a requirement of Rs.5000 
crore, they had approached the Ministry of Finance for additional funds.  The Committee 
observe that against the proposed allocation of Rs. 55500 crore of Gross Budgetary 
Support (GBS) in which the diesel cess component was Rs.5000 crore, the Finance 
Ministry allocated Rs. 45000 crore as GBS consisting of Rs. 34220 crore under Cap and 
RSF of Rs. 10780 crore from the CRF against diesel cess, out of which Rs. 3000 crore is 
allocated for road related safety works for Level Crossings (LCs) and ROBs/RUBs, and the 
remaining Rs. 4912 crore for New Lines and Rs. 2870 crore for Gauge Conversion. It is 
regrettable that while the Ministry of Railways had proposed allocation of Rs. 5000 crore 
for 2016-17 for their safety related works, they are being given only Rs.3000 crore. Th e 
assessment made by the Railways of the requirement of funds for their safety related 
works should have been favourably considered by the Government since around 40 
percent of the total rail accidents and about 60 percent casualties occur at level 
crossings.  Being the most important aspect of running the Railways and considering 
their responsibility and obligation to transport passengers safely to their destinations, the 
significance of safety related works cannot be underestimated.  The Committee are of 
the considered view that the Ministry should explore the possibility of constituting a non -
lapsable Special Railway Safety Fund for 5 -6 years to complete the much required safety 
works, including maintenance of tracks, rails, old bridges, etc.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Committee constituted by Ministry of Railway proposed for creation of a graded 
non lapsable fund Rastriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) of total Rs.119183 crores for 
safety related works to be operated over next five years.  Hon’ble Minister of Railways 
has also requested the Hon’ble Minister of Finance for sanction of this non -lapsable Fund 
amounting Rs. 119183 crores, out of which Rs. 111683 crores to be funded by Ministry 
of Finance for the safety related works on Indian Railways vide lette r No. 2014/CE -
III/BR/SRSF-II dated 20.05.2016. 
 

 
 
25 
 
Recommendation (Para No.11) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways has launched a scheme of 
project development, financing and monitoring through Joint Ventures/SPVs with State 
Governments.  Out of 17 State Governments who have accorded ‘in principle’ approval to 
form Joint Venture Companies (JVCs), Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) for setting up 
JVCs have been signed with seven State Governments, viz., Karnataka, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Chhattisgarh and Telangana.  The Committee observe 
the same and feel that only very fews States are in a position to share the cost of project 
development with the Railways.  They are compelled to point out that those States which 
are unable to do the same for lack of adequate resources but need development on a 
much larger scale should not be left behind.  This is where the social obligation role of 
the Railways should come to the fore.  The Committee strongly state that those State 
Governments which are low on their financial health should also necessarily be included 
by the Railways while taking up infrastructural projects across the country.  In fact, the 
Committee are aware that these are the States which have other problems as well, which 
can be addressed by extending railway network for effective transport and 
communication network.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways is aware of its social responsibility of equitable growth of rail 
network in the country besides those required for operational reasons.  Hence Ministry of 
Railways will try to maintain reasonable balance in allocation of funds for exp ansion of 
network out of the resources it has at its disposal. It is a well accepted fact that due to 
inability of Railways to generate surplus and inadequate Gross Budgetary Support projects 
have been languishing leading to vicious cycle of time and cost overrun. To tide over this 
problem of resource crunch, Ministry of Railways have taken number of initiatives to arrange 
additional resources.  This scheme of forming Joint Venture is one of many such initiatives.  
Basic purpose of creation of JVs with Stat e Governments is to arrange resources for fast 
tracking ongoing projects which are languishing for want of fund and to take up new 
projects to serve  their core sector  industries, ports, mines, industrial corridors, station 
redevelopment etc.,  which cann ot be taken up by MoR at present at desired pace. The 
Joint Venture so formed with equity participation from Ministry of Railways to the extent of 
49% and rest by respective State Governments will leverage the equity in raising funds for 

 
 
26 
 
those projects. In doing so, the JV will also seek participation by various stakeholders such 
as Industries, Ports, Mines etc. The role of Joint Venture Company, inter alia, is to choose 
projects, identify and collaborate with its stakeholders, mobilize resources, form proj ect 
specific Special Purpose Vehicle (if required).  The Joint Venture can mobilize resources in 
the form of debt from banks/multi -lateral agencies/Financial Institutions as debt funding by 
leveraging the equity or in the form of financial support from var ious stakeholders of the 
projects through the formation of project specific Special Purpose Vehicle.  The project 
specific Special Purpose Vehicle will have equity participation of Ministry of Railways and the 
State Government through the Joint Venture.  T he Special Purpose Vehicle shall be at the 
liberty to arrange investment from other Stakeholders, Public Sector Undertakings, raise 
debt from Banks or Financial Institutions for undertaking a project.  The repayment of the 
loan will be out of the earning f rom the project after its completion. The participation of the 
State Government will be limited to their equity contribution.  The initial paid -up capital as 
approved by the Cabinet is Rs. 100 Crore, therefore, the initial liability on respective State 
Government will be limited to only Rs. 51 Crore. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.12) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways have included 30 projects (25 
New Line, 2 Doubling & 3 Gauge Conversion) in their Capital Investment programme of 
2016-17 at an ant icipated cost of Rs. 58,274 crore, just in anticipation of various State 
Governments coming forward to form JVCs. The Committee are of the view that keeping 
in view the possibility of some State Governments not volunteering, the Railways should 
keep themse lves ready with some back -up plan.  The Committee desire that such 
projects merit favourable consideration from the State Governments who have signed 
MoU for setting up JVCs.  However, the Ministry of Railways should keep themselves in 
constant touch with these State Governments for timely execution of various projects 
undertaken for implementation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Railways is in constant dialogue with State Government for the 
formation of Joint Venture.  As of now 17 State Governments, viz., Andhra Pradesh, 
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 

 
 
27 
 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, & West 
Bengal have accorded ‘In Principle’ approval to form such JVCs.  Memoranda of 
Understanding (MoU) for setting up JV Companies have been signed with Seven State 
Governments, viz. Odisha , Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Chhattisgarh, Haryana 
and Telangana.     
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
 The Committee note that during 2015 -16, the Ministry of Railways have fallen 
short of their target in respect of Gross Traffic Receipts (GTR) whe rein Rs.183578 crore 
(BE) has been revised downward to Rs.167834 crore (RE), leading to a shortfall of 
Rs.15,744 crore, i.e. 8.57%. When compared with the GTR of Rs. 156710.54 crore 
(Actuals) during 2014 -15, then GTR during 2015 -16 has been missed by a mar gin of 
nearly 10%,  i.e., there was mere 7% growth at RE level in 2015 -16  against the 
targeted growth of 17% at BE level in 2015 -16. It is indeed a matter of concern for the 
Committee that this situation, when the percentage gap between RE growth over BE 
growth was more than 5 percent, has happened only twice previously, i.e. in 2001 -02 
and in 2012 -13 when the same was -6.4% and -6.6%, respectively. Similarly, the 
expected shortfall on account of freight loading would be around 80 MT ( -10.1 % growth 
over BE level in 2015 -16).   Here again, there is a gap of 11% between growth at RE 
over BE of NTKMs during   2015 -16 if compared to actual 2014-15.  Such a situation had 
happened only twice in the last 20 years when the targets were missed by more than 
5%, i.e., in 1998-99 and 2012-13 at 9.1% and 5.1%, respectively. 
 The reason for the shortfall during the year 2015 -16 has been attributed to less 
realisation of both freight loading and passenger traffic.  The Committee inter -alia feel 
that sharp deterioration in  the competitive strength of Railways in its AC -I and AC -II 
passenger business, and in finished products like  Petroleum, Oil and Lubricants (POL), 
Cement, Steel etc. are also the factors for falling volumes in Railways' passenger and 
freight segments. For  example, in early 2000 domestic air travel used to be a small 
fraction of Railways AC business, but over the last 15 years, it has left Railways far 
behind. Now, number of domestic air travellers is over 50 times the number of AC -I and 
6 times AC-II passengers of Railways. In fact, now the combined AC business (of all the 
4 classes i.e. AC -I, AC-II, AC-III and AC Chair Car) is smaller by 20% as compared to 

 
 
28 
 
domestic air travel business. While domestic air travel has grown by double digits over 
the last few years and 15% during 2015 -16, Railways AC passengers of all the 4 classes 
registered a negative growth last year. The Committee feel that the Ministry should 
maintain data about domestic air travel which they do not maintain right now as 
submitted by them. From a commercial point of view, the Railways should look into this 
since it impacts its health in a highly competitive market place. Similarly, cement BTKMs 
declined by 8%, food grains BTKMs by 4% and container BTKMs by 1% in 2015-16 RE as 
against actuals of 2014-15. In the finished products segment of freight business also the 
competitiveness of Railways is under serious threat from road transport as Railways is a 
‘Station to Station’ transporter rather than ‘Point to Point’ transporter like trucks and 
therefore, the incidental cost of Rail transportation is very high.    In respect of freight 
loading, as stated, there had been a tepid growth of the core sector, which was only 1.9 
percent upto January 2016 for the year 2015 -16 as compared to 5 percent in the 
corresponding period of the previous year.  The Ministry have apprised the Committee 
that the freight basket of Railways which is dominated by 10 bulk commodities will be 
expanded to increase the revenue base.  The freight tariff policy will be reviewe d to 
rationalise freight tariffs and make them more competitive as compared to other modes 
of transport.  The Committee call upon the Ministry to chalk out a clear and time -bound 
road map for the manner in which the Railways will enhance their freight bask et and 
pursue the same.  They also emphasise that the freight tariff policy should be reviewed 
with specified timelines and rationalisation of tariffs so as to inspire confidence in the 
intended segment, thus making the Railways more competitive as compare d to other 
modes of transport.  The Committee are of the opinion that this is one area which 
requires focused attention of the Ministry; they have conducted an in -depth study based 
on which they should take appropriate measures with a view to curbing the e ffect of 
negative growth of the core sector of the economy in respect of demand of coal, cement, 
iron, steel and foodgrains, on the Indian Railways. The progress in their efforts should be 
intimated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The government has initiated various steps so as to increase the share of Rail in 
transportation market. The strategy adopted to increase share of Railways in freight 

 
 
29 
 
movement is multi -pronged. It include directed and focussed investments to increase 
transportation capacity in congested sections and also tariff and non -tariff policy 
initiatives aimed at attracting more traffic ( including new traffic) streams to Railways. 
Some of these are as under: 
i) The originating traffic tonnage is likely to increase i n the coming year because of the 
impact of budget announcement such as expansion of the freight basket of IR, expansion 
of container sector to all traffic (barring Coal & specified Mineral Ores) and access to 
container traffic for all existing terminals/sh eds. Moreover all efforts would be made to 
increase the share of high value commodities in total loading. 
ii) The freight rates are being rationalized further to make it more competitive with other 
modes of transportation. Certain steps have already been i nitiated in this direction to 
attract more traffic to rail which includes: 
• Permitting all covered wagons for booking of traffic to two -point/multi-point 
combinations, mini rake. 
• Distance restriction applicable for mini rake has been relaxed from 400 to 600 kms.,  
• Automatic freight rebate scheme for traffic loaded in empty flow direction. 
• Withdrawal of Port Congestion charge,  
• Withdrawal of Busy Season Charge,  
• Discontinuance of dual freight policy for Iron Ore traffic,  
• Introduction of Roll-on-Roll-off policy,   
• Merry -Go-Round (MGR) scheme has been further rationalised to attract short lead 
traffic.  
• Classification of Red Mud has been reduced from Class-150 to Class-120. 
        It is expected that the above mentioned initiatives would spur  growth in various 
sectors of the economy and generate additional revenue for Railways. Rationalisation of 
tariff is an on -going process and in future also various initiatives would continue to be 
taken as per the need and demand of the IR and Economy. 
In Addition to this, certain ‘Digital India Initiatives’ have been taken like  
• Electronic Registration of Demands & Electronic Transmission of Railway Receipt. 
• SAMVAD – A process of structured dialogue between customers and top Railway 
authority has been initiated at Railway Board as well as zonal level to take continuous 
feedback from customers. Ten key customer Managers at Railway Board level have been 
nominated to liaison with major freight stake holders. 

 
 
30 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para nos. 11 and 12 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.14) 
 The Committee appreciate that the Ministry could lessen the effect of major 
shortfall in Gross Traffic Receipts during 2015 -16 by containing their working expenses 
by about Rs.10,000 crore, partly due to reduction in diesel fuel prices and also by their 
efficient fuel consumption and changing the procedures for procurement of electric 
energy directly from the producers. However, what is worrisome is the fact that there is 
a major shortfall of around 21% in their targets for net revenue during 2015 -16 - against 
a target at Rs.25076.45 crore (BE), the net revenue stands at Rs. 19897.84 crore (RE). 
 The Committee further note that the target for total receipts for the year 2016 -17, 
is Rs. 189270.64 crore  (BE) which is only Rs.17465.67 crore  higher, depicting only 
around 10% growth over RE of 2015-16, viz., Rs.171804.64 crore. Furthermore, the total 
expenditure of Rs. 171060.00 crore (BE) is higher by Rs. 19152.87 crore, i.e., growth of 
12.60% over Rs. 151907.13 crore (RE) during the year 2015 -16. Therefore, th e net 
revenue would decline by  Rs.1687.20 crore, i.e., around 9% from Rs.19897.84 crore 
(RE) during 2015 -16 to Rs. 18210.64 crore (BE) during 2016 -17. The Committee 
acknowledge the constraints of the Ministry for fixing a moderate target for their receipt s 
during 2016-17, considering the trend of the subdued growth in freight loading and the 
not so optimistic trend in passenger booking. However, the overriding concern is that the 
factors affecting growth in 2015-16 are not likely to improve during the curr ent year and 
the expenditure is going to increase, particularly in view of the added burden of the 7th 
Central Pay Commission Report. In the given circumstances, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to work out a time -bound action plan to overcome the looming f inancial 
constraints. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Keeping in view the subdued trend of growth in freight loading and not so 
optimistic trend in passenger booking, the Railways have formulated a very moderate 

 
 
31 
 
and reasonable traffic plan for 2016 -17, wherein NTKMs growth has been targeted at 
4.1% and PKM growth at 0.3%.  
To give a boost to the passenger earnings while introduction of trains on cost 
recovery basis and with dynamic pricing are planned, rationalization of freight rates to 
attract bulk traffic to Railways i.e. review of busy season surcharge / port congestion 
charge and expanding the basket of commodities carried by Railways are being 
considered. Further, Railways’ incremental loading target in BE 2016 -17 is also based on 
the expectation of a turn-around in the performance of the core sector of the economy.  
A lot of emphasis is also being attached to generation of non -tariff revenues 
through commercial exploitation of vacant land and space rights over station buildings, 
monetizing land along railway tracks, monetizing the soft assets, advertising, overhaul of 
parcel business and revenue from manufacturing activity. Toward this end a dedicated 
Directorate has been created in the Ministry to address related issues so that the share 
of non-tariff revenues increases. 
Capacity constraints are being addressed by a five year investment plan (2015-19) 
with substantial investment on capacity enhancing works under Doubling, Traffic 
Facilities and Electrification. On the other hand, various economy measures are  also 
adopted to keep the Ordinary Working Expenses under check.  
Further, as proposed by the Ministry of Finance in the first memorandum to the Railway 
Convention Committee (RCC) (2014) and the recommendation made by the RCC (2014), 
the Ministry would pursue, with the Ministry of Finance, constitution of an inter -
Ministerial body to qualify and quantify the social service obligations that could be 
considered for reimbursement by the Government. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.15) 
 
The Committee note that there is an expected shortfall of around 500 PKM ( -5.8% 
growth at RE over BE for the year 2015-16) in originating passengers during RE, 2015-16 
over BE, 2015-16. The reasons for the same are  stated to be inter alia the burning of the 
Route Relay Interlocking (RRI) at Itarsi due to which traffic was paralysed for almost one 
month; the flood that affected traffic for 10/15 days; various agitations resulting in 
cancellation of a large number of trains, etc. The Committee desire that except natural 
calamities, the other factors responsible for the decrease in passenger traffic should be 

 
 
32 
 
looked into and promptly addressed so that such hindrances do not adversely affect rail 
movement in future.  The Committee also want the Ministry to examine the reasons for 
passenger dissatisfaction with the existing amenities and services such as on -board 
services, hygiene, cleanliness, catering and punctuality and address them effectively.  
The Committee also emphasize that the Railways should focus on last mile connectivity to 
attract short and medium distance passengers as it will increase passenger traffic and, in 
turn, passenger earnings. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As regards factors other than natural causes affecting passenger traffic, there are 
laid down rules and procedures relating to periodic maintenance of Railways assets, 
rolling stock and equipment.  
However, the financial year 2015 -16 started off with falli ng trend in passenger 
traffic on account of substantial decrease in number of season tickets due to spurt in sale 
of season tickets in the corresponding period of previous year due to impending fare 
hike. This was compounded by cancellation of trains on ac count of various factors, viz. 
agitations, fire accident in Itarsi, gauge conversion, natural disasters vis. floods (in 
Chennai resulting), fog, etc.  
Due to renewed effort on ticket checking and better utilization of the existing train 
accommodation, the number of passengers has picked up and the gap vis -à-vis 2014-15 
has narrowed down since July, 2015 and but for the large scale cancellations, the 
number of passengers could have been much higher.  Special/ Suvidha trains are also 
being run during festival  periods/vacations and additional coaches are attached to the 
trains to meet higher demand. The gap in passengers booked therefore narrowed down 
to 77.77 million at the end of March, 2016, closing the year with total passenger traffic of 
8151.90 million, i.e. (-)0.94% over the previous year.  Notably, PRS segment has grown 
by 3.28%.  The originating passenger earning has also increased by 5.86% as compared 
to last year.  
On Board Housekeeping Services (OBHS) scheme has been envisaged for all the 
Rajdhani/Shatabdi/ Duronto and all mail/ express trains (excluding purely over night 
trains) for on board cleaning and hygiene attention to the coach compartments and 
toilets. Good quality washed bedrolls are provided in the AC coaches. For further 

 
 
33 
 
improvement in the quality of washing of bedrolls, Railways are in the process of setting 
up of mechanized laundries at identified locations. 
Supervision and Monitoring is strengthened through surprise, periodical and 
scheduled inspections of catering units. Emphasis during  the inspections is laid on 
corrective action to improve the quality, hygienic standards of food for the travelling 
passengers. Deficiencies are analyzed and remedial action is accordingly taken. A system 
for obtaining feedback from the passengers has been  put in place wherein regular 
passenger opinion/feedback, on services rendered to them, is obtained, analyzed and 
corrective action taken. Improvement of catering services is an on -going process. Steps 
taken to ensure quality catering services are provided  on the Railways inter -alia include: 
(i) Engagement of reputed food chains/brands to provide quality food under E -catering 
and Ready to Eat meal schemes. (ii) Strengthening the supervision and monitoring 
system at different levels to check quality of food being supplied to passengers. (iii) 
Operation of centralized Catering Service Monitoring Cell (CSMC) (toll free number 1800 -
111-321) for prompt redressal of passenger grievances relating to the catering activities 
and real time assistance to travelling pub lic. (iv) Imposition of penalties in case of 
deficiencies detected in services. (v) Operation of all India Helpline ( No. 138) for rail -
users to lodge complaints/suggestions regarding food and catering services (vi) A Twitter 
handle with the address @IRCAT ERING has also been made operational to cater to the 
complaints/suggestions with regard to  catering services  (vii) Third Party Audit of 
catering services to be conducted at periodic intervals by independent auditors and zonal 
railways are empanelling rep uted auditing agencies accredited by NABCB (National 
Accreditation Board for Certification Bodies). (viii) Stringent conditions for award of 
catering contracts.  
The cumulative punctuality performance of Mail/Express trains on Indian Railways 
for the first quarter 2016-17 is 81.02% as against 74.55% in the same period of previous 
year. This is an improvement of +6.47%. A strict watch is being kept on all factors 
affecting punctuality performance and continuous efforts are being made to make up 
delays taking preventive steps to control assets failures apart from implementing capacity 
building measures in critical sections, so that mobility improves further. 
In the context of improving last mile connectivity, instructions have already been 
issued to Zonal Rail ways impressing upon the need for a focused strategy to identify 
potential sectors to initiate dialogue with the State Road Transport Corporations (SRTC) 

 
 
34 
 
to provide bus services at identified stations suiting the train timings, connecting major 
residential and office areas, which can build synergy between the two modes by feeding 
customers for each other. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.16) 
The Committee observe that a target of 8182 PKM (BE) has been fixed at 2016 -17 
w.r.t originating passengers, depicting a grow th of only 1% over the projection of 8101 PKM 
(RE), 2015-16. The projection for passenger earnings is Rs. 51012 crore during 2016 -17, i.e., 
a growth of 13% over Rs.45376.15 crore (RE) during 2015 -16. As reported, passenger 
capacity this year will increase by almost eight per cent and will be used for premium train 
services like Tejas and Hamsafar which will be based on dynamic pricing; such services will be 
provided on the cost recovery basis.  This is going to fetch the Railways around 12 per cent 
additional revenue. Out of the total originating passengers, six per cent are reserved category 
passengers and 94 per cent passengers are in the unreserved segment.  The Committee note 
the efforts being made by the Railways to come out of the severe resource crunc h and 
financial stress they are faced with. They would, however, like to caution that in their efforts 
to increase the revenue by addressing the needs of the reserved category passengers, 
extending facilities for 94% of the unreserved category passengers s hould not be overlooked; 
rather, the Railways would do well to provide appropriate services to this huge segment of 
passengers also which will not only improve passenger satisfaction but also encourage them to 
opt for better services, even by paying an additional amount. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Unreserved segment comprises of about 94% of total passenger traffic. Railways 
have taken a number of measures to boost the sale of tickets like facilitation of 
availability of tickets by appointment of Jansadharan Ticket Booking Sewaks (JTBS), 
proliferation of Automatic Ticket Vending Machines (ATVMs) etc and innovative measures 
like unreserved tickets through mobile phone on suburban sections of certain Zonal 
Railways for convenience of passengers. These steps will increase ticket vending capacity 
and are expected to encourage rail travel by masses and increase the passenger traffic 
including unreserved passenger traffic.  
Amenities/facilities being provided to passengers in different types of coaches 
including unreserved coaches are as per their respectiv e design. Facilities like cushioned 

 
 
35 
 
seats/berths, toilet and washbasin facilities, dustbins, etc. are being provided in all 
unreserved GS coaches. Recently this Ministry has issued instructions for provision of 
mugs in toilets of unreserved coaches. Furthe r in the Rail Budget 2016 -17, Deen Dayalu 
coaches were announced which are also unreserved coaches. Following additional 
amenities have been envisaged in Deen Dayalu coaches: 
• Cushioned luggage racks. 
• Additional hand hold in doorway area. 
• J hook near longitudinal luggage racks. 
• Toilets with polymerized floor coating. 
• Bio-toilets. 
• Water level indicator. 
• Toilet occupation indication display board. 
• Enhanced mobile charging facility. 
• Fire extinguishers with anti-theft arrangement. 
Similarly another train service Antyodaya was also announced in Rail Budget 2016-
17 which is fully unreserved superfast trains with majority of additional amenities as 
envisaged for Deen Dayalu coaches to provide fast connectivity to unreserved 
passengers on long-distance routes. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.17) 
 The Committee further note that by introducing premium train services during 
2016-17, there will certainly be an indirect increase in passenger fares, though, 
outwardly, there is no rise in the Railway fares.  The Committee find that Railways have 
increased passenger fares and freight rates across the Board by 40 -65 percent even in 
segments where it is vulnerable to the competitors in the market place.  They also note 
that during the last five years, various charges like cancellation, reservation, tatkal, 
superfast surcharge, MUTP surcharge, Mela surcharge and freight rates have been 
increased to the tune of 27% to 100%, which are not reflected in the Budget Speech. 
The Committee agree with the Ministry for taking necessary steps for revenue 
generation, however, they desire that the Ministry should be more forthcoming in their 
tariff pronouncements.  Further, for arresting the trend of falling volumes and 
productivity, margins and market shares, the Committee recommend that the Railways 
would have to be completely market-driven and customer centric and adopt dynamic and 

 
 
36 
 
differential (depending upon the relative competitive strength of Railways) pricing 
strategy so that ambitious targets of GTR, passenger and freight volumes and earnings 
growth would be achieved in 2016-17. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Premium Special Trains had been introduced over and above the regular trains on 
specific high demand sectors irrespective of the distance. 
In place of Premium Special trains, Suvidha trains are introduced w.e.f. 
01.07.2015, for meeting demand peaks as may arise from time to time during summer, 
winter, festivals, and on other such occasions. 
Besides Suvidha trains, Special trains on special charges are also introduced based 
on demand pattern. 
In view of the Subsidised f are structure for the regular Time Tabled trains and 
extra efforts being made by Railways for running of such special trains, the fare of 
Suvidha trains and Special trains on special charges are introduced on higher fares. 
The Minimum fare of Suvidha trains is equal to Tatkal fare applicable for the class 
of accommodation for initial 20% of the berths and thereafter the fare increases for 
subsequent slabs of 20% of seats/ berths booked subject to maximum three times of the 
Tatkal fare. Other charges like reservation charge, catering charge, Superfast surcharges, 
Service Tax etc. are chargeable in full wherever applicable.  
The Government has initiated various steps so as to increase the share of Rail in 
transportation market.  The strategy adopted to increase share of Railways in freight 
movement is multi -pronged. It include directed and focused investments to increase 
transportation capacity in congested sections and also tariff and non -tariff policy 
initiatives aimed at attra cting more traffic ( including new traffic) streams to Railways. 
Some of these are as under:- 
i. The originating traffic tonnage is likely to increase in the coming year because of the 
impact of budget announcement such as expansion of the freight basket of IR, expansion 
of container sector to all traffic  
(barring Coal & specified Mineral Ores) and access to container traffic for all existing 
terminals/sheds. Moreover, all efforts would be made to increase the share of high value 
commodities in total loading. 

 
 
37 
 
ii. The freight rates are being rationalized further to make it more competitive with other 
modes of transportation. Certain steps have already been initiated in this direction to 
attract more traffic to rail which includes:- 
• Permitting all covered w agons for booking of traffic to two -point/multi-point 
combinations, mini rake. 
• Distance restriction applicable for mini rake has been relaxed from 400 to 600 kms. 
• Automatic freight rebate scheme for traffic loaded in empty flow direction. 
• Withdrawal of Port Congestion charge. 
• Withdrawal of Busy Season Charge. 
• Discontinuance of dual freight policy for Iron Ore traffic, 
• Introduction of Roll-on-Roll-off policy, 
• Merry -Go-Round (MGR) scheme has been further rationalized to attract short lead 
traffic. 
• Classification of Red Mud has been reduced from Class-150 to Class-120. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.18) 
 
 The Committee note that there is an expected shortfall of 80 MT during 2015 -16 
in originating freight tonnes. Fur ther, originating tonnage is 1157 MT (BE) for the year 
2016-17, i.e., a growth of 50 MT over 1107 MT (RE), 2015 -16 and freight earnings of 
Rs.1,17,933 crore (BE 2016 -17), i.e., a growth of 5.4% of Rs. 111852.72 crore (RE) for 
the year 2015 -16. The Railways  have stated that they taken various measures with a 
view to bringing back the freight from road to rail, viz. rationalisation of freight fare, 
reviewing of port congestion surcharge to make it 5% from 10%,  increasing the basket 
of commodities for freight  traffic, concentrating on parcel traffic, restoration of CENVAT 
credit, paying attention to non -fare revenue in order to increase the same, etc. The 
Committee, while appreciating the measures taken by Railways with a view to achieving 
freight targets, hope that all out efforts will be made by the Railways in implementing the 
same at the ground level in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government has initiated various steps so as to increase the share of Rail in 
transportation market. The strategy adopted to increase share of Railways in freight 
movement is multi -pronged. It include directed and focussed investments to increase 
transportation capacity in congested sections and also tariff and non -tariff policy 
initiatives aimed at attractin g more traffic ( including new traffic) streams to Railways. 
Some of these are as under: 

 
 
38 
 
i) The originating traffic tonnage is likely to increase in the coming year because of the 
impact of budget announcement such as expansion of the freight basket of IR, expansion 
of container sector to all traffic (barring Coal & specified Mineral Ores) and access to 
container traffic for all existing terminals/sheds. Moreover all efforts would be made to 
increase the share of high value commodities in total loading. 
ii) The freight rates are being rationalized further to make it more competitive with other 
modes of transportation. Certain steps have already been initiated in this direction to 
attract more traffic to rail which includes: 
• Permitting all covered wagons fo r booking of traffic to two -point/multi-point 
combinations, mini rake. 
• Distance restriction applicable for mini rake has been relaxed from 400 to 600 kms.,  
• Automatic freight rebate scheme for traffic loaded in empty flow direction. 
• Withdrawal of Port Congestion charge,  
• Withdrawal of Busy Season Charge,  
• Discontinuance of dual freight policy for Iron Ore traffic,  
• Introduction of Roll-on-Roll-off policy,   
• Merry -Go-Round (MGR) scheme has been further rationalised to attract short lead 
traffic.  
• Classification of Red Mud has been reduced from Class-150 to Class-120. 
        It is expected that the above mentioned initiatives would spur growth in various 
sectors of the economy and generate additional revenue for Railways. Rationalisation of 
tariff is an on -going process and in future also various initiatives would continue to be 
taken as per the need and demand of the IR and Economy. 
 In Addition to this, certain ‘Digital India Initiatives’ have been taken like  
• Electronic Registration of Demands & Electronic Transmission of Railway Receipt. 
• SAMVAD – A process of structured dialogue between customers and top Railway 
authority has been initiated at Railway Board as well as zonal level to take continuous 
feedback from customers. Ten key cus tomer Managers at Railway Board level have been 
nominated to liaison with major freight stake holders. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.19) 
 The Committee observe that the Railways had not been able to achieve their 
targets in respect of PPP during 2012 -13, 2013 -14 and 2014 -15. The achievement all 
these years was NIL, where the targets of Rs. 1050 crore, Rs. 6000 crore and Rs. 6005 
crore, respectively were kept.  Further, during 2015 -16, BE of Rs. 5781 crore has been 

 
 
39 
 
revised upward to Rs. 27269 crore. As stated, the estimated figures at the final 
modification estimate (FME) stage of Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) (partnerships) is 
Rs.15,081 crores, which includes the estimated investments/financial commitments in 
sanctioned rail connectivity PPP projects, investmen ts in private freight terminals and 
wagon investment/leasing schemes, investments from State Governments in ROB/RUB 
works and in other rail line cost sharing projects, investment by container operators in 
rolling stock and terminals, cost sharing projects with Central Ministries, capital 
investments made in rail sector by railway PSUs and external direct funding for Eastern 
DFC project, etc. The Committee note that final modification estimate (FME) in 2015 -16, 
indicates a shortfall vis-a-vis RE, 2015-16 for PPP. It matters that the under-achievement 
in targets for PPP could result in lowering of the Annual Plan size of Rs. 1,00,000 crore, 
substantially during 2015-16. The Committee call upon the Ministry to be extra cautious 
in their efforts to fulfill their targets of Rs.18340 crore in respect of PPP during 2016-17. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 All efforts will be made to achieve the target of 2016-17. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 15 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.20) 
 The Committee are concerned to note that during 2016 -17, appropriation to the 
Pension Fund, Capital Fund (CF) and Debt Service Funds(DSF) is less than appropriation 
from these Funds. The amount of Rs. 42500 crore, Rs. 5750 crore , Rs. 214.35 crore has 
been appropriated to each of these Funds respectively; however, appropriation from 
these Funds is to the tune of Rs. 45500 crore, Rs. 7000 crore and Rs. 3000 crore, 
respectively. As submitted, the higher withdrawal of Rs. 3000 crore from DSF and Rs. 
2786 crore from the Pension Fund is to meet the salary and pension arrears’ impact of 
the 7th CPC pertaining to January, 2016 to March, 2016 and higher withdrawal of Rs. 
1250 crore from CF is to meet the obligatory repayment of lease charges (principal 
component).  In its 4th Report on Demand for Grants (2015 -16), the Committee, while 
quoting Bibek Debroy Committee, had observed that the Railways are making provision 
for depreciation on residual basis rather than on the basis of actual requirement for 

 
 
40 
 
replacing all overaged assets. But Railways have made under -provisioning for DRF from 
Rs. 7900 crore in BE to Rs. 5500 crore in RE of 2015-16 and meagre Rs. 3200 crore in BE 
of 2016 -17 as against actual requirements of over Rs. 20,000 crore. If Railways had 
made provisi on for DRF on actual requirement basis in the next year, it would have 
adversely impacted Railway finances. As submitted, the proportion of Annual Plan size 
which has gone up manifold, funded out of internal resource generation has gone down 
from 27.4% in 2014-15 to 13.8% in BE of 2016 -17.  The Committee feel that the 
Ministry of Railways should be wary of expending from their stock without replenishing 
them.  The Committee would like to stress that if the Railways have to stay content with 
today's competit ive and market driven economy in an effective manner, they have to 
improve their working and delivery system significantly. They should prioritise and focus 
on projects which are near the completion stage, projects which are operationally viable 
and projects which are traffic capacity generators. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Hon’ble Committee are aware that appropriations to various Railway Funds are 
guided primarily by the resource position of the Railways and the outgo estimated during 
the year. It may be app reciated that in BE 2016 -17, appropriations to various Railway 
Funds have been decided amidst tight resource position of the Railways emanating from 
impending implementation of  7th CPC recommendations. The level of appropriations to 
these funds also take note of the balances available in those funds from earlier years so 
as to meet the estimated outgo from these funds during the year.  
Railways have all along tried to build up the fund balances during the years of 
bounty and draw down from those balances i n years when Railways are either not able 
to generate enough resources due to subdued traffic performance or due to higher 
expenditure liability on account of pay commissions etc.  
There is no intention to under -provide for DRF. Though the appropriation to  DRF 
in RE 2015 -16 was kept at Rs 5500 cr as against Rs 7900 cr in B.E. 2015 -16, the plan 
outlay under DRF in RE 2015-16 was Rs 7300 crore as against Rs 7500 cr in BE 2015 -16. 
The actual (Prov) expenditure under DRF during 2015 -16 has been Rs. 7593 cr whic h is 
higher than even the BE provision. Similarly, in B.E. 2016 -17 though the appropriation to 
DRF has been kept at Rs 3200 cr, the provisioning for plan expenditure under DRF has 
been kept at Rs 7160 crore(Gross).  

 
 
41 
 
Ministry of Railways are concerned with the depleting fund balances and are 
making all efforts to generate more revenues though a mix of short term and long term 
measures. To reap early benefits of investments made, projects are being prioritised with 
ring-fenced allocations for time -bound completion. The last mile projects are also being 
provided with full allocation for early completion. 
A five year(2015-19) investment plan of Rs. 8.56 lakh crore has been chalked out 
with greater emphasis on capacity enhancement works under Doubling, Traffic Fa cilities 
and Electrification which is expected to give a boost both to freight and passenger traffic 
in the years to come and thereby to Railways’ revenues. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.21) 
In the context of Operating Ratio of the Railways, t he Committee note that during 
2012-13, against 84.90% (BE) and 88.80% (RE), the actual was 90.20%. For 2013 -14, 
against 87.80% (BE) and 90.80% (RE), the actual was 93.60%. Again, during 2014 -15, 
against 92.30% (BE) and 91.80% (RE), the actual Operating Ratio was 91.30%. Dur ing 
2015-16, against BE of 88.5%, RE is 90.0%. The reason for the high operating ratio 
during 2015-16 is stated to be shortfall in Gross Traffic Receipts. The Committee further 
observe that in BE 2016 -17, Operating Ratio is targeted at 92 percent. This has  been 
done due to the impact of 7th CPC for which a higher provision of about Rs. 9,000 crore 
(net basis) has been made under Ordinary Working Expense for salary and Rs. 5,000 
crore higher than usual appropriation under the Pension Fund. The Committee feel  that 
this is a very important aspect which requires the Ministry's immediate attention so that 
the Operating Ratio can be maintained at an optimum level.  The Railways have also 
admitted that annual impact of the 7th CPC on Railways has been estimated at Rs. 
28500 crore inclusive of pensionary payments. Despite this OWE in BE for 2016 -17 are 
expected to increase just by 12% over 2015 -16. It is extremely unlikely that impact of 
7th CPC can be managed by such meagre increase in OWE particularly in light of t he fact 
that Railways would also have to make payments for arrears with effect from January 01, 
2016 to March 31, 2016.  Windfall gains due to fall in POL prices are also unlikely to 
materialise once again in the current year, more so because crude prices have already 
gone up by over 10% since February, 2016. Therefore, the Net Revenue at BE of       Rs. 
18210 crore may be missed by a wide margin and Ministry of Finance may have no other 
option but to consider the request of Ministry of Railways for a Reven ue Grant for 

 
 
42 
 
meeting the burden of 7th CPC.    The Committee, however, urge the Ministry to probe 
the possibility of raising revenues in various segments as well as reduce operating 
expenses by observing absolute financial discipline. They should also be ex tremely 
prudent on the expenditure side, keeping a close and constant monitoring of the Railway 
finance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Though the net outlay under O.W.E. has increased by 12%, the gross outlay in 
O.W.E. is higher by 19%. On net basis, the amount  provided for pay commission comes 
only to Rs 9000 crore. It has already been submitted to the Committee in reply to the list 
of points that a provision of Rs 12000 crore has been made in B.E. 2016 -17 towards 
salary impact due to 7th CPC and of this Rs 3000 crore would be met out of Debt Service 
Fund (DSF) for which necessary appropriation to the fund has been made in R.E. 2015 -
16. The DSF rules provide for utilization of the DSF balances for pay commission also. 
This amount has been assessed to mitigate th e impact of the arrear component of the 
pay commission. The growth in salary as per B.E. 2016 -17 therefore comes to about 
32% over RE 2015 -16. Thus provision has been made towards the 7th CPC impact on 
salary based on the 7th CPC report. However, as alread y submitted before the Hon’ble 
Committee, the provision under Ordinary Working Expenses in BE 2016 -17 does not 
account for the allowances part of the 7th CPC recommendations. Provision for 
allowances would be made during the course of the year depending upon the acceptance 
of the Report by the Government. Moreover, the liabilities on account of allowances 
would arise only from the date of effect of their implementation. 
Secondly, the economy in expenditure on fuel is based on various cost cutting and 
innovative measures contemplated in 2016 -17 like purchase of power as distribution 
licensee, taking up various energy conservation measures, purchase of power at lower 
rates from various State Electricity Boards and other units, fitment and working of 
Auxiliary Power Units, use of Bio -diesel, rationalization of fuelling pattern, improvement 
in Specific Fuel Consumption(SEC) and Specific Energy Consumption (SEC) etc. 
The Railways are conscious of the difficult financial scenario in the light of the 
imminent implementation of 7th CPC recommendations and subdued traffic growth and 
are taking all possible steps to enhance earnings  as elaborated in the Action Taken Note 
on Recommendation No. 14 of this Report and minimize avoidable expenditure.  

 
 
43 
 
Comprehensive instruct ions on Expenditure Management - Economy Measures, 
Austerity, Cost Control, Rationalization of Expenditure and Revenue Augmentation have 
been circulated to all concerned for being followed scrupulously and the budget targets 
are being monitored at all levels. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.22) 
 The Committee note that the Railways had signed a MoU with the Life Insurance 
Corporation (LIC) during 2015 for a period of 5 years. The investment by the LIC will be 
made through bonds worth Rs.30,000 crore issued annually  by rail entities such as the 
Indian Railway Finance Corporation and will be channelised by the Railways in capacity 
augmentation projects. The bonds will come with a five -year moratorium on interest and 
loan repayment. Further, the Japan International Co -operation Agency (JICA) has also 
extended loans for financing the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) project. As 
submitted, the loan is at 0.1 per cent interest with the loan term period of 50 years, with 
a moratorium of 15 years. 
 The Committee note  that these efforts are being made to improve passenger as 
well as freight services at a time when almost 70 per cent of the Railways’ high density 
network is congested with capacity utilisation of more than 100 per cent.  They also 
recognise that the Rail ways have been suffering from under -investment for quite some 
time and that huge investment is needed to improve the services by augmenting the 
capacity, resulting in more revenue to service the debt. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should adhere to  the time schedule and closely monitor the progress thereof. 
Further, the Committee are satisfied to note that the fluctuation in the Japanese Yen 
during the repayment period for the loan extended to the Railways by JICA will be 
hedged by the Ministry of F inance. The Committee observe that the Railways should be 
very wary as  such financial provisions carry with them liabilities of repayments with 
interest. That being so, it becomes imperative for the Railways to ensure that there is 
optimal and efficacious utilisation of funds with timely implementation of the projects so 
as to avoid falling  into a debt trap.  The Committee also recommend that the Railways 
should critically analyse bankability of projects and also utilise these high cost and risk 
infected market borrowing to commercially viable areas with assured returns.  
 
Reply of the Government 

 
 
44 
 
 Concerns of the committee are noted. 
Ministry of Railways (MoR) has constituted a Committee of Additional Members of 
the Railway Board to monitor the physical and financial progress of works which are 
being financed from funds drawn from the Life Insurance corporation of India (LIC). 
It has been decided that Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) will be entered 
into by Railway Board with General Manager of each of t he Zonal Railways for 
implementation of the projects in a time bound manner. 
In view of the fact that Doubling and Electrification projects as a group constitute 
the more remunerative of the sanctioned projects of IR and are also justified from 
operational point of view, it has been decided that all works under these Plan Heads, 
with a few exceptions, may be financed out of LIC funds. These projects would be 
provided with funds on an assured basis so that they are completed quickly and can start 
generating revenue, rather than allowing time and cost overruns due to paucity of funds 
and deteriorating viability. 
It has also been decided that as far as projects other than Doubling and 
Electrification are concerned, only such projects which are remunerative will  be 
considered for financing out of LIC funds.  
The Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (from Jawaharlal Nehru Port, Mumbai to 
Dadri near Delhi. -1504 km) is being implemented through Official Development 
Assistance (ODA) loan from Japan International Coope ration Agency (JICA) under the 
Special Terms for Economic Partnership (STEP) Scheme of Government of Japan. JICA is 
providing a loan of 646 billion Japanese Yen. The loan is hedged by Ministry of Finance. 
Ministry of Railways is required to pay interest on ly at 7% per annum to Ministry of 
Finance. The loan term is 40 years with a moratorium of 10 years. The interest rate for 
Ministry of Finance is 0.2% for first two tranches of loan. For the third tranche loan, the 
interest has been reduced to 0.1%. 
The con struction of Western DFC is on fast track and is being monitored on 
regular basis for timely completion. The DFC has been planned for commissioning in 
phases between 2018 to 2019. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.25) 
 The Committee note with satisfaction that allocation was revised upward at RE, 
2015-16 for road safety works like Level Crossings and Road Over Bridge/Under Bridge 

 
 
45 
 
due to enhancement of the outlays at  RE by the Ministry of Finance in view of the higher 
share under Road Safety Fund from diesel cess. Consequently,  Rs. 155 crore could be 
allocated on cost -share received from Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India 
Limited (DFCCIL) for ROBs/RUBs on DFC routes. However, the Committee note that 
there is  a shortfall in achievement in financial targets in respect of road safety works 
during 2015-16. The allocation for road safety works under PH -29 and PH -30 had been 
increased from Rs.1645.91 crore (BE) to Rs. 2662.00 crore (RE), but the expenditure up 
to F ebruary, 2016 is only Rs. 1761.58 crore. The Committee further note that the 
financial allocation for road safety works has been increased in BE, 2016 -17 as against 
RE, 2015-16 due to increased share under Road Safety Fund from diesel cess. However, 
the ph ysical targets have not been increased in proportion. As against the likely 
achievement in 2015 -16 of 1203 level crossings eliminated, 369 manned level crossings 
closed, 190 ROBs constructed and 820 RUBs/subways constructed, the targets during  
2016-17 hav e been kept at 1250, 300,160 and 840, respectively. In view of the 
foregoing, the Committee draw the attention of the Ministry of Railways to around 10440 
existing unmanned level crossings, which are the cause of the maximum number of 
accidents and casualt ies in Railways and implore the Ministry to ensure that focused 
efforts are towards elimination of level crossings and that the physical targets are 
suitably revised upward at RE stage.  
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The final expenditure under PH 29 & PH 30 was Rs.2689.18 crores (upto 
March’2016). Allotted funds for Road Safety Works (under PH 29 & 30) have been fully 
utilized in year 2015 -16. During 2015 -16, 1253 Unmanned Level Crossings & 390 
Manned Level Crossings have been eliminated and 194 Road Over Bri dges (ROBs) & 830 
Road under Bridges (RUBs/Subways) have been constructed.  Allotment of funds for 
Road Safety Works has been increased from Rs. 2662.00 crore (RE) in 2015 -16 to Rs. 
2998.24 (BE) for year 2016 -17. Accordingly, target for 2016 -17 have been reviewed and 
fixed higher viz; elimination of 1440 Unmanned Level Crossings &  300 Manned Level 
Crossings and construction of 210 Road Over Bridges (ROBs) & 1000 Road Over Bridges 
(RUBs/Subways).  

 
 
46 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.26) 
 The Committee are concerned to note that, at present, there is a throw-forward of 
432 major ongoing project s consisting of 155 new line, 42 gauge conversion and 235 
doubling costing Rs. 4,39,721 crore. Further, the total length kms of the 155 new lines, 
42 gauge conversions and 235 doubling pending projects are 17005 kms, 9520 kms and 
18703 kms, respectively, i .e., a total throw -forward of 45228 kms. The Committee feel 
that in view of the huge throw -forward of their ongoing projects, the targets during 
2016-17 of commissioning of  400 kms of new lines, 800 kms of gauge conversion and 
1600 kms of doubling, i.e., a total of 2800 km in a year, are too moderate and need to 
be enhanced, especially as the development of the Railways is one of the priority areas 
of the Government, and some capital infusion is expected for the same.  It is going to 
take another 20 years or even more to pass the benefits of these projects to the masses 
at this rate of progress. The Committee apprehend that the throw -forward of the 
ongoing projects will go on piling up year after year, unless ambitious annual targets, 
supplemented with dedi cated efforts, are made.  The Committee urge the Ministry to 
make a detailed analysis of the pending projects - be it new lines, doubling, gauge 
conversion, track renewal, electrification, etc. - and prioritise them.  The Committee 
reiterate that the Minis try should focus on expeditious completion of last mile projects 
and those near completion first.  The Committee may be kept abreast of the same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways have been taken several measures to garner funds for its 
capital investments such as arrangement of  Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) from 
financial institutions including Life Insurance Corporation of India for executing ongoing 
and new capacity enhancement projects, requesting State Governments to share cost of 
projects falling in their State, launching a scheme of project development, financing and 
monitoring through Joint Ventures/SPVs with State Governments, issue of a new 
participative policy etc.  As a result of these initiatives, the capital expenditure have 
increased substantially in 2015 -16 as compared to the expenditure in previous years.  
The capital investment outlay has been further ramped up from Rs. 94,000 Crore in 
2015-16 to Rs. 1,21,000 Crore in 2016 -17.  As railway projects are capital intensive and 

 
 
47 
 
have long gestation period, sufficient investment have to be made over a period of two 
to three years for commissioning of the projects.  Accordingly, commissioning target for 
2016-17 has been pegged at 2800 Km which is almost same as that of 2015 -16.  The 
commissioning target will be substantially hiked from 2017 -18 onward depending upon 
the progress of various initiatives of Ministry of Railways to arrange resources.  
Indian Railways  have carried out prioritisation of projects to give focused and 
pointed a ttention to capacity enhancement, decongestion, last mile connectivity, last 
mile, cost sharing, National & remunerative projects.  Funds are allocated to projects 
based on prioritisation.  Projects which do not fall in any of the above categories & not 
made any significant progress have been accorded lowest priority.  Allocation of funds for 
railway projects are done every year based on the prioritisation depending upon throw 
forward of ongoing projects, overall availability of funds and competing demands. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.27) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways had projected an outlay of 
Rs.7,19,671 crore for addressing its capacity bottlenecks and investment on 
modernization and safety in order to provide satisfactory services to the passengers. 
However, the Plann ing Commission had approved only Rs.5,19,221 crore, comprising of 
Gross Budgetary Support ( GBS) of Rs.1,94,221 crore, internal resources of Rs.1,05,000 
crore, market borrowings of Rs. 1,20,000 crore  and private investment, including PPP, of 
Rs. 1,00,000 c rore. Moreover, the Annual Plan sizes were not proportionate on account 
of lesser allocation of GBS, lower materialisation of internal resources and lesser 
generation of extra budgetary resources for rolling stock leasing and PPP. During 2012 -
13, 2013 -14, 2014-15 and 2015 -16, funds to the tune of Rs. 60100 crore, Rs. 63363 
crore, Rs. 65445 crore and Rs. 100011 crore respectively, had been allocated. For 2016 -
17, a provision of Rs. 121000 has been made. Though the allocation for the year is 
reasonable, it is noticed that during the 12th Plan, a total of Rs. 409919 crore has been 
allocated against the approved outlay of Rs. 519221 crore, i.e., less by 21 percent. They 
further note that against the approved GBS of Rs.1,94,221 crore for the 12th Plan, the 
allocation has remained at Rs.1,47,545 crore which is less by 24.03 percent. The 
Committee do not approve of such substantial downsizing of the proposed Plan outlay 
and desire that the sanctity of the Plan should be maintained at all costs as the Ministry 
had as sessed the outlay projected by them as necessary to fulfill the goals of their 

 
 
48 
 
developmental projects.  The Committee desire that to meet the mandated role of the 
Railways for the development of the remotest corners of the country through the 
ongoing projects, adequate capital should be infused into the system through GBS.  The 
Ministry of Railways should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance accordingly.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 Ministry of Railways has been repeatedly requesting for higher bu dgetary support 
to the Railways for timely completion of projects in progress and other critical and 
important capacity augmentation and safety related works necessary for provision of 
improved Railway services.  
Request for allocation of the higher GBS to  implement the developmental projects 
of the Railways was made to the Ministry of Finance/NITI Aayog during the preparation 
of the Railway Budget for 2016-17. 
There has been a constant dialogue with the Ministry of Finance to increase 
budgetary support to Indian Railways within the overall financial position of the 
Government of India. Budgetary support was enhanced from Rs. 35000 crore in 2015 -16 
to Rs. 45000 crore in 2016-17.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.29) 
 The Committee have been apprised of the shortfall in physical targets in respect of 
Freight traffic, Passenger traffic and New Lines, Doubling, Gauge Conversion and Wagon 
procurement during the 12th Plan. The Committee are convinced that while adequate 
funds had played a part  in shortfall in targets pertaining to network expansion works as 
the yearly allocation of funds were not proportionate to the approved 12th Plan 
allocation, oft repeated excuses like delay in land availability, forestry clearances, etc. are 
not acceptable as these hurdles could have been overcome by the Ministry by concerted 
efforts in this direction. Further, against the 12th Plan Revised Mid Term Targets of 1240 
MT Originating Freight, 763.84 Billion Freight Net Tonne Km., 8561 milli on Originating 
Passenger Km., 1286 Billion Passenger Km. and 1,05,659 wagons, the likely achievement 
is 1157 MT Originating Freight, 694.607 Billion Freight Net Tonne Km., 8182 million 
Originating Passenger Km., 1137.3 Billion Passenger Km.  and 62,360 wag ons, 
respectively.  The decline in passenger traffic has been attributed to the drop in 
suburban traffic and in non -suburban traffic in the 1 —100 km segment due to the 

 
 
49 
 
development of metro networks in cities and increased shift to personal vehicles (2 -
wheelers) on account of falling prices of petrol, improved road connectivity and 
expanding road infrastructure. Further, shortfall in freight traffic has been attributed to 
the dismal performance of the core sectors due to less growth in the economy and the 
global economic downturn. Needless to say, these impediments have to be dealt with, 
with a sense of urgency and as top priority so that the targets set by the Railways do not 
remain illusory.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should make the best use o f the 
investment made in 2015 -16 as well as the investment plan for 2016 -17 which will be 
partly funded by transfer of Rs.45000 crore from the Union Budget.  The Committee 
further desire that the availability of these funds should be matched by strict fina ncial 
discipline by the Railways, leading to optimum and effective utilisation of resources 
coupled with achievement of physical targets in a stipulated time-frame.   
 
 
Reply of the Government  
           The achievements of Indian Railways against the tar gets fixed as given below 
indicates that in last four years performance of Indian Railways against the targets has 
improved and it has improved significantly in 2015 -16 due to relatively better fund 
availability. Indian Railways has also set a target of 28 00 Km for New Line, Gauge 
Conversion and Doubling for the financial year 2016-17 which is in line with the emphasis 
in  Rail Budget 2016-17.  
 
ACHIEVEMENT NEW LINE, GAUGE CONVERSION AND DOUBLING  
DURING LAST  FOUR YEARS 
 (Figures in Kms) 
Plan/Annual Plan New 
Line 
Gauge 
Conversion 
Doubling Total 
2012-13 (Target) 700 800 700 2200 
2012-13 
(Achievement) 
501 605 705 1811 
2013-14 (Target) 450 375 700 1525 
2013-14 
(Achievement) 
450 404 708 1562 
2014-15 (Target) 300 450 700 1450 
2014-15 
(Achievement) 
313 527 705 1545 
2015-16 (Target) 500 800 1200 2500 

 
 
50 
 
2015-16 
(Achievement)  
813 1042 971 2826 
2016-17 (Target) 400 800 1600 2800 
 
 The demand for freight loading on Indian Railways is a derived demand and is 
dependent on the growth in the economy, especially in the core sector, since Railways is 
primarily a bulk carrier of freight. 
 
 Indian Railways has been making efforts to maximize the revenue earning freight 
loading. In order to do so, a number of initiatives have already been taken. Improvement 
in freight loading performance was achieved with intensive monitoring of freight 
movement and freight terminals through a computerized Freight Operation Information 
System (FOIS) for effective reduction in wagon detention. Review of maintenance 
practices has also helped in improving overall availability of wagons. Further, to increase 
the physical loading, gradual proliferation of enhanced axle load running is being 
resorted to.  Special emphasis is being given for removal of bottlenecks to traffic, 
speedier completion of throughput enhancement works and rapid induction of newer 
rolling stock. Concepts of Distributed Power System & Long Haul on trial basis to 
overcome capacity constraints over congested/saturated sections have been introduced. 
Loading in Mi ni rakes, Two Point rakes and multi point rakes has been permitted to 
improve the freight. Along with this, freight marketing schemes in the form of incentives 
and discounts are being offered to customers to capture newer traffic, thereby increasing 
freight loading and revenue. 
 
        All efforts will be made to enforce strict financial discipline and ensure optimum 
utilization of resources for Plan Outlay 2016 -17, which includes Gross Budgetary Support 
of Rs. 45,000 crore from General Exchequer, so as to achieve all targets set  for the 
financial year. However, the observations of the Committee have been noted in this 
regard. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.32) 
 The Committee appreciate that on the request made by the then Hon’ble Minister 
of Railways in February, 2013 to the then Hon’ble Minister for Rural Development, 
Railway works, viz. developing waterways/trenches, construction of pathways, 

 
 
51 
 
afforestation and construction of Kuccha approach road have been included in the list of 
works of MGNREGA.  However, the Committee feel that the extant guidelines under 
MGNREGA inter alia requiring 40:60 ratio of material cost to labour cost in their works 
should be amended with regard to Railway works to the extent that the ratio of material 
cost to the labour cost should be revised to 60:40. Further, the Committee understand 
that the Ministry of Rural Development has again been requested in September, 2015 
and March, 2016 to make provision for construction of Road Under Bridges/Subways, 
wherever necessary, as a part of project of construction of roads under the Pradhan 
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) as the labour used would help in asset creation. The 
Committee would want the Ministry of Railways to pursue the matter with the Ministry of 
Rural development and if need be raise the matter to the PMO and/or the Cabinet. 
Reply of the Government  
In February 2013, the then Hon’ble Minister of Railways had requested the then 
Hon’ble Minister for Rural Development for inclusion of Railway works in the list of works 
of MGNREGA. As a result, Ministry of Rural Development included only following 4 -type 
of Railway works under MGNREGA: 
i. Developing waterways/trenches. 
ii. Construction of pathways. 
iii. Afforestation. 
iv. Construction of Kuccha approach road. 
Hon’ble Minister of Railways then discussed the issue with Hon’ble Minster of Road 
Transport and Highways, Shipping, Rural Development, Panchayati Raj and Drinking 
Water and Sanita tion on the subject and thereafter requested again vide DO letter in 
June 2014 to consider making provision for construction of Road Under Bridge 
(RUB)/Limited Height Subways (LHS) etc, wherever necessary, as a part of the proposal 
of the roads under Pradh an Mantri Gramin Sadak Yojana (PMGSY). In this connection, 
despite two letters (15.09.2015 & 10.03.2016) to Secretary, Ministry of Rural 
Development to consider the request. The decision on this subject is still awaited and is 
being perused. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.33) 
 The Committee note that the Hon’ble Minister of Railways had made an 
announcement in his Budget Speech for the year 2015 -16 for introduction of e -catering 

 
 
52 
 
service in 108 trains on an experimental basis from January, 2015. In order to widen the 
range  of  food options available to passengers and to mitigate passengers' complaints 
with regard to monotonous and stereotyped catering services, the IRCTC has started e -
catering service in 1350 trains without pantry cars or Train Side Vending, as we ll as on 
45 designated stations, to enable passengers to book food of their choice through 
website/phone/SMS. The Committee further note that in March, 2016, e-catering services 
have been extended to all 'A1' and 'A' category railway stations across the co untry. The 
Committee appreciate the scheme of e -catering service introduced by the Railways; 
however, they would like to stress that security concerns that are associated with e -
catering service while delivery of food packets to the passengers through deli very boys 
should be scrupulously addressed. The Committee have been informed that the Railways 
are taking certain steps in this regard, viz. Ministry of Railways/IRCTC issues identity 
card/authority by Divisions to all the delivery persons for their entry into railway 
premises, provision of frisking/scanning by RPF/security personnel, etc. While 
appreciating the introduction of e -catering services in trains as a step in the right 
direction, the Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that the terms and conditions 
on which various vendors are engaged for providing e-catering service in trains should be 
strictly adhered to. 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
In order to widen the range of food options to the passengers, Ministry of 
Railways have already issued policy guidelines regarding e -catering services on trains 
and at stations by virtue of which they can book meal of their choice on payment.  IRCTC 
has been mandated to operate e-catering services over Indian Railways.   
 IRCTC has been instructed to strictly follow the terms and conditions of the policy 
guidelines issued in this regard. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.34) 
 The Committee are aware that in 2014 Ra ilways had announced the continuation 
of the Fuel Adjustment Component (FAC) to revise the passenger fares every six months.  

 
 
53 
 
The Committee learn that FAC linked revision in passenger fares was carried out twice - 
the first revision was increase by 2% effe cted in October 2013 and another by 4.2% in 
June 2014.  The Committee are not convinced with the reason cited by the Ministry for 
not extending the benefit of decline in diesel prices to the passengers which is stated to 
be that the expansion, strengthenin g and modernising of IR network requires resources 
of a high order.  At the same time, the Committee note that the Railways' input costs 
over the years have risen much higher than the growth in their earnings.  It is, of course, 
a fact that the decrease in fuel cost has been very marginal compared to overall increase 
in input cost.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to review the FAC and the 
other costs at the earliest in order to safeguard the interest of the common man so that 
they can also benefit by the fall in overall input costs. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
During the last review of FAC linked revision, it was decided to defer the FAC 
linked revision, due to the fact that the fuel cost is not the only factor which impacts cost 
of Railways operation and the cost of all other inputs have increased considerably. 
However, it may be appreciated that the Passenger fares have not been increased after 
June, 2014, which has benefited the passenger despite increasing input costs of 
Railways. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.35) 
 The Committee are concerned to note that one of the factors attributed for the 
decline in passenger traffic is the changed norms/regulations in the issue of concessional 
tickets, particularly in the case of Izzat MSTs. As apprised, Izzat MSTs, priced at Rs. 25/-, 
and issued to persons working in the unorganized sector with monthly income not 
exceeding Rs 1500/- per month can be used for travel up to 150 kms. This scheme was 
started on 1.8.2009. The Committee feel that as the pri ce of Izzat MST was fixed almost 
seven years back in 2009, the Ministry of Railways should consider reviewing the same. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  

 
 
54 
 
 Extract has been taken for further examination. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.38) 
 The Committee find from the Budget 2016 -17 that the Railway Board is being 
organised along business lines and that the Chairman of the Railway Board will be 
empowered accordingly.  Cross functional directorates will be set up within the Railway 
Board to focus on areas such as non -fare revenues, speed enhancements, information 
technology, etc.  The Committee are of the view that this would bring about focused 
attention of the Railways on their crucial areas.  The Committee feel that Strategic Lines 
are one of the areas that need urgent  attention, given the national security concerns 
and, as such, a dedicated Member in the Railway Board, will be able to address related 
matters in an effective manner. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 At present no strategic lines has been sanctioned. Out of 14 strategic lines 
identified by MoD following four projects have been proposed for taking up in first Phase:  
(a)  Missamari - Tenga - Tawang (378 Km)  
 
(b)  Bilaspur - Manali - Leh (498 Km)  
 
(c)  Pasighat – Tezu - Rupai (227 Km), and  
 
(d)  North Lakhimpur - Bame (Along)-Silapathar (249 Km) 
 
 
All these Strategic lines are in Himalayan region involving large scale tunnelling and 
bridging. To have reasonably accurate cost estimates of projects in Himalayas the 
alignment needs to be frozen which can be done only after carrying out Final Location 
Survey. Final Location Survey involves detailed study of topographical features (Creation 
of Digital Elevation Model (DEM) based on satellite imagery), detail Geological 
investigation/mapping, Geo -physical, Geo -technical examination etc. and consultation 
with tunnelling and Geological experts. After finalization of alignment, exact length of 
Bridges, Tunnels can be ascertained and thereafter cost Estimate can be firmed up. 
In 8 th meeting of Empowered Committee on Borde r Infrastructure (ECBI) on 
24/7/14, it was decided that Ministry of Defence with approval of Competent Authority 
will provide Ministry of Railways requisite funds for the Final Location Survey of four 

 
 
55 
 
prioritized projects.  Total cost of Final Location Sur vey for these four lines assessed at 
Rs. 345 crores was conveyed to Ministry of Defence for transfer of fund in Oct’14. 
Ministry of Defence has conveyed the approval of the Cabinet for carrying out Final 
Location Survey on 31.12.2015, however, Ministry of Defence is yet to transfer requisite 
fund. 
 These strategic lines are still at the stage of preliminary studies.  Actual cost 
estimate of the projects can be assessed after completion of Final Location Surveys.  
Final Location Surveys for these four survey s will be completed within a period of 2 
years. Thereafter, MoD will take final call on sanction & funding of these projects.  The 
need for a separate Member (dedicated Board) can be examined at that stage. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 39) 
 The Committee are happy to learn that the Railways have taken certain steps to 
expand the use of solar power in railway stations; viz. (i)10 Mega Watt (MW) capacity, 
including 1 MW solar power plant, has been installed at Katra Railway station; (ii) order 
for 2 MW (50x2 KWp at 20 locations) has been issued on 23.07.2015; (iii) the Letter of 
Award (LOA) for provision of 4.5 MWp (200x10 KWp & 5x500 KWp) has been issued on 
30.9.2015; (iv) 50 MWp capacity has been identified and allocated to Zonal Railways for 
provision on rooftops of Railway stations and Railway buildings for which Model Tender 
Document has been issued and tenders have been floated by almost all the Zonal 
Railways; and        (v) 100 MW is planned to be allocated to the Railways after obtaining  
confirmation for Viability Gap Funding (VGF) from the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy (MNRE) and the Railway Energy Management Company Ltd.(REMCL) has been 
asked to study the feasibility of putting up 500 MW solar plants. The Committee 
appreciate these initiatives to use solar energy and other green energy and recommend 
that the Railways should strive to use such energy alternatives more extensively.  
Furthermore, the Committee strongly suggest that at least one Railway Station should be 
taken up as a  pilot project to make it fully functional on solar power on the analogy of 
the Kochi Airport where the entire energy requirement of the Airport is being met by the 
solar power.  This would not only save on the funds of the Railways but also help in 
harnessing solar energy while saving a conventional energy resource.   
 

 
 
56 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 Accepted and noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.40) 
 The Committee appreciate that the Railways have taken the initiative of putting in 
place the "Opti cal Fibre Communication System”. As extensive use of Optical Fibre 
Communication System has provided major benefits in trains as well as administrative 
operations, the Railways have planned to cover 12500 Rkms of Railway Network with 
Optical Fibre Communication to cover the remaining sections.  The Committee desire that 
the Ministry should strive hard to expeditiously cover the 12500 Rkms of Railway 
Network with Optical Fibre Communication system. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Noted. 
Indian Railways has plans to provide high -speed Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) along 
its entire route. Out of 66030 Rkms (approx) OFC is available in 49000 Rkms (approx). 
Further work is sanctioned and is in progress in 7000 Rkms and in remaining sections it 
is proposed to sanction and undertake the work in a phased manner and complete it in 
next 5 years. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.41) 
 The Committee learn that RailTel, a Public Sector Undertaking functioning under 
the Ministry of Railways, has the core competence to utilize the surplus telecom capacity 
and Right of Way available with the Indian Railways to build nation -wide optical fibre 
cable based broadband telecom and multimedia network. The Committee stress that 
the RailTel, with its huge potential,  should make optimal commercial utilisation of optical 
fibre network and other related infrastructure available with it so as to generate more 
revenues.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 Noted. 

 
 
57 
 
  RailTel Corporation of India (RCIL) has undertaken commercial utilization of the 
optical fibre network and other related infrastructure by leasing out the surplus capacity 
to generate revenue. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.42) 
 The Committee understand that 'Reorganise, Restructure, Rejuvenate Indian 
Railways through Nav Arjan, Nav Manak and Nav Sanrachana' is the theme of the 
Railway Budget 2016 -17.  While the Committee appreciate the vision of the Ministry of 
Railways, they would like to emphasise that this trio of Nav Vichar can only be achieved 
by substantial financial support which Indian Railways is lac king at this juncture. The 
Indian Railways is presently lagging behind in achieving financial targets; its net revenue 
is decreasing due to downward trend in Gross Traffic Receipts, both in passenger and 
freight earnings. Further, the unfavourable Operatin g Ratio, likely shortfall in the 12th 
Plan projection, increasing burden of Social Service Obligations, no increase in internal 
resources and growing dependence on Gross Budgetary Support and Market Borrowings 
with extra burden of interest payments, the hu ge number of throw forward railway 
projects, and the likely impact of the 7th Central Pay Commission are some of the areas 
which are matters of utmost concern for the Committee. 
 The likely shortfall in achieving physical targets in track expansion and  cr oss-
utilization of funds for safety purposes without making provision of separate fund for 
meeting all the safety requirements of Railways are issues which need immediate 
attention. In the end, the Committee appreciate the innovative steps taken by the Ind ian 
Railways to overcome the challenges before them.  The Committee hope that the 
Railways will lay sharper focus on financial prudence and will stand by its commitment 
towards becoming a growth facilitator for the entire country. The Committee trust that 
the Ministry will understand their concerns in the right perspective and give serious 
consideration to their observations/recommendations and keep apprising them of the 
steps taken by the Railways in this regard.    
 
Reply of the Government  
The emphasis i s not only on cost optimization but also planning investment on 
capacity enhancement in a manner which is likely to yield maximized returns. Enhanced 

 
 
58 
 
focus is being made on not only increasing the revenue earnings but also to incur 
expenditure in the most judicious manner so as to improve the fiscal health of Railways. 
Progress of various activities and physical targets are being monitored by the 
Ministry regularly.  
  

 
 
59 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
Recommendation (Para No.9) 
 
 The Committee regret to note that during 2015-16, even the GBS of Rs. 40000 
crore allocated to the Ministry of Railways at BE was reduced to Rs. 32000 crore at RE. 
Besides, the target for Market Borrowing under Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) of Rs. 
17655 crore had fallen short by Rs. 5807 crore to Rs. 11,848 crore at RE. Also, the target 
for EBR through institutional finance could not be achieved. Against BE of Rs. 17,136 
crore, the revised target is Rs. 9584 crore.  The Committee find that the very purpose of 
fixing targets is defeated when they  are not effectively addressed.  They call upon the 
Ministry to make every effort to remove the impediments so that the targets fixed for 
2016-17 are definitely achieved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Overall plan outlay in B.E. 2015 -16 was Rs 100011 crore. Des pite reduced GBS 
and reduced provision under market borrowings and Institutional Finance in R.E. 2015 -
16, the plan outlay in RE was kept at almost the same level at Rs 1 lakh crore with 
enhanced provision under EBR -Partnerships.  GBS has however subsequent ly been 
restored to Rs. 35000 crore by the Ministry of Finance in 2015-16. 
The annual plan provision for 2016-17 has been made with full deliberation on the 
targets and priorities. No slippage in funds utilizations under internal resource segment; 
viz. DRF, DF and CF is anticipated as these have been allocated amidst tight resource 
position in view of the 7th CPC and also because the provisions are in the light of 
available fund balances of 2015 -16. The allocations under GBS are also much short of 
the re quirement projected to the Ministry of Finance. EBR (Bond and Institutional 
Finance) segment depends on requirements for rolling stock and projects, mainly under 
planheads doubling and electrification. The funds in this segment have been allocated 
with the target set for the year in the B.E stage. EBR -Partnerships is a thrust area of the 
Ministry. Thus, all efforts would be made to achieve the plan expenditure target 
envisaged in BE 2016-17. 
  

 
 
60 
 
Recommendation (Para No.23) 
 
 The Committee find that during 201 5-16, BE allocated for Gauge Conversion, 
Doubling, Traffic Facilities, Rolling Stock, Track Renewals, Bridge Works, Signalling & 
Telecommunications Works and Passenger Amenities was revised downwards at RE. The 
reason proffered is that the fund allocation in RE 2015 -16 was decided on the basis of 
requirement projected in RE by the Zonal Railways. Also, the reduction in GBS by the 
Ministry of Finance from Rs. 40,000 to Rs. 32,000 crore resulted in allocation being 
reduced under cap funded projects falling in  the purview of Plan head, viz., Gauge 
Conversion and Doubling among other Plan heads under Capital Fund. The Committee 
take a serious view of this downsizing of the targets as it defeats the very purpose of the 
budgetary exercise in planning and preparing  budgetary estimates. They, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should henceforth keep the original targets in view while 
preparing the budgetary estimates so that continuous downsizing of the Plan outlay 
could be avoided.  
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Overall plan outlay in B.E. 2015 -16 was Rs 100011 crore and in R.E. 2015 -16 it 
was kept at almost the same level at Rs 1 lakh crore. 
However, reduction in GBS by Rs 8000 crore (from Rs 40000 crore in BE 2015 -16 
to Rs 32000 crore in RE 2015 -16) forced the Ministry to prioritize the reduced allocation, 
less expenditure incurred till Dec.’16, on projects where these could be optimally spent. 
GBS has however been restored to Rs. 35000 crore by the Ministry of Finance in 2015 -
16. 
Despite the cut imposed by the M inistry of Finance, the allocation under CAP 
(GBS) on gauge conversion increased from Rs 3401 crore in B.E. 2015 -16 to Rs 3668 
crore in RE 2015-16.  
The Revised Estimates are a part of various Budgetary stages when resources are 
allocated based on available expenditure trends of eight months and the requirement for 
the remaining year. If the allocations made at the BE level only are to be maintained, the 
scarce resources would not be optimally spent and projects where revised fund 

 
 
61 
 
requirement is more would starve while excess funds on other works may get 
surrendered. 
Outlays in RE 2015-16 were decided on the basis of requirement projected by the 
zonal railways, estimated internal resource generation and the absorptive capacity of 
various plan heads as per th e trends of expenditure. The allotments under GBS were 
adjusted downwards to match the reduction of GBS from Rs 40000 cr at BE stage to 
32000 cr in RE stage. Such adjustments are necessary as a part of budgetary exercise 
with a view to regulate expenditure  so as to remain within the available resources. Such 
adjustments therefore become unavoidable during periodical Budgetary reviews and 
ruling them out completely would not be a financially prudent approach. 
The targets however were not scaled down in the RE stage as seen from the table 
below:- 
Item B.E. 
2015-16 
R.E. 
2015-16 
Gauge Conversion (Route km) 500 800 
New Line (Route km) 300 500 
Electrification 
(Route km) 
1600 1600 
Doubling (Route km) 700 1200 
 
In Track Renewals, it has already been informed to the Committee in response to 
the list of questions that the ‘Actuals’ upto Feb.’16 was 2617 km which is more than the 
target of 2500 kms set in  B.E. 2015-16. 
From the above it may be appreciated that the revision in  allocation in RE 2015 -
16 stage did not compromise with the B.E. targets. In fact the targets were bettered.   
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.24) 
 The Committee note that while a target to complete/commission 500 kms (BE) of 
new lines was kept during 2015 -16, the achievement up to February, 2016 is shown at 
683 kms. The financial allocation was revised upward from BE of Rs. 12830 crore to Rs. 
13484 crore at RE, 2015-16. Projections at BE, 2016 -17 is again higher at Rs. 15586. In 
that context, the Committee fail to understand as to why a lower physical target of 400 
kms of new lines has been fixed at BE, 2016 -17. They expect that the endeavour of the 

 
 
62 
 
Ministry should be to strive for realistic and rational targets based on specific criteria and 
achieve them through concerted efforts so as to enhance the share of Railways and 
retrieve their lost ground to other modes of transportation.  
 
 
Reply of the Government  
Railway Projects have a long gestation period.  Projects are executed in phases 
and depending upon the availability of resources budgetary allocation is to projects on 
yearly basis.  As and when a particular phase / stretch has progress significan tly then 
further investment is made in subsequent phases /stretches.  The stretches which are at 
an advanced stage are targeted for completion during the year. There is no correlation 
between Budgetary allocation in a year and the physical target as only a  part of the 
allocation is spent on sections / projects targeted for completion during the year and 
major part of allocation is spent on stretches which are targeted for completion in 
subsequent years.  As far as New Line projects are concerned, it cannot be executed 
without acquisition of land.  After enactment of new Land Acquisition Act, 2013, the land 
acquisition process had almost come to standstill for almost two years due to delay in 
framing of rules by various State Governments. Now the process of a cquisition has 
started.  The length of new line that will get commissioned after 2016 -17 will depend 
upon the extent of land acquired during the year.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.28) 
 The Committee find that during the 12th Five Year Plan, the Annual Plan si zes 
were not proportionate during the last four years on account of lesser allocation of GBS, 
lower materialisation of internal resources, and lesser generation of extra budgetary 
resources for rolling stock leasing and PPP.  During 2012 -13, against the An nual Plan 
outlay of Rs. 60100 crore (BE) and Rs. 52265 crore (RE), the actual plan outlay was Rs. 
50383 crore.  In 2013 -14, against Rs. 63363 crore (BE) and Rs. 59359 crore (RE), the 
actual outlay was Rs. 53989 crore. Similarly, during 2014 -15, against Rs. 65445 crore 
(BE) and Rs. 65798 crore (RE), the actual outlay was Rs. 58719 crore. Further, during 
2015-16, Rs.100011 crore (BE) has been revised downward to Rs.100000 crore (RE). 
Internal generation of resources and extra budgetary resources are again the major 
areas of shortfall. The Committee further note that during 2015 -16, GBS of Rs.40000 
crore at BE level has been reduced to Rs.32000 crore at RE level.   As is evident, the 

 
 
63 
 
funds allocated against GBS at BE have consistently been reduced at RE.  The Committee 
once again express their concern over the frequent downsizing of Annual Plan outlays 
during the 12th Plan.  It is equally distressing that the Ministry has fallen short of even 
the revised annual outlays. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the  Ministry to 
concentrate on the areas of shortfall, viz., internal generation of resources and extra 
budgetary resources, by formulating concrete action plans in this regard to optimally 
achieve the targets. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
As submitted in the A ction Taken Note on Para 9 and 23 of this Report, the 
possibility of such adjustments in RE vis -à-vis BE cannot be ruled out all together as the 
outlays are based on the requirement projected by the zonal railways, the level of Gross 
Budgetary Support extended by the Government, estimated internal resource generation 
and the absorptive capacity of various plan heads. 
Railways are taking all possible steps to enhance internal resource generation to 
supplement plan expenditure through various short term and systemic measures. 
However, the Hon’ble Committee may appreciate that the benefits of such moves have 
been adversely impacted by periodic Pay Commissions.    
Further, as proposed by the Ministry of Finance in the first memorandum to the 
Railway Convention Committee (RCC) (2014) and the recommendation made by the RCC 
(2014), the Ministry would pursue, with the Ministry of Finance, constitution of an inter -
Ministerial body to qualify and quantify the social service obligations that could be 
considered for reimbursement by the Government. Reimbursement of such identified 
losses would augment the railways’ resource position.  
With regard to Extra Budgetary Resources, it may be submitted that apart from 
usual market borrowing through IRFC to finance Railways’ Rolling Stock Programme, 
Institutional Finance is being mobilized for funding remunerative projects like network 
decongestion, capacity creation/enhancement works. In addition, various stake holders 
like State governments are also being made partners for investment in Railway projects 
through formation of JVs etc.  
The Ministry has already formulated a five year investmen t plan with physical and 
financial targets that are being monitored closely at all levels. 
 

 
 
64 
 
Recommendation (Para No.30) 
 The Committee are concerned to note that the funds allocated for the head 
"Passenger Amenities" remained under -utilised during the last  four years. During 2012 -
13, out of the allocation at BE and RE of Rs. 1101.95 crore (BE) and Rs.967.56 crore 
(RE), the actuals were Rs. 842.14 crore; during 2013 -14, out of the allocation of Rs. 
1200.38 crore (BE) and Rs. 895.36 crore (RE), the actuals we re Rs.857.73 crore. During 
2014-15, out of the allocation of Rs. 1025.68 crore (BE) and Rs. 1047.90 crore (RE), the 
actuals were Rs. 858.16 crore and during 2015 -16, out of the allocation of Rs. 1748.48 
crore (BE) and 1211.84 crore (RE), the likely expendi ture is Rs. 754.43 crore (upto Feb. 
2016). The Committee observe that there has been a tendency during the past many 
years to make higher budgetary estimates and then reduce the same at the revised 
estimate stage, ultimately spending an even lesser amount than projected at RE. 
Whatever might be the reasons, the bottom line is that the passenger remains deprived 
of better amenities. On one hand, the scarce resources are much in demand for 
utilisation in various areas of work in the Railways; on the other, once available these are 
not being utilised optimally, depriving the passengers of improved facilities and 
amenities. The Committee urge the Ministry to seriously look into the under -utilisation of 
funds allocated for the Head "Passenger Amenities" and want the Ministry to take 
proactive measures to optimally utilise the funds of Rs. 1838 crore proposed during 
2016-17. They emphasise that the Ministry should release the funds well in time so that 
these funds are optimally utilised. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The expenditure on works relating to passenger amenities at railway station is 
generally funded under Plan Head ‘Passenger Amenities’.  Allotment of funds is made 
individual work -wise keeping in view the requirement & depending upon progress of 
work keeping in view the overall availability of resources. Work -wise progress is also 
monitored at appropriate levels. 
Funds allocated under passenger Amenities are from DRF and DF which depends 
on appropriations made to these funds. The Appropriations are based on ‘e xcess’ 
available after meeting working expenses and dividend liability. In 2015 -16, in view of 
than available trends expenditure under DRF and DF were regulated. No such 

 
 
65 
 
instructions have been issued for 2016 -17 and it is estimated that allotment made unde r 
plan head will be fully utilised. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.36) 
 The Committee note that the Railways, on the basis of  suggestions, 
recommendations and reports of misuse received from the Zonal Railways,  has reviewed 
and revised the provisions for issue of Izzat MST w.e.f 15.10.2013. The Committee desire 
that the Ministry should take all necessary steps to keep a check to avoid any misuse of 
Izzat MST, while at the same time making sure that genuine users face no difficulty in 
getting Izzat MSTs issued. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
Izzat MST are being issued directly across the counter on the BPL Card or income 
certificate from District Magistrate IZZAT MST are issued smoothly on production of the 
requisite certificate and residential proof. 
  

 
 
66 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.31) 
 The Committee are further apprised that out of 106 railway stations targeted to be 
developed during 2015 -16 as Adarsh Stations, only 29 railway stations could so 
developed up to February, 2016. The works for the remaining stations are stated to be in 
progress and at advanced stage. The Committee express their apprehension about the 
completion of the work of the remaining 77 railway stations to be developed as Adarsh 
Stations by March, 2016. That being so, they urge the Ministry to complete the pending 
work expeditiously. The Committee further desire that the projects taken up during a 
year should be completed in a given time frame, as delays affect the physical and 
financial targets for the next year, besides leading to cost escalation and time overruns.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 1052 stations were identified upto 2014 -15 for development under Adarsh station 
scheme. Out of these, 946 stations had been developed upto 31.03.2015.  Balance 106 
stations were targeted for development, out of these, 40 stations had been developed 
during 2015 -16.  Further, 200 stations have been identified for development under 
Adarsh Station Scheme during 2015-16 which are planned for development by 2017-18.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no. 18 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
67 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.37) 
 
 The Committee have been apprised that the Ministry of Defence has identified 
four strategic lines to be taken up in the first phase, out of the list of 14 identified 
strategic lines, viz., (i) Missamari - Tenga - Tawang (378 Km) (ii) Bilaspur - Manali - Leh 
(498 Km), (iii) Pasighat – Tezu - Rupai (227 Km), and (iv) North Lakhimpur - Bame 
(Along)-Silapathar ( 249 Km). These strategic lines will be fully funded by either the 
Ministry of Defence or the Ministry of Finance and the grant has to be given over and 
above the yearly GBS through a separate window.  Funds for the Final Location Survey of 
these projects a re awaited from the Ministry of Defence. The Committee would like the 
Ministry to keep them apprised of the progress in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Ministry of Railways is actively pursuing with Ministry of Defence for depositing Rs. 
345 Crore for carrying out Final Location Survey which is still awaited. The Committee 
will be kept abreast of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  SHRI SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY 
8 December, 2016  CHAIRPERSON 
17 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
68 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2016-17) 
 
The Committee met on Thursday, the 8th December, 2016 from 1500 hrs. to 1540 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
     
 PRESENT 
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay -  Chairperson  
  
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri E. Ahamed 
3. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary  
4. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
5. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar 
6. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
9. Srhi Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy 
10. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu 
11. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shanker 
12. Shri Ganesh Singh 
13. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
14. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
15. Shri Shwait Malik 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Director 
2. Smt. Geeta Parmar   - Deputy Secretary 
 

 
 
69 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft 
Reports:- 
(i)  Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ obser vations of 
the Committee contained in their 9th Report on the ‘Demands for Grants (2016-17) 
of the Ministry of Railways’; and 
 
(ii)  xxx xxx xxx xxx 
 
The Committee a dopted the Report at Sl. No. (i) without any modification and 
xxx xxx xxx. 
 
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Report s and 
present the same to Parliament. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned.      
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
xxx: Not related to the Report 
  

 
 
70 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 9TH REPORT         
(16TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2016-17 OF THE MINISTRY OF 
RAILWAYS’’  
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 40 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the  Government –  
 
Para Nos.  2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,19, 
20, 21,22,25,26,27,29,32, 33,34,35,38,39,40,41 and 42 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
 Percentage of total   
 
80% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
 
Para Nos.  9,23,24,28,30 and 36 
 
 
 
6 
 Percentage of total   
 
15% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration –  
 
Para Nos.  31 
 
 
 
 
1 
 Percentage of total   
 
2.5% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies 
are still awaited -      
 
Para Nos. 37 
 
 
1 
 Percentage of total 
 
2.5% 
 
 
        
 
 
 