 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the Twenty First Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Major Railway Accidents 
during the last five years – Causes and Remedial Measures’] 
 
 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
                                      December, 2014/ Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
      
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2014-15) 
   SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA  
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 1 

 
 
      SCR NO. 188 
 
FIRST REPORT 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2014-15) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 [Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the Twenty First Report of the Standing  
Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Major Railway Accidents 
during the last five years – Causes and Remedial Measures’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2014 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2014/ Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
              PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………….………………………..              (iii) 
  
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………….………                 (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report……………………………………………………………                  1    
   
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been                
accepted by the Government  …………………………..    15   
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee             
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government 
replies……………………………………………………………     33     
   
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which          
   replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee and which require reiteration ….….      34        
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final     
replies of the Government  are still awaited  ………….        44  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX-I  Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on    
Railways held on 17.12.2014…………………………………     45 
  
 
APPENDIX-II    
 
 
47            
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the  
Twenty First  Report (15th Lok Sabha) on “Major 
Railway Accidents during the last five years – Causes 
and Remedial Measures”……………………………………… 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2014-15) 
 
Shri Dinesh Trivedi - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri E. Ahamed 
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gourav Gogoi 
7. Shri Rajen Gohain 
8. #Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
9. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
10. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar 
11. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
12. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal 
13. Shri K.H. Muniyappa  
14. Shri Thota Narasimham 
15. Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
16. Shri R. Radhakrishnan 
17. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy 
18. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu 
19. Shri Ganesh Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21.   Shri S.R. Vijayakumar 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri A.K. Antony 
23. Shri Mukut Mithi 
24. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
25. @Vacant 
26. Shri Ambeth Rajan 
27. Shri T. Rathinavel 
28. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
29. Shri Devender Goud T. 
30. Shri Alok Tiwari 
31. Shri Motilal Vora 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  *  Constituted vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No.623 dated 01.09.2014  
  #   Sh. Bandaru Dattatreya  ceased to be a Member  on his appointment as Minister w.e.f. 
09.11.2014. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi was nominated as Member vide LSS Bulletin Part 
No.783 dt.14.11.2014 
@   Smt. Kusum Rai retired on 25.11.2014 vide R.S.S. I.d. No.1(2)2014-coord. dt.20.11.14 
 
 (iii)

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt.Anita Jain   - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Banani Sarker Joshi  - Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Railways (20 14-15), 
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present this First Report of the Committee on action taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways on ‘Major Railway Accidents during the last five 
years – Causes and Remedial Measures’ 
 
2. The Twenty First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 18.12.2013 
and it contained 16 recommendations/observations.  The Ministry of Railways 
have furnished their action taken replies in respect of  all the 
recommendations/observations.   
  
3. The Committee considered and adop ted the draft Action Taken Report at 
their sitting held on 17.12.2014.  
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/ observations contained in the Twenty First  Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                          DINESH TRIVEDI, 
17 December, 2014                                                                        Chairperson, 
26 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)                              Standing Committee on Railways 
   
 
 
 
 
 
      (v) 

 
 
1 
 
  CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
           This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations and observations contained in the 21st 
Report (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Major Railway Accidents during the last five years – 
Causes and Remedial Me asures’. The Report was presented to the Lok Sabha 
on 18.12.2013 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 06.02.2014.  
 
1.2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government on all 
the 16 recommendations/observations contained in the Repo rt. These have 
been broadly categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15  
               Total :  9 
              Chapter II 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:- 
Para No.  Nil                  Total :  Nil 
   Chapter III 
             
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:- 
Para Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 16                   Total : 07 
          Chapter IV  
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies are still 
awaited:-  
 Nil                   Chapter V 
 
1.3  The Committee trust that utmost importance would be 
given to implementation of the recommendations/observations 

 
 
2 
 
accepted by the Government.  In cases where it is not possible for the 
Ministry to implement the recommendations for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons thereof.  
The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on t he 
recommendations/observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report  
should be furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations/observations. 
     A Under utilisation of funds for safety related works 
Recommendation (Para No.5) 
 
1.5  The Committee note with concern that there was lack of utilisation 
of the allocated funds in the safety category during the last two financial years, 
i.e. 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 where there was shortfall in utilisation.  The 
Committee fails to understand how the Railways could have ended up with 
unutilised funds in such a critical category as safety.  This reflects very poorly 
on the Railways as regards safety which involves the l ives of millions of 
passengers who avail of the Railway services.  The Committee forcefully 
recommend that the Railways should fully utilise the funds meant for safety so 
that accidents/ untoward incidents are avoided. 
 
1.6  In their Action Taken Reply, th e Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:  
“Funds are allocated for safety related works, under both Plan and non -
Plan side. This expenditure is largely met out of the internal resources 
generated by the Railways in addition to contributions received fo r 
Railway Safety Fund from Central Road Fund.  From the expenditure 
incurred on safety related works in the last three years it will be seen 
that allocations in this regard show an increasing trend.  There is no 
‘surrender’ as such and lower expenditure wa s forced by the inadequate 

 
 
3 
 
resources generated during the year.  The Railways had to regulate 
expenditure to match internal generation available.  However, the 
Committee’s observations have been noted for further enhancing the 
level of expenditure and its utilisation for safety related activities.”  
 
1.7  The Committee find that expenditure incurred for safety 
related works are largely met out of internal resources generated by 
the Railways , in addition to contribution received for Railway Safety 
Fund. The Ministry has stated that during the last year the shortfall in 
utilization of allocated funds was forced by the inadequate internal 
resource generation by the Railways.  The Committee find it 
unacceptable that such a critical aspect of safety is being 
compromised due to reduced internal resource generation and  
strongly recommend to the Ministry to ensure that there is no 
reduction in expenditure for safety from the allocated amount due to 
any reason, and to suitably enhance it so that all safety related works 
can be undertaken effectively. The Committee , therefore, reiterate 
their earlier recommendation that the Ministry must place maximum 
emphasis on safety and ensure that the outlay s are suitably enhanced 
and fully utilised. 
 
B Elimination of Unmanned Level Crossings 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
1.8   The Committee are extremely distressed to note that more than fifty 
per cent of all accidents across the Indian Railways occur at level crossings, 
both manned and unmanned. The Committee are quite critical of the premise of 
the Railways that the main factor res ponsible for the high rate of accidents at 
level crossings is as a result of the negligence of road users. The Committee are 
equally critical of the fact that of the total 31254 level crossings across India, 
12582 level crossings remain unmanned even today which comes to about 40%. 
This is in spite of the fact that the Railways have committed in their 'Vision 

 
 
4 
 
2020' document to eliminate all unmanned level crossings. The Committee feel 
that the Railways is not addressing this serious issue with the desired 
purposiveness as is seen from the fact that the targets for elimination of 
unmanned level crossings have never been achieved in the last five years. It is 
even more distressing that the progress of manning of unmanned level 
crossings has been woefully inade quate, with only 2310 of the 5351 level 
crossings identified having been actually manned. The Committee also find with 
consternation that funds meant for road related safety works have consistently 
been underutilized during the last five years - at times to the tune of less than 
40 per cent utilization. The Committee take a very serious view of this apathetic 
attitude of the Railways, especially their stand that the onus of safety at level 
crossing is on the road user. The Committee wish to remind the Railw ays of 
their social and moral responsibility towards the travelling public as also the 
road users and urge them to take proactive measures to put an end to accidents 
at level crossings. While noting that the task of elimination of level crossings is 
gigantic, the Committee reiterate their position that the Ministry should urgently 
take measures to discourage people/vehicles from using level crossings rashly. 
 
 The Committee understand that the alternatives to level crossings are 
grade separators, i.e., ROBs /RUBs. They are, however, greatly concerned that 
there has been very tardy progress in respect of construction of ROBs/RUBs 
during the last five years. The Committee, in several meetings, have 
emphasized the need for speedy and time -bound completion of wor k on 
ROBs/RUBs so that accidents and loss of life at unmanned level crossings could 
be eliminated. However, not much has been done by the Railways in this 
regard. It is pertinent to mention again that utilization has fallen short of 
allocation by up to for ty per cent in all years from 2008 -09 to 2012-13 which is 
reflective of the lackadaisical approach of the Railways to very serious safety 
issue. The Committee are not convinced by the reasons forwarded by the 
Ministry for under-achievement of targets such as late sanction of corresponding 
work in the State Budget, inadequate fund allocation by the State Government, 

 
 
5 
 
non-availability of encumbrance -free land, etc. The Committee are of the view 
that the Ministry should give focused attention towards resolving these 
problems and take expeditious measures to achieve the set targets and achieve 
optimum utilization of allocated funds.” 
 
1.9  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under: 
 “Elimination of Unmanned Level Crossings:  
 It has emerged from the analysis of pattern of accidents that manning of 
unmanned LCs is not an ideal solution. Therefore, Railways have decided to 
progressively eliminate all unmanned LCs by: 
Closure - Closing unmanned LCs having NIL/negligible TVU  
Merger - Merger of unmanned LCs to nearby LCs/grade -separators by 
construction of diversion road  
Provision of Subways/RUBs  
Manning-  Unmanned LCs which cannot be eliminated by above 
methods will be progressively manned.  
In the last 5 years, Indian Railways have  eliminated 5,400 
unmanned level crossings (2,310 by manning and 3,090, by grade - 
separators and other methods). Year-wise details are as below: 
 
 
 
 
 
:
  
  
 
 
Year By Closure/ 
Merger/Subway  By Manning  Total  
2008-09  556  259  815  
2009-10  553  377  930  
2010-11  800  434  1234  
2011-12  481  777  1258  
2012-13  700  463  1163  
TOTAL   3090  2310  5400  

 
 
6 
 
Utilisation of Road Safety Fund: 
Railways is making its best efforts to achieve the targets for elimination of 
level crossings. Elimination of all these Level Crossings is a gigantic task and 
involves lot of manpower, resources and budgetary support. It is a continuous 
process and is done as per nee d, inter-se priority of works, availability of funds 
and co -operation of State Government, particularly, in getting consent for 
closure of level crossing and undertaking to maintain road and drainage in 
future for subways.  In general, Railway undertakes co nstruction of ROB in 
Railway Bridge Portion whereas approaches are being constructed by State 
Government. Smooth progress of ROBs/RUBs mainly depends on positive 
cooperation from the State Government. Most of the times, progress of 
ROBs/RUBs is hampered due to:  
• late sanction of corresponding work in the State Budget 
• inadequate fund allocation by the State Government  
• non-submission of General Agreement Design (GAD) and estimate 
by the State Government. 
• frequent changes in alignment of approaches 
• late finalisation of tender for the work of approaches  
• non-availability of encumbrance free land for construction of 
approaches, 
• not providing undertaking to maintain road and drainage in future 
for RUBs, 
• delay in providing consent of closure of level crossings 
 
To reduce the effect of above factors on timely completion of ROBs/RUBs, 
Railways has taken following Pro-active Measures: 
• engaging single agency for construction of Railway B ridge as well 
as the approaches, 
 
• joint survey with all concerned including State Government to 
finalise the tentative GAD, 

 
 
7 
 
• circulation of check list  and guidelines for preparation of GAD to 
State Government to avoid any back reference f rom Railway to 
State Government, 
• standardization of drawings for various spa ns to avoid delay in 
designing, 
• nomination of nodal officer for single window clearance of GAD 
from Railway side, and 
• use of pre-cast /pre-fabricated components of the bridge. 
 
Several policy initiatives have been taken to expedite faster completion of 
the construction and to remove the various roadblocks. This has resulted in 
increased utilisation of allocated funds for the purpose over the years, as shown 
under: 
Year Allocation 
(Rs. Crore) 
Expenditure 
(Rs. Crore)  % Utilisation 
2008-09 1300 566 43.5 
2009-10 1600 900 56.3 
2010-11 1700 1101 64.8 
2011-12 2000 1329 66.5 
2012-13 2000 1558 77.9 
2013-14 (upto 
Dec'13) 1500 1132.26 75.48 
 
  Thus, it is clear from above that Railways is trying to utilise the available 
resources to its optimum capacity to achieve the targets.”  
 
1.10  The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the 
Ministry. The Committee are distressed to note the slow progress with 
regard to elimination of unmanned level crossings where only 5400 of 
a total of 12582 unmanned level crossings have been eliminated in the 
last 5 years  through manning/closure/merger/ provision of 
ROBs/RUBs, etc.  At this pace, the committee are left wondering  how 
the Ministry would be able to keep their commitment of eliminating all 
level crossings by 2020 as reflected  in their ‘Vision 2020 ’ document. 

 
 
8 
 
The Committee while , taking note of the efforts being made by the 
Ministry to eliminate unmanned railway crossings , desire that the 
Railways take up this matter with increased urgency and vigo ur with 
effective coordination with the State Governments to  ensure that  the 
targets set are achieved within the timeframe.  
 
C Vacancies in the safety category 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
1.11       The Committee further observe that requisite manpower, fully 
equipped and adequately trained, is a prerequisite for the safety of the 
travelling public. However, the Committee are surprised to note that currently 
there exists 5209 vacancies in the posts of  gateman or staff manning level 
crossings. The Committee observe that such a scenario is not at all desirable or 
satisfactory and recommend that recruitment and deployment of these 
personnel should be done with utmost urgency. The Committee would like to b e 
kept apprised of the progress in this regard.  
 
1.12  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under: 
“Arising and filling of vacancies of Gatemen is a continuous process and 
necessary action is being taken by the zonal railwa ys to fill these vacancies 
on priority basis.”  
 
1.13  The Committee are unhappy with the comments furnished 
by the Ministry on such an important aspect as vacancy in security 
categories.  The Committee are disappointed that on being reminded 
that the Ministry should show urgency in completing the recruitment 
for safety related posts, the Ministry has provided a vague reply 
instead of addressing the concerns of the Committee .  The Committee 

 
 
9 
 
strongly recommend that the Ministry should provide detailed re plies 
to their recommendations in future. 
  The Committee, as such , reiterate their earl ier 
recommendation to expedite the recruitment and deployment of 
gatemen/staff manning level crossings at the earliest  and would like 
to be kept apprised of the concrete measure  being taken to fill up the 
huge backlog of vacancies critical to railway safety. The Ministry 
should issue instructions to the Zonal Railways for filling up these 
vacancies on an urgent basis.  
 
D Delays in implementation of TAWD, ACD, TCAS and TPWS 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 8) 
 
1.14  The Committee note that the Railways have initiated the project of 
Train Actuated Warning Device (TAWD) which gives audio -visual warning to 
road users about an approaching train. The Committee further note that there 
were certain lacunae detected in this system which are being investigated and 
corrective action being taken by the RDSO. The Committee call upon the 
Railways to hasten the deployment of TAWD so that accidents/ casualties a t 
level crossings can be avoided/ lowered. The Committee would like to be kept 
apprised of the progress in this regard.      
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:  
 
 “Trials of Train Actuated Warning Device (TA WD) which gives audio-visual 
warning to road users about an approaching train at Level Crossing Gate 
were undertaken. However, the system was found unworkable / unsuitable 
due to various reasons such as law and order, theft, inaccessibility of site, 
poor power supply and public vandalism which resulted in non -availability 

 
 
10 
 
of system.  Provision of Train Actuated Warning System at unmanned LCs 
can be implemented after an effective and theft proof system is developed 
by RDSO.”                            
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 9) 
 
 1.16     The Committee find that the Anti-Collision Device (ACD) was developed 
by Konkan Railway Corporation (KRCL) to prevent collision like situation of 
trains. It was taken up as a pilot project on the  North  East Frontier Railway 
(NFR) in June 2007 covering 1736 Route Kilometers. Though some operational 
difficulties were noticed in the pilot project, the Ministry is actively trying to 
resolve these issues. Considering that several years have gone by in variou s 
trials, the Committee urge the Ministry to take appropriate steps to resolve the 
operational difficulties so that the benefit of this safety measure can be made 
available on the entire rail network. The Committee would like to be kept 
apprised of the position in this regard and urge that all help should be rendered 
to KRCL for glitch-free installation of ACD in Indian Railways.   
 
1.17 In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under: 
“Based on the experience of North East Frontier Railway (NFR), to improve 
reliability and dependability  of  Anti-Collision Devices (ACDs) and to test its 
functioning on multiple lines as well as electrified routes, the specifications  
and design configuration were revised and the system as  ev olved was 
tried on the electrified multiple lines, automatic signalling section of the 
Southern Railway in 2010 -2011. A number  of operational and technical 
problems were experienced during the trials on Southern Railway, which 
cannot be fully resolved by K onkan Railway Corporation Limited (KRCL) 
due to design limitation of ACD.     After above trials on electrified multiple 
lines and Automatic Signalling sections of Southern Railway, further 
development of ACD version 2.0 has been put on hold by KRCL. In vie w of 

 
 
11 
 
above, it has been planned to undertake development of Train Collision 
Avoidance System (TCAS) by Research Design and Standards Organization 
(RDSO) for its deployment on main line sections of Indian Railways.  ACD 
provided by KRCL and on trial on NFR a lso has some operational and 
technical issues for which efforts are underway by KRCL and RDSO to 
resolve the identified issues. In this connection, improved ACD Software 
Version 1.1.2m has already been validated by Electronics Test and 
Development Centre (ETDC)/ Chennai in July, 2013. This software Version 
1.1.2m has been loaded in all stationary ACDs, Loco and Guard ACDs of 
the trains that ply on Tinsukia Division of NFR. After the performance 
evaluation jointly by RDSO, KRCL and NFR, deployment of ACD ver sion 
1.1.2m on remaining four divisions of NFR (Katihar, Alipur Duar, Rangia 
and Lumding) has also been taken up.”  
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 10) 
 
1.18      The Committee have observed that the Train Collision Avoidance 
System (TCAS) was initiated by the Indian Railways based on the experience 
gained from the ACD and Train Protection Warning System (TPWS).  Currently, 
it is under trial over 200 kms for safety validation and assessment of operational 
performance over different rolling stock and under variou s traffic conditions.  
However, as in the case of the ACD, trial has been going on for several years.  
The Committee would like to state that the Railways should work towards 
making it available on the entire rail network by December 2014 and ensure 
that t he deadline is met.  The Vigilance Control Device (VCD) too should be 
equipped in all diesel and electric locomotives. 
 
1.19  In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated 
as under: 
 
  “To overcome major problems noticed in ACD due to its dependence on 
Global Positioning System (GPS) for location, error in Deviation Count 

 
 
12 
 
Theory resulting in wrong Track ID (TID) and need for large numbers of 
mid-section repeaters, RDSO finalized specifica tion of Train Collision 
Avoidance System  (TCAS) by involving Indian vendors. TCAS shall be a 
fusion of functionalities of TPWS and ACD and shall prevent Signal Passing 
at Danger and Collisions. After invitation of Expression of Interest, six 
Indian firms h ave been shortlisted by RDSO. Pilot system developed 
indigenously by one of the firms was successfully demonstrated during 
Proof of Concept Trials in October / November 2012 on Tandur -Nawandgi 
section of Vikarabad -Wadi section of South Central Railway. Bas ed on the 
successful demonstration of Proof of Concept Trial of the technology, 
extended field trials have been planned by RDSO on 250 Route Kilometers 
section of Lingampalli -Vikarabad-Wadi-Bidar of South Central Railway for 
further development of TCAS wit h multi -vendor, interoperability features  
for which a work has been sanctioned at a cost of Rs. 29 crore and funds 
to the tune of Rs. 6 crore have been allocated during the current year 
2013-14. After safety assessment, validation and conclusion of extende d 
field trials and based on results of these trials, further deployment of TCAS 
on Indian Railways will be considered.           
     RDSO has allocated work for the complete 250 kilometers section to 
three indigenous firms to facilitate parallel developme nt work by multiple 
vendors. Prototype of the product developed by vendors is undergoing field 
trials.  All electric locomotives and 99% of diesel locomotives are equipped 
with Vigilance Control Devices.”  
 
1.20  The Committee observe that the Ministry has  developed 
several new technologies like the T rain Actuated Warning Device 
(TAWD), Anti-Collision Device  ( ACD), Train Collision Avoidance 
System (TCAS), Train Protection Warning System (TPWS), etc. in order 
to enhance the safety of Indian Railways. Howeve r, all these 
mechanisms are in trial/pilot phases only and their implementation 
over the entire rail network will take time.  The Committee are of the 

 
 
13 
 
considered view that all these innovations would  go a long way in 
enhancing rail safety and that   their d evelopment should be accorded 
the highest priority by the Railways. This would not only improve the 
safety performance of the Railways but also eliminate accidents/ 
mishaps arising due to human negligence/error. The Commi ttee 
strongly recommend that the Ministry place utmost emphasis on the 
timely completion of trials on these safety devices and make them 
available on the entire rail network so that railway accidents can be 
avoided/reduced.   
 
E Delays in project implementation 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16)   
1.21      The Committee would also like to emphasize that the usefulness of 
any project, however well intentioned it be, will be lost if there are inordinate 
delays in its implementation.  As such, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should take corrective s teps to ensure that the deadlines of all projects 
should be met and that there are no spill-overs.  
 
1.22  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as 
under:    
 “Railways are sensitive towards its responsibility for completion of projects 
in a time bound manner.  The slippage in the deadlines are  primarily on 
account of delays in obtaining clearances in the process of land acquisition 
and handing over of land to the Railway Authorities for execution of work, 
law and order issues a nd lack of sustained flow of funds.  However, all 
efforts shall be made to ensure that the deadlines of projects are met.”   
 
1.23  The Committee do not agree with the reasons furnished by 
the Ministry regarding non -compliance of deadlines and spillover of  
projects. The Committee are of the view that the blueprint of any 
project should take into accou nt all issues relating to land a cquisition, 

 
 
14 
 
finances, implementing agencies , etc., and the project  should be 
formulated accordingly.   Delays and bottle -necks point to poor and 
inadequate planning , resulting in huge cost escalations , besides 
hindering timely completion of projects. The usefulness of these 
projects also get diluted in the face of inordinate delays. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry put in place a 
mechanism to eliminate all impediments in the initial planning stage s 
of a project itself. 
  

 
 
15 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED           
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that the Railways have a very comprehensive and well 
developed definition of the different types of accidents which have been graded 
according to their severity. Consequential or major accidents have been classified 
on the basis of loss of lives of 10 or more passengers or serious damage to 
Railway property of the value exceeding Rs. 2 crore or interruption of rail traffic 
ranging from 3 to 6 hours on broad gauge routes. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the Railways should st rictly comply with this classification to 
facilitate speedier investigation and consequent corrective measures, wherever 
required. The Committee also suggest that the Railways should review the 
classification, if so desired, to rationalise the categories further. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The classification of consequential train accidents issued vide Board’s letter 
No. 2000/Safety(A&R)/19/20 dated 13.12.2000 has been reviewed by the Ministry 
of Railways from time to time to meet the requirements and to mak e these 
classifications relevant. Necessary amendments have accordingly been 
incorporated from time to time. Indian Railways strictly comply with the 
classification of consequential train accidents issued vide Board’s letter referred 
above. Recommendations  of the Standing Committee for further review of the 
above classification have since been noted.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
        The Committee are, however, concerned that incidents of run over of 
passengers/ pedestrians by trains are not accounted for as accidents under the 

 
 
16 
 
Railway classification scheme. They feel that there is a lack of adequate 
deterrence insofar as pedestrians and vehicular traffic is concerned. The 
committee strongly urge the Ministry to take appropriate measures to discourage 
road users and vehicles from crossing railway tracks by putting up physical 
barriers, considering punitive fines and giving wide publicity on the disastrous 
consequences and dangers of such acts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In view of direction of Standing Committee, instructions have been issued to 
zonal railways to direct concerned officers and staff down the line to make all out 
efforts to discourage road users and vehicles from crossing railway tracks.  
Following preventing measures are being taken by Railway Protection Force 
(RPF) to prevent road users and vehicles from crossing railway tracks:  
 
i. Random checks are conducted against trespassers by RPF in 
coordination with Safety Branch, Government Railway Police (GRP) and 
local police and offenders are prosecuted under the Railways Act.  
 
ii. People are being educated and alerted through poster, banner and 
public address system asking them to desist from using the Railway 
tracks for crossing.  
 
iii. Awareness campaigns are organized  to sensitize the passengers/ public 
about the dangers of crossing Railway track and advising them to make 
use of the foot over bridges.  
 
iv. Deterrent action against road vehicle drivers involved in accidents 
causing damage to Level Crossing Gates is taken a nd the errant drivers 
are dealt under relevant provision of the Railways Act.  
 

 
 
17 
 
v. Wide publicity is given to the general public appealing them to strictly 
adhere to the safety rules while crossing manned/ unmanned level 
crossings through print and visual media.  
Moreover, Section 161 of the Indian Railways Act, 1989 provides that “if any 
person driving or leading a vehicle is negligent in crossing an unmanned level 
crossing, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year. 
For the purpos e of this section, “negligence” in relation to any person driving or 
leading a vehicle in crossing an unmanned level crossing means the crossing of 
such level crossing by such person –  
(i) without stopping or caring to stop the vehicle near such level crossing 
to observe whether any approaching rolling stock is in sight, or 
(ii) even while an approaching rolling stock is in sight”.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee understand that the Railways have defined the liability of the 
Rail Administration in the event of a consequential accident under Section 124 of 
the Railways Act of 1989.  However, the Committee note that the award of 
compensation to victims are dependent on the decree awarded by the Railway 
Claims Tribunal, the formalized process of which has no fixed time frame.  The 
Committee take strong exception to this and recommend that in the case of 
accidents accompanied by loss of life, limb or livel ihood, the Railways should 
dispose of cases in the shortest possible time so that compensation is not denied 
or delayed when most needed.  The Committee wish to remind the Ministry that 
when the general public travels on trains, the Railways have a moral r esponsibility 
to transport them safely to their destination. Further, the Committee find that 
there is no policy to provide employment to the dependents of the deceased in 
train accidents. The Committee find it distressing that the Ministry take the view 
that this is done only in those cases where the Minister of Railways makes an 
announcement. This position is certainly not desirable, since the Committee feel 

 
 
18 
 
that there has to be a clear and consistent policy in this regard. Though, it is 
understandable that it may not be feasible to provide employment to all families 
affected by train accidents, yet the Committee urge the Ministry to examine 
compassionately and in a humane manner those cases where the head of  the 
family/ sole earning member has lost his/ her life, subject to laid down guidelines. 
The Committee also recommend that investigation into accidents should be 
expeditious and time -bound and compensation issued to the victims’ families 
without inordinate delay. Where action is to be taken against er ring officials or in 
the case of follow up action for remedial measures, these too should not be kept 
pending.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
         The procedure for payment of compensation which is in vogue at 
present is a judicial process.  The compensati on is decided by the Railway Claims 
Tribunal, which is a quasi -Judicial body independent from the Railways after 
following the judicial process. 
 
However, in accidents involving loss of lives of passengers, ex -gratia relief is 
given by the Railway Administration soon after an accident to meet the immediate 
expenses of the victims. With effect from 01.08.2012, the rate of ex -gratia in case 
of death as defined under Section 124 of the Railways Act, 1989, is Rs. 50,000/ - 
payable to the next of the kin of the d eceased passenger. In case   of grievous 
injuries, the ex -gratia is paid at the rate of Rs. 25,000/ - upto 30 days of 
hospitalization and if indoor treatment is required for more than 30 days, 
additional ex-gratia is paid at the rate of Rs. 300/ - per day to be released at the 
end of every 10 day period or discharge whichever is earlier. The maximum period 
of payment of such ex-gratia will be 12 months. Ex-gratia in case of simple injuries 
under Section 124 for train accidents is Rs. 5,000/ -. In exceptional ca ses, Hon’ble 
Minister of Railways announces payment of ex -gratia at enhanced rate to next of 
kin of the deceased.  

 
 
19 
 
Regarding provision of employment to the dependents of the deceased in 
train accidents, the issue was examined by this Ministry but the same has not 
been found feasible. 
 
All consequential train accidents are investigated either by Commissioner of 
Railway Safety (CRS) under the Ministry of Civil Aviation or by the Departmental 
Inquiry Committees on the zonal railways depending upon severity of the accident. 
All efforts are made to complete these depa rtmental inquiries on zonal railways 
within the stipulated time frame of 10 days (15 days if staff of foreign railway is 
involved). After receipt of the inquiry reports of the Commissioners of Railway 
Safety/ Departmental Inquiry Committees and fixation of responsibilities of the 
staff found guilty, these reports are examined by the zonal railways and 
disciplinary action is initiated on priority against the staff found guilty. The 
remedial measures as suggested through recommendations of the inquiry 
committees are taken up for implementation by the zonal railways.  
The procedure for payment of compensation which is in vogue at present is a 
judicial process. The compensation is decided by the Railway Claims Tribunal after 
following the judicial process, as it is a quasi -Judicial body independent from the 
Railways. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry has utilised 97.7 per cent of Rs. 
16694.66 crore, i.e. Rs. 16318 crore, allocated under the Special Railway Safety 
Fund (SRSF).  Since the mandate of the SRSF was to wipe out the arrears in 
renewal of over-aged assets within a fixed time, close to cent percent utilisation of 
funds points to its purposive implementation.  The Committee further note that the 
renewal of tracks, bridges, signalling gears, rolling stock, etc. carried out have 
shown very positive results as is  evident from the reduction of consequential train 
accidents from 415 in 2001 -02 to 194 in 2007 -08 and 121 in 2012 -13.  Similarly, 
accident per million kilometre has come down from 0.55 in 2001 -02 to 0.22 in 
2007-08 and eventually to 0.13 per million km in  2012-13.  The Committee are of 
the opinion that the Railways should now move to the next level of safety.  For 

 
 
20 
 
this purpose, the Ministry may consider requesting the Government to provide 
another fund on similar lines to enhance the safety index of the Ra ilways.  The 
Committee would also like to recommend that the Railways should further strive to 
generate investible surplus from within its own resources to contribute towards the 
safety fund. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
             Ministry of Railways is grateful for the appreciation by the 
Committee of its efforts in achieving targets of utilising allocated funds under 
‘Special Railway Safety Fund’ (SRSF) for various categories and thereby ensuring 
improvement in safety of passengers and operation of trains. 
            SRSF was set up in 2001 -02 with a corpus of Rs. 17,000 crore and 
was in operation till 2007-08. 
               Although Railways’ demand for setting up of another fund on the 
lines of SRSF is being raised at different fora, the financial po sition of the 
Government does not support such a fund and therefore presently all activities 
relating to renewal/replacement of assets, road related safety works and other 
safety works are being taken up under ‘Depreciation Reserve Fund’ (DRF), 
‘Development Fund’ (DF) and ‘Railway Safety Fund’ (RSF). While DRF and DF are 
financed through the Railways’ internal resources, RSF receives appropriations 
from the Central Road Fund.  Investment in safety gets close attention at all times.  
Fund allocation on safet y related activities is also being increased over the years 
as feasible.  While Railways would strive to continue to contribute to this fund 
from investible surplus, any gesture from Government to provide a specific fund 
for this purpose would be welcome. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
 
       Insofar as derailment is concerned, the Committee note with concern 
that poor maintenance of track is the major cause of such derailment. The 

 
 
21 
 
Committee, however, find that the Railways are making strenuous efforts to 
improve the condition of tracks. In fact, there has been optimum utilization of the 
allocated funds and achievement of targets has been satisfactory. The Ministry is 
also taking pro active steps, including introduction of technological innovations to 
improve tracks. Further, the Committee note that the Railways have a well defined 
inspection mechanism to ensure rail-worthiness of tracks.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
           Indian Railways is making continuous efforts to improve the condition 
of track.  The progress of Track Renewal vis -à-vis targets and achievement during 
the last three year are as under:  
Year Target Achievement 
(Km of CTR Units) 
2010-11 3150 3465 
2011-12 3000 3300 
2012-13 3000 3296 
2013-14 3000 2155 (Upto December, 2013) 
 
             In current year 2013 -14 (upto  Dec’13), the total number of 
consequential accidents due to track defects are 19 against a total number of 87 
consequential train accidents.  Out of these 19 consequential train accidents, only 
8 accidents were due to poor maintenance of track. In order t o improve safety, 
modern track structure consisting of PSC sleepers, 52 kg/60 kg, 90 or higher UTS 
rails, fanshaped layout of PSC sleepers, Steel Channel Sleepers on girder bridges is 
being used while carrying out primary track renewals. Further it has bee n decided 
to lay Thick web switches, Weldable Cast Manganese Steel crossings on identified 
routes. Use of higher section of rail i.e. 60 kg rails will progressively be increased. 
To assess the internal defects and take remedial action well before any failu re of 
rail or weld, ultrasonic flaw detection (USFD) is carried out as a preventive 
measure. 
          Number of derailments have increased on account of rail/weld 
fractures. Major cause of rail fractures is corrosion of rail foot due to dropping of 

 
 
22 
 
excreta from the coaches directly on the rails. All passenger train coaches need 
to be fixed with zero-discharge toilets. 
         Following measures are being taken to protect the rails from 
corrosion due to above reasons: 
(i) The corrosion resistant rails Nickel -Chromium-Copper (NCC) rails 
and Copper -Molybdenum (Cu -Mu) rails have also been developed and are 
under trial in different Zonal Railways. 
 
(ii) Anti-corrosive bituminous painting of rails and greasing and sealing 
of liner contact area is being done on identified corrosion prone areas.  
 
(iii) A study on rail corrosion due to micro organisms and remedial 
measures, has been entrusted to Centre for Electro Chemical Research 
Institute (CECRI)/Karaikudi through a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MOU) between Research Designs & Standards Organisation (RDSO) and 
CECRI/Karaikudi entered into in the month of February 2012. The study is 
in progress. 
           Increase in speed, axle loads and volume of traffic requires more 
maintenance efforts and supe rior quality of maintenance. At the same time, 
due to increase in traffic, time available for maintenance of track has reduced 
considerably. Therefore, complete mechanization of track maintenance and 
construction has been planned. High initial quality of t rack laying needs lesser 
maintenance. Also the durability of mechanized maintenance is much more. 
Mechanization reduces bottlenecks in operation. Vision 2020 document of 
Indian Railways envisages complete mechanisation of track maintenance and 
construction. 
           In addition, an elaborate system of inspections of track has been laid -
down in Indian Railways Permanent Way Manual (IRPWM) for Keymen, 
Gangmate, Junior Engineer (Permanent Way), Section Engineer (Permanent 
Way), Assistant Engineer and Divisio nal Engineer.  Higher officials not only 
conduct technical inspections but also keep check on quantity and quality of 

 
 
23 
 
inspections conducted by their juniors. The periodicity of track inspection has 
been defined in IRPWM. 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
          The Committee are of the opinion that ‘Signal Passing At Danger’ is a 
major cause of concern as it points to human failure. Therefore, the early 
introduction of the Train Protection Warning System which seeks to eliminate 
accidents caused due to human  error is certainly very much needed. The 
Committee, while appreciating this initiative by the Ministry, urge them to 
protectively eliminate all bottlenecks in its implementation all across the railway 
network so that the added benefits can accrue to both the Railways and the 
travelling public. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
              TPWS prevents accidents caused by human error like Signal 
Passing at Danger (SPAD) and over speeding. Two pilot projects of TPWS were 
sanctioned one each on Southern and North Central Railway.  
                  The pilot project on Southern Railway was taken up on Chennai 
Central - Gummiddipundi (50 Route Kms) sub -urban section and was 
commissioned in May’2008 and since then it is operational. On North Central 
Railway, it was taken up in non-suburban section on Delhi-Agra section (200 Route 
Kms) where TPWS has been provided and service trials are in progress on 35 
locomotives on nominated trains.  TPWS has been commissioned on One AC rake 
on Kolkata Metro and 5 more rakes have been equipped with TPWS equipment.  
Work is in progress to provide TPWS system on all rakes on Kolkata Metro. 
                   Based on the experience gained, works for deployment of 
TPWS on High Density Network (HDN)/Automatic Signaling Sections have been 
sanctioned at a cost of Rs.1768 crore covering 3397 route kilome ters over 8 Zonal 
Railways i.e. Central, Eastern, Northern, South Central, North Central, Southern, 
South Eastern and Western.  
 

 
 
24 
 
             In first phase, process to acquire TPWS (ETCS Level 1) on 
Automatic Signalling Suburban Sections where EMUs, MEMUs  and DEMUs and 
Main Line Locomotives ply on Eastern, South Eastern and North Central Railways, 
has been initiated. In next phase, balance sanctioned works of TPWS shall be 
taken up. 
          Besides above, Indian Railways is developing low cost indigenous  
system, namely, Train Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) which can prevent signal 
passing at danger, over speeding as well as mid -section collision. Specifications of 
the system have already been finalized by Research Design and Standards 
Organization (RDSO). The proof of concept trial of TCAS were successfully carried 
out during October/November, 2012 on South Central Railway.  
          Extended field trials on 250 kilometres Lingamapalli -Vikarabad-Wadi-
Bidar Section of South Central Railway have also been planned by RDSO.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
    With over one lakh  bridges, out of which 30 -35 percent being hundred 
years old, the Committee feel that the Railways should stringently monitor their 
carrying capability and special emphasis must be laid on their proper maintenance.  
Inspection procedures must be strictly complied with, and appropriate action taken 
whenever required.  The Committee would appreciate if the Railways could initiate 
a comprehensive survey of all bridges on its network with focused attention on the 
more than hundred year old ones, so that any saf ety issue could be accordingly 
dealt with and where required rehabilitation/ rebuilding could be effected.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
   A regular and rigorous system of inspection of bridges is followed on 
Indian Railways for identification of bridges req uiring attention.  Under this 
system, all the bridges are thoroughly inspected once a year by designated 
officials.  In addition, the inspecting officials also inspect the bridges during their 
routine inspections.  The rebuilding/ rehabilitation/strengthen ing of bridges is 

 
 
25 
 
undertaken on the basis of their physical condition as ascertained during their 
regular inspections and not on the basis of age.  Rehabilitation/ 
rebuilding/strengthening of Bridges is a continuous process on Indian Railways.  
During the last five financial years, a total of 5609 railway bridges have been 
rebuilt/rehabilitated/ strengthened.  As on 01.04.2013, 3426 bridges are 
sanctioned for rehabilitation/ rebuilding/strengthening.  During current year 2013 -
14, 791 bridges are planned for  rebuilding/rehabilitation/ strengthening and upto 
December’2013, 508 bridges have been rebuilt/rehabilitated/ strengthened.   
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 
   Another area of concern for the Committee is that of accidents due to fire 
which have been classified as Class B Category accidents by the Railways. 
Accidents occurring as a result of fire have a very high casualty rate.  The 
Committee while taking note of the measure introduced by the Railway to prevent 
incidents of fire on train, urge the Ministry to take steps to ensure that 
inflammable/ combustible material are not carried on board through a system of 
rigorous security checking at entry points at sta tions. Further, train originating at 
such places where combustible/ inflammable material are manufactured (such as 
crackers) should be more thoroughly and meticulously checked for prevention of 
carriage of such materials. There should be very stringent che cks during festival 
seasons in different parts of the country. The Committee also urge the Ministry to 
conduct awareness campaign regularly among the travelling public of the dangers 
of carrying of such material on board so that there is self-deterrence on the part of 
the passengers.  At the same time, the Railways should also address other factors 
responsible for fire incidents in the train. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

 
 
26 
 
 To reduce the possibility of carriage of dangerous/ prohibited goods on 
trains, instructions have already been issued stipulating the following:  
 
 Ticket checking staff at stations should observe that inflammable and 
dangerous/ prohibited goods are not brought into the railway stations.  
 
 On trains, whenever such goods are detected, ticket checking staff, detecting 
these items, should intimate about the same to the station staff for necessary 
action.  
 
 Coach Attendant detecting these items should bring it to the notice of ticket 
checking staff on the trains. 
The extant instructions have been reiterated to all concerned for strict 
compliance. In addition, Zonal Railways, as per the recommendation of 
Committee, have also been advised that checking of carrying of combustible/ 
inflammable materi al at entry point at locations/ stations, where such materials 
(such as crackers) are manufactured may be made more rigorous and 
strengthened, especially during festival seasons. 
  Railway Protection Force (RPF) also takes following measures to prevent 
carriage of inflammable material in trains: 
   
1. Regular drives are being conducted in coordination with 
Commercial Department and Government Railway Police against the carrying of 
inflammable/ combustible materials in trains and at railway premises and the 
offenders are prosecuted under the Railways Act.  
 
2. Rigorous security checking is being done at entry points at 
stations against the carrying of inflammable/ combustible materials. Frisking of 
passengers luggage is done either manually or by X -ray baggage scan ners 
installed at important Railway Stations.  
 

 
 
27 
 
3. Joint checks are conducted at parcel offices to indentify the 
presence of fuel in the vehicles booked for transportation and other 
inflammable/ combustible material if any booked.  
 
4. Sustained campaign for public awareness is being launched through 
appropriate print and electronic media, exhorting passengers not to carry 
inflammable/ dangerous/ explosive articles as a part of their luggage.  
 
5. Regular announcements are made through Publ ic Announcement 
System urging the passengers to desist from smoking and carrying inflammable 
material in trains. 
 
6. The train escort parties are briefed to keep strict watch/ vigil on carrying 
of inflammable/ combustible material in trains. 
            Instructions have also been issued to zonal railways to direct concerned 
officers and staff down the line to be more vigilant and alert and to take effective 
measures to check the carriage of inflammable articles to avoid fire accidents in 
railways. 
 
         Railways have taken various measures to prevent incidents of fire in trains, which 
include the following: 
1. Indian Railways have always endeavoured to enhance fire worthiness of coaches 
by using fire retardant furnishing materials in the interior of its coach es which 
conform to international norms of fire retardancy. 
 
2. Portable dry chemical powder type fire extinguishers are being provided in all   
air-conditioned coaches, second class – cum – guard and luggage vans, pantry 
cars and train locomotives in all mainline trains. 
 
3. Railways have also taken measures to prevent fire due to electrical short circuit 
in coaches, which include (a) Multi tier electrical protection system and fire 
retardant cables are used in all coaches working on Indian Railways for 

 
 
28 
 
prevention of fire due to any electrical defect; (b) separation of positive and 
negative wires; (c) use of fire retardant materials in all electrical items. 
 
4. With a view to improve fire safety in running trains, Automatic Fire and 
Smoke Detection System has bee n provided on coaches of one rake of 
Train Nos. 22812 and 22824 New Delhi -Bhunaneswar Rajdhani Express as 
pilot project. The system provides advance warning in case of any fire 
hazard in running train and thus enables the passengers to protect them 
from fi re. Recently one rake of Train No. 12425 New Delhi -Jammu Tawi 
Rajdhani Express has also been provided with such system. Based on the 
feedback, technical specification has been revised and air brake system has 
been interfaced with this system for stoppage o f trains in emergency 
situations. Provision of similar automatic fire alarm system in 20 more 
rakes for extended field trial has also been planned.  
 
5. Detailed instructions have been issued to zonal railways for observance of 
safe practices in handling of p antry cars and for ensuring periodical 
inspection of electrical and LPG fittings in the pantry cars. 
 
6. Prohibition of petrol/diesel in two wheelers booked as luggage/parcel. 
 
7. Intensive publicity campaigns to prevent the travelling public from 
carrying inflammable and explosive goods are regularly undertaken. 
 
8. Strict enforcement of no smoking policy inside trains and on railway 
premises. 
 
9. Two separate Fire Safety Audit Teams have been constituted recently to 
plan safety audit in selective stations, coaching depots and workshops, etc. 
  
 
 
 
 

 
 
29 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 
          The Committee wish to reiterate that technology upgradation  should 
be a consistent endeavour of the Railways. Technological advancements can go a 
long way in reducing the risk of accidents. The Railways should focus on 
increasing efforts towards this end and at the same time learn from the best 
practices prevalent in other countries. Filling up of vacancies, skill development of 
personnel, and regular monitoring of their health parameters should also be a top 
priority.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
        Technological upgradation  in the laying and maintenance of track is 
being carried out continuously. Few of the various items of technology upgradation 
are as under: 
 
1. Switching over to Mobile Flash Butt Welding technology in place of 
Alumino Thermit (AT) welding to carry out weld renewals. The quality of Mobile 
Flash Butt Welding is superior to AT welding. At the same time, technology of 
Alumino Thermit welds has been upgraded by introduction of Auto weigh 
method, pre-heating with compressed air petrol and 3 piece moulds, so as to 
upgrade the quality and reliability of welds. 
2. Single rail panels of 65m length are being manufactured at the steel plant 
to minimize number of Alumino Thermit/Flash Butt welding joints in the track 
which are being converted into 260m/130m long panels by Fla sh Butt welding 
technology which is superior to Alumino Thermit welding. 
 
3. Digital Ultrasonic testing machines capable of freezing scan as well as 
storing data have been developed.  Zonal Railways have been advised to 
progressively use digital machines. 
 

 
 
30 
 
4. Vision 2020 document of Indian Railways envisages complete 
mechanization of track maintenance and construction activities. Towards this 
goal, various aspects of track maintenance and track renewal are 
progressively being mechanized with the help of modern state of the art track 
machines for optimization of track inputs, better quality and improved safety 
environment at work sites. A Master plan has been drawn for procurement of 
track machines to achieve complete mechanization and procurement of 
machines.  A 3 tier system of track maintenance is being adopted. As the 1 st 
tier, heavy on track machines would be used for planned maintenance. The 
2nd tier of Mobile Maintenance Units will provide Rail/Road borne transport to 
track men, small machines and track mat erials for which hitherto no 
satisfactory system exists. The 3rd tier of sectional gangs will deal with sundry 
activities.  
           As on 01.04.2013, total 708 number of track machines are in 
operation, 119 number are under supply, whereas 111 number of  track 
machines are under procurement.  
 
5. Two numbers of Rail Grinding Machines have been procured to reduce 
gauge face corner cracks. 
 
6. Electronic monitoring of track geometry is carried out with Track 
Recording Cars (TRC) and Portable Oscillation Monitorin g Systems (OMS) to 
detect geometry defects for planning maintenance as per frequencies laid 
down depending upon speed and route classification. 
 
7. Track management system is being introduced progressively on Indian 
Railways for development of database and de cision support system and to 
rationalize maintenance requirement and optimize inputs. 
          Following Technical up -gradations are being carried out by Telecom 
Department which will go a long way in reducing the risk of accidents: 

 
 
31 
 
a) All over head alignmen ts are being replaced with underground copper 
cable and Optical Fiber cable for the working of Block, Control, Block Proving by 
Axle Counter (BPAC) circuits etc. 
 
b) Progressively Mobile Train Radio Communication is being introduced on 
“A” “B” & “C” routes of  Indian Railway Network to provide secured means of 
communication. 
         Technological advancement/upgradation is continuous endeavour and a major 
thrust area in Signalling on Indian Railways. Status as on 31.12.2013 is: 
 
1. Track Circuiting of the complete station section has been provided at 
30323 locations. Thus completing about 93% of total tack circuiting to be 
provided on Indian Railways. On A, B & C routes 99.8% track circuiting has been 
provided. 
 
2. Fouling Mark to Fouling Mark track circuiting  on entire A,B, C,D Spl and D 
routes, where permissible speed is more than 75 Kmph, has been completed. 
 
3. Electrical/Electronic Interlocking has been provided at 5142 station out of 
6189 interlocked stations on Broad Gauge.  
 
4. Block Proving by Axle Counters (BPAC) for ‘Last Vehicle Check’ has been 
provided on 4085 Block Sections. 
 
5. Interlocking of Level Crossing (LC) Gates has been provided at 10378LC gates. 
6. Automatic Block Signalling (ABS) has been provided on 2601 RKms. 
  
7. Intermediate Block Signalling (IBS) has been provided on 445 block sections. 
  The following technological upgradation has been carried out in electric locos to 
enhance safety: 

 
 
32 
 
 Electric locomotives are fitted with Vigilance Control Device (VCD), a safety 
device which monitors and judg es the alertness of driver on run to ensure safety 
of the train.  
  
 Twin beam headlights for improving the visibility of the drivers during night 
time. 
 
 Flasher lights which gets automatically switched on in case of train parting 
due to derailment or otherwise.   
 
 Air dryers for improved reliability of the braking system. 
 
 Simulator based training is being imparted for improving upon the driving 
skills and the reaction time of drivers. 
  
 In order to reduce fatigue level of loco crew, ergonomically designed Loco 
cabs are being provided and facilities in running rooms are being improved. 
          Arising and filling up of vacancies is a continuous process and necessary 
action is being taken by the zonal railways to fill the vacancies on priority basis. 
All categories of employees on Indian Railways undergo a structured training at 
zonal railway training centre at induction stage. In addition, the employees also 
undergo promotional/ refresher courses at periodic intervals.  
           Provision for Pre-periodical medical examination of railway employee in 
safety category is mandatory and is being done regularly.  
 
  

 
 
33 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
NIL 
  

 
 
34 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 
         The Committee note with concern that there was lack of utilisation of the 
allocated funds in the safety category during the last two financial years, i.e. 
2011-12 and 2012 -13 where there was shortfall in utilisation.  The Committee 
fails to understand how the Railways could have ended up with unutilised funds 
in such a critical category as safety.  This reflects very poorly on the Railways as 
regards safety which involves the lives of millions of passengers who avail of the 
Railway services.  The Committee forcefully recommend that the Railways should 
fully utilise the funds meant for safety so that accidents/ untoward incidents are 
avoided. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
           Funds are allocated for safety related works, under both Plan and non -
Plan side. This expenditure is largely met out of the internal resources generated 
by the Railways in addition to contributions received for Railway Safety Fund 
from Central Road Fund.  From the expenditure incurred on safety related works 
in the last three years (Statement placed at Annexure), it will be seen that 
allocations in this regard show an increasing trend.  There is no ‘surrender’ as 
such and lower expenditure was forced by the inadequate resources generated 
during the year.  The Railways had to re gulate expenditure to match internal 
generation available.  However, the Committee’s observations have been noted 
for further enhancing the level of expenditure and its utilisation for safety related 
activities. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no.1.7 of Chapter I) 

 
 
35 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
 
            The committee are extremely distressed to note that more than fifty per 
cent of all accidents across the Indian Railways occur at level crossings, both 
manned and unmanned. The Committee are quite critical of the premise of the 
Railways that th e main factor responsible for the high rate of accidents at level 
crossings is as a result of the negligence of road users. The Committee are 
equally critical of the fact that of the total 31254 level crossings across India, 
12582 level crossings remain unmanned even today which comes to about 40%. 
This is in spite of the fact that the Railways have committed in their 'Vision 2020' 
document to eliminate all unmanned level crossings. The Committee feel that the 
Railways is not addressing this serious issue w ith the desired purposiveness as is 
seen from the fact that the targets for elimination of unmanned level crossings 
have never been achieved in the last five years. It is even more distressing that 
the progress of manning of unmanned level crossings has be en woefully 
inadequate, with only 2310 of the 5351 level crossings identified having been 
actually manned. The Committee also find with consternation that funds meant 
for road related safety works have consistently been underutilized during the last 
five y ears - at times to the tune of less than 40 per cent utilization. The 
Committee take a very serious view of this apathetic attitude of the Railways, 
especially their stand that the onus of safety at level crossing is on the road user. 
The Committee wish to  remind the Railways of their social and moral 
responsibility towards the travelling public as also the road users and urge them 
to take proactive measures to put an end to accidents at level crossings. While 
noting that the task of elimination of level cr ossings is gigantic, the Committee 
reiterate their position that the Ministry should urgently take measures to 
discourage people/vehicles from using level crossings rashly. 
 

 
 
36 
 
 The Committee understand that the alternatives to level crossings are 
grade separators, i.e., ROBs/RUBs. They are, however, greatly concerned that 
there has been very tardy progress in respect of construction of ROBs/RUBs 
during the last five years. The Committee, in several meetings, have emphasized 
the need for speedy and time -bound completion of work on ROBs/RUBs so that 
accidents and loss of life at unmanned level crossings could be eliminated. 
However, not much has been done by the Railways in this regard. It is pertinent 
to mention again that utilization has fallen short of a llocation by up to forty per 
cent in all years from 2008 -09 to 2012-13 which is reflective of the lackadaisical 
approach of the Railways to very serious safety issue. The Committee are not 
convinced by the reasons forwarded by the Ministry for under -achievement of 
targets such as late sanction of corresponding work in the State Budget, 
inadequate fund allocation by the State Government, non -availability of 
encumbrance-free land, etc. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry 
should give focused attent ion towards resolving these problems and take 
expeditious measures to achieve the set targets and achieve optimum utilization 
of allocated funds. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Elimination of Unmanned Level Crossings: 
         It has emerged from the analysis of pattern of accidents that manning of 
unmanned LCs is not an ideal solution. Therefore, Railways have decided to 
progressively eliminate all unmanned LCs by: 
Closure - Closing unmanned LCs having NIL/negligible TVU  
Merger - Merger of unmanned LCs to nea rby LCs/grade -separators by 
construction of diversion road 
Provision of Subways/RUBs 
Manning-  Unmanned LCs which cannot be eliminated by above methods 
will be progressively manned. 

 
 
37 
 
        In the last 5 years, Indian Railways have eliminated 5,400 unmanne d level 
crossings (2,310 by manning and 3,090, by grade -separators and other 
methods). Year-wise details are as below: 
 
 
 
Utilisation of Road Safety Fund:  
        Railways is making its best efforts to achieve the targets for elimination 
of level crossings. Elimination of all these Level Crossings is a gigantic task and 
involves lot of manpower, resources and budgetary support. It is a continuous  
process and is done as per ne ed, inter-se priority of works, availability of funds 
and co-operation of State Government, particularly, in getting consent for closure 
of level crossing and undertaking to maintain road and drainage in future for 
subways. 
        In general, Railway unde rtakes construction of ROB in Railway Bridge 
Portion whereas approaches are being constructed by State Government. Smooth 
progress of ROBs/RUBs mainly depends on positive cooperation from the State 
Government. Most of the times, progress of ROBs/RUBs is hampered due to:  
• late sanction of corresponding work in the State Budget 
• inadequate fund allocation by the State Government  
• non-submission of General Agreement Design (GAD) and estimate by the 
State Government. 
Year By Closure/ Merger/Subway  By Manning  Total  
2008-09  556  259  815  
2009-10  553  377  930  
2010-11  800  434  1234  
2011-12  481  777  1258  
2012-13  700  463  1163  
TOTAL   3090  2310  5400  

 
 
38 
 
• frequent changes in alignment of approaches 
• late finalisation of tender for the work of approaches  
• non-availability of encumbrance free land for construction of approaches, 
• not providing undertaking to maintain road and drainage in future for RUBs, 
• delay in providing consent of closure of level crossings 
To reduce the effect of above factors on timely completion of 
ROBs/RUBs, Railways has taken following Pro-active Measures: 
• engaging single agency for construction of Railway Bridge as well as the 
approaches. 
• joint survey with all concerned including State Government to finalise the 
tentative GAD, 
• circulation of check list  and guidelines for preparation of GAD to State 
Government to avoid any back reference from Railway to State 
Government. 
• standardization of drawings for various spans to avoid delay in 
designing.  
• nomination of nodal officer for single window clearance of GAD from 
Railway side 
• use of pre-cast /pre-fabricated components of the bridge. 
 
 Several policy initiatives have been taken to expedite faster completion of the 
construction and to remove the various roadblocks. This has resulted in increased 
utilisation of allocated funds for the purpose over the years, as shown under: 
Year Allocation 
(Rs. Crore) 
Expenditure 
(Rs. Crore)  % Utilisation 
2008-09 1300 566 43.5 
2009-10 1600 900 56.3 
2010-11 1700 1101 64.8 

 
 
39 
 
2011-12 2000 1329 66.5 
2012-13 2000 1558 77.9 
2013-14 (upto Dec'13) 1500 1132.26 75.48 
 
            Thus, it is clear from above that Railways is trying to utilise the available 
resources to its optimum capacity to achieve the targets. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no.1.10 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
 
       The Committee further observe that requisite manpower, fully equipped and 
adequately trained, is a prerequisite for the safety of the travelling public. However, 
the Committee are surprised to note that currently there exists 5209 vacancies in the 
posts of gateman or staff manning level crossings. The Committee observe that such 
a scenario is not at all desirable or satisfactory and recommend that recruitment and 
deployment of these personnel should be done with utmost urgency. The Committee 
would like to be kept apprised of the progress in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
         Arising and filling of vacancies of Gatemen is a continuous process and 
necessary action is being taken by the zonal  railways to fill these vacancies on 
priority basis.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
The Committee note that the Railways have initiated the project of Train 
Actuated Warning Device (TAWD) which gives audio -visual warning to road users 
about an approaching train. The Committee further note that there were certain 

 
 
40 
 
lacunae detected in this system which are being investigated and corrective action 
being taken by the RDSO. The Committee call upon the Railways to hasten the 
deployment of TAWD so that accidents/ c asualties at level crossings can be avoided/ 
lowered. The Committee would like to be kept apprised of the progress in this regard. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
         Trials of Train Actuated Warning Device (TAWD) which gives audio-visual 
warning to road users about an approaching train at Level Crossing Gate were 
undertaken. However, the system was found unworkable / unsuitable due to various 
reasons such as law and order, theft, inaccessibility of site, poor power supply and 
public vandalism which resulted in non-availability of system. 
 
          Provision of Train Actuated Warning System at unmanned LCs can be 
implemented after an effective and theft proof system is developed by RDSO. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
 
            The committee find that the Anti-Collision Device (ACD) was developed 
by Konkan Railway Corporation (KRCL) to prevent collision like situation of trains. It 
was taken up as a pilot project on the  North East Frontier Railway (NFR) in June 
2007 covering 1736 Route Kilometers. Though some operational difficulties were 
noticed in the pilot project, the Ministry is actively trying to resolve these issues. 
Considering that several years have gone by in various trials, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to take appropriate steps to resolve the operational difficulties so that the 
benefit of this safety measure can be made available on the entire rail network. The 
Committee would like to be kept apprised of the position in this regard and urge that 
all hel p should be rendered to KRCL for glitch -free installation of ACD in Indian 
Railways. 
 

 
 
41 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
           Based on the experience of North East Frontier Railway (NFR), to 
improve reliability and dependability  of  Anti-Collision Devices (ACDs) and to test its 
functioning on multiple lines as well as electrified routes, the specifications  and 
design configuration were revised and the system as  evolved was tried on the 
electrified multiple lines, automatic signalling section of the Southern Railway in 2010-
2011. A number  of operational and technical problems were experienced during the 
trials on Southern Railway, which cannot be fully resolved by Konkan Railway 
Corporation Limited (KRCL) due to design limitation of ACD. 
           After above trials on electrified multiple lines and Automatic Signalling 
sections of Southern Railway, further development of ACD version 2.0 has been put 
on hold by KRCL. In view of above, it has been planned to undertake development of 
Train Collision Avoidance S ystem (TCAS) by Research Design and Standards 
Organization (RDSO) for its deployment on main line sections of Indian Railways. 
 
           ACD provided by KRCL and on trial on NFR also has some operational 
and technical issues for which efforts are underway by KRCL and RDSO to resolve the 
identified issues. In this connection, improved ACD Software Version 1.1.2m has 
already been v alidated by Electronics Test and Development Centre  (ETDC)/ Chennai in 
July, 2013. This software Version 1.1.2m has been loaded in all stationary ACDs, Loco 
and Guard ACDs of the trains that ply on Tinsukia Division of NFR. After the 
performance evaluation jointly by RDSO, KRCL and NFR, deployment of ACD version 
1.1.2m on remaining four divisions of NFR (Katihar, Alipur Duar, Rangia and Lumding) 
has also been taken up. 
  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
 

 
 
42 
 
        The Committee have observed that the Train Col lision Avoidance System (TCAS) 
was initiated by the Indian Railways based on the experience gained from the ACD and 
Train Protection Warning System (TPWS).  Currently, it is under trial over 200 kms for 
safety validation and assessment of operational perfo rmance over different rolling 
stock and under various traffic conditions.  However, as in the case of the ACD, trial 
has been going on for several years.  The Committee would like to state that the 
Railways should work towards making it available on the en tire rail network by 
December 2014 and ensure that the deadline is met.  The Vigilance Control Device 
(VCD) too should be equipped in all diesel and electric locomotives.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
             To overcome major problems noticed in ACD due to its dependence 
on Global Positioning System (GPS) for location, error in Deviation Count Theory 
resulting in wrong Track ID (TID) and need for large numbers of mid -section 
repeaters, RDSO finalized specification of Train Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) by 
involving Indian vendors. TCAS shall be a fusion of functionalities of TPWS and ACD 
and shall prevent Signal Passing at Danger and Collisions. After invitation of 
Expression of Interest, six I ndian firms have been shortlisted by RDSO. Pilot system 
developed indigenously by one of the firms was successfully demonstrated during 
Proof of Concept Trials in October / November 2012 on Tandur -Nawandgi section of 
Vikarabad-Wadi section of South Central  Railway. Based on the successful 
demonstration of Proof of Concept Trial of the technology, extended field trials have 
been planned by RDSO on 250 Route Kilometers section of Lingampalli -Vikarabad-
Wadi-Bidar of South Central Railway for further developmen t of TCAS with multi -
vendor, interoperability features for which a work has been sanctioned at a cost of Rs. 
29 crore and funds to the tune of Rs. 6 crore have been allocated during the current 
year 2013 -14. After safety assessment, validation and conclusi on of extended field 
trials and based on results of these trials, further deployment of TCAS on Indian 
Railways will be considered.  

 
 
43 
 
                RDSO has allocated work for the complete 250 kilometers section to 
three indigenous firms to facilitate par allel development work by multiple vendors. 
Prototype of the product developed by vendors is undergoing field trials. 
            All electric locomotives and 99% of diesel locomotives are equipped 
with Vigilance Control Devices.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no.1.20 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
         The Committee would also like to emphasize that the usefulness of any 
project, however well intentioned it be, will be lost if there are inordinate delays in its 
implementation.  As such, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should take 
corrective steps to ensure that the deadlines of all projects should be met and that 
there are no spill-overs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
          Railways are sensitive towards its responsibility for completion of 
projects in a time bound manner.  The slippage in the deadlines are  primarily on 
account of delays in obtaining clearances in the process of land acquisition and 
handing over of land to the Railway Authorities for execution of work, law and order 
issues and lack of sustained flow of funds.  However, all efforts shall be made to 
ensure that the deadlines of projects are met 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para no.1.23 of Chapter I) 
 
 

 
 
44 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                  DINESH TRIVEDI, 
17 December, 2014                                                                              Chairperson, 
26 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Railways 

 
 
45 
 
  Appendix I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON RAILWAYS (2014-15) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 17th December, 2014, from 1500 hours to 
1530  hours in Committee Room No. ‘62’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
    PRESENT 
SHRI DINESH TRIVEDI -  CHAIRPERSON  
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri E. Ahamed 
3.  Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel 
4.  Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary 
5. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
6. Shri Sanjay Dhotre 
7. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
8. Shri Rajen Gohain 
9. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
10. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar 
11. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
12. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
13. Shri Thota Narasimham 
14. Shri R. Radhakrishnan 
15. Shri Mekapati Raja Mohan Reddy 
16. Shri Ganesh Singh 
17. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
18.  Shri Mukut Mithi 
19.   Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
20.  Shri Ambeth Rajan 
21.   Shri T. Rathinavel 
22.   Shri Devender Goud T. 
23. Shri Alok Tiwari 
24. Shri Motilal Vora 
 
        SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal   - Additional Director 

 
 
46 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following 
draft Reports and adopted the same without any modifications: 
 
(i)  Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 21st Report on “Major Railway Accidents  
during the last five years – Causes and Remedial Measures”;  
 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 25th Report on “Ongoing and Pending 
Railway Projects, with special emphasis on Projects in the Nor theast 
Region”; and 
 
(iii) Demands for Grants 2014-15 of the Ministry of Railways. 
 
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports and 
present the same to Parliament. 
 
 The Committee, then, adjourned.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
47 
 
APPENDIX-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 21TH REPORT         
(15TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘MAJOR RAILWAY ACCIDENTS DURING THE LAST FIVE 
YEARS-CAUSES AND REMEDIAL MEASURES’’  
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 16 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the  Government –  
 
Para Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15   
 
 
9 
 Percentage of total   
 
56.25% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
 
Para Nos.  NIL       
 
 
NIL 
 Percentage of total   
 
0% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration –  
 
Para Nos.  5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 16        
 
 
 
7 
 Percentage of total   
 
43.75% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited -      
 
Para Nos. Nil 
 
 
Nil 
  
Percentage of total 
 
 
0% 
 
 
        
 
 