EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants—2015-16
of the Ministry of Railways’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08.12.2015
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 08.12.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 ( Saka)


S.C.R. No. 200
Price : R  80.00
© 2015 BY L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER IR eport ..................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................ 10
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ............................. 37
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ................................................ 47
C
HAPTER VR ecommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ................................................... 53
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on
Railways held on 30.09.2015 ................................. 54
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants—
2015-16 of the Ministry of Railways ’......................... 56
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
RAILWAYS (2015-2016)
Shri Dinesh Trivedi —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri E. Ahamed
3. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
4. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
6. Shri Gourav Gogoi
7. Shri Rajen Gohain
8. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
9. Shri Ramesh Kaushik
10. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
11. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
12. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
13. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
14. Shri A.T . Nana Patil
15. Shri R. Radhakrishnan
16. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
17. Shri Lakhan Lal Sahu
18. Shri Ganesh Singh
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
20. Shri Narasimham Thota
21. Shri S.R. Vijayakumar
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.K. Antony
23. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
24. Shri Mukut Mithi
25. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
26. Shri T . Rathinavel
(iii)

(iv)
27. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
28. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
29. Shri Devender Goud T .
30. Shri Alok Tiwari
31. Shri Motilal Vora
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
4. Smt. Geeta Parmar — Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. Banani Sarker Joshi — Sr. Cte. Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2015-16),
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Eighth Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in their Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands
for Grants— 2015-16 of the Ministry of Railways ’.
2. The Fourth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 20.04.2015
and was laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.04.2015. The Report contained
18 recommendations/observations. The Ministry of Railways furnished
their Action Taken Notes on all the recommendations/observations
contained in the Report on 24.08.2015.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken
Report at their sitting held on 30.09.2015. The minutes of the sitting
is given in Appendix-I.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Fourth Report of the
Standing Committee on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.
   N EW D ELHI; DINESH TRIVEDI,
01 December, 2015 Chairperson,
10 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Railways deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for
Grants 2015-16 of the Ministry of Railways ”.
2. The Fourth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 20 April,
2015 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 23 April, 2015. It contained,
inter alia,  18 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations have been received and categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted
by the Government:—
Para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 18
Total : 12
Chapter II
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s replies:—
Para Nos. 1, 7 and 16
Total : 03
Chapter III
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:—
Para Nos. 5, 12 and 17
Total : 03
Chapter IV
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies are still awaited:—
Para No. NIL
Total : NIL
Chapter V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
implementation of the Recommendations accepted by the
Government. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report
should be furnished to them not later than three months of the
presentation of this report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations/observations.
A. Budgetary Planning
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
6. The Committee, in their 4th Report on the Demands for Grants
(2015-16), had noted that the Annual Plan of the Ministry of Railways
for the year 2015-16 had been budgeted at Rs. 1,00,011 crore which
was an increase of 52% as compared to RE 2014-15. There was
37 per cent. increase in capital (budgetary support) and an increase
of 8 per cent. in Internal Resources. The Committee had also noted
that there was a large shelf of pending projects which was estimated
at Rs. 4,91,510 crore. They were informed that due to funds constraints,
allocation to all plan heads was not as per requirement. Therefore,
the Committee had strongly recommended that the NITI (National
Institution for Transforming India) Aayog/Ministry of Finance should
consider a higher and realistic allocation for the Ministry, so as to
effectively meet the objective of transforming the Railways into an
efficient vehicle for development as well as for meeting the increasing
demands of the economy.
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated
as under:—
“Ministry of Railways is requesting repeatedly for higher budgetary
support to the Railways for timely completion of present projects
in progress and other important infrastructure projects necessary
for provision of additional facilities to the passengers.
Reference was made to NITI Aayog in this regard for information
and necessary action at their end. NITI Aayog in their response
have agreed with the observation of the Committee that the
Railways are the life-line of the national economy and it needs to
be given top priority in implementation of its various programmes
including modernization and capacity enhancement. It is with this
view that an Investment plan of Rs. 5,19,221 crore, consisting of

3
Rs. 1,94,221 crore of GBS, Rs. 1,05,000 crore of Internal Resource
Generation, Rs. 1,20,000 crore of Market Borrowings and
Rs. 1,00,000 crore of Private Investment, including PPP , was
approved for the 12th Plan period (2012-2017).
NITI Aayog has further stated that in the first three years of the
Plan, 43.73% of total projected outlay of GBS has been provided.
As far as the GBS component of the planned investment is
concerned, the shortfall in the first three years has been made
good in the 4th year (2015-16) by allocating an amount of
Rs. 41,646 crore, an increase of 31.8% over the Revised Estimates
of 2014-15 and an increase of 47.8% over the Budget Estimates of
2014-15.
The allocation/mobilization of GBS in the four years stands at
Rs. 1,26,650 crore (65.2%). ”
8. The Committee note that in response to their recommendation
to consider a higher and realistic allocation for the Ministry of
Railways, the NITI Aayog have stated that in view of the
implementation of various programmes of the Indian Railways,
including modernisation and capacity enhancement, an investment
plan of Rs. 5,19,221 crore which included GBS of Rs. 1,94,221
crore, had been approved. Further, allocation of GBS in the first
four years of the 12th Five Year Plan stands at Rs. 1,26,650 crore
which is 65.2 per cent. of the approved GBS. In this regard, the
Committee would like to stress that the NITI Aayog should allocate
to the Ministry of Railways the remaining 34.8 per cent. of the
approved Five Year Plan allocation in its last year,  i.e. 2016-17 with
a view to enabling them to implement their developmental projects.
9. The Committee are aware that Railways are unable to generate
sufficient internal resources for various reasons. Further, the Railways
have a huge throw forward of pending projects largely due to severe
fund constraints. In such a scenario, the Committee again urge the
NITI Aayog/Ministry of Finance to augment financial allocation for
the Railways in the coming years, commensurate with their need to
provide efficient rail services to the travelling public.
B. Implementation of the recommendations of Expert Committees
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
10. The Committee had noted that in the recent past, various
Expert Committees had been constituted by the Ministry of Railways
to study different aspects of the functioning of the Indian Railways.
For example, the Kakodkar Committee was constituted to review the

4
safety of the railways system; the Mittal Committee was formed to
suggest ways and means to raise the revenue of the Indian Railways;
the Sreedharan Committee was set up to review the delegation of
commercial powers for railway projects to the lower levels of
bureaucracy; and the Sam Pitroda Committee looked into the ways and
means to modernize the railway system. Similarly, the Bibek Debroy
Committee was set up to study and report the limited role of the
Railway Board, revamping of HR functions and switch over to commercial
accounting. Though some of these Committees had submitted their
Report in the year 2012, their recommendations were still under
examination and awaiting implementation. Taking note of the
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry of Railways in this regard, the
Committee had recommended that a time-schedule be prescribed to
implement the recommendations of these Expert Committees and that
the progress made on the matter should be closely monitored regularly
and scientifically at the highest level in the Ministry.
11. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:—
“(i) Kakodkar Committee:
The recommendations of High Level Safety Review Committee
(Kakodkar Committee) have since been discussed by the Board
as regards their acceptance/partial acceptance/non-
acceptance. The recommendations are presently under
acceptance by the Minister of Railways. The recommendations
found acceptable will shortly be initiated for implementation
as per the availability of funds.
(ii) Mittal Committee:
It is stated that the report of the Mittal Committee was
recently submitted on 30.12.2014. The recommendations of
the Committee have been duly circulated to all the
Directorates for examination. Some of the recommendations
were incorporated in the Budget Speech of the Minister.
Other recommendations are under review and acceptance of
Board, after which they will be taken up for implementation
and monitored.
(iii) Sreedharan Committee:
Ministry of Railways had constituted One Man Committee of
Dr. E. Sreedharan on 13th November , 2014 to suggest a proper
system and procedure to ensure proper accountability and
transparency at the General Manager and other functionaries
levels for taking all commercial decisions, including tendering.
The One Man Committee submitted its Final Report on
11.03.2015.

5
(iv) Sam Pitroda Committee:
Action has been initiated on various key recommendations of
the Sam Pitroda Committee recommendations such as
pertaining to elimination of level crossing & unmanned level
crossings, mechanised maintenance of track, introduction of
new generation locomotives, high speed potential LHB
coaches, upgradation of suburban coaches, green toilets on
all passenger trains, development of modern high pay to
tare ratio wagons, enhancement of customer amenities at
stations and on trains, development of various PPP models
to attract private investment, feasibility studies of high speed
and semi-high speed corridor etc.
Sam Pitroda Committee had assessed a fund requirement of
Rs. 5.6 lakh crore for various modernisation works which has
been a challenge.
(v) Bibek Debroy Committee:
However , some recommendations pertaining to organisation
restructuring/reforms, which have far-reaching implications,
have not been implemented. Bibek Debroy Committee:
Restructuring and reforms on Indian Railways have been
separately examined by the Bibek Debroy Committee whose
final report has also been received. ”
12. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Railways have
not submitted a proper response to the recommendation of the
Committee and have simply given the status of implementation of
the recommendations of various expert committees. The Committee
stress that there has been inordinate delays in implementation of
the recommendations of different expert committees and that such
delays defeats the very purpose of constitution of the expert
committees. The Committee reiterate that a time-schedule may be
prescribed for examination so that the implementation of
recommendations of the expert committees can take place in a
timebound manner. Further, the progress made in this regard should
be monitored regularly at the highest level in the Ministry.
C. Track Renewals
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
13. The Committee had found that the progress on track renewal
had reached an alarming level, due to inadequate allocation of funds
and inability to wipe out arrears which had resulted in a backlog of

6
5300 kms. The Committee were extremely concerned about the sluggish
progress and felt that not only would this backlog result in
disproportionately high maintenance efforts but would also result in
reduced reliability of assets, which could lead to safety failures. The
Committee had, therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Railways
should take urgent remedial measures and accord highest priority to
this sector. Further , they had advised that the pace of track renewal
must be accelerated with utmost promptness to complete the backlog
of those tracks which need urgent renewal and are operationally
important.
14. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have
stated as under:—
“Railway Tracks are changed as and when a stretch of track becomes
due for renewal on age-cum-condition basis i.e. on the basis of
traffic carried over the track and physical condition of track etc.
Track renewal works are planned in advance every year and their
execution is prioritized according to the condition of track and
overall availability of funds ensuring all the time that track is in
a sound condition for safe running of trains. In case, if any stretch
of track is not renewed in time due to various reasons including
scarcity of funds, materials etc., suitable speed restrictions is
imposed to ensure safe running of trains. Regular inspection of
tracks is carried out to ensure safe running of trains.
The progress of track renewals during 2014-15 is 2424 km against
revised estimate of 2200 km. The budget outlay for 2015-16 has
been increased to Rs. 6035 crore in comparison to Rs. 5046 crore
in Revised Estimates of 2014-15. Accordingly a target of 2500 km
of track renewal has been kept. It is expected that with the
increase in outlay, the arrears of track renewal will come down.
As on 31.03.2015, track renewal and related works covering
2250 km of track renewal have been sanctioned. In addition, track
renewal works for 2850 km have been sanctioned in the year
2015-16.”
15. Taking note of the huge backlog of track renewal works
estimated at a staggering 5300 km, the Committee had recommended
that the pace of track renewables should be urgently accelerated.
The action taken reply furnished by the Ministry has stated that if
track renewal is not possible due to various reasons, speed
restrictions are imposed. The Committee wish to impress upon the
Ministry that track renewables should be accorded the highest priority

7
and funds utilized in the most efficient manner in order to cover
the current requirements as well as the accumulated backlog. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and urge
the government to implement the same at the earliest.
D. Social Service Responsibility
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
16. The Committee had observed that the Indian Railways had
been incurring losses every year by undertaking a variety of non-
remunerative but socially necessary services. The Railways had to bear
social service obligation of around Rs. 25,000 crore every year and
that cost was met through cross-subsidization. Further , in order to
compensate the social obligation costs, the Ministry of Railways had
approached the Ministry of Finance and consequently a Committee of
Secretaries had recommended that such costs be reimbursed to the
Railways. However , the matter was unresolved. The Committee, had
therefore, recommended that the Government should work out a
procedure on the basis of which the social service obligation costs
could be reimbursed to the Railways.
17. The Ministry of Railways in their action taken notes have stated
as under:—
“The following points are requested to be considered by the Standing
Committee with regards to Social Service Obligation:—
1. Arising out of recommendations of the Standing Committee
on Railways in 1997-98, 1998-99 & 1999-2000 as well as the
Railway Convention Committee, a draft Cabinet Note
highlighting the various social service obligations borne by
the Railway and the urgent need for compensation from the
Central Government for offsetting the loss thus suffered was
circulated on 21.1.2000.
2. The parameters on the basis of which compensation was
calculated were not acceptable to the Ministry of Finance
and at the behest of Ministry of Finance an Inter-ministerial
Working Group (IMWG) comprising of the functionaries of
Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission was set up with a view to establish the
parameters for calculation of Social Service Obligation in an
objective and transparent manner.

8
3. The draft Cabinet Note seeking compensation for Social
Service Obligation was turned down categorically by the
Ministry of Finance with observation that the Railways were
very much part of the Government and the Railway Budget
is an adjunct of the General Budget. It is included in the
General Budget. Therefore, any loss arising out of Government
decisions taken in public interest by the Ministry of Railways
cannot be claimed as compensation as if these were to be
paid to a body corporate outside the Government.
4. Similarly, Planning Commission observed that “the tariff
policies and fare structure of the railways should be such
that the price of each service should reflect its cost as
closely as possible ”.
5. Railways have initiated various steps in this regard:
(i) Fuel adjustment component — Railway have set up a
mechanism to neutralise the impact of increase in fuel
price on operating expenses.
(ii) In 2015-16, Railway Minister in his Budget Speech has
commented that “Indian Railways currently is the only
rail-based trans-city infrastructure provider and operator
in the country. Therefore, for the purpose of orderly
development of infrastructure services, enabling
competition and protection of customer interest, it is
important to have a regulation mechanism independent
of the service provider. Initially it was contemplated to
set up only a Tariff Regulator, however , it is now proposed
to set up a mechanism, which will be entrusted with
making regulations, setting performance standards and
determining tariffs. It will also adjudicate on disputes
amount licenses/private partners and the Ministry,
subject to review in appeal ”. Steps have been initiated
to complete the process.
6. Ministry of Railways has raised this issue in the Railway
Convention Committee (2014) memorandum. Further action
will be taken as per the recommendations of the Railway
Convention Committee.
The tariff policy of Indian Railways has been to keep passenger
fares low especially in the lower classes so that even the poorest
segment of the people can travel by rail. Railways have traditionally
cross-subsidized passenger business through their freight business
as a result of which Railway freight rates have increased regularly
while passenger fares have stagnated.

9
The commodities in Low Rated Classes are being carried below
cost of operations.
Railways have been granting concession of 6% in freight on all
goods traffic booked to and from NE region since 1983, as amended
from time to time.
Apart from these, during natural calamities and disasters, Railways
carry relief materials free of cost to the affected States.
In Passenger segment the losses incurred in different classes of
travel are as under:—
Classes Loss in Rs. cr. %age
2013-14 to total
Second Class 17718.74 57.07%
Sleeper Class 8858.65 28.53%
Upper Classes 374.53 1.21%
EMU Suburban & 1st Ordinary 4097.36 13.20%
Total 31049.28 100%
All of the above are part and parcel of Indian Railways Social
responsibility.”
18. The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways had taken
up the matter of compensating the expenditure borne by them on
various social service obligations with the Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission. However, a draft Cabinet note seeking
compensation in this regard was turned down by the Ministry of
Finance with certain observations.
19. The Committee note from the Performance Budget of the
Ministry of Railways that the Indian Railways is a departmental
commercial undertaking of the Government of India; however, a
substantial amount of Railways ’ total outlay goes towards meeting
social obligations. Besides, there is a huge throw-forward of railway
projects in financial and physical terms. As such, the Committee
strongly desire that the issues relating to reimbursing the amount
spent by the Railways in fulfilling social service obligations should
be looked into and resolved expeditiously.

10
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Railways are rightly described as a national integrator and
considered to be the lifeline of the national economy. It is the most
availed means of connectivity among the people, interlinking the length
and breadth of the country. In order to transform the Railways into an
effective, efficient and transparent vehicle for development as well as
for meeting the ever increasing demands of the economy, innovative
ideas have to be conceived and implemented as a matter of topmost
priority. What is needed is a distinctive vision of the Indian Railways
and its vary significant role in buoying up the nation ’s economy. It has
to function as a catalyst of growth for the economy, for which the
Railways need a huge investment. In this context, the Committee note
that the Annual Plan of the Ministry of Railways for the year 2015-16
has been budgeted at Rs. 1,00,011 crore which is an increase of 52%
as compared to RE 2014-15. There is 37 percent increase in capital
(budgetary support) and an increase of 8 percent in Internal Resources.
The Committee also note that there is a large shelf of pending projects
which is estimated at Rs. 4,91,510 crore. As submitted to the Committee
by the Ministry, due to funds constraints, allocation to all plan heads
are not as per requirement. The Committee are disappointed to note
that the allocation of funds for the fiscal year 2015-16 is not adequate
for effectively enforcing the ambitious investment plan of the Railways
as well as expeditious completion of pending projects. As such, the
Committee strongly recommend that the NITI (National Institution for
Transforming India) Aayog/Ministry of Finance should consider a higher
and realistic allocation for the Ministry, so as to effectively meet their
objective of transforming the Railways into an efficient vehicle for
development as well as for meeting the increasing demands of the
economy.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Railways is requesting repeatedly for higher budgetary
support to the Railways for timely completion of present projects in
progress and other important infrastructure projects necessary for
provision of additional facilities to the passengers.

11
Reference was made to NITI Aayog in this regard for information
and necessary action at their end. NITI Aayog in their response have
agreed with the observation of the Committee that the Railways are
the life line of the national economy and it needs to be given top
priority in implementation of its various programmes including
modernization and capacity enhancement. It is with this view that an
Investment plan of Rs. 5,19,221 crore, consisting of Rs. 1,94,221 crore
of GBS, Rs. 1,05,000 crore of Internal Resource Generation, Rs. 1,20,000
crore of Market Borrowings and Rs. 1,00,000 crore of Private Investment
including PPP was approved for the 12th plan period (2012-2017).
NITI Aayog has further stated that in the first three years of the
Plan, 43.73% of total projected outlay of GBS has been provided.
As far as the GBS component of the planned investment is concerned,
the shortfall in the first three years has been made good in the
4th year (2015-16) by allocating an amount of Rs. 41,646 crore an
increase of 31.8% over the Revised Estimates of 2014-15 and an increase
of 47.8% over the Budget Estimates of 2014-15.
The allocation/mobilization of GBS in the four year stands at
Rs. 1,26,650 crore (65.2%).
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation Para no. 8 and 9 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that the Railways, in a bid to shake off the
inertia of under investment, have formulated a forward looking and a
highly ambitious investment plan for 2015-2019. An investment of
Rs. 8.5 lakh crore has been envisaged for these five years. While
admitting that the resource crunch had severely eroded the financial
credibility of the Railways, the Ministry has placed utmost reliance on
this fund ’s injection. The Plan size of Rs. 8.5 lakh crore would be
funded through a mix of internal generation by the Railways, Budgetary
Support from the Government and through Extra Budgetary Resources,
including market borrowings. The Committee have also been informed
that while the funding for the bulk of the investment plan, i.e. to the
tune of Rs. 2.5-3 lakh crore would be provided by the Government, the
Railways expects to generate Rs. 1 lakh crore as internal resources.
Besides, the Life Insurance Corporation of India have committed an
investment of Rs. 1.5 lakh crore to the Railways for the next five
years. The Railways also expect to generate Rs. 1 lakh crore through
private public partnerships. The Committee find that out of the total

12
Rs. 8.5 lakh crore, the Railways propose to utilize around Rs. 3.99 lakh
crore on network expansion and network decongestion. The Committee
are of the considered view that the proposed five-year investment
plan should serve as a stimulus package to assist in the turnaround of
the Railways ’ financial resources. The Committee, therefore, desire
that availability of funds should be matched by strict financial discipline
on the part of the Railways to ensure effective utilisation of resources,
coupled with achievement of the physical targets in the stipulated
timeframe with no cost escalations or delays. Accordingly, the
Committee recommend that a National Policy on Indian Railways should
be formulated, wherein, inter alia,  a detailed road map is drawn up
to sort out the bottlenecks. The Committee would await specific action
taken by the Government in the matter.
Reply of the Government
Noted. NITI Aayog has been advised about the observation of
Standing Committee on Railways to formulate National Policy on Indian
Railways to sort out the bottlenecks.
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee find that the Railways are endeavoring to secure
funding from infrastructure funding agencies, multilateral and bilateral
agencies, institutional investors, etc. The Committee also note that
funding from the World Bank and the Japanese Bank for International
Cooperation Agency (JICA) has already been tied up for the Eastern
and Western Corridors for the Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC).
However , the Committee are not certain as to whether the bankability
of projects have been meticulously worked out by the Railways. In this
connection, the Committee wish to remind the Ministry that borrowings
from these agencies have financial liabilities attached to them in the
form of payment of heavy interest and return of principal amount. The
Committee, therefore, would like to caution the Railways not to get
into a debt-trap. The Committee feel that implementing a model of
financing without going into the minute details of bankability of projects
could be a sure recipe for disaster. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Railways should not only undertake a pragmatic
study on bankability of projects but also utilize this high-cost and risk-
infested market borrowings in those sectors that can offer assured
returns.
Reply of the Government
Debt funding of US$ 2.725 billion from the World Bank and
550 million JPY from Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)
have been tied up for the Eastern and the Western Dedicated Freight

13
Corridors respectively. These two freight corridors would carry significant
volumes of freight traffic and as such have also been assessed as
bankable projects by the lending agencies in their project appraisal
documents (FIRR of 16% for the Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor &
9% for the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor). The RITES report of
2007 has also considered the traffic volumes and bankability of the
project. The concerns expressed by the Committee have been noted.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee ’s examination has revealed that the Annual Plan
outlay for the year 2015-16 was to the tune of Rs. 1,00,011 crore
which would be broadly financed through Gross Budgetary Support of
Rs. 40,000 crore; Diesel Cess of Rs. 1645.60 crore; market borrowing
under Extra Budgetary Support of Rs. 17,655 crore and internal resources
of Rs. 17,793 crore. Further , the Railways ’ share of diesel cess from
the Central Road Fund and funding through PPP would be to the tune
of Rs. 5781 crore. The Committee are dismayed to find that over the
years, there has been a sharp decline in the generation of internal
resources by the Railways which has resulted in greater dependence
on Budgetary Support and on market borrowings which do not help in
the long term. The reasons for poor generation of internal resources
has been primarily attributed to the Pension Fund, dividend paid by
the Railways to the General Revenues and the implementation of the
recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay Commission. The Committee
are not convinced with the oft-repeated reason attributed to the
implementation of the recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay
Commission for the adverse financial health of the Railways. This
reason has become all the more worrisome when the recommendations
of the Seventh Pay Commission will be implemented very soon.
Nonetheless, the Committee examined the aspect of payment of
Dividend by the Railways to the General Revenues and the budgetary
support given by the Government to the Railways and found this
arrangement as contradictory and counter-productive. On the one hand,
the Railways are made to pay the dividend and on the other hand, the
Government provide budgetary support to the Railways. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that a two-pronged strategy should be
adopted by the Government, i.e. they should ensure strict financial
discipline and practice prudent ways to cut the unproductive
expenditure and at the same time, the practice of paying dividend to
the General Revenues by the Railways be kept in abeyance till the
financial health of the Indian Railways is improved and the proposed
investment plan is implemented in its entirety. The Railways also could
look at commercialization of stations including branding of stations, to
generate additional revenue.

14
Reply of the Government
(i) It is to be clarified that the Railways ’ share of diesel cess from
the Central Road Fund (CRF) (Rs. 1,646 crore) and funding through PPP
mode (Rs. 5,781 crore) totalling to Rs. 7,427 crore in the Annual Plan
2015-16 and not Rs. 5,781 crore mentioned in the para.
(ii) Further , the internal resource generation which declined during
the period from 2008-09 to 2011-12 due to implementation of the
6th Central Pay Commission (CPC) has improved discernibly since
2012-13. It stands at Rs. 15,380 crore in 2014-15 and is estimated to
increase to Rs. 22,166 crore in 2015-16 (BE). The Railways ’ annual
plans have conventionally been dependent on budgetary support, market
borrowings and internally generated resources to sustain the Capex
programmes. While market borrowings are deployed for funding rolling
stock procured every year and are put to traffic use immediately
thereby enhancing immediately the traffic capacity, the budgetary
support is essential for various capital works and projects.
(iii) It is a fact that internal generation of resources is certainly
impacted by the outgo under pay and pension. The pension outgo, as
was the case with salary and allowances, had to be paid as per
6th CPC while the receipts continued to grow at the normal traffic
growth rate. This lead to drop in internal resource generation. It may
be appreciated that the pay and pension expenditure on Indian Railways
has increased manifold after implementation of the 6th CPC.
Cumulatively, the additional outgo on this account has been assessed
to be more than 1.00 lakh crore rupees up to the end of the current
fiscal. Pay and pension cost, which constituted 36.3% in the pre-6th
CPC era spiked to 62% in 2009-10 and still stands at about 52%
(in 2014-15) despite fare and freight rationalizations done several times.
Thus this continues to be one of the main reasons that adversely
impact the internal resource generation of the Railways.
(iv) Dividend payment by the Railways and Budgetary support by
the Government are per-se not contradictory and counterproductive.
These serve two different purposes and are two different accounting
streams. While the GBS from the Government is used for funding
capital works under different plan-heads, more importantly items like
New Lines, Land cost for projects, Gauge Conversion, Doubling, Railway
Electrification, Traffic Facilities having a higher rate of return,
workshops, equity investments, MTP , National Projects and projects of
national importance, the dividend payment on the other hand is paid
on the cumulative capital contributed by the general revenues and is

15
met out of revenue. Budgetary Support would be required even in the
absence of dividend waiver or dividend deferment. The proposed
investment plan has been prepared keeping the above in view.
(v) As recommended by the Committee, it has always been the
endeavour of the Railways to control the avoidable unproductive
expenditure.
(vi) The issues relating to dividend is decided by the Railway
Convention Committee. The contention of the Standing Committee for
dividend waiver so as to augment the resource position of railways is
indisputable and the same has been pleaded in the Memorandum
submitted to the RCC (2014) that has been constituted in March 2015.
The concern of the Railways in meeting the likely impact of 7th CPC
has also been spelt out in the Memorandum proposed.
(vii) As regards commercialization of stations including branding of
stations to generate additional revenue, it is submitted that a task
force under the Member Traffic (Railway Board) has been constituted
to tap this potential.
Redevelopment of stations is planned through leveraging commercial
development of land/air space in and around the stations. The model
adopted for redeployment of stations would be such that revenues
realized from leveraging commercial development are sufficient to at
least cover the entire cost of station redevelopment after meeting the
full expenditure on real estate development and maintenance
obligations. Such redevelopment would generally be cost neutral to
railways, however , at some stations railway may get surplus revenue
to finance its other developmental activities.
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee find that there has been a downward revision of
the Budget allocation for 2014-15 to the tune of Rs. 917 crore. It has
also been observed that against the BE target of Gross Traffic Receipts
of Rs. 1,60,165 crore and RE allocation of Rs. 1,59,248 crore during
2014-15, the actual Gross Traffic Receipts were Rs. 1,40,250.98 crore
(upto February, 2015). The Committee also find that though the actuals
of the GTR for 2014-15 are not yet compiled by the Railways, a close
examination of the approximate traffic earnings of Rs. 1,40,250.98
crore (upto the end of February, 2015) indicates that it is short of the
proportionate budget target (based on RE) by around 1.4 percent or by
Rs. 2303 crore. According to the Ministry of Railways, the downward
shift in Gross Traffic Receipts is primarily on account of the downward
revision of earnings target under passenger , other coaching and sundry
earnings. The Committee are perturbed to note the tendency of the

16
Ministry of Railways to give stereotyped reasons for this regressive
trend. The Committee, again, are seriously apprehensive as to whether
the ambitious target of Rs. 1,83,578 crore on account of Gross Traffic
Receipts for the year 2015-16 would be achieved or not. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Railways to take effective steps, viz.,
increasing the seating capacity by attaching additional coaches,
reduction in wagon turnaround time, rationalization of freight structure
and goods tariff, etc. to achieve the targets in respect of Gross Traffic
Receipts. The Committee may be apprised of action taken in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
Indian Railways subject to operational feasibility, traffic justification
consistently endeavours to augment the load of train services.
Accordingly, during 2014-15 various train services have been augmented
utilizing 568 coaches. Further , during the financial year 2015-16 (till
June 2015), 200 coaches have been attached in existing trains on
permanent basis. Besides, Indian Railways also attach coaches on
temporary basis to serve the sudden rush of passengers during holidays,
vacations, mela etc. These steps not only help generate additional
accommodation for travelling passengers but also additional revenue
for the Indian Railways.
Evaluation of various alternatives relating to rationalisation of
freight structure is an on-going process. In line with the Recommendation
of the Committee, recently, w.e.f. 01.04.2015 freight rates have been
rationalized; the salient features of this rationalization are as under:—
(i) The freight structure for the Base Class-100 has been
increased by 10%.
(ii) The classification of the following commodities has been
reduced:—
Sl. Commodity Earlier Revised
No. Class Class
1. Salt for Human consumption 110 100
2. Cement 150 140
3. Coal and Coke 150 145
4. Limestone, Dolomite & Manganese ore 160 145
5. Iron or Steel 180 165
6. Pig Iron 160 150
7. Iron ores 180 165
8. Petroleum Products 200 180

17
(iii) The distance slabs beyond 1500 kms has been revised from
250 km to 125 km between 1501-3500 km.
(iv) List of Commodities in Goods Tariff has also been rationalized
and a revised Goods Tariff has been issued.
Apart from the above rationalization following steps have also
been taken to increase the rail share:—
With a view to convert empty wagon into loaded one and thereby
increasing the revenue and Automatic freight rebate scheme was
launched in October 2014 as a pilot project on NF and S. Rly. It has
been decided to implement this scheme on all India basis.
(ii) Electronic registration of demand (e-RD) and Electronically
transmission of Railway Receipts (e-TRR) have been launched in order
to make the procedure simple, transparent and hassle-free and customer
friendly. Now customer can register their demand from comfort of the
Home or Office instead of physically visiting the Goods Shed.
The following steps have been taken/are being taken for reduction
of wagon turnround:—
1. The focussed attention on improving the operational efficiency &
optimization of wagon utilization even in the empty flow
directions.
2. The availability of locomotives is being improved through
review of the existing links of passenger trains.
3. Focused investment on improvement of the freight terminals.
4. Intensive monitoring of freight terminals through a
computerized Freight Operation Information System (FOIS)
for effective reduction in wagon detention.
5. Review of maintenance practices.
6. Removal of bottlenecks to traffic, speedier completion of
throughput enhancement works and rapid induction of newer
rolling stock.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee observe that the passenger earnings which were
budgeted at Rs. 44,645 crore during 2014-15 were revised downwards
to Rs. 43,002 crore. However, the actuals (upto the end of February
2015) were Rs. 38,008 crore only. The Committee find that besides

18
poor funds utilization, the Railways have also suffered a negative
growth of around 2.12% in originating passengers during 2014-15. This
had prompted the scaling down of originating passengers from a BE
figure of 8645 million to 8350 million at RE. The reasons quoted by the
Railways for the negative growth in passenger traffic are broadly the
norms/regulations in the issue of concessional tickets, closure of certain
sections in the North Eastern Railway, shortage of ticket checking
staff, etc. The Committee are not convinced with these reasons given
by the Railways. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Railways
to realistically examine the reasons for the dissatisfaction of the
passengers with the services made available to them, including issues
like unsatisfactory onboard services, catering, punctuality, hygiene,
etc. The Committee further desire that the Railways should make
concerted efforts to increase the passenger earnings as it will help the
Railways to augment the generation of internal resources. The
Committee also recommend that the Railways should improve the last
mile connectivity to attract short and medium distance passengers
which may lead to increased passenger earnings.
Reply of the Government
Indian Railways continuously strive to augment revenue through
various measures like introduction of new trains, augmentation of
train services, running of special trains during festivals and holidays,
facilitating the purchase of tickets through appointment of Jansadharan
Ticket Booking Sewaks (JTBS), Station Ticket Booking Sewak (STBS),
establishment of Yatri Ticket Suvidha Kendras (YTSK), proliferation of
Automatic Ticket Vending Machines (ATVMs) etc. For increasing the
passenger revenue, w.e.f. 01.10.2014, 50% of the existing Tatkal quota
under the dynamic fare scheme has been introduced on selected trains
which are most in demand. This is a distance-slab based fare scheme
where the fare increases by 20% after each slab of 10% berths are sold
subject to the existing cap (maximum fare chargeable) on dynamic
fare. Further based on demand w.e.f. 01.07.2015, Suvidha trains shall
be introduced during peak seasons like winter rush, summer rush, Holi
rush and on other occasions as decided by Zonal Railways. The minimum
fare for this train shall be Tatkal fare and the fare will increase after
booking of every 20% of the berths/seats. Evaluation of various
alternatives to rationalise Passenger fares is however an ongoing
exercise. In recent Budget MR has announced that Railways are making
efforts to make travel on Indian Railways a happy experience with
various initiatives and there is no increase in Passenger fares. Zonal
Railways have been given powers to run Special Trains with special
fare structure to meet the holiday and festival rush in popular sectors.

19
In the context of improving last mile connectivity, instructions
have already been issued to Zonal Railways impressing upon the need
for a focussed strategy to identify potential sectors taking into
consideration the available constraints on achieving growth. The
Railways have been advised to initiate dialogue with the State Road
Transport Corporations (SRTC) to provide bus services at identified
stations suiting the train timings, connecting major residential and
office areas, which can build synergy between the two modes by
feeding customers for each other. Possibility of issuing combined MSTs
for road and rail may also be explored. Similar action can be taken
with regard to providing combined passes for Rail and Metro services
which will help both organizations to increase the passenger traffic.
Introducing facilities like integrated e-ticketing with SRTCs and single
ticket over both modes of transport could reduce the burden of standing
in queue at each location for purchase of tickets. In order to utilize
the Sleeper Class coaches effectively and to offer more accommodation
in trains to General Class passengers, General Managers/Railways have
been given powers to decategorise Sleeper Class coaches as General
coaches in identified trains and sectors to optimize utilisation of coaches
and to provide additional General Class accommodation.
On Board Housekeeping Services (OBHS) scheme has been envisaged
for all the Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto and select mail/express trains
for on board cleaning and hygiene attention to the coach compartments
and toilets. Good quality washed bedrolls are provided in the AC
coaches. For further improvement in the quality of washing of bedrolls,
Railways are in the process of setting up of mechanized laundries at
identified locations.
Supervision and Monitoring is strengthened through surprise,
periodical and scheduled inspections of catering units. Emphasis during
the inspections is laid on corrective actions to improve the quality,
hygiene and standard of food to the travelling passengers. Deficiencies
are analyzed and remedial actions are accordingly taken. A system for
obtaining feedback from the passengers has been put in place wherein
regular passenger opinion/feedback, on services rendered to them,
are obtained, analyzed and corrective actions are taken.
Improvement of catering services is an on-going process. Steps
taken/being taken to further improve the catering services include
(i) Third Party Audit of catering services to be conducted at periodic
intervals by independent and reputed auditing agencies accredited by
NABCB (National Accreditation Board for Certification Bodies) as
empanelled by the zonal Railways. The parameters for audit include

20
all aspects of catering services like personal hygiene, infrastructure
facilities, cleaning and sanitation, food safety, storage facilities,
implementation of regulatory, statutory and safety regulations, quality
of presentation etc., (ii) Introduction of e-Catering so that passengers
can book the food of their choice through internet, (iii) Introduction
of Pre-cooked Food (ready to eat) meals of reputed brands to improve
the quality, hygiene and to provide variety of options of meals to the
passengers, (iv) A Centralised Catering Service Monitoring Cell (CSMC)
has been set up having a toll free number 1800-111-321 for prompt
redressal of the passenger grievances related to the catering activities
for real time assistance to travelling public, and (v) Imposition of
stringent punitive action including heavy penalties in case of deficiencies
in services.
Punctuality of Mail/Express trains on terminating basis is 74.5%
(from April to June 2015) as compared to 80% in the corresponding
period of the last financial year (2014-15). Loss of punctuality of Mail/
Express trains is largely due to line capacity constraints on account of
increasing passenger and freight traffic due to economic development
and growth, adverse weather conditions, intermittent natural calamities
such as floods, cyclones, heavy rains; heavy road traffic at level crossing
gates across the Indian Railways network; multi-faceted law and order
problem, including public agitations and bandh calls in left wing
extremism affected areas, miscreant activities such as theft of Railway
assets (over head equipment wires, signalling cables and other
equipment); mid-section run over cases involving cattles and humans
due to no-fencing of Railway tracks, etc. In addition to the above, too
many experimental stoppages for long distance trains at shorter intervals
have also adversely impacted the average speed of trains and punctuality
performance by reducing line capacity on the IR network. However,
pro-active steps which have been initiated by the Railways for improving
punctual running of trains are sensitization of staff involved in train
operations towards importance of punctuality, prioritization of
preventive maintenance of assets to minimize asset failures and
rectification of failures in shortest possible time, better co-ordination
with Civil and Police authorities of States to minimize delays arising
out of law and order problems, stress on timely completion of Capacity
enhancement projects such as construction of additional loop lines,
Doubling, Third line corridors, automatic signalling, RUBs, ROBs etc.
which are already sanctioned and in progress.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee note that 65 per cent of the revenue of the Railways
comes from freight earnings. The Committee further note that the
Revised Estimates of 2014-15 for freight earnings and freight loading

21
were Rs. 1,06,927 crore and 1101.25 million tonnes, respectively,
whereas the actuals show a downward trend of Rs. 94,986.05 crore
and 993 million tonnes, respectively. The Committee are, therefore,
apprehensive that the increasing freight cost in the Railways will have
a cascading effect on the earnings and will also nullify the efforts of
the Railways to expand their freight carrying capacity. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that with a view to attracting the enhanced
freight traffic volumes, the Railways should operate their existing
capacity in a refined market-driven mode in a commercially-viable
manner. The Railways should also accord the highest priority to the
Dedicated Freight Corridor Project so that on its completion, the carrying
capacity of the Railways as well as earnings could be progressively
increased.
The Committee note that the tariff policy of the Indian Railways
has traditionally followed the principle of cross subsidization in order
to offset the losses incurred in passenger and other coaching services
through additional revenue from freight movement. The Committee
feel that both passenger fares and freight rates have to be demand-
cum-market driven and fixed differently for different segments. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that pricing should be fixed so as
to yield a net return that corresponds to the scarcity value of the
capital in the economy.
Reply of the Government
With a view to enhance freight loading by making transport by rail
more efficient and competitive, following steps have been taken by
the Railways:
(i) In order to enhance the rail share in the movement of bulk
commodities by competitive pricing, the classification of the
major commodities has been reduced as per the following:—
Sl. Commodity Earlier Revised
No. Class Class
1. Salt for Human Consumption 110 100
2. Cement 150 140
3. Coal and Coke 150 145
4. Limestone, Dolomite & Manganese Ore 160 145
5. Iron or Steel 180 165
6. Pig Iron 160 150
7. Iron Ores 180 165
8. Petroleum Products 200 180

22
(ii) To retain longer lead traffic with rail, the existing distance
slab of 250 km. beyond 1500 kms. has been reduced to
125 km.
(iii) Apart from above following market driven initiatives have
been undertaken for optimum utilization of existing capacity:—
(a) With a view to convert running of empty wagon into
loaded one and thereby increasing the revenue,
Automatic freight rebate scheme in empty flow
directions was launched in October 2014 as a pilot
project on N.F . Railway and S. Railway. Now, it has
been decided to implement this scheme on all India
bases.
(b) In order to make the registration of demand simple,
transparent and hassle-free, electronic registration
(e-RD) of demand has been introduced, which facilitates
customers to register their demand through FOIS website
without physically visiting the Railway offices.
Railways have traditionally cross-subsidized passenger business
through freight business as a result of which Railway freight rates have
increased regularly while passenger fares have stagnated. In the Railway
Budget 2014-15, a beginning was made to correct these imbalances.
With effect from 25.06.2014, therefore, the passenger fares of all
classes, including Monthly Season Tickets was increased by 14.2%,
whereas the freight rates were increased by 6.5%.
Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) Project is a strategic capacity
augmentation initiative taken by Railways and involves construction of
dedicated freight lines to carry predominantly coal and steel on Eastern
DFC and container on Western DFC. The construction of DFCs are on
fast track and are being monitored on regular basis for timely
completion. The DFC has been planned for commissioning in phases
between 2017 to 2019. The operationalisation of the DFC will result in
segregation of freight and passenger traffic leading to quicker freight
movement. The average speed of trains will go up which will reduce
the transit time. The higher axle load of DFC route will further go up
from 25 tonnes to 32.5 tonnes in future which would result in increase
in throughput.
As a result both carrying capacity of Railways and earnings will
progressively increase.
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee are of the firm opinion that that New Lines, Gauge
Conversion, Doubling and Track Renewals are long-term assets and a

23
major revenue multiplier. The Committee note that under-investment
and a staggered approach in these areas have impacted the network
expansion and modernisation and the Railways are caught in the
perennial problem of resource crunch. The Committee are disheartened
to note that the expenditure on these counts has not been in tandem
with the requirements and has severely depleted in the last few years.
The Committee express their serious concern on the fact that the
throw-forward for New Lines and Gauge Conversion is Rs. 1,21,907
crore and Rs. 1,90,20 crore, respectively, whereas for doubling, it is
Rs. 34,789 crore. In fact, while taken together , it is almost 75 per cent
of the total cost of the pending priority projects. The Committee are
extremely alarmed at this and wonder if the Railways will ever be able
to wipe out these mammoth arrears. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that if the Railways wish to stay relevant in the present-
day market-driven economy, they have to drastically improve their
working and delivery system by way of re-fashioning their approach:
projects which are near the completion stage, projects which are
operationally viable, and projects which are traffic capacity generators
should be given precedence over others.
Reply of the Government
It is precisely with this objective that an exercise of prioritization
of projects was carried out. Main objective of prioritization of projects
was to give focused and directed attention to important projects and
avoids thin spread of funds. Last mile connectivity, last mile, throughput
enhancement, debottlenecking, alternate route, National, Cost sharing
projects have been accorded higher priority. Allocation of funds is
being done based on the prioritization.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee observe that the outlay under rolling stock during
the fiscal year 2014-15 was Rs. 15,322 crore which was subsequently
revised upwards to Rs. 17,376.90 crore and, later on, the actuals were
significantly lowered to Rs. 11,255.66 crore. The Committee have been
informed that there is an overall shortfall in the acquisition of wagons,
coaches and locomotives during the fiscal year 2014-15. There has also
been a serious issue of replacement of overaged assets. As of now,
there are 6177 and 1120 overaged wagons and coaches, respectively.
Similarly, there are 170 and 40 overaged diesel and electric locomotives,
respectively. While giving reasons for the slow pace of replacement of
rolling stock, the Ministry of Railways have informed that it was primarily
due to the slowing down of the manufacturing activities. The Committee

24
are extremely disappointed to note that even when the Railways are
fully conscious of the overaged rolling stock and the consequences of
continuing their operations on such obsolete stock, thereby posing a
serious threat to life and property, not much effort has been made to
tide over this situation. Merely stating that the Railways could not
replace the overaged rolling stock because the manufacturing activities
had slowed down is an unacceptable reason, considering the very
serious nature of its consequences. The Committee are left wondering
that if the Railways do not realize the hazards of running their
operations on obsolete stock and do not formulate a quick solution to
this precarious problem, how they can ensure safety and security on
the Railway network. The Committee, therefore strongly recommend
that the Railways should give top-most priority to the replacement of
overaged rolling stock for which a structured policy needs to be
formulated and implemented at the earliest. At the same time, the
production capacity of rolling stock should be enhanced so that
replacement of overaged rolling stock with the new ones is done in a
systematic and methodical manner. The Committee also wish to urge
the Government to consider immediately withdrawing those overaged
rolling stock which are suspect technologically. The Committee would
like to be kept informed of progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The outlay under rolling stock at Budget Estimate 2014-15 stage
was Rs. 15,322 crores which was subsequently revised upwards to
Rs. 17,376.9 crores during the Revised Estimate 2014-15 stage. The
actuals of Rs. 11,255.66 crore indicated, is the approximate expenditure
up to the end of December 2014 only. During 2014-15, the tentative
booking on account of acquisition of rolling stock, so far, is Rs. 15,087
crores. However, inventory of about Rs. 2,075 crores is yet to be
booked. Final expenditure figures will be known in the next couple of
months.
The physical targets and the actual production/acquisition of rolling
stock during 2014-15 is as given below:—
Rolling Stock Target Actual
2014-15 2014-15
Wagons 10000 11151
Coaches 3658 3731
Locos 649 605

25
As may be seen that there was no shortfall/slowdown of
manufacturing activities in the case of coaches and wagons. In case of
locomotives, the shortfall occurred because the requirement was being
reassessed in view of economic slow down and provision of adequate
funds for manufacture of locomotives during the year was consequently
delayed. As all rolling stock, especially locomotives, require sufficient
lead time for procurement of material and manufacturing process, this
resulted in shortfall in the outturn.
As on 01.01.2015, there are 1200 Wagons, 260 Diesel Locos,
48 Electric Locos and 1120 Coaches (as on 31.03.2014), running
overaged. The rolling stock on Indian Railways (IR) is condemned based
on the criteria of age-cum-condition basis. The Survey Committee
nominated for the purpose examines the condition of the rolling stock
and recommends for its condemnation. All the rolling stocks approved
for condemnation by the competent authority are invariably grounded.
In addition, all the rolling stocks are checked at laid down intervals by
the competent technical personnel for its safety before permitting
them to run on Indian Railways. Any rolling stock unsafe for running
is never permitted to run on Indian Railways.
Nevertheless, to meet the rising demand of rolling stock, as also
to replace the overaged rolling stock on case to case basis, production
capacities of Diesel Locomotive Works, Varanasi and Chittaranjan
Locomotive Works, Chittaranjan are being enhanced. Setting up of a
new Diesel Locomotive Factory at Marhowra and an Electric Locomotive
Factory at Madhepura have also been planned. In case of coaches, the
production capacity of Integral Coach Factory, Chennai has been
augmented and a new Rail Coach Factory at Raebareli is also being set
up.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Railways are mandated to provide for basic facilities like safe
drinking water , clean toilets, proper lighting, etc. at the stations as
well as in the trains, besides maintaining an acceptable level of
cleanliness. Further , the general infrastructure of the stations like
lifts, escalators, waiting rooms, etc. are some of the basic services
which constitute passengers amenities. The Committee have, however,
observed that in spite of various initiatives taken by the Railways,
passengers amenities are far from satisfactory, both in the trains and
at the stations. The Committee are surprised that even when the
entire country is committed to the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, the level
of amenities provided by the Railways is still co-related with passenger

26
traffic at stations and annual earnings. It is high time that the Railways
acknowledged that passenger amenities and its maintenance cannot be
limited on the basis of a classification based on the annual earnings
of the Railways. The Committee strongly recommend that the provision/
maintenance/augmentation of amenities, including drinking water, toilet
facility and seating arrangements at railway stations should be
undertaken by the Railways on a uniform pattern. With a view to
improving the standard of cleanliness and standard of passenger
amenities, the Committee recommend that Railways should re-visit
their station-category-based passenger amenities ’ approach and
implement a multi-pronged strategy by synergizing technology, user
awareness, provision of mechanized equipment as well as penalty
provisions. The Railways should also pay special attention to the facilities
that are being offered on long distance trains. Further , the Committee
urge the Railways to lay stress on special arrangements that should be
made for the benefit of differently abled passengers as also senior
citizens, which should be prominently displayed. In particular , Railways
may introduce Railway Time-Tables in Braille for the benefit of the
visually challenged. The Committee would like to be apprised of a
definite roadmap, including targeted dates for implementation of the
action plan in this regard, at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Present day passengers expect visible, qualitative and effective
improvements on each and every item of public utility provided at the
stations/platforms. In view of the increased expectations of the
passengers/daily commuters, Indian Railways are making all out efforts
to provide various facilities at the stations. It has always been the
endeavour of the Railways to provide adequate amenities to the
passengers at the stations. Passenger amenities at stations are provided
in accordance with comprehensive guidelines issued to Zonal Railways
which specify the level of amenities to be provided at each category
of stations. Upgradation of passenger amenities at stations is a
continuous process and the norms for provision of passenger amenities
at various categories of stations, which includes Minimum Essential
Amenities, Recommended Amenities and Desirable Amenities, are
reviewed and revised periodically. Accordingly, Zonal Railways have
been advised to upgrade the amenities at stations. In addition,
identification of stations has also been done for development under
the Adarsh Station Scheme. Adarsh Station Scheme prescribes
conforming to ethnic ethos, quick entry and exit of passengers, smooth
entry from the civil road to station premises, better signage, wider
foot-over-bridges, etc. Although, there is no direct relation between

27
increase in passenger fares and provision of passenger facilities/
amenities at stations but upgradation of stations to higher category is
done on the basis of increase in the earnings at that station which is
also a fair indicator of volume of traffic handled at the station.
Passenger amenities items are provided in coaches as per the
prescribed norms. All the passenger amenity items fitted in the coaches
of Indian Railways are monitored during the various maintenance
schedules and the deficiency found, if any, is rectified. On Board
Housekeeping Services (OBHS) for cleaning attention on run has also
been prescribed for all the Rajdhani Express trains. However , some
complaints/references are received from the passengers regarding
passenger amenities in the coaches and these are acted upon
appropriately by Indian Railways.
Efforts are being made to improve upon the cleanliness and hygiene
in coaches including toilets. For improving cleanliness standards in the
coaches including toilets, mechanized cleaning is now being done in
coaching depots. Coach cleaning activity is being monitored by
supervisors. Coaches are also being cleaned at identified enroute stations
under ‘Clean Train Station’ (CTS) scheme. In addition, on-board house-
keeping on the coaches of Rajdhani/ Shatabdi and Duronto and select
Mail/Express trains are also being provided for attention during run.
As regards facilities at stations for persons with disabilities, the
short term facilities viz. standard ramp with railing for barrier free
entry, earmarking of at least one parking lot for two vehicles used by
disabled persons, a non-slipper walkway from parking lot to building,
signages of appropriate visibility, at least one drinking water tap suitable
for use by a disabled person, at least one toilet on the ground floor
and ‘May I help you ’ booth are planned to be provided at all stations,
beginning with ‘A1’, ‘A’ & ‘B’ category stations.
The recommendation of the Committee for bringing out Railway
Time Table in Braille, for the convenience of blind people, is well
taken. However, it would be appreciated that the same is not feasible
for implementation, as Railways presently do not have necessary
wherewithal for bringing out such time tables.
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee observe that for the fiscal year 2014-15, the
Railways improved their operating ratio to 91.8% at RE as against the
BE target of 92.5%. Similarly, for the fiscal year 2015-16, the Railways
have projected an aspirational operating ratio of 88.5%. The Committee

28
find that the overall performance of the Railways is invariably reflected
in terms of their operating ratio. The Committee are of the strong
view that in order to reduce operating ratio, the Railways need to
adopt a long-term strategy by enhancing the efficiency in operation
and various maintenance units. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Railway finances should be monitored and managed prudently
by keeping a close and constant tab on the undesirable/unproductive
expenditure so that the operating ratio may reach an acceptable level
in the near future.
Reply of the Government
1. The Operating Ratio as per provisional accounts for 2014-15
have improved further to 91.3% from the RE target of 91.8%.
2. Operating Ratio for 2015-16 is based on the strength of projected
incremental traffic earnings and expenditure management. As a long
term measure, efforts have been made to prioritise projects that directly
contribute to capacity augmentation which will increase throughput.
The annual plan for 2015-16, as a part of the 5 year investment plan
mentioned in the Budget, reflects increase in the outlays, under capital
and railway funds, for project plan-heads (doubling, gauge conversion
and electrification) by around 40%; under Traffic Facilities plan head
by about 49% and in ‘M&P and Work-shop ’ plan head by about 21.1%.
3. Apart from capital investment that would help improving capacity
on a long term basis, expenditure under working expenses is closely
monitored so that the operating ratio may reach targeted level. Some
of the key features are detailed below:—
(a) Budgetary control and monitoring on Revenue expenditure,
demand-wise, on a monthly basis;
(b) A well set system of concurrent finance function, internal
audit, post audit, MIS, costing, work studies and financial
reviews. The system keeps a strong tab on undesirable and
unproductive expenditure.
(c) Pension management like complete revision of pension master,
reconciliation with banks, pensioner’s verification, spot-checks
in banks are being carried out. Further, a pension portal and
pension application named ‘ARPAN’—Advanced Railway Pension
Access Network have been launched.
(d) Expenditure under DRF is also strictly monitored and regulated
to cater to essential replacements and renewals.

29
(e) Revenue expenditure is managed by imposing spending limits
so that the expenditure is regulated during the year. Economy
and austerity instructions are complied with in full. Items
like net inventory are also monitored very tightly.
(f) In Budget 2015-16, various initiatives have been announced
for the improvement of management processes, systems and
HRD. It has been proposed to link key activities to global
benchmarking, to audit train operations and to undertake a
human resource audit. Due emphasis is being given to
manpower planning and staff rationalisation on Indian
Railways. Zonal Railways are consistently asked to surrender
vacancies in non-safety non-essential categories, identify
pockets of surpluses and redundancies for activities which
have become redundant or obsolete due to technological
upgradation and changes in working system and right-size
activities as per benchmarking norms. To improve staff
productivity, it is proposed to analyse manpower deployment
by reviewing activity-based yardsticks of all departments to
arrive at adequate number of staff requirement.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Rakesh Mohan Committee had observed that purely at operating
level, Indian Railways is in a terminal debt trap and it, ‘under business
as usual growth scenario (2-3% per annum growth in NTKM) ’ would
declare a bankruptcy of Rs. 61,000 crore by 2015. However , over the
next few years, the same Railways staged a dramatic turnaround and
its operating ratio improved to 76% in 2007-08 although it did not bear
the impact of the 6th Central Pay Commission.
Unfortunately, the Indian Railways once again is reeling under a
severe financial crisis. Its operating ratio has deteriorated to 93.6%,
ratio of net revenue to capital to 5.6% and excess surplus of just
Rs. 3740 crore in 2013-14. Though these ratios were projected to
improve as per RE of 2014-15 but as reported by the Railways, the
actual earnings are likely to fall short of the RE by nearly Rs. 2500
crore and thus the projected improvement in operating ratio may not
materialize to any significant extent and the actual operating ratio
may be in the range of 92.5 to 93.5%, depending upon increase/
decrease in provision for depreciation and pension fund. However,
even the operating ratio of 93% may also be understated; had the
Railways made adequate provisions for depreciation based on actual
requirements for replacement of overaged assets, the operating ratio
would have been close to 100%. The fact that the Railways are making

30
provision for depreciation on residual basis rather than on the basis of
actual requirement for replacing all overaged assets, is also corroborated
by the following observations of Shri Bibek Debroy, Member , NITI Ayog
Committee:—
“…With dividends and appropriation to the pension fund fixed, a
“desirable” operating ratio is determined and appropriations to the
DRF obtained as a residual. Thus, whenever appropriations to the
Pension Fund have increased, as they have after the Sixth Pay
Commission, appropriations to DRF have declined and IR has been
constrained to fund even rolling stock through market borrowings
through IRFC. ”
Under provisioning for depreciation is resulting in piling up of
throwforward of works concerning renewal of overaged assets of the
order of Rs. 41871 crore (as reported by the Railways in their reply).
What is more serious is the fact that appropriation for development
fund, which is used for taking up traffic facility works for uninterrupted
and smooth flow of traffic under various plan heads, has declined from
Rs. 7800 crore in 2013-14 to Rs. 1305 crore in 2014-15 RE. Under-
provisioning for depreciation and the inability of the Railways to
generate enough cash flows for servicing, and increased borrowings for
financing of rolling stock have resulted in a sharp decline in track
renewals, procurement of wagons, coaches and electric locos. Simply
stated, presently the Railways are not generating enough cash flows
for even running as a ‘going concern ’ on a continuing basis. In their
replies, the Railways have admitted that IR needs to generate adequate
internal resources to cater for four critical requirements, viz.
depreciation, development and debt servicing apart from dividend
payment to the General Exchequer. Admittedly, Traffic Facility works
and other areas could have benefited from higher allocations which
was not possible due to these being appropriated from resources left
over from the other priorities detailed above. The resource position of
the Railways that was drastically eroded due to the impact of the
6th CPC, required higher market borrowings through IRFC primarily to
meet its rolling stock requirements. The market borrowing level that
was Rs. 4844 crore in 2007-08 has increased to Rs. 17,276 crore in
2015-16.
Under-provisioning for depreciation, sharp fall in procurement
quantities of rolling stock (for example, procurement of wagons has
gone down from 16894 in 2012-13 to 10,000 in 2014-15, electric locos
from 305 to 250, etc.) and not taking up even absolutely critical
throughput enhancement operational improvement and traffic facility

31
works for operational improvement and efficiency have adversely
impacted system productivity. System productivity which was by and
large at a secure uptrend for the last many decades has started falling
after 2012-13 onwards. For example, unit input cost per NTKM at a
constant prices (the broad measure of systems productivity for freight
operations) has gone up from 31.19 paise in 2011-12 to 32.61 paise in
2013-14, i.e. a deterioration of nearly 4
1/2% in systems freight operations
system productivity. Similarly, unit cost per PKM at constant prices has
gone up from 22.82 to 23.21%, i.e. a decline of 1.7% in systems passenger
business productivity. Fall in systems business productivity is further
corroborated only in individual asset productivity like NTKM per wagon
day has come down from 9261 in 2011-12 to 8471 in 2013-14, wagon
turnaround time has deteriorated from 5.08 to 5.13, NTKM per route
km has gone down from 11.94 to 11.45, NTKM per employee from 0.55
to 0.53, etc.
A similar trend has also been observed in passenger business
productivity. Over the last many decades, unit cost of the Railways for
freight and passenger business was increasing by and large than the
rate of inflation in the economy minus improvement in system
productivity. But since for the last two years, system productivity is
falling on an annual rate of 1% to 2% its unit cost at current prices
both for passenger and freight business has grown in double digits
though the rate of inflation in the economy has been far less than this
number. For example, the Railways have admitted that unit cost at
current prices per NTKM has gone up around 15% each in 2012-13 and
2013-14. This is one of the sharpest increases in unit cost of freight
operation in the recent years. Similarly, passenger unit cost has gone
up by nearly 13.4% in 2013-14 over 2012-13 but the Railways
unfortunately appears to be totally unaware of this disturbing trend as
reflected in their self-contradictory reply.
Despite decline in systems productivity, rise in unit cost and decline
in procurement of rolling stock, the Railways have projected a growth
rate of over 15% in gross traffic receipts for the year 2015-16. Its
operating ratio is expected to improve from 93.6% in 2013-14 to 88.5%
in 2015-16. It has also projected a growth rate of nearly 16% in passenger
earnings and over 7.5% growth in freight BTKMs. In their reply, the
Railways have admitted that these targets appear to be challenging.
Achievement of these targets become all the more difficult in the light
of the fact that the RE targets for 2014-15 have already been missed
by nearly Rs.2500 crore and therefore the required growth rate of over
15% would get enhanced to 16.5%–17% for 2015-16. These targets can
only be achieved either by a sharp increase in passenger and freight

32
rates or by a quantum jump in productivity of existing assets of sweating
them harder and faster and by improving the overall operating
efficiency.
The Railways improved its financial performance in between by
single mindedly focusing on its core operating performance and the
same has again deteriorated sharply. The Railways can easily come out
of this morass by following the same strategy of improving productivity
of the existing assets and the overall operational efficiency. Text book
solutions of privatization, downsizing, frequent passenger fare hikes,
apart from being politically unpalatable, are not enough to transform
the financial health of the Railways. On the other hand, scale driven
strategy, of ‘playing on volumes, reducing unit cost, reducing tariffs
and gaining market share and margins can once again work wonders
for turning around the financial health of the Railways. This strategy
is eminently suitable for the Railways as its operating leverage is very
high and variable costs are not more than 15%-20%.
This strategy can be successfully implemented by ‘resource
leveraging, i.e. by getting more out of same existing assets’ by sweating
them harder and faster. Undue emphasis on construction and
procurement of new assets has to be replaced with renewed focus on
asset maintenance, enhancing productivity and better utilization of
assets. Innovation and asset optimization, as opposed to asset
accumulation, are central to this strategy. The entire supply side
strategy can be summarized in three words ‘faster (faster turnaround
of trains), longer (adding additional coaches/wagons) and heavier (higher
axle load) trains ’. For example, reducing turnaround time of wagons
from 6 to 5 days alone can add nearly 20% of incremental freight
carrying capacity at zero additional cost. Similarly, demand side strategy
is captured in another three words: dynamic (peak and non-peak tariff),
differential (tariff for politically sensitive and not so sensitive segments)
and market driven (tariff driven by the relative competitive strength
of Railways). The focus has to be on value creation, agility, customers ’
satisfaction and tech savvy approach.
But this is easier said than done as operating longer , faster and
heavier trains has been debated for decades in the Railways. The key
obstacles are the Railway’s narrow departmentalism, monopoly mindset
and lack of commercial orientation. Indian Railways is a mega system
with several sub-systems within systems. These systems are structured
around various Departments and are interwoven and interdependent in
complex ways. Each technological intervention requires collaboration
across Departments, Zones and Divisions, and to expand the capacity

33
of the system there is a need to work on several variables simultaneously
to synergize policy initiatives. For example, reducing wagon turnaround
time from 6 to 5 days would require coordination among decisions
regarding investment, commercial and operating policies as well as
train maintenance and examination practices.
This would also require that the available funds are invested
strategically to fill the gaps by adopting a systems based approach to
improve the utilization of the existing assets. ‘Low cost, short gestation,
rapid pay back and high returns investments ’ should be given top
priority in the allocation of plan funds of over Rs. 65,000 crore (excluding
tied funds for DFC and national projects). Such investments would
include increasing the length of the platforms and goods terminals,
upgrading and strengthening infrastructure at examination and
maintenance depots and deploying information technology for
strengthening the freight and passenger operating information systems.
There should be no restriction (subject to availability of funds) on
taking up works ‘for replacement of overaged assets, traffic facility
and throughput enhancement ’. For augmenting network capacity,
throughput enhancement works identified through route-wise planning
simulations for elimination of critical bottlenecks on high density
networks and congested junctions have to be given top priority. The
focus has to be on increasing the overall capacity of critical routes by
enhancing throughput per train or augmenting the number of trains on
a particular route, or both. Returns from the limited funds can be
multiplied manifold by fostering strategic alliances for the purpose
with the private sector , particularly the customers.
The Committee would like the Ministry of Railways to look into the
recommendations of the Committee especially in the context of the
serious financial constraints the Ministry of Railways are facing today.
The Committee desire that they should be apprised of the steps taken
by the Ministry of Railways in this regard.
Reply of the Government
This is the concluding Para of fourth report of the Hon ’ble
Committee. The fact that despite the crisis pointed out by the Rakesh
Mohan Committee, Indian Railways (IR) staged a turnaround by achieving
an Operating Ratio (O.R.) of 76% in 2007-08, points to the inherent
strengths and restores confidence in the capability of IR to overcome
any crisis and contribute to the national growth. However the slippages

34
in O.R. in subsequent years arose for reasons beyond control of Railways
as explained below:—
The resource position of the IR had been stretched by two factors:
(i) the impact of the 6th CPC which had impacted IR by over Rs. 1 lakh
crore in last 7 years, and (ii) the second factor is non-revision of fares
in lower-classes; in fact a nominal drop of one rupee was effected
over several years, in the decade from 2003-04 to 2011-12. The revenue
foregone on this count would have significantly contributed to
improvement in O.R. and in fund balances.
The fact that IR ’s O.R. in 2014-15 (Prov.) has improved to 91.3%,
despite higher than B.E. appropriations to DRF and PF , is encouraging.
The fund balances have improved, entire lease charge (interest and
capital) has been paid out of internal resource generated and full
dividend has been paid to the General exchequer. These are indicative
of improvement in railways ’ finances.
The points on depreciation raised by the Hon ’ble Committee were
replied by this Ministry in the submission to the questions raised by the
Committee. The Report of the ‘Committee for mobilization of resources
for major railway projects and restructuring of Railway Ministry and
Railway Board ’ under Mr. Bibek Debroy has been received only in June
2015 and is yet under examination. Therefore, without any reference
to any of the observations made in that report, we would like to
reiterate that appropriation to DRF is made on need basis and building
up of balances in respective funds is judiciously planned keeping in
view the planned requirements. The basis of appropriation to railway
funds has been approved by the successive Railway Convention
Committees.
In so far as rolling stock replacement and renewals are concerned,
these are increasingly being funded out of market borrowings since
1986-87 and such rolling stocks are leased out to IR by the lessor IRFC
in view of low GBS. However , IR fully provides for rolling stock as per
traffic requirements.
Indian Railways (IR) is aware of the capacity constraints and
congestion in its existing network. These are the fundamental reasons
that are stunting traffic growth and systems efficiency. Precisely with
the objective of removing these constraints, IR has formulated a five
year investment plan pegged at Rs. 8.56 lakh crore. As a part of the
said five year plan, an investment of Rs. 1 lakh crore has been envisaged
in the annual plan of 2015-16 (BE). The concerns of the Committee are
amply taken care of as this investment plan aims not only at capital
investments for capacity augmentation but at all replacements,
renewals, and traffic facility works etc.

35
While expressing its concern on system productivity, the Committee
has specifically based their comments with reference to 2013-14 and
2011-12. The parameters commented upon are (a) unit cost (at constant
prices) per NTKM, (b) NTKMs per Wagon day and (c) wagon turnaround.
These, and several other efficiency parameters, are a matter of constant
monitoring by the Ministry and by the General Managers and Divisional
headquarters. However , the point needs some elaboration for clearer
appreciation.
NTKMs of IR have seen a fall due to drop in freight lead. NTKM in
2011-12 was 667607 million and in 2013-14 it was 665810 million. The
loading however in this period has grown from 969.05 million tonnes
in 2011-12 to 1051.64 million tonne in 2013-14.
The expenditure on freight services (at constant prices) has grown
by 4% from 2011-12 to 2013-14 while tonnage has grown by 8.5%. The
Committee has taken cost (at constant prices) per NTKM as a reflection
of systems productivity. This cost per NTKM reflects deterioration but
the same cost per million tonne shows a vast improvement and therefore
a better productivity.
The drop in lead is beyond the control of Railways. Despite best
efforts of the railways to capture long lead traffic, it is purely a
function of behavior of demand of the economy.
The above elaboration on its own provided the clue that explains
the deterioration in NTKMs per wagon day noted by the Committee. A
negative growth in NTKMs would reflect in poorer NTKMs per wagon
day. However , the average load per wagon has improved from 53 tonne
in 2011-12 to 54.9 tonne in 2013-14. Wagon usage parameter has also
improved from 265.6 wagon kilometer per wagon day in 2011-12 to
266.5 km in 2013-14.
It is also mentioned that system productivity has gone up in
2013-14 over 2012-13 in various efficiency parameters shown below:—
Items 2012-13 2013-14
NTKMS per wagon day (Kms.) 8453 8471
Wagon turn around (days) 5.18 5.13
NTKMs per route Kms. (millions) 11.38 11.45
NTKMs per employee (millions) 0.53 0.53
The Ministry would also like to address the Committee ’s concern
on fall in number of wagons. The average number of wagons on line
daily has improved significantly from 196828 numbers in 2011-12 to
228547 numbers in 2013-14.

36
The Committee ’s concern on innovation is a welcome concern. In
2015-16 BE, IR has provided a growth of 105% and 93% respectively in
allocation to Railway Research and Computerization plan-heads. RDSO
(Research Design & Standards Organisation) as the sole R&D agency of
Indian Railways has grown from strength to strength over the years and
developed core competences in applied railway research. Large numbers
of lab to field innovations and value engineering projects have been
successfully accomplished. A list of such important projects is enclosed
as Annexure.
Further to above, IR’s emphasis on innovation could be appreciated
from the fact that in 2015-16, IR has instituted ‘Malaviya’ chair at IIT-
BHU for development of new materials for use in all assets of Railways,
besides a tie up with National Institute of Design (NID) — Ahmedabad.
Apart from these, the budget itself mentions several measures like
(a) radio-based signal design project with IIT-Kanpur for warnings at
unmanned level crossings, (b) better welding techniques, (c) setting
up of an innovation council called ‘Kayakalp’ for the purpose of business
re-engineering and introducing a spirit of innovation in railways,
(d) technology portal to invite innovative technological solutions,
(e) setting up four Railway Research Centres for doing fundamental
research, (f) RFID tracking of parcels and freight wagons, and
(g) consortium of ministries of railways, HRD, S&T and Industries as a
part of technology mission of IR (h) contribution to skill-India initiative.
All of these amply underline IR ’s commitment towards innovation and
its application for Railways growth.
Growth in traffic, in the current year and targeting 1.5 billion
tonne in next five years is based on a multi-pronged strategy. Policy
measures like forming JVs/SPVs, Institutional Financing and formulating
participative customer funding models are some such steps in attracting
investment while Private Freight Terminals, Liberalized Siding Policy,
Own your Wagon Scheme. Wagon Investment Scheme, Wagon Leasing
Scheme, Special Freight Train Operator Scheme, Automobile Freight
Operator Scheme, Automatic freight rebate scheme in empty flow
direction, mechanized loading and unloading, ‘ease of doing business ’
by adopting effective customer friendly IT systems etc. are some of
the measures to tap more and more traffic.
In annual plan 2015-16, high return investments have been given
top priority. The allocations under doubling, gauge-conversion,
electrification, traffic facilities, passenger amenities have been provided
a growth of 377%, 47%, 56%, 204% and 108% respectively.
The above steps will go a long way in addressing the concerns of
the Hon ’ble Committee as also in improving the performance of IR
both physical as well as financial.

37
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee undertook a detailed scrutiny of the Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Railways, 2015-16. During the Presentation
made by the representatives of the Ministry and during interactions
with them in the Committee meetings, a large number of issues which
impinges on the functioning of the Indian Railways came to the fore.
The written replies provided to the Committee by the Ministry also
brought into sharper focus the content and contours, besides the extent,
of these issues. The Committee deliberated on these matters
extensively, in the context of the Demands for Grants, 2015-16 and the
White Paper on the Indian Railways presented to the Parliament.
The Committee noted that the Indian Railways have been an integral
part of the Indian life for over one and a half centuries. The Railways
has an enormous social responsibility on its shoulders, and a national
obligation as well, to inter-link this country through its network, offer
affordable transport to millions of passengers on a day-to-day basis,
and contribute — directly and indirectly — to the nation ’s GDP through
movement of goods. The Indian Railway is undoubtedly a solid
organization, right from the gang man to the highest in the hierarchy,
with institutionalized experience to run its labyrinthine network.
However , the Committee note with serious concern that there is a
deep-rooted malaise that has afflicted the Indian Railways over the
decades, the origin of which can be traced to travails of resource
crunch. First and foremost, the Committee strongly feel that the Indian
Railways should have a clear and unambiguous perception of their
role, and their obligations, to the nation: are they a ‘commercial
entity’ — as they state – with a profit motive, or are they an organization
with a societal obligation to the billion plus people of this country who
use this facility every day?
If profit motive is the sole criterion, then the Indian Railways have
failed themselves, besides failing this country which prides itself as a
welfare state. If, however, they aspire to be an organization with a
social obligation, then too they have not succeeded to the extent that
they should have, especially in the post-Independence years. The

38
Committee understand, and even appreciate, that there are many
historical and other factors responsible for their predicament;
nonetheless, the Committee are convinced that what is urgently required
is perspective planning and proactive leadership, which can facilitate
sufficient external resources, generate adequate internal resources,
provide quality services, enable last-mile connectivity, contribute to
the national economy, and most of all keep the huge workforce
motivated to deliver their best. In short, the Committee will like to
stress that the key to the success of the Indian Railways lies in the
prudent management of their resources — financial, physical and
personnel.
During evidence tendered by the representatives of the Ministry of
Railways, the Committee took serious note of various dimensions of
the resource crunch faced by the Railway administration and the
resultant debilitating impact it had — and still has in a larger measure
— on the Railway system as a whole. Since the Committee are examining
the Demands for Grants of the Railways, 2015-16, some of these issues
that have a special bearing on the Railway functioning vis-a-vis the
acute fund shortage need recapitulation:—
• The Railways have the unenviable task of generating enough
operating cash surplus after payment of dividend and principal
component of the leasing charges to the IRFC, to run as a
‘going concern ’ on a continuing basis. This becomes all the
more difficult when the Railways have to make adequate
provision, based on actual requirements, for depreciation
and appreciation to the Development Fund for traffic facility
works. The Railways have admitted that they need to
generate internal resources to cater to four critical
requirements, viz. depreciation, development, debt servicing
and dividend payment to the General Exchequer.
• Another problem area is liquidation of arrears of over-aged
assets through SRSF , affecting replacements and renewals,
which also seriously affect safety on the Railway system.
• Figures for track renewals and procurement of electric locos,
wagons and coaches, including DEMU and MEMU, have shown
a downward trend.
•A  steep fall in appropriation for Development Fund has
compelled the Railways not to take up even those traffic
facility works that are absolutely critical for the smooth and
uninterrupted flow of traffic on the high density network.
This drastic fall in appropriation for Development Fund has
also resulted in fall in throughput and the system ’s
productivity.

39
• The Railways have submitted that there is an expected drop
of 3.6% in PKMs during FY 2014-15, as compared to FY
2013-14. There is also a negative growth of 2.15% in the
number of passengers booked in FY 2014-15 compared to
2013-14 for the period April-February. Further , in the last
two decades, the passenger growth recorded a negative
growth in the year 2002-03 over 2001-02, and during
2013-14 over the previous year.
• The fall in system ’s productivity, coupled with rise in the
prices of input cost, has resulted in increase of unit cost at
current prices at 15% over the last two years.
• As per approximate accounts to the end of February 2015,
traffic earnings are short of the proportionate Budget target
based on RE in Passenger , Other Earnings and under Goods.
• POL NKTM, which has been at a secular decline, has fallen
by nearly 8% in 2014-15 over the previous year.
• The Railways are faced with the gargantuan challenge to
generate enough incremental free cash flow for servicing
market borrowings of over Rs. 30,000 crore on a long-term
durable basis.
• The Railways have admitted that while private commitments
for rail projects under the Annual Plan may reach Rs. 5500
crore, the actual fund flow in that year may not match the
commitments as the time frame of bidding process and
implementation will vary from project to project, ranging
from 3 to 5 years.
• Even when private involvement was there, the results have
not been very encouraging.
• The revenue from premium trains is not often commensurate
with the investment. On the other hand, investment for
facilities in non-premium trains leaves much to be desired,
which is very visible in the condition of the non-premium
trains.
• Goods traffic, and loading across goods, has not shown the
desired progress.
• The system of setting targets in different segments of the
Indian Railways needs an urgent relook and review. The
projections are unrealistic and actual are most often much
below the targets set.

40
• Much has been made out of the fact that no new trains have
been announced in the Budget Speech of 2015-16. The larger
question that goes a begging is: what happens to those
citizens eking out a living in far-flung, remote, undeveloped,
tribal or hilly areas who have been waiting for decades to
see a rail link to their distant homes and hearths? Their
disappointment and disenchantment with the system could
lead to a sense of alienation from the national mainstream
and may possibly give rise to a frustration with the
establishment as a whole, and even extremist tendencies.
• It is of the greatest concern that even Rail projects linked
to the defence sector have been inordinately delayed for
various reasons, including resource crunch. This is most
alarming, considering that it affects the country ’s security
and defence preparedness. This is also in stark contrast to
the concerted efforts of some of the neighboring countries
that are building state of-the-art Railway networks right
next to India ’s borders, that too in highly inhospitable
terrains.
The above, inter alia,  are some of the major issues that the
Committee have flagged in the wake of the detailed scrutiny of the
Demands for Grants of the Indian Railways, 2015-16. After deliberating
on these concerns in detail, the Committee want to stress that there
is an urgent imperative of a National Policy of the Indian Railways,
which should be the guiding force for the Railway network, irrespective
of the Government in power. It is stating the obvious that the Railways
need huge investments to tide over the many difficulties that they are
confronted with and the dire financial straits they are in, today. The
Indian Railways are inevitably a catalyst for growth of the nation ’s
economy that can contribute substantially to the GDP . The moot point
that the Ministry of Railways need to address is whether its planning
should be resource-based, or need-based. Equally importantly, the
Railways have to reinvent themselves as vehicle of social engineering
and sustainable development and as an organization with a social
responsibility — and especially with its tremendous connectivity network
— and not merely as a commercial entity with a profit motive. The
success of the Indian Railway system will lie in how best they can
judiciously do both, to take it to newer heights, a Railway system that
will provide last-mile connectivity with adequate facilities for the
passengers, a worthy contributor to the national economy and an
organization that can be emulated by their counterparts across the
world.
In the light of the above, the Committee will now delve into some
of the specific components of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry
of Railways, 2015-16.

41
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Annual Plan of 2014-15 was revised to Rs. 65,798 crore from
BE of Rs. 65,445 crore, which shows an increase of Rs. 353 crore. The
Committee find that the ordinary working expenses in the BE 2014-15
has been scaled down by Rs. 2078 crore or almost by 1.40 per cent in
RE stage. Though plan outlays for major heads like New Lines, Gauge
Conversion, Doubling, Signalling & Telecom Works and Electrification
Projects have been increased, the physical targets of the New Lines,
Gauge Conversion and Doubling have shown a downward trend or
remained unchanged. The examination of the Committee further
revealed that despite availability of Capital Support from the General
Exchequer , the Railways have not been able to manage their
developmental Plan 2014-15 which is an indication that there are some
inherent deficiencies in the overall delivery mechanism. As a matter
of fact, despite availability of resources for the developmental needs,
the Railways have not been able to showcase any laudable
achievements. The Committee are of the view that the Railways should
manage their resources and delivery mechanism in a more professional
manner rather than the traditional bureaucratic model. However,
Committee are glad to note that appropriation to the Development
Fund has seen a commendable increase of nearly Rs. 1005.62 crore.
The Committee have been informed that replacement and renewals of
assets are provided for under the Depreciation Reserve Fund and for
meeting the requirements under track renewals, bridges, signal and
telecommunication, plants, equipment and machinery, etc. The
Committee also find that the Railways have set a target of Rs. 14,266
crore to be generated as a surplus in the year 2015-16. While expecting
that the projections made would be concretized in 2015-16, the
Committee have genuine apprehensions on their achievability. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Railways should
pragmatically re-design their working model with a view to generating
higher revenues so that it may accrue increased allocations under the
Development Fund to nurture the developmental agenda of the Railways.
Reply of the Government
(i) While formulating the targets of 12th Five Year Plan, it was
envisaged to have an outlay of Rs. 1,25,852 crore from Gross Budgetary
Support(GBS) for New Lines, Gauge Conversion and Doubling Projects.
Accordingly, a target of laying 17,153 km of track was set. However,
the Planning Commission approved a plan outlay of Rs. 62,421 crore
for these projects for five years. Accordingly, the target was scaled
down to 8,025 km. Further, in first three years of the 12th Plan,
Railway received less than proportionate GBS and as such the outlays
as envisaged at the beginning of the 12th Five Year Plan could not be

42
allocated for the projects. Moreover , a large portion of outlay provided
for New Line, Gauge Conversion and Doubling has been earmarked for
National Projects which fall in hilly region and are highly capital
intensive. The table shown below gives an indication of allotment for
the projects other than National Projects.
(Rs. in crore)
Year 2007-8 2008-9 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Outlay/Expenditure 7624 8357 10552 11648 11259 11427 12867 16057
DFC Land - - 30 1404 1531 1477 1738 1050
National Projects 1231 1300 1899 2203 2371 3072 3764 6027
Balance Outlay for 6393 7057 8623 8041 7357 6878 7365 8980
other project
Total KM completed 2131 1283 2222 2315 2335 1811 1562 1545
From the above table it is seen that the balance outlay for projects
other than National Projects have effectively reduced over the years
since 2009-10, more so in view of the escalation in cost. As against the
target of 8025 km for 12th Five Year Plan, Indian Railways have laid
4918 km of track in first three years.
Physical achievements during 2014-15 are indicated below:—
Items 2014-15 Remarks
Original Revised Achieve-
Target Target ment
New Lines (Route km) 300 300 313
Gauge Conversion 450 450 527
(Route km)
Doubling (Route km) 700 700 705
Electrification 1300 1350 1375
(Route km)
Track Renewals (km) 2100 2200 2424
Locos (Nos) 649 649 605
Coaches (Nos) 3658 3658 3731
Wagons (Nos) 13162 10000 11151
It is evident
from this table
that the
achievements
in 2014-15 are
higher than
the target.

43
In 2015-16, outlay for New Line, Gauge Conversion and Doubling
have been substantially increased and Railway has set a target of
laying 2000 km. Further , as against 1983 km of track commissioned in
2014-15, a target of 2500 km commissioning has been kept for
2015-16.
(ii) Railway ’s plan expenditure is continuously on the rise, though
the same is inadequate in terms of the overall requirement for expansion
of the Railway network. Railway projects, besides being capital
intensive, have long gestation period due to which the returns cannot
always be seen or correlated immediately or concomitantly with the
investment. Further , Railways also have to make investments in
financially unviable projects in public interest. Nevertheless, Railways ’
Gross Traffic Receipts are rising over the years. After overcoming the
adverse impact of 6th Central Pay Commission on Railway Finances,
Railways have been able to generate higher internal resources for
supplementing their plan expenditure. The figures of Plan Expenditure,
Gross Traffic Receipts and Internal Resource Generation by Railways
over the years are indicated below:—
(Rs. in crore)
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
(Approx) BE
Plan 39672 40793 45061 50383 53989 57444 100011
Expenditure
Gross Traffic 86964 94536 104110 123733 139558 156637 183578
Receipts
Internal Resource 2229 6955 7676 15145 11668 15380 22166
generation
(iii) In order to reap the benefits of investments at the earliest,
projects have been prioritized based on their operational requirements.
Such projects and the last mile projects have been ring-fenced with
adequate outlays for early completion. Apart from this, a five year
(2015-19) investment plan of Rs. 8.56 lakh crore has been formulated
with special emphasis on capacity augmentation. These efforts would
enable Railways to enhance their traffic output substantially and
generate higher internal resources for reinvesting and fulfilling the
developmental agenda of Railways.
For the immediate, Budget Estimates 2015-16 aims at a growth of
17.2% in Gross Traffic Receipts as against a growth of 13.4% in Total
Working Expenses comprising Ordinary Working Expenses and

44
appropriation to Pension Fund and Depreciation Reserve Fund. The
projection of Gross Traffic Receipts is based on an incremental loading
target of around 91 million tonnes and 4.5% growth in originating
passengers. Projections also take into account efforts to maximize
earnings from non-core areas such as commercial exploitation of surplus
railway land, land lease, advertisement on railway premises/rolling
stocks, dividend from Railway PSUs etc.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
In respect of safety issues, the Committee further note that the
performance of the Railways is far from reassuring. For instance, there
are 18,785 manned and 11,563 unmanned level crossings and nearly
40 per cent of all railway accidents occur at these crossings. In
2014-15, the allocation was increased from Rs. 413 crore to Rs. 459.75
crore at RE and it has been substantially reduced to Rs. 305.56 crore
for the fiscal year 2015-16. There is also a noticeable gap in the
utilization which is only Rs. 353.86 crore. A very disturbing trend of
continuous reduction in the outlay on this account has also been
witnessed over the last several years which is evident from the fact
that in 2011-12, Rs. 800 crore was allocated, whereas for the fiscal
year 2015-16, a meager amount of Rs. 305 crore has been earmarked.
The Committee also observe that allocations and utilization for building
Road Over Bridges and Road Under Bridges have consistently been on
a downward trend so much so that BE 2014-15 of Rs. 2287 crore was
reduced to Rs. 2017.25 crore while utilization was only 1083,  i.e.
around 50 per cent of the outlay (up to December 2014). Furthermore,
the allocation for the fiscal year 2015-16 has been substantially reduced
to Rs. 1340.45 crore. The Committee emphasize that safety being one
of the prime concerns of an organization like the Railways, it is their
primary duty, as a service provider , to ensure safety of their passengers.
It is a poor reflection on the Indian Railways that even after 65 years
of Independence, they have not been able to convert the unmanned
level crossings to manned ones; the tardy progress towards construction
of ROBs/RUBs is also a matter of great concern. The Committee, while
expressing its displeasure in this regard, strongly recommend that all
safety concerns should be expeditiously addressed and a road map be
drawn up to ensure that all unmanned level crossings should be
converted to manned crossings and wherever required, construction of
ROBs/RUBs should be undertaken. Safety of passengers and users is the
primary responsibility of the Railways; they cannot, and should not,
differentiate between those States which are willing to share the cost
involved, and those that are not in a position to do so. The Committee
would like to be kept informed about the quantifiable progress made
in this regard.

45
Reply of the Government
It is endeavour of Ministry of Railways to eliminate all Unmanned
Level Crossings (LCs) by any of the following methods depending upon
the feasibility of the location:—
(i) Closure: Closing Unmanned Level Crossings having NIL/
negligible Traffic Density.
(ii) Merger: Merger of Unmanned Level Crossings to nearby Level
Crossing or subway or Road Under Bridge (RUB) or Road Over
Bridge (ROB) by construction of diversion road.
(iii) Provision of Subways/RUBs.
(iv) Manning: Unmanned Level Crossings which cannot be
eliminated by above means will be progressively manned
based on rail-road traffic volume, visibility conditions.
In the last seven years (2008-15), Indian Railway has eliminated
7,650 unmanned Level Crossings, out of which 4,588 by closure/merger/
subways and 3,062 by manning. Year-wise break-up is as under:—
Year Elimination of Unmanned LCs
By Closure/ By Manning Total
Merger/
Subways
2008-09 556 259 815
2009-10 553 377 930
2010-11 800 434 1234
2011-12 481 777 1258
2012-13 700 463 1163
2013-14 777 325 1102
2014-15 721 427 1148
Total 4588 3062 7650
Works related to elimination of Unmanned Level Crossings by
Closure/Merger/Manning and other works like interlocking of busy
manned level crossings and improvement/upgradation of level crossings
etc. are chargeable to Plan Head-29 (Road Safety Works — Level
Crossings). Whereas, works related to elimination of Unmanned Level
Crossings by Subways/RUBs and other works like elimination of manned
level crossings by ROBs/RUBs/Subways are charged to Plan Head-30
(Road Safety Works — ROBs/RUBs). Hence, works of elimination of

46
unmanned Level Crossings are charged to Plan Head-29 as well as Plan
Head-30. Allotments of funds and expenditure in Road Safety Works in
last five years are as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year Plan Head-29 Plan Head-30 Total (PH-29 + (PH-30)
Revised Expenditure Revised Expenditure Revised Expenditure %
Allocation Allocation Allocation Utilisation
2010-11 702 414 999 687 1701 1101 65%
2011-12 652 519 1005 810 1657 1329 80%
2012-13 650 528 1350 1057 2000 1584 99%
2013-14 510 504 1490 1482 2000 1986 101%
2014-15* 460 441 1740 1782 2200 2222
Total 2974 2406 6584 5818 9958 8222
*Expenditure for 2014-15 is provisional.
It is evident from the above, that percentage utilisation of Fund
in Road Safety works is improving every year and it is 100% in the last
two years.
‘Railway Safety Fund (RSF) ’ is a non-lapsable Fund created to
finance road related safety works under plan heads ‘29-Level Crossings’
and ‘30-Road Over/Under Bridges ’. The Fund is credited with finance
received as Railways’ share out of Central Road Fund from cess collected
from HSD oil and petrol etc as per Central Road Fund Act 2000.
The allotment of works under the plan heads is made out of the
amount of Diesel Cess received from Ministry of Finance (MOF) and the
same is augmented by utilizing a part of the unspent fund available in
the Fund balances. However , as the utilization of funds against the
works has improved, there is very little amount left in the Fund balances
for redeployment. The allotment of Rs. 2200 crore in 2014-15 consisted
of Rs. 1496 crore as diesel cess and Rs. 704 crore as draw-down from
available balance. However , in 2015-16, while the amount of diesel
cess received from MOF is Rs. 1646 crore, there is no amount available
for draw-down, hence the total allotment remains Rs. 1646 crore only.
Ministry of Finance has been approached for enhancement of
allotment for Railway Safety Fund (RSF) in order to ensure timely
completion of sanctioned works.

47
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that in the recent past, various Expert
Committees have been constituted by the Ministry of Railways to study
different aspects of the functioning of the Indian Railways. For example,
the Kakodkar Committee was constituted to review safety of railway
system; the Mittal Committee was formed to suggest ways and means
to raise the revenue of the Indian Railways; the Sreedharan Committee
was constituted to review the delegation of commercial powers for
railway projects for lower levels of bureaucracy; and the Sam Pitroda
Committee looked into the ways and means to modernize the railway
system. Similarly, the Bibek Debroy Committee was set up to study and
report the limited role of Railway Board, revamping of HR functions
and switch over to commercial accounting. The Committee find that
notwithstanding the fact that some of these Committees submitted
their Report in the year 2012, their recommendations are still under
examination by the Ministry and no decision has been taken on their
implementation. The Committee note with concern that public money
which has gone into the setting up and working of the Committees lies
squandered when their recommendations are not implemented. That
being so, the Committee are constrained to point out that if the
Committees ’ recommendations are not implemented in the right
earnest, there appears no justification to constitute such Committees.
This sort of inaction becomes all the more serious when the much
acclaimed Investment Plan of Indian Railways is in a take-off stage and
the Government of India have been claiming to transform the Indian
Railways on the lines of the Chinese, Japanese and French Railways.
Considering the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry of Railways, the
Committee strongly recommend that a time-schedule may be prescribed
by them to implement the recommendations of these Expert
Committees. The progress made in this regard should be closely
monitored regularly and scientifically at the highest level in the Ministry.
Reply of the Government
(i) Kakodkar Committee:
The recommendations of High Level Safety Review Committee
(Kakodkar Committee) have since been discussed by the Board as regards

48
their acceptance/partial acceptance/non-acceptance. The
recommendations are presently under acceptance by the Minister of
Railways. The recommendations found acceptable will shortly be
initiated for implementation as per the availability of funds.
(ii) Mittal Committee:
It is stated that the report of the Mittal Committee was recently
submitted on 30.12.2014. The recommendations of the Committee
have been duly circulated to all the Directorates for examination.
Some of the recommendations were incorporated in the Budget Speech
of the Minister. Other recommendations are under review and
acceptance of Board, after which they will be taken up for
implementation and monitor.
(iii) Sreedharan Committee:
Ministry of Railways had constituted One Man Committee of
Dr. E. Sreedharan on 13th November, 2014 to suggest a proper system
and procedure to ensure proper accountability and transparency at the
General Manager and other functionaries levels for taking all commercial
decision, including tendering. The One Man Committee submitted its
Final Report on 11.03.2015.
(iv) Sam Pitroda Committee:
Action has been initiated on various key recommendations of the
Sam Pitroda Committee recommendations such as pertaining to
elimination of level crossing & unmanned level crossings, mechanised
maintenance of track, introduction of new generation locomotives,
high speed potential LHB coaches, upgradation of suburban coaches,
green toilets on all passenger trains, development of modern high pay
to tare ratio wagons, enhancement of customer amenities at stations
and on trains, development of various PPP models to attract private
investment, feasibility studies of high speed and semi high speed corridor
etc.
Sam Pitroda Committee had assessed a fund requirement of Rs. 5.6
lakh crore for various modernisation works which has been a challenge.
(v) Bibek Debroy Committee:
However, some recommendations pertaining to organisation
restructuring/ reforms, which have far-reaching implications, have not
been implemented. Bibek Debroy Committee: Restructuring and reforms

49
on Indian Railways have been separately examined by the Bibek Debroy
Committee whose final report has also been received.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no. 12 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
Track renewal is central to the Railways operations. To their utter
distress, the Committee find that the progress on track renewal has
reached an alarming level, due to inadequate allocation of funds and
inability to wipe out arrears which has resulted in a backlog of
5300 kms. The Committee are extremely concerned about the sluggish
progress and feel that not only will this backlog has resulted in a
disproportionately high maintenance efforts but will also result in
reduced reliability of assets, which could lead to safety failures. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Railways should
take urgent remedial measures to contain this potentially dangerous
situation and accord highest priority to this sector. Further , they advise
that the pace of track renewal must be accelerated with utmost
promptness to complete the backlog of those tracks which need urgent
renewal and are operationally important.
Reply of the Government
Railway Tracks are changed as and when a stretch of track becomes
due for renewal on age-cum-condition basis i.e. on the basis of traffic
carried over the track and physical condition of track etc. Track renewal
works are planned in advance every year and their execution is
prioritized according to the condition of track and overall availability
of funds ensuring all the time that track is in a sound condition for
safe running of trains. In case, if any stretch of track is not renewed
in time due to various reasons including scarcity of funds, materials
etc., suitable speed restrictions is imposed to ensure safe running of
trains. Regular inspection of tracks is carried out to ensure safe running
of trains.
The progress of track renewals during 2014-15 is 2424 kms against
revised estimate of 2200 kms. The budget outlay for 2015-16 has been
increased to Rs. 6035 crores in comparison to Rs. 5046 crores in Revised
Estimates of 2014-15. Accordingly a target of 2500 kms of track renewal
has been kept. It is expected that with the increase in outlay, the
arrears of track renewal will come down.

50
As on 31.03.2015, track renewal and related works covering
2250 kms of track renewal have been sanctioned. In addition, track
renewal works for 2850 kms have been sanctioned in the year 2015-16.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no. 15 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee note that the Indian Railways incur losses every
year by undertaking a variety of non-remunerative but socially necessary
services. These losses are mostly due to low ordinary second class
fare, suburban and non-suburban season fare, concessions granted on
passenger ticket and transportation of certain commodities below cost.
The operation of uneconomic branch lines, too, imposes a heavy burden
on the Railway finances. In view of this, a wide gap is created between
the income generated through these services and their running costs.
Losses incurred on this account are termed as social service obligation.
The Committee have been informed that the Railways have to bear
social service obligation of around Rs. 25,000 crores every year and
they have been meeting this cost of social service obligation through
cross-subsidization. In this connection, the Committee wish to remind
that most Railway establishments the world over are called upon to
meet certain public service obligations at low tariff in the larger social
interest for which they are adequately compensated by the Government.
The Committee have been informed that in order to compensate the
social obligation costs, the Ministry of Railways had approached the
Ministry of Finance and consequently a Committee of Secretaries had
recommended that these costs be reimbursed to the Railways. However,
the matter is still unresolved. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Government to work out a procedure on the basis of which the
social service obligation costs are reimbursed to the Railways.
Reply of the Government
The following points are requested to be considered by the
Standing Committee with regards to Social Service Obligation:—
1. Arising out of recommendations of the Standing Committee
on Railways in 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000 as well as
the Railway Convention Committee, a draft Cabinet Note
highlighting the various social service obligations borne by
the Railway and the urgent need for compensation from the
Central Government for offsetting the loss thus suffered was
circulated on 21.1.2000.

51
2. The parameters on the basis of which compensation was
calculated were not acceptable to the Ministry of Finance
and at the behest of Ministry of Finance an Inter-ministerial
Working Group (IMWG) comprising of the functionaries of
Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission was set up with a view to establish the
parameters for calculation of Social Service Obligation in an
objective and transparent manner.
3. The draft Cabinet Note seeking compensation for Social
Service Obligation was turned down categorically by the
Ministry of Finance with observation that the Railways were
very much part of the Government and the Railway Budget
is a adjunct of the General Budget. It is included in the
General Budget. Therefore, any loss arising out of Government
decisions taken in public interest by the Ministry of Railways
cannot be claimed as compensation as if these were to be
paid to a body corporate outside the Government.
4. Similarly, Planning Commission observed that “the tariff
policies and fare structure of the Railways should be such
that the price of each service should reflect its cost as
closely as possible ”.
5. Railways have initiated various steps in this regard:—
(i) Fuel adjustment component — Railway have set up a
mechanism to neutralise the impact of increase in fuel
price on operating expenses.
(ii) In 2015-16, Railway Minister in his Budget Speech has
commented that “Indian Railways currently is the only
rail-based trans-city infrastructure provider and operator
in the country. Therefore, for the purpose of orderly
development of infrastructure services, enabling
competition and protection of customer interest, it is
important to have a regulation mechanism independent
of the service provider. Initially it was contemplated to
set up only a Tariff Regulator, however , it is now proposed
to set up a mechanism, which will be entrusted with
making regulations, setting performance standards and
determining tariffs. It will also adjudicate on disputes
amount licenses/private partners and the Ministry,
subject to review in appeal ”. Steps have been initiated
to complete the process.

52
6. Ministry of Railways has raised this issue in the Railway
Convention Committee (2014) memorandum. Further action
will be taken as per the recommendations of the Railway
Convention Committee.
The tariff policy of Indian Railways has been to keep passenger
fares low especially in the lower classes so that even the poorest
segment of the people can travel by rail. Railways have traditionally
cross-subsidized passenger business through their freight business as a
result of which railway freight rates have increased regularly while
passenger fares have stagnated.
The commodities in Low Rated Classes are being carried below
cost of operations.
Railways have been granting concession of 6% in freight on all
goods traffic booked to and from NE region since 1983, as amended
from time to time.
Apart from these, during natural calamities and disasters, Railways
carry relief materials free of cost to the affected States.
In Passenger segment the losses incurred in different classes of
travel are as under:—
Classes Loss in Rs. cr. %age
2013-14 to total
Second Class 17718.74 57.07%
Sleeper Class 8858.65 28.53%
Upper Classes 374.53 1.21%
EMU Suburban & 1st Ordinary 4097.36 13.20%
Total 31049.28 100%
All of the above are part and partial of Indian Railways Social
responsibility.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no. 18 of Chapter-I)

53
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; DINESH TRIVEDI,
01 December, 2015 Chairperson,
10 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

54
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2015-16)
(Second Sitting)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 30th September , 2015, from
1500 hours to 1530 hours in Committee Room No. ‘53’, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Dinesh Trivedi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
3. Shri Ram Tahal Choudhary
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
5. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi
7. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
8. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
9. Shri Balabhadra Majhi
10. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
11. Shri A.T . Nana Patil
12. Shri Ganesh Singh
13. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri A.K. Antony
15. Shri Mukut Mithi
16. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
17. Smt. Bimla Kashyap Sood
18. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
19. Shri Devender Goud T .
20. Shri Motilal Vora

55
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Geeta Parmar — Deputy Secretary
2. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
of the Committee contained in their 4th Report on “Demands for Grants—
2015-16 of the Ministry of Railways ” and adopted the same without any
modification.
3. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the
Report and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
4. *** *** *** ***
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*Not related to this report.

56
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
4TH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) ON “DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS 2015-16 OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS ’’
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations: 18
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 12
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 18
Percentage of total 66.66%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 3
do not desire to pursue in view  of the Government ’s
replies:
Para Nos. 1, 7 and 16
Percentage of total 16.66%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 3
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos. 5, 12 and 17
Percentage of total 16.66%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Nil
final replies are still awaited:
Para No. Nil
Percentage of total 0%