 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
PASSENGER RESERVATION SYSTEM OF INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 
 
                
  
             
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
  
8 
 

S.C.R. No. 235 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PASSENGER RESERVATION SYSTEM OF INDIAN RAILWAYS 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.11.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.11.2021 
 
                
  
             
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
November, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 

CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2019-20) (iii) 
Composition of the Committee (2020-21) (iv) 
Composition of the Committee (2021-22) (v) 
Introduction (vii) 
                  REPORT  
                 PART-I  
Introductory 1 
 Classes of Reservation 3 
 Ticketing in the Indian Railways 4 
 Budgetary allocation for PRS 4 
 Mechanism of the PRS 5 
 Cancellation of Tickets under PRS 6 
 Tatkal Reservation Scheme 8 
 Timings of booking 9 
 Extent of Tatkal Accommodation 9 
 Refund under the Tatkal Scheme 11 
 VIKALP 11 
 Dynamic pricing/Flexi-fare 13 
 Special Trains on variable fare 14 
 Quotas in trains 15 
 Concessions on Indian Railways 16 
 Senior Citizen Concessions 17 
 Privilege Pass/Privilege Ticket orders 17 
 Divyangjans 18 
 Concessions given to freedom fighters 19 
 Concessions given to children 20 
 Proliferation of the PRS 21 
 Travel Insurance 25 

 Grievance redressal 26 
PART-II  
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee 27 
       ANNEXURES   
 Annexure-I 35 
 Annexure-II 39 
 Annexure-III 40 
 Annexure-IV 41 
 Annexure-V 42 
     APPENDICES          
I Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on 
13.03.2020  
43 
II Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on 
26.11.2021 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2019-20)@ 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh - Chairperson 
                MEMBERS 
      LOK SABHA 
2.  Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3.  Shri T.R. Baalu 
 
 
 
4.  Smt. Ranjanben Bhatt 
5.  Shri Pankaj Choudhary 
 
 
6.  Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury 
S 7.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant$ 
9.  Shri Suresh Kodikunnil 
10.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
11.  Smt. Diya Kumari 
12.  Smt. Jaskaur Meena 
13.  Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
14.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
15.  Smt. Queen Oja 
16.  Smt. Keshari Devi Patel 
17.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
18.  Shri N. Reddeppa 
19.  Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
20.  Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
21.  Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur 
 
     RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Shri Narhari Amin* 
23.  Shri Chh. Udayanraje Bhonsle* 
24.  Shri H.D. Devegowda* 
25.  Shri N. Gokulakrishnan 
26.  Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
27.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
28.  Smt. Phulo Devi Netam* 
29.  Ms. Saroj Pandey 
30.  Shri Ashok Siddharth 
31.  Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
@ Constituted w.e.f. 13.09.2019 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 550 dated 13.09.2019. 
$ Shri Arvind Sawant was nominated in place of Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse vide Bulletin-II No. 1170 dt. 
25.02.2020 
*Members nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 22.07.2020 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 1370 dated 
24.07.2020. 
Note: Shri Mohd. Ali Khan, Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao, Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya and  Shri Moti 
Lal Vora retired w.e.f. 09.04.2020 vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II No. 59529 dated 02.01.2020. 
 
(iii) 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2020-21)@ 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh - Chairperson 
                MEMBERS 
      LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri T.R. Baalu 
 
 
 
3.  Smt. Ranjanben Bhatt 
4.  Vacant* 
 
 
5.  Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury 
S 6.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7.  Smt. Diya Kumari 
8.  Smt. Jaskaur Meena 
9.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
10.  Smt. Queen Oja 
11.  Smt. Keshari Devi Patel 
12.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
13.  Shri N. Reddeppa 
14.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta 
15.  Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
16.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
17.  Dr. Amar Singh 
18.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
19.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
20.  Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
21.  Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur 
S 
     RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Shri Narhari Amin 
23.  Shri Chh. Udayanraje Bhonsle 
24.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
25.  Shri N. Gokulakrishnan 
26.  Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
27.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
28.  Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
29.  Ms. Saroj Pandey 
30.  Shri Ashok Siddharth 
31.  Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
@ Constituted w.e.f. 13.09.2020 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 1741 dated 29.09.2020. 
* Shri Pankaj Choudhary ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his appointment as Minister of 
State in the Ministry of Finance w.e.f. 07.07.2021 vide Cabinet Sectt. Notification No. 1/34/1/2021-Cab.(ii) of date. 
(iv) 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2021-22) 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri T.R. Baalu 
3.  Smt. Ranjanben Bhatt 
4.  Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury 
5.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6.  Smt. Diya Kumari 
7.  Smt. Jaskaur Meena 
8.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
9.  Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
10.  Smt. Keshari Devi Patel 
11.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
12.  Shri N. Reddeppa 
13.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta 
14.  Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
15.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
16.  Dr. Amar Singh 
17.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
20.  Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur 
21.  Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Shri Narhari Amin 
23.  Shri Chh. Udayanraje Bhonsle 
24.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
25.  Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
26.  Ms. Saroj Pandey 
27.  Shri Ashok Siddharth 
28.  Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki 
29.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
30.  Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha# 
31.  Vacant 
 
* The Committee constituted w.e.f. 13.09.2021 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 3192 dated 
09.10.2021. 
# Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha nominated w.e.f. 14.10.2021 vide Lok  Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 61163 
dated 18.10.2021. 
(v) 
 

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Prasenjit Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K.Kaushik   - Director 
3. Shri R.L. Yadav   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Banani Sarker Joshi  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
 
 
(vi) 
 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Railways (2021-22), having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Railways on ‘Passenger Reservation System of Indian Railways’. 
2.  The Standing Committee on Railways (1 7th Lok Sabha)  had selected the subject ‘Passenger 
Reservation System of Indian Railways’ for examination during 2019-20 and 2020-21.  The Committee took 
briefing of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) along with Chairman & Managing 
Director - Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation  (IRCTC) and Managing Director - Centre for 
Railway Information Systems (CRIS) on the subject at their sittings held on 13.03.2020. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 26.11.2021.  Minutes of the 
related sittings are given in the appendix to the Report. 
4.   The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), 
Chairman & Managing Director - Indian Railway Catering and T ourism Corporation (IRCTC) and Managing 
Director - Centre for Railway Information Systems (CRIS) for appearing before the Committee and furnishing 
the material and information which the Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject 
‘Passenger Reservation System of Indian Railways’. They would also like to place on record their deep sense 
of appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee.  
5.     For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH   
26 November, 2021                              Chairperson 
5 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

Page 1 of 38 
 
REPORT 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
The Indian Railways is the fourth largest railway network in the World after USA, China and 
Russia spread over 68,442 Route Km with 7,318 Stations. The Indian Railways  as a national 
transporter provide the principal, most economical and environmentally viable mode of transportation 
for both passenger and freight segments. They act not only as a great integrator connecting people 
from the most remote corners of our country but also play a crucial  role in facilitating a balanced and 
inclusive socio-economic development of the country as well as serve as an engine of growth which 
drives the economy by accelerating the development  of industry and agriculture.    
2. Among two facets of railway operat ions in the country  i.e., passenger segment and freight 
segment, t he passenger segment is considered as the face of Indian Railways, operating 13,500 
Passenger trains and moving a stupendous 23 Million passengers daily which is almost equal to 
moving the entire population of Australia every day. 
3. Train travel in India have come a long way since the first passenger train ran on April 16, 1853 
between Bombay (Bori Bundar) and Thane with 400 passengers and covered a distance of 34 kms in 
55 minutes. Since then, the Indian Railways have gone from strength to strength.  
4. To travel on the Indian railways , a passenger need a ticket which he requires to book  either 
through the Passenger Reservation System (PRS) or the Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS). The 
Passenger Reservation System of Indian Railways is the world’s largest online railway reservation 
system and can be described as a nationwide online passenger reservation and ticketing system which 
allows a passenger, to book train tickets from any where to any station on the Indian rail network. PRS 
also handles changes, cancellations and refunds.  
5. Passenger Reservation System is running at about 4043 locations and is handling more than 
3000 trains.  Computerized reservation terminals have been expanded to remote corners through India 
Post PRS Centres as well as non -rail head .  PRS facilities have been extended through State 
Government and local bodies.  In addition, the facilities of e -ticket has been made available for all mail 
and express trains through IRCTC website.  Apart from it, reserved tickets can also be booked on 
mobile application.  Mobile Apps on Android and Window are available for booking reserved tickets.  
Besides, Railway faci litates Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS) which is functioning at about 6242 
locations on Indian Railways.  Railways have installed 4000 Automatic Ticket Vending Machines 
(ATVMs)/Coin-cum-card operated Automatic Ticket Vending Machines (COTVMs) which facil itate 
purchase of unreserved tickets platform and recharging of season tickets by the passengers by way of 
touch screen facility.  Thus, querying at the counters is significantly reduced during the rush hours.  
Unreserved ticket booking is also facilitated  through Mobile phone via “UTSON MOBILE APP” to 
promote cashless transaction, contactless ticketing and enhanced customer convenience.  To facilitate 
ticket booking, “Station Ticket Booking Agents” are engaged to issue unreserved tickets at “E” category 
stations with a view to expanding the facilities for issuing of tickets (both reserved and unreserved), 
public private partnetship was allowed in establishment and operation of computerized PRS -cum-UTS 

Page 2 of 38 
 
Terminals at Centres called “Yatri Ticket Suvidha Kendra  (YTSK)”.  Also, to provide confirmed 
reservation to foreign tourists through internet (e-ticketing), they are allowed to book accommodation in 
Executive Class/1 st AC, 2 nd AC Class in all trains upto 365 days in advance.  The facility is available 
upto the time of opening of reservation in the train as per Advance Reservation Period.  Thereafter, the 
foreign tourists can book ticket against foreign tourist quota which has been earmarked in certain 
Mail/Express trains based on demand pattern.  Further, for t he convenience of users, first reservation 
charts have  been extended both for the tickets booked through internet as well as those booked 
through Computerized Passenger Reservation System (PRS) counters.  This facility is also available 
through the telephone number 139 and across PRS counters (during working hours of PRS centres).   
6. Before the advent of the PRS, Indian Railways was using the system of manual ticketing. The 
main disadvantages of the manual ticketing system which necessitated its replacement with the PRS 
were as under: - 
(a) Reservation was possible only at the originating station of the train.  
(b) Since details and tickets were issued manually long queues and longer waiting time ensued 
for passengers. 
(c) There existed a fair likelihood of errors in the system since details were manually entered in 
registers which would often lead to passenger inconvenience.  
(d) The ‘availability position’ was not always accurate since details were entered manually. 
Waitlisted position were also not readily available across the network.  
(e)  Possibility of unethical practices arose while allotting reservation, since access to 
information was restricted. 
7. In the light of the above circumstances , the need to modernize the system w as acutely felt and 
hence the PRS, the world’s largest online railway reservation system, was envisaged. The pilot project 
of PRS was launched on 15 November 1985, over Northern Railway with the installation of the 
Integrated Multiple Train Passenger Reservation System (IMPRESS), an online transaction processing 
system developed by the Indian Railways in association with Computer Maintenance Corporation 
(CMC) Ltd. at New Delhi. The main objectives of the IMPRESS were to (a) provide reserved 
accommodation on any train from any counter,   (b) enquiry regarding any train,(c) preparation of train 
charts, and (d) accounting of the fare collected. The system also had backup and recovery facilities. 
This application was subsequently extended and implemented at Mumb ai, Chennai, Kolkata and 
Secunderabad by 1987. Other stations were connected as remote terminals to the existing five 
computer systems for accessing the e ntire database of host computer .  While the system was a huge 
improvement over the manual ticketing sy stem, yet it was not without its shortcomings. Moreover,  the 
addition of new locations and growing expectations of the travelling public prompted the need for a 
more robust ticketing software. 
8. Hence a new application software, i.e., Country Wide Network  for Computerised Enhanced 
Reservation and Ticketing (CONCERT) was developed by the Centre for Railway Information Systems 
(CRIS) and implemented as a pilot project at the Secunderabad PRS site in September 1994. This was 

Page 3 of 38 
 
subsequently extended to the other  four PRS sites namely Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai. By 
18.04.1999, it was successfully implemented all across the country. 
9. The modern day PRS has been architected, designed, developed, implemented and is being 
maintained by Centre for Rai lway Inf ormation Systems (CRIS),which  is responsible for the IT 
infrastructure of PRS system and also the communication network. Currently, the PRS servers are 
maintained at the five sites in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and Secunderabad and operate in a 
distributed database process environment. 
10. As on 30.06.2020, total active Reservation Centres  over Indian Railways are 4043 in number 
with 10725 terminals across the country including all major stations, and important non -railhead 
locations such as tourist centers and district headquarters.  PRS facility has also been ex tended up to 
Andaman & Nico bar Islands, Lakshdweep I slands and some North Eastern States which have limited 
or no rail connectivity. In addition to railway counters, reservation facility is also available at Post 
Offices and Defence locations.  
CLASSES OF RESERVATION  
11. On a query  regarding the different classes of tickets that could be booked for tr avel across the 
Indian Railways,  the Ministry have informed that the Indian Railways have d ifferent classes of 
reservation, which  has been made in order to cater to the travel needs of different categories of 
passengers.  Indian Railways currently provide different classes of travel under two broad categories 
viz. suburban and non-suburban segment. Under the suburban segment, there are two classes i.e. First 
Class and Second Class (Ordin ary). The Committee have been apprised that recently, air conditioned 
Chair Car had been introduced on the suburban sections of Mumbai area.  
12. As per the Ministry, u nder the non -suburban segment, the various classes under which rail 
travel is permitted are as under:-  
AC First Class (1A),  
AC Sleeper class (2A), 
AC 3 Tier (3A),  
AC 3 Tier Economy (3E), 
Anubhuti Class (EA),  
Executive Class (EC), 
AC Chair Car (CC), 
First Class (FC), 
 Sleeper Class (SL) and  
 Second Class (2S). 
 
 

Page 4 of 38 
 
TICKETING IN THE INDIAN RAILWAYS  
13. Travel over the Indian Railways is possible only after purchasing a ticket either through the PRS 
or the UTS. The Passenger Reservation System handles all reserved accommodation in Indian 
Railways and is currently proc essing more than 10 crore transactions involving 4.88 crore passengers  
per day on an average. It has an uptime of 99.98% (per month) with an average earning of Rs.2873 
crores per month, as per the data of  the year 2019 -20. While the maximum transaction per minute 
(TPM) capacity of the present day PRS is of 28,915,  the average TPM for the year 2019 -20was 
8,711.The average number of Ticketing Transactions (reservation & cancellations) in PRS in a day are 
14,16,990 (On the basis of January,2020 data). Out of total transactions, approximately 84 % are on 
account of booking of tickets whereas 16% are on account of cancellation of tickets. PRS also allows 
for part cancellation / part modification of tickets online. 
14. The options available with the passenger s for booking of reserved tickets for travel on Indian 
Railways are:- 
(a)  through computerized PRS counters,  
(b) through IRCTC website/Mobile app 
(c) computerized PRS counters available in Post offices 
(d) Yatri Ticket Suvidha Kendra (YTSK) licensees and 
(e) purchase of a ticket physically at non-rail head locations. 
15. To a query on the details of transactions handled by these modes during the last 3 years are as 
under: 
No. of Reserved tickets booked through various methods since 2017 (In lakh). 
Ticket  
Booking Mode 
Tickets  
Booked in 2017-18 
Tickets  
Booked in 2018 -
19 
Tickets  
Booked in 2019 -
20 
Non-Railway Head 7.95 7.22 6.90 
Post Office  13.19 12.24 13.08 
Online Booking-IRCTC 2465.99 2842.68 3017.70 
Counter Booking 1216.30 1152.83 1063.11 
YTSK Booking 41.93 45.15 47.42 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR PRS 
16. To a query about the funding required for PRS, the Ministry have informed that since the PRS is 
a key passenger facing application, it requires constant maintenance and also continuous upgradation , 
for which the fund  requirements are met through budgetary allocations for revenue and capital 
expenditure.  

Page 5 of 38 
 
17. The Ministry have furnished the total allocations and utilizations of funds for PRS, during the last 
3 years as under - 
S. No. F.Y. Allocation 
(Rs Cr) 
Utilization 
(Rs Cr) 
1 2017-18 33.99 32.68 
2 2018-19 35.16 31.51 
3 2019-20 44.97 25.82 
 
18. The Ministry have informed that due to the pandemic scenario towards the end of 2019 -20 and 
lockdown in March end, the bills of some capital funds allocated could not be processed and the funds 
had to be surrendered, for which the year 2020-21, allocations would be utilized. 
19. The total number of passengers carried by the IR during 2016-17 to 2018-19 are as given: 
(in millions) 2018-19 2017-18 2016-17 
(i) Total Passengers carried 8,439 8,286 8,116 
(ii) Reserved Passengers 678 653 625 
 
20. Revenue earned from Passenger services during corresponding period isas under:  
(Rs. in crores) 2018-19 2017-18 2016-17 
(i) Revenue from total passengers carried 51,066.65 48,643.14 46,280.46 
(ii) Revenue earned from Reserved 
Passengers in Reserved Coaches. 
33,105.24 30,980.42 29,317.34 
 
 (Rs. in crore) 2018-19 2017-18 2016-17 
Miscellaneous. Coaching Receipts 
(including cancellation charges) * 
2065.01 1205.96 1160.30 
 
21. The Committee wanted to know the extent of revenue earned from cancellation of tickets. The 
Ministry in reply have stated that revenue earned from cancellation of tickets is not captured separately. 
Clerkage charges for tickets made non -issued (cancellatio n charges) is a part of Miscellaneous 
Coaching Receipts. This head also includes other revenue s like Siding/Wharfage Charges on parcel, 
Time tables sold, Lost property office receipts, Cloak room charges, Cash office/Accounts 
Office/Travelling Inspector of Accounts (TIA) debits and other unclassified coaching receipts. 
 
MECHANISM OF THE PRS 
22. The Committee wanted to know about the timelines for booking /modification/ cancellation of 
PRS tickets in various categories of trains . The Ministry of Railways have informed that rail tickets can 
be booked through the  given methods 120 days before the date of journey . This is known as the 
Advance Reservation Period (ARP) and booking of tickets opens 120 days in advance fo r almost all 
long-distance mail/ express tr ains and Shatabdi Express trains. For certain short distance inter -city 
trains, shorter ARP has been prescribed. The period of advance reservation (ARP) is exclusive of the 
day of departure of the train. The booking of tickets under ARP begins from 0800 hours onwards.  

Page 6 of 38 
 
23. Regarding booking of Tatkal tickets, the Ministry have informed that reservation under Tatkal 
scheme opens at 1000 hours on the previous day of journey from train originating station for AC 
classes whereas that for non -AC classes, it starts at 1100 hours on the previous day of journey from 
train originating station. 
24. The Committee also desired to know about the mechanism or working of the PRS. In this 
regard, t he Ministry have explained that in the computerized Passenger Reservation System (PRS), 
confirmed accommodation is allotted on first come first serve basis and thereafter RAC(reserved 
against cancellation) wherever applicable or waiting list tickets are is sued.  The status of these 
RAC/waiting list tickets gets updated automatically against cancellation of the tickets booked prior to 
such tickets.  At the time of preparation of first reservation chart, the accommodation available in 
unutilized reservation q uota updates status of RAC/waiting list passengers and thereafter 
accommodation available, if any, can be booked online as well through computerized PRS counters up 
to preparation of second reservation chart.  Second reservation charts are prepared between  30 
minutes and 5 minutes before the scheduled/rescheduled time of departure of train. 
25. The Ministry have elaborated that waiting list passengers are not allowed to board the reserved 
coach.   Names of all the passengers booked on a full waiting list e -ticket are dropped and refund is 
credited to the account from which the ticket is booked.  Such passengers , if found travelling in train , 
are considered as travelling without ticket and charged accordingly.  The passengers holding waiting 
list ticket issued from PRS counter can however travel in unreserved coaches of the train.   
26. To a specific query on the procedure for allotment of vacant seats to the waitlisted passengers,  
the Committee were informed that  in the event of a vacancy arising on account o f non -turning up of 
passenger, a seat is allotted by onboard ticket checking staff to RAC passengers. Onboard ticket 
checking staff are authorized to allot vacant accommodation in the train on approach to any passenger 
holding valid authority to travel.  Hand held terminals are being proliferated to ensure automation of the 
activities being performed by ticket checking staff and to bring more transparency in their functioning.  
CANCELLATION OF TICKETS UNDER PRS 
27. In addition to booking of reserved tickets , the PRS also handles cancellations and modification 
of tickets. However , the reserved tickets booked online through Indian Railway Catering and Tourism 
Corporation (IRCTC) website can only be cancelled partially online and at present, the facility of 
modification of tickets is not available online. 
28. Cancellation/Clerkage charges, as applicable as per Railway Passengers (Cancellation of 
Ticket and Refund of Fare) Rules, 2015, are levied on partial cancellation of tickets online. The details 
of cancellation charges levied are as under: 
S. 
No. 
Heading Type of Ticket Time 
Period 
Extent (of charges) 
     
1.  Clerkage Charges  
(per passenger) 
Unreserved, 
RAC & Waiting 
Within 
prescribed 
Unreserved(Second Class)- Rs.30  
Second Class (reserved) & other 

Page 7 of 38 
 
List  time limit classes- Rs. 60/- 
 
2.  Refund- 
Cancellation 
charges (per 
passenger) 
Confirmed Upto 48 
hours 
before the 
scheduled 
Departure 
of train 
 
1st AC (1A)/ 
Executive Class 
(EC) 
 Rs. 240/- 
2AC/1st Class 
(FC) 
 Rs. 200/- 
3AC/ACC/3A/3E  Rs. 180/- 
Sleeper class 
(SL) 
 Rs. 120/- 
Second 
Class(reserved) 
(2S) 
 Rs. 60/- 
 
3.  Refund- 
Cancellation 
charges (per 
passenger) 
Confirmed Between 48 
hours & 12 
hours 
before the 
scheduled 
departure 
of the train 
25% of the fare subject to minimum 
charges as  mentioned in para 2 
above 
4.  Refund- 
Cancellation 
charges (per 
passenger) 
Confirmed Between 12 
hours and 
upto 4 
hours 
before the 
scheduled 
departure 
of train 
50% of the fare subject to minimum 
charges as mentioned in para 2 
above 
5.  Refund- 
Cancellation 
charges (per 
passenger) 
Confirmed Beyond the 
above time 
limit 
No refund 
 
 
6.  Refund- 
Cancellation 
charges (per 
passenger) 
RAC/Waiting 
List/ Partially 
confirmed 
Upto half 
an hour 
before 
scheduled 
departure 
of train 
Full Refund minus clerkage 
charges. 
7.  Railway is unable 
to provide 
accommodation 
for whatever 
reasons 
RAC/Waiting 
List/ Partially 
confirmed 
within three 
hours from 
the actual 
departure 
of the train. 
Full refund no cancellation/clerkage 
charge 
8.  Late running of 
trains by more 
than 3 hours 
RAC/Waiting 
List/ Partially 
confirmed 
upto actual 
departure 
of the train. 
Full refund no cancellation/clerkage 
charge 
9.  Refund- on 
cancellation of 
train 
Confirmed/RAC/
Waitlisted 
Auto refund 
for e-ticket. 
 
Within 3 
days 
excluding 
day of 
journey 
unforeseen 
circumstanc
Full refund no cancellation/clerkage 
charge 

Page 8 of 38 
 
es i.e. 
accident, 
breach or 
flood. 
10.  Preponement/ 
Postponement  of 
journey 
Confirmed/RAC/
Waitlisted: In 
same 
class/higher 
class/same 
destination/same 
train/any other 
train. 
Upto 48 
hours 
before the 
scheduled 
departure 
of train 
Fresh reservation fee for confirmed 
tickets and clerkage charge for 
RAC/WL tickets. 
 
If such ticket is cancelled in that 
case cancellation/clerkage  charge 
shall be levied applicable for the 
case of both transactions 1 st for 
preponement/postponement and 
subsequent for cancellation. 
 
29. The Committee wanted to know about the efforts being made by the Railways for making the 
system user friendly, tran sparent and facilitate ease of access. I n response, the Ministry have 
submitted that the following measures have been taken to streamline the process of booking tickets: 
i. A provision has been made for automatic finalization of first reservation chart at least 4 hours 
before the scheduled departure of train, if the same are not prepared by Railway staff upto that 
time. 
ii. After preparation of first reservation chart, available accommodation can be booked across all 
PRS centers as well as through internet till preparation of second reservation charts. The 
second reservation charts are prepared between 30 minutes and 5 minutes before 
scheduled/rescheduled time of departure of train. If second charts are not prepared by the 
Railways upto 5 minutes before sche dule/rescheduled time of departure, the system 
automatically finalizes the second reservation chart. The tickets already booked can also be 
cancelled during this period as per extant Refund Rules. 
iii. At the time of preparation of second reservation chart , the available vacant accommodation is 
transferred to next remote location for booking. 
iv. The timings for booking of general and tatkal accommodation have been staggered. On the 
opening day of reservation, the general accommodation becomes available for  booking from 
0800 hours onwards, whereas tatkal accommodation becomes available for booking from 1000 
hours and 1100 hours onwards for AC and non-AC classes respectively.  
v. Railway Passengers (Cancellation of Ticket and Refund of Fare) Rules were modifi ed to 
facilitate hassle -free refund to passengers and to keep a check on the misuse of reservation 
system. 
TATKAL RESERVATION SCHEME 
30. One of the most popular ticketing/booking option on the Indian Railways is the TATKAL 
scheme. On being asked about the mechanism of ticketing under TATKAL Scheme, the Ministry have 
informed that the Tatkal Reservation Scheme was initially formulated and in troduced in December, 
1997with a view to provide reservation to those passengers who have to undertake journey at short 
notice and to reduce the dependence of such passengers on  unscrupulous elements/touts. 

Page 9 of 38 
 
31. Further, the Ministry have submitted that in itially this scheme was available only in around 110 
trains and mainly in Sleeper Class. This scheme was thoroughly revised in August , 2004 and some 
modifications have been made thereafter from time to time.   Tatkal scheme is now available in 
identified passenger trains, almost all types of Mail/Express trains, certain identified special trains, etc.   
This facility is , however, not available in Suvidha trains.   Zonal Railways have been authorised to 
introduce Tatkal scheme in the passenger trains in that tr ain/class in which average utilisation during 
the previous financial year has been more than 60%. The minimum Tatkal charges prescribed for 
different classes are applicable as flat Tatkal charges. All other conditions applicable to normal Tatkal 
scheme are applicable in case of identified passenger trains.  
32. To a specific query on th e efficacy of the Tatkal Scheme , the Ministry have informed that the 
scheme has been received well by the passengers as the occupancy of these trains was more than 
100% in 2018-19 as well as in 2019. 
33. The salient features of the Tatkal Scheme are given below:- 
TIMINGS OF BOOKING 
a. Tatkal booking for AC classes opens at  1000 hours on the previous day of journey excluding 
date of journey from the train originating station. For non -AC classes, Tatkal booking starts at 
1100 hours on the previous day of journey excluding date of journey from t he train originating 
station. 
b. The reservation under this scheme is available only upto the time of preparation of first 
reservation charts.  At the time of preparation of these charts, the vacant Tatkal accommodation 
is released to the RAC/waitlisted passe ngers and no Tatkal charges are realised from such 
passengers. 
EXTENT OF TATKAL ACCOMMODATION 
34. The Committee have been informed that powers for earmarking of Tatkal accommodation in 
different classes have been delegated to Zonal Railways who take a deci sion in this regard keeping in 
view the utilization pattern in that class during the previous financial year as well as availability of 
accommodation. The accommodation so earmarked, however, in no case exceed the maximum Tatkal 
accommodation permissible to be earmarked as per extant instructions, which at present is 30% of the 
total accommodation available in that class in the train. 
35. On being enquired about the charges under Tatkal scheme, it has been informed that Tatkal 
charges have  been fixed as a percentage of fare at the rate of 10% of basic fare for second class and 
30% of basic fare for all other classes subject to minimum and maximum as given in the table below:- 
 
Class of Travel Minimum Tatkal 
Charges  
(in Rs. ) 
Maximum Tatkal 
Charges (in Rs.) 
Minimum 
Distance for 
charge  
(in Km) 
Reserved Second Sitting (2S) 10 15 100 
Sleeper 100 200 500 
AC Chair Car 125 225  250 
AC-3 tier 300 400 500 

Page 10 of 38 
 
AC-2 tier 400 500 500 
Executive  400 500 250 
 
36. The Ministry have further informed that there are two exceptions in terms of the above 
parameter (a)  in case the total run of the train is less than the distance restriction, the end to end fare 
i.e. from originating to destination station is charged and,(b) there are  no such restriction for Tatkal 
scheme in passenger trains. 
 
37. On being asked about the safeguards being taken by the Ministry to check misuse of the Tatkal 
quota, the Committee have been informed of the various actions being taken in this regard as under:- 
a. The facility of change of name is not permitted on the bookings made under Tatkal scheme. 
b. No duplicate Tatkal tickets are issued. Duplicate Tatkal tickets are issued only in exceptional 
cases on payment of full fare including Tatkal charges. No refund will  be given for duplicate 
Tatkal tickets even if original ticket is found. 
c. The reservation under this scheme can be sought by full fare paying passengers only and no 
passenger holding concessional ticket is allowed to avail reservation under this scheme.Tatk al 
tickets are issued subject to the applicable distance restrictions.  
d. All authorised ticketing agents of Indian Railways/IRCTC have been restricted from the booking 
Tatkal tickets at the counters between 1000 hours and 1015 hours for tickets in AC classe s and 
between 1100 hours and 1115 hours for non-AC classes.  
e. It is possible to book a maximum of only four passengers per PNR for Tatkal tickets. 
f. The web services agents of IRCTC have been permitted to book only one Tatkal ticket per train 
per day on the internet. 
g. Whenever an extra coach is attached in a particular train to clear day to day rush, vacant 
accommodation available in that extra coach after confirming all waitlist passengers of general 
class, should be allotted to Tatkal waitlist passengers of that class. 
h. All unutilised reservation quotas released at the time of preparation of first reservation charts 
would first update general waiting list and thereafter remaining accommodation, if any, should 
update Tatkal waiting list. 
i. Random security question has been implemented for tatkal ticket booking. 
j. Checks applied on minimum time required to enter the passenger details and displayed 
CAPTCHA at the time of e-ticket booking by users.  
k. In case of tickets booked under Tatkal scheme, during the journey, one of the passengers 
booked on that ticket is required to produce any one of the prescribed proofs of identity 
mentioned below, failing which all the passengers booked on that ticket are considered as 
travelling without ticket and charged accordingly: - 
i. Voter Photo Identity Card issued by Election Commission of India. 
ii. Passport 
iii. PAN Card issued by Income Tax Department 

Page 11 of 38 
 
iv. Driving Licence issued by RTO 
v. Photo Identity Card having serial number issued by Central /State Government 
vi. Student Identity Card with photograph issued by recognized School/ College for their 
Students 
vii. Nationalised Bank Passbook with photograph and  
viii. Credit Cards issued by Banks with laminated photograph. 
ix. Unique identification Card “Aadhar” including e-Aadhar & m-Aadhar. 
x. Photo identity cards having serial number issued by Public Sector Undertakings of 
State/Central Government, District Administrations, Municipal bodies and Panchayat 
Administrations & Bar Councils of India. 
38. It has been clarified by the Ministry that if a passenger shows the Aadhaa r/Driving Licence from 
the ‘Issued Documents’ section by logging into his/her DigiLocker account, the same is also considered 
as valid proof of identity. 
REFUND UNDER THE TATKAL SCHEME  
39. Regarding the refund rules for cance llation of Tatkal quota ticket s, the Ministry have stated that 
refunds are processed as mentioned in Railway Passengers (Cancellation of Ticket and Refund of 
Fare) Rules, 2015. Keeping in view the short Advance Reservation Period and with a view to make this 
scheme economically unviable for unscrupulous elements/touts, refund rules of the scheme have been 
purposefully kept stringent in which no refund is granted on the confirmed Tatkal ti ckets.  Refund of 
waiting list T atkal tickets are , however, granted like general waitlisted tickets.   It has however been 
clarified that full refund of fare and Tatkal charges is granted on the tickets booked under Tatkal 
scheme under certain circumstances like non -attachment of coach, cancellation of train, as given  
below:- 
i. If the train is delayed by more than 3 hours at the journey originating point of the passenger & 
not the boarding point if the passenger's journey originating point and boarding point are 
different. 
ii. If the train is to run on a diverted route and passenger is not willing to travel. 
iii. If the train is to run on diverted route and boarding station or the destination or both the 
stations are not on the diverted route. 
iv. In case of non-attachment of coach in which Tatkal accommodation has been earmarked and 
the passenger has not been provided accommodation in the same class. 
v. If the party has been accommodated in lower class and does not want to travel. In case the 
party travels in lower class, the passenger will be given refund of difference of fare and also 
the difference of Tatkal charges, if any. 
VIKALP 
40. Taking cognizance of the long waiting lists on trains particularly on popular routes and the 
consequent cancellations and shifting to other modes of transport, the Committee wanted to know 
about the steps being taken by the Railways to ameliorate the situa tion. In response, the Ministry have 

Page 12 of 38 
 
submitted that with a view to provide confirmed accommodation to waitlisted passengers and also to 
ensure optimal utilization of available accommodation, the Alternate Train Accommodation Scheme 
known as ‘VIKALP’ was in itially launched on pilot basis only for the tickets booked through internet on 
two sectors i.e. Delhi –Jammu and Delhi -Lucknow sectors. The scheme has now been implemented 
only across all categories of trains. The scheme is applicable to all waiting list p assengers irrespective 
of booking quota and concession. During the financial year 2019 -20, approximately 52,259 passengers 
were benefitted with this scheme.   This scheme is particularly convenient during the festival season 
or school holiday season when ge tting a confirmed seat becomes difficult if not impossible and often 
passengers are forced to shift to other modes of travel. 
41. The details of the scheme are as under:- 
• Under this scheme, waiting list passengers can give choice to opt for ATAS scheme. The 
passengers have the option for getting shifted to a train whose time of departure is upto 72 
hours from the date and time for which the original ticket has been booked. The passengers 
who have not opted for VIKALP at the time of booking can also opt fo r VIKALP upto 24 hours 
before scheduled departure of train. 
• Neither any extra charges are taken from passenger nor any refund is provided for difference 
of fare. 
• ATAS opted passengers who remain fully Waitlisted at the time of preparation of first 
reservation chart, are considered for allotment in the alternate train. 
• Either all passengers of a PNR or none is transferred to alternate train in same class. The 
passenger can be considered for shifting to a train leaving from any station amongst the 
cluster of stations defined by Railways based on the convenience of the passengers to a 
station serving the destination station on the same analogy. 
• Waitlisted passengers of original train are not allowed to board the original train if allotted 
alternate accommodation. 
• Passengers once provided alternate accommodation in alternate train is treated as normal 
passengers in alternate train and is eligible for upgradation. 
• When an ATAS opted passenger opts to cancel, after he/she has been given an alternate 
accommodation, he/she is treated as a CONFIRMED passenger and the cancellation rules will 
apply accordingly. 
• No refund for difference of fare between the original train and the alternate train, including 
Tatkal charges, if any, is given to re-allocated passengers. 

Page 13 of 38 
 
• Once an ATAS passenger has been allotted alternate accommodation, journey modification is 
not permitted. 
• When a passenger who has been allotted alternate accommodation has not performed his 
journey in the alternate train, he can claim for refunds by filing a TDR request. 
DYNAMIC PRICING / FLEXI-FARE  
42. Dynamic pricing had been introduced by the Indian Railways in some of the selected trains 
which are high in demand with effect from 01.10.2014 .  Under this scheme , 50% of the existing 
accommodation under Tatkal Quota has been earmarked as Premium Tatkal Quota and is being 
booked on dynamic pricing. It is a distance -slab based fare scheme where the fare increases by 20% 
after each slab of 10% berths subject to maximu m three times of Tatkal fare. Other applicable 
supplementary charges like reservation charge, superfast charge, Goods and Service Tax if applicable 
etc., are also levied separately.  In this regard, the Ministry have clarified that the berths/seats left over 
from the Premium Tatkal quota are allotted first to the waitlisted passengers under the tatkal quota and 
thereafter to the passengers waitlisted under general quota. 
43. The detailed data of premium tatkal quota since its introduction w.e.f. 01.10.2014 have been 
furnished by the Ministry as under:- 
Financial year Total number of 
trains 
Average  
Occupancy 
Dynamic earnings  
(in Rs. Crore) 
2014-15 
(w.e.f. 
01.10.2014) 
337 60.84% 123.51 
2015-16 383 63.16% 361.52 
2016-17 558 60.01% 383.53 
2017-18 904 66.57% 500.55 
2018-19 1153 67.04% 602.54 
2019-20 1212 66.50% 598.00 
 
44. In addition to the dynamic fare scheme, the Railways also have introduced the flexi Fare 
scheme. It had been introduced in Rajdhani, Shatabdi &  Duronto trains w.e.f. 09.09.2016. Under this  
fare scheme, the fare increases by 10% with every 10% of berths sold subject to maximum limit of 1.4 
times in all. The Ministry have , however, clarified that no change has been made in the fare of 1st AC 
and Executive Class. Other supplementary  charges like reservation charges, superfast charge, 
Catering charges, Goods and service tax etc., as applicable is levied separately. 
45. To a query on experience of the Railways in the implementation o f the dynamic pricing 
mechanism, the Committee have been informed that based on the feedback from different quarters, the 
Ministry have now  rationalized the Flexi Fare scheme in Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Duronto trains  as 
under:- 
(i) Discontinuation of Flexi fare scheme from 15 trains till further review and from 32 trains during 
pre defined lean period of 3 months (February, March & August). 

Page 14 of 38 
 
(ii) Maximum cap of flexi fare scheme has been reduced to 1.4 times in all flexi fare applicable 
classes. (Before 15.03.2019 maximum limit was 1.5 times in 2nd AC, AC cha ir car, Second and 
sleeper classes) 
(iii) Graded discount has been introduced in flexi fare trains, where class -wise occupancy is less 
than 60%, 4 days prior to scheduled departure of the train as under:- 
Occupancy Discount 
Up to 70% 20% on last fare 
70 to 80% 10% on last fare 
Above 80% Nil 
 
46. In response to a query on the impact of dynamic pricing on the patronage and earnings of 
Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi/Suvidha and other trains before and after introduction of flexi -fares 
/Dynamic pricing/ variable pricing, the Ministry have informed that the number of passengers booked in 
the trains having flexi fare has registered an increase of 0.95% for the period September 2016 to 
August 2018 (Two  full  year  Flexi  Fare  period before rationalization of the scheme) as compared to 
corresponding period of previous years (Two full year non Flexi Fare period). Further, it has been 
stated that   overall occupancy of Rajdhani, S hatabdi and Duronto trains has registered a continuous 
increase since the inception of Flexi Fare. The details are as given under: 
Financial Year % Age Occupancy of Flexi Fare Trains 
2016-17 (Sept to March)             81.36 
2017-18             83.56 
2018-19             86.53 
 
 The Ministry have also informed that the total additional revenue generated due to 
implementation of Flexi fare scheme upto March, 2020 is approximately Rs.3000 crore. 
SPECIAL TRAINS ON VARIABLE FARE:  
47. In addition to Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Duronto trains, certain other trains called Suvidha trains 
have introduced variable fares. In this regard, t he Ministry have apprised the Committee that Suvidha 
trains with variable fares run over and above the normal time -tabled trains to meet surge in demand 
during peak seasons, holiday seasons and festivals.  The Ministry have elaborated  that under this 
scheme minimum fare of Suvidha trains is equal to Tatkal fare applicable for the class of 
accommodation for initial 20% of the ber ths and thereafter the fare increases for subsequent slabs of 
20% of seats/berths booked subject to maximum three times of the Tatkal fare. However, unreserved 
class of Suvidha trains is charged at par with the second class superfast Mail/Express fares.  
48. When queried about the impact of dynamic/flexi fares  on the finances and occupancy in the 
Indian Railways given the fact that the passenger segment of the Indian Railways is not  yielding 
adequate revenue and are facing stiff competition f rom low cost airlines, the Ministry, in a reply, have 
submitted that there is no fixed maximum limit of fare in Airlines whereas Railways have fixed maximum 
fare throughout the year. Moreover, Airline fare varied significantly depending on time of operation, 
stoppages, travel duration, Origin – Destination pair, carrier etc. In contrast, Railways’ fare may or may 

Page 15 of 38 
 
not be higher than the air fare depending upon the class of travel as well as factors like peak/ lean 
periods.  
49. The Ministry have elaborated  that the avera ge occupancy of all reserved accommodation 
including routes of flexi fare trains during 2015 -2016 (Non-flexi period) was 101.15% which has gone 
up to 108.70% in 2019-20 (Flexi period).  
50. The Ministry have also  informed that in order to reconcile their s ocial service obligations  with 
their commercial interests and based on the feedback from different quarters, Indian Railways have, 
with effect from 15.11.2018 for journey commencing from 15.03.2019, rationalized Flexi Fare scheme in 
Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Duronto trains as under:- 
(i).    Discontinuation of Flexi fare scheme from 15 trains till further review and from 32 trains during 
pre-defined lean period of 3 months (February, March & August). 
(ii).    Maximum cap of flexi fare scheme has been reduced to 1.4 times in all flexi fare applicable 
classes. (Before 15.03.2019 maximum limit was 1.5 times in 2nd AC, AC chair car, Second and 
sleeper classes) 
(iii).  Graded discount has been introduced in flexi fare trains, where class -wise occupancy is less 
than 60%, 4 days prior to scheduled departure of the train as under:- 
Occupancy Discount 
Up to 70% 20% on last fare 
70 to 80% 10% on last fare 
Above 80% Nil 
 
51. To a specific query on the pricing of tickets of Humsafar trains,  the Committee have been 
informed that Humsafar trains run on fixed fare, which is 1.15 times of classwise Mail/Express fare. 
QUOTAS IN TRAINS  
52. The Committee have been informed that ticketing on the Indian Railways  involve different types 
of quotas in t rains: The reserved accommodation available in a train is distributed under different 
reservation quotas as under:- 
i. General  
ii. Tatkal & Premium Tatkal 
iii. Emergency 
iv. Defence 
v. Foreign Tourist 
vi. Ladies  
vii. Senior Citizens 
viii. Quota for persons with disability 
ix. Parliament House  
x. State Government 
xi. RAC 
xii. Pooled Quota 
xiii. CRPF 

Page 16 of 38 
 
xiv. Cancer 
xv. Duty Pass 
xvi. Outstation 
xvii. Railway Employee & duty 
xviii. Yuva 
xix. Value Added Tour Package Quota 
CONCESSIONS ON INDIAN RAILWAYS  
53. In this regard, the Ministry have submitted that the Indian Railways have a unique position in the 
country. While it serves as a commercial enterprise it also has a huge social service obligation ranging 
from running of trains on all rout es to granting a wid e range of concessions. As a welfare measure, 
Railway extends concession in passenger fare to more than 50 categories of passengers. There are 
certain categories of Divyang passengers, 11 types of patients, senior citizens, Press correspondents, 
war widows, sport persons etc. The element of concession varies from 10% to 100%. They have further 
stated that no concession is admissible in newly introduced trains like Humsafar, Vande Bharat, 
Suvidha, Gatimaan etc. 
54. When asked to furnish the class -wise figur es (in numbers and percentage) of concessions 
availed by passengers during the last three  years, the Ministry, in a written reply have submitted that 
class-wise details of passengers availing concessions is not maintained separately. They have , 
however, provided the data of total no. of passengers who availed concessions in passenger fares for 
the important categories as under:- 
 
Financial Year Number of Passengers who availed concession 
 (In millions) 
2016-17 257.07 
2017-18 292.63 
2018-19 296.65 
 
55. The Ministry have furnished a  detailed list of concessions and their coverage (ANNEXURE-I).  
The Ministry have, however, informed that w.e.f. 20.03.2020 due to Covid-19, Railways have withdrawn 
concessions in passenger fare to all categories of passengers except 4 categories of Divyangjans, 11 
categories of patients and students till further advice. 
56. To a query on the quantum of revenue forgone in the passenger earnings segment  as a result 
of concessions during the last 3 years, the Ministry has provided the following information: 
Years Revenue Foregone due to 
concession in passenger 
fare (Approx. Rs. in crore) 
*Passenger Earnings 
2016-17 1670 46280.46 
2017-18 1810 48643.14 
2018-19 1995 51066.65 
 

Page 17 of 38 
 
SENIOR CITIZEN CONCESSIONS 
57. On the Indian Railways, male citizens of minimum 60 years and female citizens of minimum 58 
years are granted concession s in the fares of all classes of Mail/Express/Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Jan -
Shatabdi/Duronto group of trains. The element of concession is 40% for men and 50% for women.   In 
July 2017, Indian Railways  had introduced a ‘Giv e Up scheme’ for Senior Citizen  passengers under 
which Senior Citizens could opt to give up 50 per cent or 100 per cent element of concession amount of 
reserved tickets.  The Committee wanted to have the data on the number of senior citizens who have 
exercised this option of giving up  their concession in part or in full since the scheme was launched. In 
reply, the Ministry have informed that approximately 76.87 lakhs  senior citizen passengers had given 
up their concession during 22.07.2017 to 31.03.2020 and the amount of concession value given up was 
approximately Rs. 126.88 crore.   When asked  whether the travelling public w as aware of such a 
scheme, Ministry have stated that this information has been printed on the reservation form for easy 
facilitation.  Regarding the issue of giving wider publicity and raise passenger awareness for this 
scheme, the Committee have been info rmed that during booking of e -tickets senior citizens are asked 
to opt one of the three options i.e. Give up 100%, Give up 50%, No Give up. Information on this count is 
also available in the general information available on the website of IRCTC. 
PRIVILEGE PASS/ PRIVILEGE TICKET ORDERS 
58. Regarding the details of privilege passes, the Ministry have submitted as under:  
 “As defined under Rule 2(f) of extant Railway Servants (Pass) Rules -1986 (ie . RSPR -1986), 
"Pass" means an authority given by the Ministry of Railways or any Railway Administrations to a 
person authorizing him to travel by rail gratuitously and "Privilege Pass" is accordingly a travel 
authority. As defined under Rule 2(g) of RSPR -1986, "Privilege Ticket Order" (PTO) is an 
authority issued in favour of a Railway Servant which may be exchanged for a passenger rail 
ticket on payment of one third of the normal fare.” 
 
59. The Committee wanted to know the circumstances under which these passes/tickets are issued. 
The Ministry, in a written reply, have stated that, 
"In accordance with the provisions of RSPR-1986, only the persons engaged in Railway Service 
are issued Privilege Passes/PTOs and as long as they continue in such service. The C lass of 
Pass/PTO and its number commensurate with the Status (ie. Gazetted/Non -gazetted) and Pay 
Level in the Pay Matrix (PLPM) held by the individual Railway Servant. A Privilege Pass or PTO 
of the Class of entitlement is issued for travel from one Railway Station to another, as requested 
by the Railway Servant." 
 
60. When asked as to which  category of persons can avail this concession, the Committee were 
informed that Privilege Passes/PTOs are not "Concessions" but are service entitlement of Railway 
Servants and are granted under the statuary provisions contained in the Railway Servants (Pass) 
Rules-1986, framed by the President in exercise of powers conferred on him by the proviso to Article 
309 of the Constitution of India, as amended from time to time. Whereas "Concessions" are granted by 
the Ministry of Railway s to various categories of travelling public viz., Senior Citizen, Persons with 
Disability, etc as a social obligation. However, it is stated that all categories of Railway Servants (ie. 
Gazetted and non -Gazetted), Officers and Staff of Audit Department serving in Railway Audit 

Page 18 of 38 
 
Departments and officials of other Departments serving  in Indian Railways on deputation are provided 
Privilege Passes/PTOs, as per entitlement stipulated in RSPR-1986. 
 
61. Regarding the frequency of Privilege Pass/PTO entitlement, the Ministry have informed that as 
per extant RSPR -1986, the following number of Privilege Passes/PTOs are admissible in a calendar 
year:- 
Privilege Passes: 
(a) Gazetted cadre:  6 sets 
(b) Non-gazetted cadre: 1 set or 3 sets(i.e. 1 set upto the end of 5thyear of railway  service 
and 3 sets thereafter). 
Privileged Ticket Orders: 
Gazetted & Non-gazetted cadre: 4 sets (Set means a Pass/PTO for outward and  return 
journey). 
62. The Ministry have also clarified that the entitled number of Privilege Passes/PTOs is left to the 
discretion of the Railway Servants as Privilege Passes/PTOs are issued only on receipt of a request for 
the same. The Committee also enquired whether Pass/PTO details are ente red in the PRS.   In this 
regard, the Ministry have stated that when reservation is made against Privilege Passes/PTOs, details 
of journeys intended to be performed get entered in the PRS. 
63. Regarding the number of passengers who have availed this concess ion during the last 3 years 
and in which classes , the Ministry have stated that Privilege Passes/PTOs being not a "Concession" 
and a statutory service privilege of all the Railway Servants and issued in accordance with RSPR-1986, 
no separate data regarding  the number of Privilege Passes/PTOs issued and the numbers of persons 
travelled on them are maintained. Regarding the  revenue that  the Railways have forgone as a result 
of  concession granted under this category during the last three years, the Ministry  have stated that 
travel on Privilege Passes/PTOs also does not necessarily result in any revenue forgone or giving up of 
revenue. In case of travel by pass holders, when occupancy in the trains is less than 100%, there is 
"zero revenue foregone" as the vacant berths/seats cannot generate any revenue. Apparently where no 
revenue can be generated, no revenue can be foregone. 
 
64. Regarding the mechanism in place for prevention of misuse of this concession , the Committee 
have been informed that the Railway Servants (Pass ) Rules, 1986 provide for imposing stringent 
punishments including dismissal/removal from Railway Service and serves as a deterrent against any 
kind of misuse of Privilege Passes/PTOs. The Pass/PTO holder is also treated at par with other 
passengers and subjected to all existing checks by Ticket Checking Staff, Vigilance Squad, etc. 
 
DIVYANGJANS 
65. The Committee wanted to know t he methodology followed by the Railways to determine the 
quantum of concessions that can be availed under the Divyangjan category.   The Ministry have 
informed that as a welfare measure and to  facilitate Divyang passengers to book concessional tickets 

Page 19 of 38 
 
across reservation counters and online through IRCTC as well as to reduce the scope of its misuse, 
Indian Railways issue Unique number ed photo identity card to eligible Divyangjans.   Further, to a 
specific query on the facilities that are accorded to the Divyangjans in the PRS , the Ministry have 
informed that they are being provided the following reservation related facilities:- 
i. Concessional online ticket booking facility has been extended to the Divyangjans on the basis of 
photo identity cards issued by the Zonal Railways. 
ii. A reservation quota of four berths in sleeper class and two berths in 3AC has been earmarked 
in all trains ru nning on non -suburban sections for Divyangjans performing their journey on 
handicapped concessional ticket. The person accompanying the Divyangjans as escort is also 
allotted the berth out of this quota. 
iii. Instructions have also been issued that in the tickets issued through Computerized Passenger 
Reservation System, to extent feasible, one lower berth should be allotted to the Divyangjans 
and the person accompanying him/her as escort should be allotted middle/upper berths near the 
Divyangjans subject to availability of accommodation. 
iv. After departure of the train, if there are vacant lower berths available in the train, and if any 
Divyangjan booked on the authority of handicapped concessional ticket, who has been allotted 
upper/middle berth, approaches for allotment of vacant lower berths, the Conductor/Train Ticket 
Examiner (TTE) has been authorized to allot the vacant lower berth to them making necessary 
entries in the chart. 
v. Specially designed coaches known as SLRD coaches with wider entrance doors to allow a 
wheel chair to enter, wider aisles and modified toilet with 4 berths, the lower two for Divyangjans 
and upper berths for attendants have been attached in almost all Mail/ Express trains except 
Rajdhani, Shatabdi, Jan Shatabdi Express Trains and Duronto Express Trains.   
vi. Instructions have been issued that in all Mail/Express Trains, the SLRD coaches should be 
treated as unreserved coaches earmarked for exclusive use of D ivyangjans.  In case of Garib 
Rath Express Trains which are fully reserved trains, these coaches are treated as reserved for 
booking by Divyangjans travelling on handicapped concession on payment of full fare of 3 AC 
class of Garib Rath Express on first come first serve basis. 
vii. Separate counters are earmarked at various Passenger Reservation System(PRS) centers for 
dealing with the reservation requisitions received from Divyangjans, Senior Citizens, Ex. MPs, 
MLAs, accredited journalists and freedom fighters, if the average demand per shift not less than 
120 tickets.  In case , there is no justification for earmarking of an exclusive counter for any of 
these categories of persons including Divyangjans, one or two counters depending upon the 
total demand are earmarked for dealing with the reservation requests for all these categories of 
persons. 
CONCESSIONS GIVEN TO FREEDOM FIGHTERS 
66. The Ministry have stated that the Indian Railways also provide concessions to freedom fighters 
and their widows.   In this regard, t hey issue  Complimentary Card Passes on lifetime basis free rail 

Page 20 of 38 
 
travel in First Class and 2AC along with one companion in the same class by any train all over India 
except Metro Railway, Kolkata.  
67. To a query on the number of passenge rs and companions that availed the freedom  fighter 
concessions since 2016 , the Ministry have stated that a total of 10435  Complimentary Card Passes  
(CCPs) were issued/renewed in favo ur of Freedom Fighters/their companions by Indian Railways 
during 2016, 2017 and 2018. 
68. When asked about  the number of instances companio n concession code was utilized where 
companions were unaccompanied by the Freedom fighter, the Ministry have stated that under the 
current procedure it was not feasible to book ticket alone by companion if unaccompanied by Freedom 
Fighter. In certain cases, the original PNR on which both freedom fighter and companion were booked 
was released and freedom fighter was booked  on a new PNR. The details of concession availed by 
freedom fighters and their companions and number of passengers less than 72 years using Freedom 
fighter concession are enclosed as Annexure-II. The details of Link -PNR booked against released 
accommodation is enclosed as Annexure-III. The Ministry further informed that debits for the journeys 
performed by freedom fighters and their companions are raised against Ministry of Home Affairs. 
69. On the question of the quantum of revenue  foregone as concessions under freedom fighter and 
companion category during the last 3 years, the Committee were informed that the entire cost of the 
Complimentary Card Passes (CCPs) given to Freedom Fighters/their companions is reimbursed by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. The to tal amount reimbursed by MHA during 2016 to 2018 for 10,435 CCPs 
issued/renewed by IR is Rs.33,68,21,743. Therefore , as per the Ministry , no revenue has been 
foregone by them on this count. 
70. When asked about  the age profile of passengers availing the freedom fighter concession s 
keeping in view the fact  that it has already been 73 years  since India has gained independence  
including the number of passengers using the freedom fighter concessions who are less than 73 years 
old, t he Ministry have provided the details as appended a t Annexure-IV. The details of Link -PNR 
booked for this category of freedom fighters against released accommodation, have also been apprised 
as Annexure-V.  
CONCESSIONS GIVEN TO CHILDREN 
71. The Committee wanted to know about the guidelines relating to reservation of seats and 
concessions for children. In reply , the Ministry ha ve informed that Child fare is not the part of 
concession.  They have elaborated that children below 5 years of age travel free without reserved 
berths/seats. However, the Ministry have clarified that if berths/seats are sought for children , the same 
are provided on full Adult fare but if berth is not sought for such children, half of the adult fare is 
charged. 
72. When asked whether the Railways have undertaken any review of this category of concessions 
and the details of last review undertaken, the Ministry have informed that based on the feedback from 
different quarters, review of concession policy is a continuous and  ongoing process. They have also 
outlined the following actions taken to rationalize concession policy during the last six years:- 

Page 21 of 38 
 
i. Changes have been made during 2014 -15 for concession in only basic fare of Rajdhani, 
Shatabdi & Duronto trains instead of in total fares. 
ii. On demand of full berth/seat for the children of 5 years and above and below 12 years, adult 
fare is charged. In case of no berth option half of the adult fare is charged. No major changes 
have been made in the unreserved sector. This has been implemented during 2015. 
iii. Concession to foreign national/NRI senior citizens has been withdrawn in 2016. 
iv. No concession is granted in the new category of services like Gatimaan, Humsafar, Antyodaya, 
Suvidha trains, Special trains on Special charges, Vande Bharat etc., 
v. No new concessions have been announced since last 6 years. 
vi. In addition to 100% give up option of concessional amount, provision has also been made to 
give up 50% of the concession amount for senior citizens. 
vii. Further, letters have already been sent to Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (For 
senior citizen & Divyangjan), Ministry of Health & Family welfare (Patients, Doctors nurses etc.) 
& Ministry of youth and sports (Sports & Youth) for reimbursement o f revenue foregone due to 
concession being given to above mentioned categories of passengers. 
 
PROLIFERATION OF THE PRS 
Indian Railways Catering and Tourist Corporation (IRCTC) 
73. As per the Ministry of Railways, a round 72 percent of reserved tickets are booked online 
through IRCTC website and the Mobile App. When asked about  the number/percentage of tickets 
booked through the IRCTC website and through the Mobile App , the Ministry have provided the 
information as under: 
“The percentage share of e-ticket booking during FY 2019-20 is as under: 
 
Mobile App    : 1415 Lakh tickets/47% 
Website    : 770 Lakh tickets/26% 
Agents    : 741 Lakh tickets/24% 
G2G (Defence & CPF)  : 93 Lakh tickets/3%” 
 
74. The Ministry have, however, clarified that the following functions of website are not available in 
the Mobile App at the moment but are in the process of implementation. 
i. Tax invoice generation facility  
ii. Option of seat available in Alternate trains before booking.   
iii. Foreign Tourist (International) user registration facility.  
iv. Booking facility in FT (Foreign Tourist) quota for foreign users.   
75. The Committee were further informed that the reserved tickets booked online through Indian 
Railway Catering and Tourism  Corporation (IRCTC) can be cancelled partially online. However, at 
present, the facility of modification of tickets is not available online and this facility could be availed 
across computerized PRS counters only. 

Page 22 of 38 
 
76. Since the Indian Railways’ ticketing inherently includes ticketing by agents , the Committee 
wanted to know the role of authorised agents for issuing tickets.  In this regard, t he Ministry ha ve 
informed that IRCTC appoints  Principal Service Providers/ PSPs (Principal agents) as per its policy 
formulated for the purpose. However, PSPs do not do the retail business. Retail Business of e -ticketing 
is carried out through retail shops located in markets and are owned & managed by  Retail Service 
Providers (RSPs). The PSPs are authorised to appoint RS Ps (sub agents) as per the defined slabs. 
The RSPs are registered with Unique Mobile Number and Unique e -mail ID and are verified by their 
Aadhar No. and PAN Card No. at the time of registration. The Ministry have further informed that as a 
security measure, no two RSP IDs can be created with same Mobile Number and e mail ID.  
77. Regarding the monitoring mechanism implemented by the IRCTC to ensure that the authorized 
agents do not manipulate the system , the Ministry have stated that Principal Service Prov iders/PSPs 
(Principal agents) register their respective Retail Service Providers/RSPs (Sub agents) to spread e -
ticketing of reserved rail tickets to every corner of the country. The RSPs are registered with Unique 
Mobile Number and Unique e -mail ID and are  verified by their Aadhar No. and PAN Card No. at the 
time of registration and no two RSP IDs can be created with same Mobile Number and e mail ID.  
78. It was further informed that RSP(sub agent) booking is completely restricted for the first 15 
minutes from 08:00 to 08:15 hours for opening ARP (Advance Reservation Period) tickets, and from 
10:00   to 10:15 hours and 11:00 to 11:15 hours for opening Tatkal tickets for AC and Non AC classes 
respectively. As an additional measure, only One Tatkal ticket per day/per train is allowed to be booked 
by Retail Service Providers (agents). 
79. Regarding the charges for booking of tickets by agents, it was informed that all authorised RSPs 
are permitted to charge an Agent Service Charge of Rs.20/ - per ticket for 2nd & Sleeper Classes and 
Rs.40/- per ticket for AC Classes & First Class, irrespective of number of passengers. These charges 
are inclusive of applicable taxes. 
80. One of the gravest problems faced in the ticketing across Indian Railways is the menace of 
unauthorised agents more commonly known as touts. Touts have for very long been overcharging 
unsuspecting passengers who unknowingly or due to high demand , purchase tickets from them. In this 
regard, the Committee wanted to know the actions being taken by the  Ministry to check the menace of 
unscrupulous elements or touts in the booking of e -tickets including Tatkal tickets, the Ministry have 
informed as under. 
i. Checks have been introduced to ensure that form filling by automatic software is 
comparable to those filled by human beings. 
ii. Restrictions have been put on creation of IRCTC user id and booking of tickets per user. 
iii. Dynamic CAPTCHA has been introduced at registration, login and booking page. 
iv. Multilayer security and regular audits by Standard ization Testing and Quality Certification 
(STQC). 
v. Restriction on authorized agents of IRCTC(except Defence and Paramilitary Forces) for 
booking tickets during first fifteen minutes of opening of ARP booking and tatkal booking. 
vi. Individuals are allowed only 2 ARP tickets per user-id from 08:00 Hrs to 10:00Hrs. 

Page 23 of 38 
 
vii. Individuals are allowed only 2 ARP tickets per IP Address from 08:00 to 10:00 hours. 
viii. 120 Days Advance Reservation Period (ARP) check for general ticket. ARP booking not 
allowed before 08:00 hours. 
ix. Individual users are allowed only 2 Tatkal tickets per user-id from 10:00 Hrs to 12:00 Hrs. 
x. Individual users are allowed only 2 Tatkal tickets per IP from 10:00 to 12:00 hours. 
xi. Random Security question has been implemented to Indivi dual Users for Tatkal Ticket 
bookings. 
xii. Blocking of Foreign IP addresses at peak time has been done at network level.  
xiii. Individual users are logged out in case enquiries exceed 25 per session during opening 
hours i.e. from 08:00 to 12:00 hours. 
xiv. Only one (1) booking in one user login session except for return/onward journey between 
08:00 and 12:00 hours. To do another booking user needs to logout and login again. 
xv. Only One Tatkal ticket per day/per train is allowed to Retail Service Providers (agents). 
xvi. Individual users are allowed only 6 tickets in a month, unless authenticated through Aadhar 
in which 12 tickets can be booked in a month to prevent mass bookings by a single user.  
xvii. Only 4 passengers allowed in TATKAL ticket. 
xviii. Incoming day TATKAL booking for AC classes not allowed before 1000 hours. 
xix. Incoming day TATKAL booking for Non-AC classes not allowed before 1100 hours. 
 
81. The Committee have also been informed that as a part of its checks and balances and to 
strengthen its fight against any malafide in e -ticketing, the Indian Railway Catering and Tourism 
Corporation (IRCTC) & CRIS carry out continuous monitoring of the users of the e -ticketing application. 
Based on various investigations and data/time analysis carried out by IRCTC in coordination with CRIS 
and RPF, about 1.15 Lakh Personal User IDs in FY 2018 -19 and about 11.20 Lakh Personal User IDs 
in FY 2019 -20, have been deactivated by IRCTC. The penal action was initiated in coordination with 
CRIS, through the Railway Protection Force (RPF).  
82. In addition, the Railway Protection Force (RPF) has been undertaking intensive and continuous 
action against persons involved in touting at PRS counters (unauthorised carrying on of business of 
procuring & supply of railway tickets). The Committee were also informed as under: 
 
“Several all India drives i.e. Operation Storm (2018), Operation Thunder (2019) etc. were 
launched with outstanding resu lts. With the help of query based module PRABAL, RPF 
accessed PRS data and bas ed on analysis of data obtained clubbed with field inputs, the drive 
against touts was made focused and effective which led to arrest of 6591 touts and seizure of 
future tickets worth Rs.25.44 Crores during the period from Jan, 2019 to March, 2020. Operation 
of several illegal software for touting was detected during these drives. A planned nation -wide 
co-ordinated action was launched against the suppliers and operators  of these illegal software 
leading to arrest of 104 criminals involved and disruption of  several illegal software like I -BALL, 
RED BULL, ANMS, MAC, N -GATE, CYCLE, STAR -V2 etc. Fut ure confirmed tickets worth 
Rs.9.92 Crores booked using these software were also got cancelled. The data obtained during 
the action against illegal software was shar ed with CRIS and IRCTC and by joint efforts of all 
departments of Indian Railways, we were able to disrupt the operation of illegal software as of 
now. RPF will keep working in close co-ordination of CRIS and IRCTC to upgrade the security of 

Page 24 of 38 
 
the PRS system  in order to thwart the attempt of such software in future too. The drive has 
again been started from 20 thMay with start of limited passenger services after the lockdown and 
RPF has been able to arrest 314 touts with forfeiture of future tickets worth Rs.42.43 lakhs till 
date.” 
 
The Ministry have assured the Committee  that such drives against touts would continue  in 
future. 
 
83. Given that it is relatively easy to create multiple email accounts and procure multiple, the 
Committee wanted to know how IRCTC ensures agents/sub -agents/touts not to create multiple logins 
using such credentials, the Ministry ha ve stated that such a question of creation of multiple sub agent 
Ids by RSPs and multiple user Ids by Individual User does not arise since every Individual User/User ID 
and RSP (Agent)ID is created with Unique Mobile Number and Unique e -mail ID after due verification 
through OTP messages on mobile Number and Mail ID. As such no two user IDs can be created on 
same Mobile Number or same e -mail ID.  Further, all RSPs are verified by their Aadh aar Numbers and 
PAN Card Numbers. 
84. Cyber security is one of the most important aspects of internet usage especially when there is 
financial transaction involved. Since ticketing not only involves financial transactions but also sensitive 
/financial information is stored in passengers profiles, the Committee wanted to know about the   
measures being taken towards cybe r security of the IRCTC website . The Ministry have informed  as 
under: 
“They have implemented a multilayered security in the New Generation Ticketing (NGET) 
system, which involves provision of security infrastructure such as Firewalls, Intrusion 
Prevention System (IPS), Web  Application Firewalls, Access Control Filters & Security 
hardening, Security Zoning, Security Information and Event Management tool and Host Intrusion 
Prevention Systems. Security is also implemented in PRS at the system side including operating 
system, application software and also at application level for handling OWASP (Open W eb 
Application Security Project) threats as well as Spring security framework for authentication and 
authorization. Auth 2.0. authorization framework enabling a third -party application to  obtain 
limited access to an HTTP service, has been implemented for secure authorization in both 
Website and Mobile App.” 
 
85. With respect to protecting Passenger profile information from Bulk access/download from the 
internals DBA Users, the Ministry informed that they were taking the steps as follows: 
i. Created named u ser for Database users of CRIS & IRCTC with desired Roles and 
Privileges with defined Tables access. 
ii. Identification of Tables and Attributes for critical /user data and masking. 
iii. Capturing of Audit Logs for high privileged users, including DBAs. 
iv. Data Based Administration (DBA) User logs were send to Security Information and Event 
Management (SIEM). 
v. Disabling of critical column access to Database users  
vi. Password Function implemented. 
vii. Encrypted Database backups have been configured. 

Page 25 of 38 
 
86. The Committee were also apprised that as an additional layer of security the  IRCTC e- ticketing  
website (www.irctc.co.in), - is got periodically audited by STQC (Standardization, Testing & Quality 
Certification) Directorate, Ministry of Electronics & C ommunication Technology (MeitY), Govt. of India, 
which includes-  Web Application Security A ssessment, Vulnerability Assessment (VA) of hosts, and 
Penetration Testing (PT) of application/hosts to keep the NGeT system free of security vulnerabilities.  
On-line payment on E -ticketing system is fully secured as Credit/Debit Card data of users are neither 
captured nor stored in IRCTC system. The Ministry have assured that all user data is protected through 
end to end encryption between user and IRCTC servers us ing Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)/ Transport 
Layer Security (TLS) certificates. 
TRAVEL INSURANCE  
87. The Committee enquired about the travel insurance being offered by the IRCTC on train 
journeys and the extent of the cover. In reply, the Ministry have submitted as under: 
“The extent of Travel Insurance cover is as under: 
 
Death & Total Disability                           -      Rs. 10 Lakhs 
Partial Disability                                         -     Rs. 7.5 Lakhs 
Hospitalization Expenses   for Injury.  -     Rs. 2 Lakhs 
Transportation of Mortal    Remains.    -     Rs.10,000” 
 
88. It was elaborated that while travel insurance mechanism is not built into the PRS but it is part of 
NGeT System and is meant for travelers booking their tickets online. 
 
89. The Committee wanted to have details regarding the total amount collected  as premium in the 
last 3 years. In this regard, the Ministry have furnished information as below: 
 
Total Premium Amount Collected in Last Three Years 
Financial Year Total No. Of Passengers 
Opted Travel Insurance 
(Nos. in Cr.) 
Total Premium   (Rs.in 
Cr.) (with GST) 
2017-18* 39.33  0.00 
2018-19* 34.40  8.53 
2019-20  27.30  13.38 
Total 101.03 21.90 
 
90. It was , however, clarified that free Travel Insurance was provided to all the passengers on 
account of Government’s initiative of digital promotion w.e.f. 10.12.2016 to 31.08.2018. W.e.f. 
01.09.2018, Travel Insurance was made optional and to be paid by passenger,  Insurance premium is 
Rs.0.49/- per passenger. 
91. As part of the cyber security apparatus of the travel insurance mechanism and especially since 
Railways utilize third party for coverage of insurance, the Committee wanted to know whether, this does 
not ma ke the PRS vulnerable to cyber-attacks and the safe guards  that have been installed for 

Page 26 of 38 
 
deterring cyber-attacks/data theft in such instances , the Ministry, in a reply,  have stated that t he third 
party integration for insurance are done with the IRCTC system (NGET) and there is no integration of 
same with PRS(CONCERT) system. Therefore, PRS is not vulnerable to cyber -attacks due to third 
party insurances. The integration done with IRCTC also is one way in an outbound manner through 
APIs provided by Travel insurance companies. 
92. To a query whether IRCTC has received any claims for insurance and the details of the amount 
disbursed, so far, during the last three years specifying the time limit o f disbursement vis-à-vis claims, 
the Ministry have submitted as under: 
“IRCTC has not received any claims. Claims are being processed and paid by the Insurance 
Companies directly to the claimants. Claims paid by insurance companies to the victims or family 
members for the last three years are as follows: 
 
Period Amount (Rs in crores) 
2017-18 3.59 
2018-19 6.12 
2019-20 3.73 
 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 
 
93. Grievance redressal mechanism is the cornerstone of any service which is related to public 
dealing.  In this regard, the Committee wanted to know the mechanism that has been put into place for 
making complaints on PRS/ticket booking. In response, the Ministry have assured that Indian Railways 
has a well -established system for registering and redressing grievances. For Offline (manual) 
grievances, complaint registers a re available at stations and in trains. It was further informed that 
recently RailMadad was launched merging all Online and Offline channels of grievances into a single 
platform. RailMadad replaces erstwhile CoMS and converges Online modes of grievances li ke Web, 
APP, SMS, Phone & Social Media, and also provides option for uploading offline complaints.   They 
have further stated  that Rail-Madad has an inbuilt system for monitoring time and quality of redressal. 
All complaints coming in RailMadad  are automatically routed to the concerned field staff for faster 
redressal. The system also provides for in -depth MIS reports which enable Railway managers to 
analyze root-cause for making of system improved. Further, the customers feedback received are a lso 
monitored and analyzed for effective disposal . To a response on the number of  such complaints 
received on a daily basis , it was informed that Railways had received an average of 354 reserved 
ticketing complaints per day in FY 2019-20. 
94. The Committee also wanted to know the average time taken for redressal  of all such 
complaints. The have stated that all out efforts are being made to redress complaints on PRS ticket 
bookings and that r eserved ticketing complaints were disposed within an a verage time of 17.81 hrs in 
FY 2019-20. 
  

Page 27 of 38 
 
PART-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
1. The Committee note that the Indian railways not only provide the most economical and 
environment friendly mode of transport but also play a vital role in socio -economic 
development of the country. They cover a long way to carry about 23 million 
passengers per day with t heir 13,500 passenger trains. With this magnitude of 
passengers it becomes imperative on the part of Railways to facilitate their 
passengers with a proper system of booking tickets from any station to travel 
anywhere in the country  in their coaches. The Co mmittee find that the P assenger 
Reservation System (PRS), the main customer facing application of the Indian 
Railways, has been functional over the last three decades. Moving from the manual 
mode of PRS to Integrated Multiple Train Passenger Reservation Sy stem (IMPRESS), 
the Indian Railways have no w shifted to a new ticketing software i.e. Country Wide 
Network for Computerized Enhanced Reservation and Ticketing (CONCERT) system  
duly maintained by the Centre for Railway Information Systems (CRIS). The Committee 
are of the opinion that the  emergence of new software has not only reduced the  
processing time manifold but also gave the rail user s the opportunity to get real time 
information on all trains on their preferred route/destination as well as current position 
of waitlisted tickets etc . enabling them greater flexibility in planning their journey s 
which were not possible with the manual system of ticketing. The Committee are also 
of the opinion that with the advent of the PRS,  mal-practices in ticketing have been 
curbed to a very large extent. 
2. Though the Committee appreciate the initiative of the Railways  of launching the new 
software for booking tickets, yet they note that lakhs of passengers are left in lurch per 
day due to non -confirmation of their waitlisted tickets  due to one reason or another . 
They are forced to opt for other modes of transport like bus an d airlines etc. resulting 
into loss to railway exchequer. The Committee, therefore, recommend that given the 
current scenario of railway finances coupled with growing customer expectations and 
conveniences especially in the face of increasing competition from road and low -cost 
airlines, the Indian Railways should make all out efforts to make their ticketing system 
more robust and weed out inherent deficiencies that hinder the process of ticketing 
with the ultimate aim of passenger convenience and passenger sat isfaction. The 
Committee would also like the Railways to address the various technical, financial and 
resource constraints which hamper the working of its passenger reservation system. 
3. The Committee would like to stress that while certain deficiencies in PRS like difficult 
access, lower speed and efficiency are detrimental to its smart functioning , yet grave 
issues like possibility of  unethical practices and blatant contravening of rules by 
agents etc.  may erode the credibility of the Indian railways and dilute  their public 

Page 28 of 38 
 
image. The Committee wish to point out the Ministry that the Indian Railways , being  
the backbone of the nation-wide transport system in the country carrying  millions of 
passengers every day , any manipulation in reservation system  would not only affect  
their journey but also impact upon their lives too either directly or indirectly. To this 
end, the Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to explore more robust ticketing 
systems currently in vogue in countries having high rail density/rail users and adopt 
best practices commensurate to th at system to strengthen the Indian Railways  
passenger reservation system. They also desire the Ministry to explore the 
possibilities to  collaborate with renowned institutions /premier institute s of repute  
/organizations with a view to upgrade and refine the PRS in Indian Railways. 
4. The Committee find that currently Indian Railways have more than 4043 reservation 
centres with over 10725 terminals across the country . These include  major stations, 
non-rail heads and other locations such as tourist centres and district headquarters  
etc. They note that though the Railways have made all out efforts to proliferate the 
reservation centres all over the network, yet the Committee are not satisfied with these 
numbers keeping in view the immense length and breadth of the country . The 
Committee would like the Ministry to take proactive actions to further proliferate these 
centres across the country and explore the possibilities of mobile PRS etc. to get them 
reach to  non-rail head centres esp ecially in remote locations having  poor or no 
road/internet connectivity till a stable PRS is set up there so that passengers of these 
areas are also benefited at par with other areas of the country . The Committee would 
also like to suggest the Ministry to cover the sites of Technical hubs/ professional 
colleges (engineering, medical etc .), large industrial units, manufacturing plants etc . 
having sizable migrant population to help them to fulfil their travel needs.    
5. The Committee note that while there are several options available with the passenger s 
for booking of reserved tickets for travelling on Indian Railways such as PRS counters, 
Postal PRS counters, Yatri Ticket Suvidha Kendras, etc., yet the majority of tickets are 
booked online through the IRCTC website / app which is one of the most convenient 
modes of passenger reservation. The Committee find that the reserved tickets booked 
online through IRCTC website/app  during 2019-20 is three times greater than that of 
tickets purchased at physical locations. However, this website is usually slow and 
particularly during rush hours considerable time is consumed in booking a ticket 
through it. The Committee would like to point out that e-ticketing facility is not only 
convenient  for the passengers but also helps in decongesting railway counters and 
eliminates the menace of touts as well as the possibility of receipt of fake currency at 
counters. Therefore, the Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry the need 
of regularly strengthening and upgrading the capacity of the IRCTC website/servers so 
as to make it more robust to handle greater traffic with minimal turnaround time. They 
would also like to be apprised of the actions taken in this regard.  

Page 29 of 38 
 
6. The Committee note that currently the PRS processes over one crore transactions per 
day involving about 5 crore passengers on an average. Though the system has been 
empowered to handle a maximum of 28,000 transactions per minute  (TPM), yet the 
average transaction per minute for the year 2019-20 was about 8711. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to act proactively and take all preparedness to further 
strengthen the capacity of server/website to yield desired results so that no  hardship 
is faced by the users on this count.   
7. The Ministry have informed that  PRS can be used for booking , modification and 
cancellation of tickets in various categories of trains. They note that rail tickets can be 
booked 120 days prior to  the date of scheduled journey known as the Advanced 
Reserved Period for almost all long -distance mail express trains /Shatabdi express 
trains except some short distance/inter -city trains. The accommodation through the 
PRS is allotted on first come first serve basis and  thereafter reservation against 
cancellation (RAC) and waitlisted tickets are issued. The status of RAC tickets gets 
updated automatically against cancellation  of confirmed tickets. The Committee also 
find that tickets can be booked online as well as through  computerised PRS counters 
till the preparation of second reservation charts which are prepared between 30 
minutes and 5 minutes before the scheduled time of departure of the train. The 
Committee, h owever, find no logic in book ing of tickets between the time of 30-5 
minutes before the departure of the train when there are thousands of RAC/waitlisted 
tickets already booked and waiting for confirmation. In their opinion, there is no scope 
of getting th ese tickets confirmed . The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion  that 
since Tatkal facilities are available for passengers wishing to travel at a short notice, 
all seats of the train found vacant after preparation of the first reservation chart which 
are prepared 4 -5 hours before the departure time should au tomatically be allotted to 
RAC/Waitlisted passengers to facilitate them to travel as per their plan . The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the need for  preparation of second reservation 
charts should reviewed with a view to  facilitate the needy passengers and  also to 
refrain the touts from being involved in  the probable  mal-practice during the  last 
minute rush.  
8. The Committee note that, as at present, in case  a vacancy arises on account of 
passenger no -show, the same is  allotted by on -board ticket checking staff to RAC 
passenger. The Committee are happy to find that the railways have facilitated the Train 
Ticket Examinees with the hand held terminals for ease of booking available seats and 
to ensure automation so as to  bring more transparency in their functioning. 
Sometimes, these staff do not co -operate with the passengers in addressing their 
queries. Since the y have overall control over it and also it is not feasible for them  to 
interact/respond each and every passenger ’s queries  the Committee would like the 
Ministry to  put in place some mechanism in the respective coaches so that 

Page 30 of 38 
 
passengers could approach straight and witness  the current status of seat/berth  
confirmation.  They would also like to update information on real time basis for greater 
transparency in the allocation of vacant seats/berths onboard trains.  
 
9. The Committee note that Tatkal Scheme was introduced to provide reservation to 
those passengers who have  to undertake journey at short notice . T atkal ticket  is 
booked on payment of premium charges on 'first come -first-served' basis. Currently, 
this is booked from 1000 hrs. on the previous day of the journey for AC Classes and at 
1100 hrs . for non -AC Classes at Passenger Reservation System (PRS) and Indian 
Railways Catering and Tourism Co rporation (IRCTC) website . The Committee further 
note that Tatkal charges are levied at the rate of 10% of basic fare for second class and 
30% of basic fare for all other clas ses subject to minimum and maximum charges. For 
example, for a minimum distance of 100 kms a second sitting reserved class ticket will 
accrue a minimum Tatkal charge of Rs .10 and a maximum of Rs .15 over and above 
base fare . Similarly, in the Executive class for a minimum distance of 250 kms , the 
Tatkal charges will range between Rs. 400 and Rs .500. The Committee while 
appreciating the scheme which is particular ly aimed at meeting the urgent/ emergent 
travel requirement of passengers , are apprehensive over the possible involvement of 
touts whose unscrupulous activities may inhibit bonafide passengers to avail the 
benefits of this scheme. The Committee are of the opinion that Railways should be 
ever vigilant to threats posed by these elements in both the physical and cyber sphere. 
They, therefore,  recommend the Ministry to put in place a stringent monitoring 
mechanism to curb the misuse of the scheme and refrain the unscrupulous 
elements/touts from being involved. 
10. The Committee are of the considered view that the Indian Railways as a part of social 
service obligation, provide the cheaper mode of transport to a huge magnitude of 
passengers per day. However, t he Tatkal scheme provides much needed relief to the 
people having urgent need to travel by paying premium charges. In the opinion of the 
Committee, the charges levied on the  tatkal tickets a little unjustifiable and putting a 
huge burden particularly on those passengers who are financially weak and are forced 
to travel in urgency to meet their kith and kin or so  for a very short distance also.  The 
Committee desire the Ministry to devise a measures for a pro rata fare for the distance 
travelled. The Committee note that most of the tatkal tickets are booked online.  The 
passengers opting to book tickets at PRS counters physically are facing problems and 
the accommodation availability exhausted when their turn comes after a long queue. 
They would like to suggest the Ministry to provide a fix quota for Tatkal reservations at 
PRS counters so that th e passengers having no internet access  and visiting PRS 
counters for the needful could book a ticket . Such a step would let them avail the 
benefits of Tatkal ticket reservation in a more impartial and just manner. 

Page 31 of 38 
 
11. The Committee are glad to note that the Indian Railways have  launched the VIKALP 
scheme or alternate train accommodation system to help wait listed passengers to get 
a vacant berth in another train running on the same route whose time of departure is 
upto 72 hours from the date of journey of the original ticket. The Committee also note 
that the Vikalp option which  has primarily been brought forward to assure a seat on 
the route selected by the passengers , has been well received by the passengers 
having not only an option of not only getting a reserved seat/berth but also  of 
securing a higher accommodation in one of the elite trains . The Committee are happy 
to note with satisfaction that the Railways which were earlier plagued by huge waiting-
lists, have found a panacea to this chronic problem. The Committee would , however, 
like to recommend the Ministry to  continue this scheme  and find out the rationale 
behind  heavy patronage  and utmost importance given to that popular train for travel 
by the passengers and on the other hand lesser attention given to trains having vacant 
seats/berths for accommodating VIKALP opting passengers.  In their opinion, the  
arrival/departure timings, punctuality, travel time, station of origin /destination, halts, 
facilities/amenities etc . may be the factors for popularity of the trains resulting in  
waitlisted passengers. The Committee feel that  if corrective actions are taken to 
provide similar conditions to Vikalp trains running on the same route, it would not only 
increase ridership but also reduce the waiting lists on popular trains enabling a larger 
number of people to travel. 
12. The Ministry have informed  that the Flexi fare scheme has  been introduced in 
Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Duronto trains in 2016. Under this  scheme, the fare  is 
increased by 10% with every 10% of berths sold subject to a maximum limit of 1.5 
times in second AC classes, sleeper, second sitting reserved, AC chair car and 1.4 
times in AC third class. The Committee note that while no change has  been made in 
the fare of AC first and executive classes  but based on the feedback received on the 
scheme, the railways have now rationalised the scheme. The Flexi fare scheme has 
now been discontinued from 15 trains till further review and fr om 32 trains during a 
pre-defined lean period of three months (February, March and August). Moreover the 
maximum gap of Flexi fares has been reduced from 1.5 times to 1.4 times in all Flexi 
fare applicable classes. In addition  to these measures,  the Railways are now offering 
meaningful discounts where class -wise occupancy is less than 60% four days prior to 
the scheduled departure of trains. Th ough the Committee are happy to note that the 
Indian Railways are now rationalising Flexi fares  yet they are const rained to note that  
flexi/dynamic pricing appears to be somewhat discriminatory given the facts that fares 
of the Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Durontos are already higher as compared to other mail 
and express trains and are almost at par and at some instances higher than those of 
budget airlines. The Committee are of the view that w ith an enhanced fare structure in 
place, passengers with modest income or the financially disadvantaged rail users may 

Page 32 of 38 
 
not be able to afford these fares and may not opt for t hese trains. The Committee , 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should, in greater public interest,  review the 
flexi/dynamic fare mechanism and take a prudent decision of pricing of fares which are 
balanced and based on equal footing.  
13. The Committee note tha t as part of their Social Service Obligations, the Indian 
Railways extends concession in passenger fare to more than 50 categories of 
passengers. The element of concession varies from 10% to 100% and are permitted for 
certain categories of Divyang passenge rs, 11 types of patients, senior citizens, 
freedom fighters, Press correspondents, war widows, sports persons etc. The 
Committee also find that the Indian Railways also provides concessions to railway 
employees by way of Privilege Passes /Privilege Ticket Order and complimentary 
passes. The Committee further find that the quantum of revenue forgone in the 
passenger earnings segment as a result of concessions was Rs .1,670 cr during 2016 -
17, Rs.1,810 cr during 2017 -18 and Rs .1,995  cr during 2018 -19 which is a substantial 
burden on the  Railway finances.  The Committee feel that while concessions are 
required to maintain social equity, yet given the precarious finances of the Indian 
Railways and especially in respect of the dismal earnings of their passenger se gment, 
there is an urgent need to assess its impact on their finances. The Committee would 
like to recommend the Ministry to  take proactive steps to review the criterion for 
granting of conce ssions with a view to contain  the amount of concessions granted. 
They also desire the Ministry to  have an internal mechanism in place to exercise 
control over the misuse of Privilege Passes /Privilege Ticket Order and complimentary 
passes by their employees and punitive action taken wherever required.  
14. The Committee note  that while senior citizens are granted a fare concession 
amounting to 40-50 percent of their fare on the other hand, offered  'give up' scheme to 
forego the concession and pay full fare if he/she so desires. It is seen that those who 
can afford to pay full fare , are availing the concession. The Committee while 
appreciating the scheme would like to suggest the Ministry to give a wider publicity of 
the scheme and create awareness among the senior citizens so that only deserving 
passengers could avail the benefit . The Committee would like to be kept informed of 
the action taken in this regard. 
15. The Committee find that the Ministry does not maintain any separate data regarding 
the number of Privilege Passes/PTOs and compli mentary passes issued to railway 
employees and the number of persons who availed them. They even do not maintain 
data of revenue lost as a result of such concessions. The Committee do not concur 
with the reasoning of the Ministry. While fully acknowledging  the fact that certain 
concessions may be granted by the transporter, they would like to point out that the 
revenue expenditure of the Indian Railways have to be met entirely out of their internal 
resources and any misappropriation of such concessions may erode their internal 

Page 33 of 38 
 
finances. Therefore, the Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry to act 
proactively and make adequate provisions and take stringent steps to prevent the 
abuse of such privileges to the extent possible.  To this end, the Committee would also 
like the Ministry to include the expense in their accounting so that it correctly reflects 
their revenue expenditure.  
16. The Committee note that Indian Railways provides concessions to freedom fighters 
and their widows.  The Committee appreciate this initiative of the Ministry and are of 
the firm opinion that this noble service of the Railways is an apt tribute for the trials 
and tribulation borne by our freedom fighters for gaining incredible independence. The 
Committee note that Complimentary Card Passes are issued on lifetime basis free rail 
travel in First Class and 2AC along with one companion in the same class by any train 
over all Indian Railways except Metro Railway, Kolkata. The Committee find that from 
2016-18, a total of 104 35 Complimentary Card Passes have been  issued. The 
Committee observe that almost 75 years have elapsed since independence and any 
freedom fighter has to be in the age group of more than 85 -90 years. Though, a hefty 
expenditure of Rs.33,68,21,743 is reimbursed by the Ministry of Home  Affairs on this 
count, the Committee wish to stress the  need to have genuine  proof for identification 
of the intended users with a view to prevent the misuse of the Scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry t o be vigilant and take stringent actions to 
avoid misuse of these passes and undertake regular audit. They also desire to arrange 
issuance of smart cards to bona-fide pass holders. 
17. The Committee find that under the PRS, around three-fourth of the tickets are booked 
through the IRCTC website or the mobile app.  The Committee note that Tickets can 
either be booked by the individual or by Principal Service Pr oviders/PSPs (Principal 
agents) or their respective Retail Service Providers/RSPs (Sub agents) who are the 
license holder agents authorized by the Ministry of Railways to procure Rail tickets 
on behalf of passengers by charging nominal service charges from passengers fixed 
by the Railways from time to time.  The Committee note that the Railways have taken 
all out efforts to deter the manipulation. They appreciate the additional measures 
taken by them to allow the Retail Service Providers (agents) to book  only one Tatkal 
ticket per day/per train. The Committee are of the firm opinion that such an initiative 
may go a long way in discouraging unauthorized booking agents as Aadhar Number 
and PAN are unique to each citizen  and can not be used many times  and any 
irregularity committed in respect of the PRS , cannot continue without active 
involvement of touts/connivance of the officials manning the PRS. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Railways to investigate all such cases of irregularities in a time 
bound manner and take deterrent punitive action against those found guilty.  
18. In order to strengthen the fight ag ainst any malafide in e -ticketing and as a part of its 
checks and balances, the Committee find that the Railways have initiated a number of 

Page 34 of 38 
 
steps to de-register the suspected accounts/Ids of malafide users. In this regard, the  
IRCTC has deactivated 1.15 Lakh Personal User IDs in FY 2018 -19, and about 11.20 
Lakh Personal User IDs in FY 2019 -20. The Committee appreciate this initiative of the 
Ministry and urge the m to maintain the momentum and weed out such accounts on a 
day to day basis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH   
26 November, 2021                              Chairperson 
5 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
  

Page 35 of 38 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2019-20) 
 
 
The Committee met on Friday, the 13 th March, 2020 from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 2, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Pankaj Choudhary 
 
 
3.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
4.  Smt. Diya Kumari 
5.  Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
6.  Smt. Queen Oja 
7.  Smt. Keshari Devi Patel 
8.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
9.  Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
10.  Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11.  Ms. Saroj Pandey 
12.  Shri Ashok Siddharth 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Kavita Prasad   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Director 
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav   - Addl. Director 
4. Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Deputy Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar 
Yadav 
Chairman, Railway Board & Ex -officio Principal 
Secretary to the Government of India 
2. Shri Vishwesh Chaube Member Engineering, Railway Board & Ex -officio 
Secretary to the Government of India 
3. Shri Arun Kumar Director General/Railway Protection Force 
4. Shri O.P. Singh Principal Executive Director/  
Station Development Engineering  
5. Shri N. Madhusudan 
Rao 
Principal Executive Director/  
Commercial (Rates and Marketing) 

Page 36 of 38 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board) to the sitting and invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 
55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding the confidentiality of the proceedings.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) in connection with examination of the subject "Passenger Reservation 
System of Indian Railways". 
 
4. The Chairman, Railway Board briefed the Committee about some of the salient features 
of passenger amenities provided by the Railways at various categories of railway stations in 
Indian Railways. He also informed the Committee about the status of modernizat ion of Railway 
stations including Modern Stations, Model Stations, Adarsh stations and World Class Stations. 
The Committee broadly discussed the issues related to categorization of stations, improvement 
of amenities including cleanliness at stations as wel l as onboard and prevention of slippages, 
providing greater amenities at halt stations, improvement in quality/cleanliness of linen 
provided in trains etc.  
 
5. The Committee, then, sought certain clarifications on the issues related to the subject. 
The Chairman, Railway Board replied to some of the queries and assured to send the written 
replies to the queries in respect of which the information was not readily available with him.  
The evidence was concluded. 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Committee has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.     
-------- 
  

Page 37 of 38 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2021-22) 
 
 
The Committee met on Friday, the 26 th November, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in  
Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
3.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta 
4.  Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
5.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
6.  Shri Gopaljee Thakur 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
7.  Shri Narhari Amin 
8.  Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
9.  Ms. Saroj Pandey 
10.  Shri Ashok Siddharth 
11.  Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Prasenjit Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Director 
3. Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Deputy Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
1. Sh. Suneet Sharma Chairman & Chief Executive Officer, Railway 
Board & Ex. –officio Principal Secretary to the 
Government of India. 
2. Sh. Sanjeev Mittal Member (Infrastructure), Railway Board & Ex. -
officio Secretary to the Government of India. 
3 Sh. Ram Prakash Additional Member, Railway Electrification 
4 Sh. Rahul Agarwal Additional Member, Signal 

Page 38 of 38 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.    
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the two draft Reports on (i) ‘Passenger 
Reservation System of Indian Railways’ and (ii) Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations /Recommendations of the Committee contained in thei r 7th Report on “Demands 
for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Railways”.   
The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Reports without any modifications. 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise  and present the Report to the 
Parliament during the ensuing Session. 
4. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 
5. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
6. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Committee has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.     
-------- 
-------- 
xxxx not related to the Report. 
 
 