 
 
intrgg`   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 16th Report of 
the Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Performance of Rail 
Land Development Authority] 
 
 
     SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
                                       
  
             
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945 (SAKA) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS 
(2023-24) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
17 

 
 
i 
 
SCR NO. 244 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2023-24) 
  
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 16th Report 
of the Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Performance of 
Rail Land Development Authority] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2023 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.12.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
       December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945 (SAKA) 
  

 
 
ii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................................ (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v) 
 
PART-I 
CHAPTER I REP ORT……………………………………………………………………
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government……………………………………………………... 
6 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………………… 
 
16 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration …………………………………………… 
17 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited ……………………………….. 
18 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 I.    Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on 
12.12.2023 
19 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 I.  Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha). 
 
 21 
 

 
 
iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2023-24)@ 
 
   Shri Radha Mohan Singh - Chairperson 
 
                MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
3. Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthever Baalu 
4. Smt. Ranjanben Dhananjay Bhatt 
5. Shri Abu Hasen Khan Choudhury 
6. Shri Kotagiri Sridhar 
7. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik 
8. Shri Suresh Kodikunnil  
9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
10. Vacant* 
11. Shri Dhairyasheel S. Mane  
12. Smt. Jaskaur Meena 
13. Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
14. Smt. Keshari Devi Patel 
15. Shri Ramulu Pothuganti 
16. Shri Mukesh Rajput  
17. Smt. Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
18. Shri Achyutananda Samanta 
19. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati  
20. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
21. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 22. Shri Narhari Amin 
 23. Shri Chh. Udayanraje Bhonsle  
 24. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
 25. Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim  
26. Shri Khiru Mahto 
 27. Dr. Prashanta Nanda 
28. Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
29. Ms. Saroj Pandey 
30. Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak 
31.  Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
@ Constituted w.e.f. 13.09.2023 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 7379 dated 16.09.2023. 
* Km. Diya Kumari resigned w.e.f. 06.12.2023 vide Bulleting Part I No. 255 dated 07.12.2023. 
 
 

 
 
iv 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora   - Additional Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam   - Director 
3. Ms. Savdha Kalia   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Rudresh Singh Yadav  - Committee Officer 
 
 
  

 
 
v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
  
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2023-24), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Seventeenth Report on Action 
Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Sixteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘’Performance of Rail Land Development Authority”.  
2.  The Sixteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha  and laid in the 
Rajya Sabha on 08.08.2023. The Report contained 9 
Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry of Railways furnished Action 
Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report 
on 07.11.2023.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
12.12.2023.  The minutes of the sitting are given in Annexure.  
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.  
  
5.  An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix. 
  
 
NEW DELHI: 
                                                       
 
 
 
                                                     RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
 12 December, 2023                                                                                       Chairperson, 
 Agrahayana 21, 1945 (Saka)                                         Standing Committee on Railways 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations 
/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Sixteenth Report (17thLok Sabha) 
on ''Performance of Rail Land Development Authority". 
 
2 .  The Sixteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
08.08.2023. It contained 9 Observations/ Recommendations. Replies of the Government in 
respect of all recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:- 
 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 
Total: 09 
Percentage: 100 
 
(ii) Observations / recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies:- 
 
NIL 
 
Total :00 
Percentage: 00 
 
 
(iii) Observations / recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:- 
 
NIL 
 
Total :00 
 
Percentage: 00 
(iv) Observations / recommendations in respect of which ﬁnal replies are still 
awaited:- 
 
NIL 
 
Total :00 
Percentage: 00 
  
  
    

 
 
2 
 
 
3 . The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the Observations / Recommendations accepted by the Government. 
The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report should be 
furnished to them at the earliest but not later than three months of the presentation of 
this Report. 
 
4 . The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier Observations / 
Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
5. 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
In their earlier Report, the Committee urged the Ministry to encourage private sector 
participation through suitable models to accelerate the redevelopment process. The 
Committee felt that this exercise can attract investment, expertise and innovative ideas 
resulting in faster execution. The Committee also recommended to the Ministry to 
implement a phased approach to redevelopment, prioritizing stations based on factors like 
passenger footfall, connectivity and strategic importance. 
 
6 . In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Railways have stated as under: 
"Ministry of Railways has thoroughly reviewed Station Development programme and has 
recently launched Amrit Bharat Station Scheme for the development of stations. This 
scheme envisages development of stations on a continuous basis with a long-term 
approach. It involves preparation of Master Plans and their implementation in phases to 
improve the amenities at the stations like improvement of station access, circulating areas, 
waiting halls, toilets, lift/escalators as necessary, cleanliness, free Wi- Fi, kiosks for local 
products through schemes like 'One Station One Product', better passenger information 
systems, executive lounges, nominated spaces for business meetings, landscaping etc. 
keeping in view the necessity at each such station. The scheme also envisages improvement 
of building, integrating the station with both sides of the city, multimodal integration, 
amenities for Divyangjans, sustainable and environment friendly solutions, provision of 
ballast less tracks, Roof Plazas as per necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city 
centers at the station in the long term. So far, 1309 stations have been identiﬁed for 
development under this scheme. Public Private Partnership (PPP) is one of the modes of 
tendering adopted by Government for station redevelopment through private sector 
participation. One station i.e. Rani Kamlapati has been developed by RLDA through PPP 
mode and has been inaugurated on 15.11.2021. Identiﬁcation of vacant land parcel in and 
around the other identiﬁed stations are being considered for commercial utilisation while 
formulating Master Plan as per feasibility. Commercial development of such land parcels 
shall be taken up by participation of private sector participation in future. Prioritization of 

 
 
3 
 
station development is being done on the factors like passenger footfall, connectivity and 
strategic importance, etc. as recommended by Committee." 
7. The Committee note that Ministry of Railways has recently launched Amrit 
Bharat Station Scheme for the development of stations which envisages development of 
stations on a continuous basis with a long term approach. The Ministry has stated that 
1309 stations have been identiﬁed for development under this scheme. Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) is one of the modes of tendering adopted by Government for station 
redevelopment through private sector participation. The Committee appreciates 
continuous and long term approach envisaged by the Ministry. The Committee desire 
that the redevelopment schemes for railway stations be made inclusive and thereby 
Railway stations in backward areas which have not been covered for development 
under any scheme may also be developed using suitable models. Such an outlook 
shall ensure that stations located in remote areas are also equipped with modern 
facilities. 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
8. Taking note of the issues being faced by RLDA in getting approval for various 
development plans, the Committee in their earlier Report urged the Ministry of Railways to 
initiate regular and proactive communication with the concerned authorities and coordinate 
with Ministry of Housing & Urban Aﬀairs and ensure compliance of the directions 
mentioned in the above mentioned letter by all States/UTs. 
 
 
9. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Railways have stated as under: 
"Ministry of Housing and Urban Aﬀairs (MoHUA) has been requested, vide D.O. letter 
dated 19th June 2023, to recognize the Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA) as a 
local authority. It is noteworthy  that several state governments, including Uttar Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, and Uttarakhand, have taken the initiative to issue 
notiﬁcations acknowledging RLDA as a local authority. Other state governments are also 
being pursued by RLDA to issue similar instruction. Recently, MoHUA, through their 
oﬀicial communication bearing reference number A11013/1/2022-DD.II dated 30th 
January 2023, has granted its approval in the following manner: 
 
1. The Delhi Urban Art Commission (DUAC) is permitted to accept and evaluate the 
entire project related to the development of New Delhi Railway Station from RLDA, 
facilitated through the One-Time Planning Application Approval System (OPAAS), as a 
singular and exceptional occurrence. 
2. The DUAC is directed to thoroughly assess the proposal, in consultation with relevant 
Local Bodies and statutory authorities, which notably includes the Delhi Development 
Authority (DDA). 
3. It is stipulated that RLDA must adhere to the provisions delineated in the Master Plan for 

 
 
4 
 
Delhi, speciﬁcally the Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) Policy and TOD 
Regulations. Additionally, RLDA is required to deposit the applicable TOD charges and 
supplementary Floor Area Ratio (FAR) charges with the respective local bodies." 
 
1 0 .  The Committee are happy to note that several State Governments, including 
Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, and Uttarakhand, have taken the 
initiative to issue notiﬁcations acknowledging RLDA as a local authority. Other State 
Governments are also being pursued by RLDA to issue similar instruction. The eﬀorts 
being made by the Ministry and the RLDA are highly appreciable. In order to further 
strengthen the status of RLDA as a local authority at par with other local authorities in 
all the other states, the Committee feel that such recognition of RLDA remains urgent as 
seamless plan approvals for redevelopment by RLDA shall ensure that the rate of 
revenue generation by RLDA is further augmented. Hence, the Committee reiterate that 
the Ministry may steadfastly pursue the proposal of grant of local authority status to 
RLDA with the remaining states and keep the Committee informed in this regard. 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
11. In their earlier Report the Committee noted that Letter of Acceptance of 16 
commercial sites has been cancelled mainly because of default in payment of installments of 
lease premium by the developers. Ministry has informed that to address the issue, 
modiﬁcations in RLDA regulations are under process which will enable the developers in 
obtaining loans from ﬁnancial institutions. The Committee therefore urged the Ministry to 
issue necessary modiﬁcations at the earliest to avoid further cancellations and ensure 
fulﬁllment of development of commercial sites. The Committee also desired the Ministry to 
establish a clear and fair dispute resolution mechanism within the contracts including 
provisions for mediation, arbitration and other alternative dispute resolution methods." 
 
1 2 . In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee , the Ministry of Railways have 
stated as under: 
"Change in RLDA regulations for making it compliant to the provisions of RERA Act 2016 
and other marketing related issues are under active consideration in the Ministry and 
necessary modiﬁcations/amendments will be approved/notiﬁed after taking legal views and 
examining other aspects. Provisions of clear and fair dispute resolution mechanism in the 
contract including provision of mediation, conciliation and Arbitration are already in place in 
lease agreement and other contracts. " 
 
13. The Committee note that Changes in RLDA regulations for making it compliant 
to the provisions of RERA Act 2016 and other marketing related issues are under active 
consideration in the Ministry and necessary modiﬁcations/amendments will be 
approved/notiﬁed after taking legal views and examining other aspects. The Committee 
feel that default by developers in payment of installment of lease premium is a very 

 
 
5 
 
serious issue. The Committee therefore urge the Ministry to undertake fair dispute 
resolution mechanism and other necessary changes to avoid any further cancellations.  
The Committee would like to be apprised about the ways in which the changes proposed 
would result in reduction of the cases of cancellations of Letter of Acceptance. 

 
 
6 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA) has been set 
up for development of vacant railway land for commercial use for the purpose of 
generating revenue by non-tariﬀ measures.The development work undertaken by RLDA 
includes commercial development of land parcels, redevelopment of Railway Colonies, 
redevelopment of Railway Stations, and development of Multi- Functional Complexes. The 
Committee further note that RLDA has presently been entrusted with the redevelopment of 
103 Railway Stations and redevelopment of two Railway Stations viz. Ranikamalapati and 
Gandhinagar has been completed so far. While appreciating the developmental works 
initiated by RLDA in recent years, the Committee observes that the development works 
particularly related to the redevelopment of Railway Stations may be further reinforced. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to encourage private sector participation 
through suitable models to accelerate the redevelopment process. The Committee feels that 
this exercise can attract investment, expertise and innovative ideas resulting in faster 
execution. The Committee also recommend to the Ministry to implement a phased 
approach to re development, prioritizing stations based on factors like passenger footfall, 
connectivity and strategic importance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways has thoroughly reviewed Station Development programme and 
has recently launched Amrit Bharat Station Scheme for the development of stations. This 
scheme envisages development of stations on a continuous basis with a long-term approach. It 
involves preparation of Master Plans and their implementation in phases to improve the 
amenities at the stations like improvement of station access, circulating areas, waiting halls, 
toilets, lift/escalators as necessary, cleanliness, free Wi- Fi, kiosks for local products through 
schemes like 'One Station One Product', better passenger information systems, executive 
lounges, nominated spaces for business meetings, landscaping etc. keeping in view the 
necessity at each such station. The scheme also envisages improvement of building, 
integrating the station with both sides of the city, multimodal integration, amenities for 
Divyangjans, sustainable and environment friendly solutions, provision of ballast less tracks, 
Roof Plazas as per necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city centers at the station 
in the long term. So far, 1309 stations have been identiﬁed for development under this 
scheme. Public Private Partnership (PPP) is one of the modes of tendering adopted by 
Government for station redevelopment through private sector participation. One station i.e. 
Rani Kamlapati has been developed by RLDA through PPP mode and has been inaugurated 
on 15.11.2021. Identiﬁcation of vacant land parcel in and around the other identiﬁed stations 
are being considered for commercial utilisation while formulating Master Plan as per 
feasibility. Commercial development of such land parcels shall be taken up by participation of 

 
 
7 
 
private sector participation in future. Prioritization of station development is being done on the 
factors like passenger footfall, connectivity and strategic importance, etc. as recommended by 
Committee.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 1 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that out of total vacant Railway land of about 62068.21 hectares about 
60%-70% consist of narrow strips along tracks which is utilized for various operational 
needs. 1216 hectares of vacant land has been handed over to RLDA for commercial 
development  which is one of the mandates of RLDA. Out of 1216 hectares, 66.91 hectares 
has been given by RLDA for commercial development so far. The Committee would like to 
impress upon the Ministry to explore various means to utilize the vacant land under their 
control and ensure that more land is utilized for commercial development which will 
eventually increase the non-tariﬀ revenue of Railways. The Committee urges the Ministry 
to clearly deﬁne and designate areas of vacant railway land for commercial development 
within the existing land use regulations. The Committee further impress upon the Ministry 
to establish a streamlined approval process for fast tracking permissions, clearances and 
permits for expeditious commercial development on Railway Land. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Indian Railways has undertaken a large number of infrastructure work for expansion of 
its infrastructure. Accordingly, the railway land  is being identiﬁed for this purpose also. The 
identiﬁcation of vacant railway land for commercial development which is not required 
immediately for railways own operational purposes is a continuous process. Zonal railways and 
RLDA have been advised to identify vacant land that will not be required for immediate or 
future railway use and to submit proposals to the Railway Board for commercial utilization. 
The proposals received from both the Railways and RLDA undergo a comprehensive review 
process. Comments and perspectives from both RLDA and the Railways are actively sought 
and evaluated. In cases where there is a disagreement between the proposals submitted by 
RLDA and the Railways, the decision regarding the entrustment of land parcels to RLDA is 
made based on the merits of the individual case. Further, the commercial utilisation of vacant 
railway land depends on the local conditions of that area. In coordination with the Ministry of 
Housing & Urban Aﬀairs, a letter was issued to chief Secretaries of all states/UTs vide letter 
no. K-14011-05-2016-UT-I dated 13.11.2019 to incorporate suitable provisions in the local by-
laws/development control norms in congruence with the national TOD policy as well as the 
relevant provisions of the Railway Act and thereby facilitating Railways/RLDA to proceed 
with their development plans in consultation with the local bodies/other statutory authorities. 
Now, no change of  land use is required for developing Railway land for commercial use and 
RLDA can approve its plans in consultation with local bodies/other statutory authorities so that 
development of stations is harmonious with the surrounding development. 
 
 
 

 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee are aware that about 782.81 Hectares of Railway land is under 
encroachment across various zones. The Committee appreciate the various steps taken by 
Indian Railways to remove and prevent further encroachment of its land which include 
removal of encroachments under the provisions of Public Premises Eviction of 
Unauthorized Occupants, Act, 1971, construction of boundary wall at vulnerable locations 
prone to encroachments and tress-passing, deployment of RPF for checking encroachments 
and to keep a vigil of vacant land prone to encroachment through ﬁeld oﬀicers etc. 
Considering the fact that land is a highly valuable resource and the encroached land also 
includes land in various metropolitan cities, the Committee are of the considered opinion 
that concerted efforts be made to collaborate with local bodies and authorities to address 
encroachment and unauthorised occupation and all necessary steps must be taken to ensure 
that the encroached land is reclaimed. The Committee, therefore recommend to the 
Railways to conduct the surveys by ﬁeld oﬀicers frequently and to set up a proper 
monitoring mechanism to check the working and outcome of ﬁeld oﬀicers and surveys 
respectively. Further the Ministry should also consider imparting tailor made training to 
ﬁeld oﬀicers to deal with such encroachment cases. Also the Land Management Cell must 
be put to proper use for checking of such encroachments. The Committee further urge the 
Ministry to set a timeline for removal of all encroachments other than those pending in 
courts and keep the Committee informed in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Survey for identifying Encroachment: All zonal Railways carry out regular surveys for 
identifying encroachments and take action for their removal. As per the provisions of 
Indian Railways Work Manual, the frequency of inspection of encroachment shall be at 
least once in 03 months. Section Engineer/Works and P.way are required to submit a 
certiﬁcate once in three month to be countersigned by AEN. If the encroachments are of 
temporary nature (soft encroachments) in the shape of jhuggies, jhopris and squatters, the 
same got removed in consultation and with the assistance of Railway Protection Force & 
local civil authorities. For old encroachments, where party is not amenable to persuasion, 
action is taken under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 
(PPE Act, 1971), as amended from time to time. Actual eviction of unauthorized occupants 
is carried out with the assistance of State Government and police The details of ﬁeld survey 
conducted by all zonal Railways and the outcome of these surveys during last three years is 
as under:- 
 
 
 
 
 No of Survey 
conducted 
Area retrieved (Hect.) 
  
 

 
 
9 
 
 
9696 100.169 
 
 
 
Responsibility of ﬁeld oﬀicers of Railway: In terms of Para 815 of Indian Railways Work 
Manual, the responsibility of various ﬁeld staﬀs has been stipulated in case of any 
encroachment. Field oﬀicials routinely inspect the section and areas prone to encroachment as 
per their monthly schedules. The details of ﬁeld surveys are recorded in encroachment registers 
which are maintained and regularly updated by ﬁeld oﬀicers. These registers are also checked 
by higher oﬀicials. Section Engineer/ Works and P.way submit a certiﬁcate once in three month 
to be countersigned by AEN. AEN also submit every month the summary of the status of 
removal of encroachments to the Divisional Engineer. Monthly progress regarding additions 
and removal of encroachments, ﬁling eviction cases and their progress in court of Estate 
Oﬀicer, in Civil Courts etc. should be submitted by Divisions to Head Quarter. 
 
Training  of ﬁeld staﬀ: The instructions regarding prevention and removal of 
encroachment, responsibilities are clearly deﬁned in Manuals.  Refresher courses are conducted 
regularly for Group-C (SSEs/Works, P.Way,etc) at Zonal Civil Engineering Training Institute.  
In these refresher courses, training sessions for imparting knowledge, updated rules which 
inter-alia includes Land Management topics, encroachments, etc. are covered. For oﬀicers, 
training sessions are conducted at IRICEN/ Pune. 
 
Land Management Cell: Land Management Cell strenuously makes eﬀorts to monitor and 
prevent new encroachments & eviction of existing encroachments. Following actions have been 
done by Land Management Cell: 
 
(i) Maintaining and scrutinizing railway land boundary veriﬁcation registers by ADENs, 
SSE/Ws and SSE/P. Ways and veriﬁcation of railway boundaries annually and 
recording of entries in these registers. 
(ii) Demarcation of land boundary posts as per certiﬁed land plans over zonal railways 
and preventing cropping of new encroachments. 
 
(iii) Monitoring reply of complaints of encroachments and resolving them promptly with 
due diligence. 
 
(iv)   Soft encroachments are being removed under provisions of Section 147 of the     
Indian Railway Act duly following the procedure laid down in the PPE Act, 1971. 
 
(v) Boundary walls have been constructed to prevent encroachment on Railway land and 
trespassing at vulnerable locations. 
 

 
 
10 
 
(vi) Surplus land are entrusted to RLDA for monetization, establishing solar plants, 
utilization under Gati Shakti Cargo Terminals and intensive afforestation/tree plantation. 
 
(vii) Digitization of land plans and uploading on online web portal Track Management 
System (TMS). 
 
Time line for removal of encroachment : The encroachments which are soft in nature are 
removed promptly as per the provisions contained in the Railway Act, 1989 by launching 
drives at frequent intervals with the help of RPF. However, for encroachments of hard type 
(other than those pending in courts), the provisions contained in the PPE Act, 1971 are 
followed wherein timeline for eviction of unauthorized occupants is as follows: 
 
Process Timeline 
Serving of Notice Within 07 days from receipt of information 
Show cause 
Notice 
Not later than 07 days from the date of issue 
of notice 
Eviction Order Within the 15 days from the date specified in 
the notice. 
Eviction Drive Not later than ﬁfteen days from the date of 
the order. 
 
However, due to the lack of support from local bodies/ civil administration, local law and order 
issue, pending court cases, the above timeline is diﬀicult to adhere to for removal of 
encroachment in most of the cases. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
 
The Committee have been informed that a plethora of encroachment cases are sub judice for 
which more than 1200 advocates are on the panel of Railways who amongst other matters deal 
with these cases across all zones. The Committee are apprised that all Zonal Railways have 
been advised to approach concerned court(s) by inviting their attention towards the directives 
issues by Hon'ble Supreme Court orders dated 16.12.2021 & 18.02.2022 in order to dispose the 
cases related to encroachment in Railway land expeditiously and seek appropriate direction 
from the concerned court to speed up the process of clearing the encroachments on Railway 
property. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to conduct a comprehensive legal review 
of all pending sub judice cases relating to encroachment of Railway land. Further, the 
Committee further suggests that coordinated eﬀorts be made among Railway, law enforcement 
agencies and local authorities to ensure eﬀective enforcement of courts orders and eviction of 
encroachers once judgments are passed 

 
 
11 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Legal Review of Pending Court Cases on encroachment: Legal review of pending 
sub judice cases related to encroachment of railway land is done regularly by all zonal 
Railways. Frequent hearings are arranged for speedy disposal of cases under the PPE Act. 
Further, all concerned Railway Advocates have been advised to approach concerned court by 
inviting attention of the concerned court to the directives issued by Hon’ble Supreme Court 
Orders dated 16.12.2021 & 18.02.2022 and seek appropriate directions from the concerned 
court to speed up the process of clearing the encroachments on Railway property. Railways 
Advocates are also constantly being followed up for early ﬁnalization of cases of sub judice 
Moreover, a coordinated eﬀort  is made among Railway, law enforcement agencies and local 
authorities to ensure eﬀective enforcement of courts orders and eviction of encroachers once 
judgments are passed by the respective courts for eviction. 
 
As soon eviction order is issued by Court, assistance is sought from local 
administration, State Governments to maintain land and order situation during the demolition 
drives. 
Before carrying any demolition drive, timely notices are given to public for vacating the 
land. Also, notice is given in advance to police for providing necessary support. 
 
Coordination with local authority : Local civil administration is also kept apprised of 
the demolition drives. 
 
Regular meetings as well as case-speciﬁc meetings are held by the Divisional 
authorities with the representatives of local authorities. 
 
As a result, at some locations, prompt response is received from local bodies / State 
Government which enabled railway to remove the encroachments. At few locations, public 
representatives / Local bodies/ State Governments demand to carry out rehabilitation and re- 
settlement of the encroachers prior to demolition of the hutments but the same is not agreed by 
the Zonal railways as there is no such provision in the policies/guidelines of Railway Board. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee appreciate that developmental activity has picked up following the Covid-19 
pandemic. The number of commercial sites and colonies awarded to developers has shown 
considerable increase. The Committee observe that in 2019-20 the revenue of RLDA was 

 
 
12 
 
highly encouraging. The Committee are of the view that by maximizing the utilization of the 
vacant land through usage of boundary walls for the purpose of advertisements, further usage 
of narrow strips of land under 'Grow More Food scheme', the revenue resources of Railways 
can be further augmented. In this regard, the Committee recommend to the Ministry to focus on 
developing and monetising its existing land bank, maximising the value of these assets. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Zonal railways have been empowered to award advertising contracts through the e-auction 
platform. Since its inception in 2022, Railway Divisions have been enabled to digitize 
advertising assets and conduct e-auction in a user friendly, eﬀicient, and transparent manner. 
Advertising contracts, coming under the domain of Commercial publicity including Out of 
Home (OoH) contracts have been brought under the ambit of e-auction. A dedicated sub-
category of 'Out of Home' under advertising category has been enabled in the e-auction portal 
to improve the “Ease of doing business" and promote participation of small entrepreneurs and 
startups. This has facilitated optimal utilization of available and feasible spaces including 
advertisement on boundary walls. Further, Innovative initiatives, implemented by diﬀerent 
Zones, are periodically circulated among diﬀerent Zones to explore the possibility of 
replication. Zonal Railways have been advised to conduct stakeholder meetings to identify 
potential opportunities, disseminate information on ongoing initiatives and use the forum for 
outreach activities. This is a continuous and ongoing process. Guidelines on utilisation of 
vacant railway land for Grow More food (GMF) purpose for railway employee were issued to 
protect valuable land from encroachment adding to the green belt and food security of Nation 
and also augmenting revenue. Wherever feasible, land under GMF is given but narrow strips 
along the track are required for maintenance work and potential future line doubling, and 
therefore cannot be allocated under the 'Grow More Food' scheme. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that Indian Railways are bringing land records to GIS 
platform by way of digitisation. For this purpose a land module has been created in Track 
Management System (TMS) module of Indian Railways. In TMS all existing land plans of 
Railways are being uploaded and also new plans created due to acquisition of land during 
construction of new infrastructure will also be uploaded once ﬁnalised. The Committee feel 
that digitisation of land records is an important step towards transparency, efficiency and 
accessibility in land management. The Committee desire the Ministry to create a centralised 
database to store all land records in a digital format. The data base so created will be accessible 
to authorised users such as government officials, land owners and potential investors. 
 

 
 
13 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A centralized database to store all land records in digital format is already there in Track 
Management System (TMS) and Indian Railway Land Asset Management System (IRLAMS). 
All Zonal Railways has to feed the required data in these applications from time to time, to 
update the records. 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
 
The Committee is aware that as per Railway extant policy guidelines, Railways/RLDA shall 
consult urban local bodies /other statutory authorities while approving its plans in terms of 
power conferred to it under Section 11 of Railway Act 1989. Further, the Committee has been 
informed that various kinds of issues are faced by RLDA with diﬀerent State Governments and 
local bodies. In Delhi, Delhi Development Authority (DDA) is not agreeing with the 
development plans of RLDA for railway land in Delhi although these have been planned in 
harmony with the surrounding development, without change in land use. Similar issues for 
development of sites on Railway land in Mumbai are being faced with local urban authority. 
The Committee note that Ministry of Housing & Urban Aﬀairs vide letter dated 13.11.2019 
had given directions to all State &UTs to consider RLDA at par with local authorities for 
deciding land use and approving various surrounding development for development projects 
undertaken by RLDA in connection with redevelopment of Railway Stations. The Committee 
takes note of the issues being faced by RLDA in getting approval for various development 
plans. In this regard Committee would urge Railway Ministry to initiate regular and proactive 
communication with the concerned authorities and coordinate with Ministry of Housing & 
Urban Aﬀairs and ensure compliance of the directions mentioned in the above mentioned letter 
by all States/UTs. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Aﬀairs (MoHUA) has been requested, vide D.O. letter dated 
19th June 2023, to recognize the Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA) as a local 
authority. It is noteworthy  that several state governments, including Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, and Uttarakhand, have taken the initiative to issue notiﬁcations 
acknowledging RLDA as a local authority. Other state governments are also being pursued by 
RLDA to issue similar instruction. Recently, MoHUA, through their oﬀicial communication 
bearing reference number A11013/1/2022-DD.II dated 30th January 2023, has granted its 
approval in the following manner: 

 
 
14 
 
1. The Delhi Urban Art Commission (DUAC) is permitted to accept and evaluate the entire 
project related to the development of New Delhi Railway Station from RLDA, facilitated 
through the One-Time Planning Application Approval System (OPAAS), as a singular and 
exceptional occurrence. 
2. The DUAC is directed to thoroughly assess the proposal, in consultation with relevant 
Local Bodies and statutory authorities, which notably includes the Delhi Development 
Authority (DDA). 
3. It is stipulated that RLDA must adhere to the provisions delineated in the Master Plan for 
Delhi, speciﬁcally the Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) Policy and TOD Regulations. 
Additionally, RLDA is required to deposit the applicable TOD charges and supplementary 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) charges with the respective local bodies. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
The Committee note that Letter of Acceptance of 16 commercial sites has been cancelled 
mainly because of default in payment of installments of lease premium by the developers. 
Ministry has informed that to address the issue, modiﬁcations in RLDA regulations are under 
process which will enable the developers in obtaining loans from ﬁnancial institutions. The 
Committee urges the Ministry to issue necessary modiﬁcations at the earliest to avoid further 
cancellations and ensure fulﬁllment of development of commercial sites. The Committee also 
desires the Ministry to establish a clear and fair dispute resolution mechanism within the 
contracts including provisions for mediation, arbitration and other alternative dispute resolution 
methods. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Change in RLDA regulations for making it compliant to the provisions of RERA 
Act 2016 and other marketing related issues are under active consideration in the Ministry and 
necessary modiﬁcations/amendments will be approved/notiﬁed after taking legal views and 
examining other aspects. Provisions of clear and fair dispute resolution mechanism in the 
contract including provision of mediation, conciliation and Arbitration are already in place in 
lease agreement and other contracts. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation para No. 8  of Chapter-I) 
   
 
 

 
 
15 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
The Committee note that various international/ internationally recognized ﬁrms 
have been brought on board by the Ministry to augment its capacity building initiatives by 
conducting various studies pertaining to designing, planning and modernization of stations, 
sustainable development among various others. Further various visits are also being conducted 
to understand the best practices of technology and development. While taking note of the same, 
the Committee urges the Ministry to implement comprehensive training and development 
program for RLDA staﬀ at all levels. These programs can focus on building technical skills, 
project management expertise, negotiation and controlling abilities, legal and regulatory 
knowledge and other relevant competencies. Besides regular training sessions, workshops and 
seminars can help employees stay updated with best practices and emerging trends. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Training programmes and special lectures are organized regularly by RLDA on the topic 
related to Land Acquisition, Architectural consultancy, Marketing and Valuation, GST related 
issues, Tendering process. Arbitration etc. Oﬀicials are also nominated for speciﬁc training as 
per requirement of RLDA. 
  

 
 
16 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
  

 
 
17 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

 
 
18 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;       RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
12  December, 2023        Chairperson 
Agrahayana 21, 1945 (Saka).           Standing Committee on Railways 
 
                       
        
                                            
  

 
 
19 
 
ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2023-24) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 12th December, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 
1530 hrs. in  Committee Room ‘B’,  Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh -  Chairperson 
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri T.R.Baalu 
3. Shri Suresh Kodikunnil 
4. Shri Achyutananda Samanta 
5. Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
6. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
7. Shri Ramulu Pothuganti 
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
9. Smt. Keshari Devi Patel 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Narhari Amin 
11. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
12. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
13. Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki 
14. Shri Khiru Mahto 
15. Dr. Prashanta Nanda 

 
 
20 
 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora   - Additional Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam   - Director 
3.  Smt. Savdha Kalia   - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in their 16th Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Performance of Rail 
Land Development Authority'. 
 
The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Report without any 
modification. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise and present the Report 
to the Parliament. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned.  

 
 
21 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 16TH REPORT 
(17TH LOK SABHA) ON TH SUBJECT ‘PERFORMANCE OF RAIL LAND 
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY’ 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations - 9 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government – 09 
Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5 6,7, 8,9 
Percentage of total 100% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies –       NIL 
Para No. NIL 
Percentage of total 0% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration – 
Para No. NIL NIL 
  
Percentage of total 0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are 
still awaited -         NIL  
Para No. NIL 
 
Percentage of total 0% 
 
  
 