1
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action T aken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the 23rd Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Maintenance of Bridges in 
Indian Railways: A Review]
FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS
(2019-2020)
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2019-2020)
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)
[Action T aken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the 23rd Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Maintenance of Bridges in 
Indian Railways: A Review ]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.12.2019 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.12.2019
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)

S.C.R. No. 297
Price: ` 46.25
© 2019 By L ok  S aBha  S ecretariat
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by DRV Grafix Print, New Delhi-110058.

(i)
CONTENTS
Page
c omPoSition  of  the  c ommittee  (2019-20) ................................................... (iii)
introduction  ......................................................................................... (v)
PART I
c haPter  i. Report ............................................................................ 1
c haPter  II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government .................................................................. 11
c haPter  III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply ... 22
c haPter  I V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require Reiteration ............................ 23
c haPter  V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still Awaited ................. 27
aPPendiceS
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Railways held on 28.11.2019 .............................................. 28
II. Analysis of Action T aken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 23rd 
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Maintenance of Bridges in 
Indian Railways: A Review’ .................................................. 30

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2019-20)@
Shri Radha Mohan Singh — Chairperson
m emBerS
Lok Sabha
 2. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
 3. Shri T.R. Baalu
 4. Smt. Ranjanben Bhatt
 5. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
 6. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
 7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
 8. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse
 9. Shri Suresh Kodikunnil
 10. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
 11. Smt. Diya Kumari
 12. Smt. Jaskaur Meena
 13. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
 14. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal
 15. Smt. Queen Oja
 16. Smt. Keshari Devi Patel
 17. Shri Mukesh Rajput
 18. Shri N. Reddeppa
 19. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
 20. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur
 21. Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur
@  Constituted w.e.f. 13.09.2019 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 550 dated 13.09.2019.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
 22. Shri N. Gokulakrishnan
 23. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha
 24. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
 25. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar
 26. Ms. Saroj Pandey
 27. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
 28. Shri Ashok Siddharth
 29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
 30. Mahant Shambhuprasadji Tundiya
 31. Shri Motilal Vora
Secretariat
1. Dr. Kavita Prasad — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav — Additional Director
4. Smt. Banani Sarker Joshi — Committee Officer 

(v)
INTRODUCTION
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2019-20), having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this First Report (Seventeenth Report) on Action T aken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their Twenty- 
third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Maintenance of Bridges in Indian 
Railways: A Review’.
 2. The Twenty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and was laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 03.01.2019. The Report contained 12 recommendations/
observations. The Ministry of Railways furnished their Action T aken Notes on 
all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report on 28.03.2019.
 3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action T aken 
Report at their sitting held on 28.11.2019. The minutes of the sitting is given 
in Appendix-I.
 4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observation and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.
 5. An analysis of the Action T aken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty Third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.
 
n ew  d eLhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH
29 November, 2019 Chairperson,
8 Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

1
ChapTER I
REPORT
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Railways deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
their Twenty-third Report (16th Lok Sabha) on "Maintenance of Bridges in Indian 
Railways: A Review".
 2. The Twenty-third Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 03.01.2019. It contained 12 Recommendations/Observations.
 3. Action T aken Notes in respect of 12 Recommendations/Observations 
have been received and categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:
 Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
  Total: 10
  Chapter II
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
 Para No. NIL
  Total: Nil
  Chapter III
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:
 Para Nos. 1 and 2
  Total: 02
  Chapter IV
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies are still 
awaited:
 Para No. Nil
  Total: NIL
  Chapter IV

2
 4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given 
to the implementation of the Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee desire that final action taken notes to 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this 
Report should be furnished to them not later than three months of 
the presentation of this Report.
 5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations/observations.
a. Classification of Bridges and Structural Safety of Old Bridges
Recommendation (p ara No. 1)
 6. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that the Indian Railways has a staggering 1,47,523 
number of bridges across its immense network. The Committee further 
note that the Indian Railways have classified bridges under three broad 
categories which are based on the breadth of their waterway. Bridges 
with a linear waterway of 300 meters are classified as Important 
Bridges and those with a linear waterway of 18 meters are classified 
as Major Bridges. All other bridges are classified as Minor Bridges. This 
classification effectively relegates 92 percent of the bridges in the Indian 
Railways to the Minor Bridge category. The Committee feel that such a 
categorization is too broad and may lead to exclusion of large number 
of bridges and in view of the fact that there exists different parameters 
for inspections, maintenance etc. of bridges, such a wide difference would 
result in unequal weightage/importance being given to only a few bridges 
as compared to vast majority. The Committee express their reservations 
on the above mentioned classification and recommend that the Ministry 
should re-evaluate their classification of bridges in order to bring about 
some parity. They also recommend that this re-evaluation should take into 
account the changing dynamics of modern rail transportation which sees 
the use of heavier and faster trains and higher density of traffic regardless 
of the measurement of waterways. The Committee strongly feel that such 
a step would result in augmented safety and security of bridges.”
Recommendation (p ara No. 2)
 7. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee find to their surprise that though 37,689 number of 
bridges on its network are 100 years or older, yet the Railways do not 
classify them as a special/separate segment. Rather they are kept at par 
with the existing newer/modern bridges when it comes to inspections and 

3
maintenance. The Committee express serious doubts over such an action 
and opine that these bridges have been planned for lesser loads and 
service conditions that have changed radically over time. Axle loads and 
traffic density have increased with the advent of faster and heavier trains 
and safety of these old bridges may be severely compromised which may 
lead to safety failures. The Committee are of the considered opinion that 
the (now) obsolete technology and materials used in these old bridges may 
not be compliant with modern rail paraphernalia and hence there would 
be a requirement of a different protocol when it comes to their upkeep 
and sustenance. The Committee also opine that deficiencies related to 
aging bridges can become a major concern for their structural safety. As 
such, the Committee do not concur with the contention of the Ministry 
that the age of a bridge has no direct bearing on its safety and it is 
only the physical condition of the bridge that is taken into account while 
classifying a bridge. The Committee wish to remind the Ministry that such 
a generalization would be detrimental to the health of a bridge since the 
archaic technology/materials of these older bridges may not be able to 
withstand the rigours of modern rail transport equipment. It should also 
be taken into account that these bridges have withstood the stress and 
rigours of over a century suffering corrosion, distress, wear and tear. The 
Committee would like to emphasize that with the advent of modern rail 
transportation, older bridges may be unable to withstand higher load 
and speed, resulting in accidents or compromise with punctuality. The 
Committee also take cognizance of the fact that several of these structures 
have formidable heritage value and are intrinsically linked to the history 
of the country and overuse or misuse of these structures may erode 
their historical value. While the Committee are aware of the commercial 
concerns as well as financial limitations of the Ministry yet they feel that 
safety is paramount and should not be compromised at anytime. They, 
therefore, advise the Ministry to devise a protocol of inspection and 
maintenance to include a greater degree of safety/safeguards for bridges 
which come under this category while keeping their commercial interests 
intact.”
 8. In their Action T aken Replies to both the above recommendations, 
the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:
“Railway Bridges are classified in the following three types based on their 
waterway:
Important bridge: Bridges with linear waterway of 300 metres or more 
or a total waterway of 1000 square metres or more and those Bridges 
considered as important by the Principal Chief Engineer/Chief Bridge 

4
Engineer, depending on considerations such as depth of waterway, 
extent of river training works and maintenance problems are classified as 
Important Bridges.
Major bridge: Bridges with total water way of 18 linear metres or more 
or which have a clear opening of 12 linear metres or more in any one 
span are classified as Major Bridges.
Minor bridge: Bridges which do not fall in the above classifications are 
classified as Minor Bridges.
However, the classification of the bridges or the age of the bridges does 
not have a direct relevance on the Inspection/Maintenance protocol of the 
bridges. There is a well established system of inspection of bridges on 
Indian Railways. All the bridges are inspected twice a year, one before 
the onset of monsoon and one detailed inspection after the monsoon. 
In addition, certain bridges are also inspected more frequently depending 
upon their condition. Repair/strengthening/rehabilitation/rebuilding of 
Railway bridges is a continuous process and is undertaken whenever 
so warranted by their physical condition as ascertained during these 
inspections and not on the basis of age. If the corrective/remedial 
measures are expected to take a long duration due to the complexity 
of the site situation, etc., suitable safety measures like imposing speed 
restrictions and keeping such bridge under close watch are taken till the 
bridge is repaired/strengthened/rehabilitated/rebuilt.
There exists a Numerical Rating System for assessment of Bridge health. 
Every bridge component of Major and Important bridges is assigned with a 
Conditional Rating Number (CRN). The list of the components is as under:
1. Foundation and Flooring;
2. Masonry/Concrete in Substructure;
3. Training and Protective work;
4. Bed Blocks;
5. Bearing and expansion arrangement;
6. Superstructure; and
7. Track structure.
Lower the CRN, more serious is the deteriorated condition of the 
component. From the CRNs of different component of the bridge, an 
Overall Rating Number (ORN) of the bridge as a whole is given. The 

5
ORN is the lowest of the 7 CRNs of the bridge. For Minor Bridges only 
ORN is given based upon its overall condition.
Thus equal weightage is being given to the Major, Important bridges by 
rating individual component and then arriving at ORN i.e. lowest of CRN.
The present system is working satisfactorily since 64 years for all categories 
of bridges in the Indian Railways system.
It is agreed that the Axle Load and Traffic density has increased with 
heavier train proposed to be run for which planning has already been 
done as under:
1. Dedicated Freight Corridor (Eastern and Western Routes)–There are 
776 and 439 bridges respectively which have been identified for 
strengthening to take the higher axle load. Concerned Zonal Railways 
(ER, ECR, NCR, NR, NWR, SER, WR, CR) have already initiated the 
action in advance for strengthening these bridges which are likely to 
carry higher axle load.
2. 25T routes–There are 1085 no. of bridges which have been identified 
which are falling on these routes. Concerned Zonal Railways (ER, 
ECoR, SER, SECR, SWR, SCR, SR) have already initiated action 
in advance for strengthening these bridges which are likely to carry 
higher axle load.”
 9. The Committee had expressed the need for revaluation 
of the existing system of classification of railway bridges by the 
Indian Railways. They had also highlighted the need for taking into 
consideration the age of a bridge whilst formulating inspection/
maintenance protocols. In this context, the Committee strongly 
recommended that bridges which were more than 100 years old 
warranted a separate protocol for inspection and maintenance. The 
Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry have made no 
effort for addressing their concerns in their action taken replies and 
have instead stated that their current system of classification of 
bridges was felt to be adequate. The Ministry have further categorically 
stated that the classification of the bridges or age of the bridges 
does not have direct relevance on the inspection/maintenance protocol 
of bridges. This premise of the Ministry is not acceptable to the 
Committee. They, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation for 
revising the existing system of bridge classification in order to bring 
about a fair degree of parity of bridges as well as to strengthen the 
bridge network across the Indian Railways.

6
B. Training Courses/Modules for Officials Connected with Bridge 
Inspections
Recommendation (p ara No. 5)
 10. In their original Report, the Committee had recommended as under:–
“The Committee find that the Indian Railways depends on a methodical 
system of inspection where conditional ratings are given based on the 
physical condition at the time of assessment by the inspecting authority. 
The Committee also find that the Ministry relies heavily on the visual 
perception and evaluation of the inspecting official. The Committee feel 
that such a system puts an undue heavy strain on the wisdom of the 
inspector and their adherence to prescribed norms/procedures. In such 
a scenario there is a distinct possibility of subjectivity creeping in as 
perceptions are often open to interpretations. The Ministry have also 
themselves admitted that they do not have a standardised guideline for 
imposing speed restrictions. They, therefore, recommend the Railways to 
formulate definitive guidelines for bridge inspections including those for 
speed restrictions in order to eliminate the need for speculation on the 
part of the assessing officer. Such guidelines should be comprehensive, 
unambiguous and include all aspects or possible scenarios of bridge 
inspections. Further, the Committee recommend that the Railways should 
design intensive training courses/modules for officials connected with bridge 
inspections keeping in mind the latest technological expertise in the sphere 
of bridge management/maintenance etc. being adopted across the world.”
 11. In their Action T aken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated 
as under:–
“There is an elaborate system of inspection and maintenance of Bridges 
on Indian Railways. These inspections are carried out at various levels. 
The bridges are thoroughly inspected by Assistant Divisional Engineers and 
detailed observations are recorded in Bridge Inspection registers in the 
prescribed proforma. In addition, detailed technical inspection of certain 
bridges is carried out by Section Engineer (Bridges) at specified interval. 
Instructions are, thereafter, given for carrying out repairs of defects noticed 
during these inspections. Bridge Registers are then sent for scrutiny and 
directions of Divisional Engineers and further to Chief Engineer/Chief 
Bridge Engineer. Based on observations in the registers, Bridges requiring 
inspection at higher level are again inspected by Divisional Engineers and 
the Chief Engineer/Chief Bridge Engineer and the remedial actions are 
taken as required.
Scrutiny and inspection at various levels is a conscious effort in minimizing 
subjectivity.

7
However, in order to further minimize subjectivity, if any, in assessment 
of condition of bridge and to assess the suitability of existing bridges for 
higher loading standards and high power locomotives (high longitudinal 
force), Indian Railways has, therefore, started implementing instrumentation 
on its bridges.
Modern Techniques for inspection are already commenced as under:
 ● Continuous water level monitoring system-
 ● Continuous Scour Monitoring of bridge foundation;
 ● 3D Scanning of river beds;
 ● Inspection of bridges by Drones; and
 ● Under Water Inspection of bridges by Remote Operated Vehicle 
(ROV).
Bridge staff are trained for their jobs both through theoretical class 
room training  and practical work at site using the tools, equipment 
and machinery. Training is a continuing process right from the time of 
recruitment.
Following training courses at Zonal Railway level, IRICEN level are 
conducted every year for training of all officials due:
i. Initial courses;
ii. Promotional courses;
iii. Refresher courses; and
iv. Special courses.
The recommendation by the Committee for exposure to global practices 
shall be further carried forward.”
 12. The Committee are satisfied to note that there is an 
elaborate system of inspection and maintenance of bridges on Indian 
Railways. also, there are modern techniques for inspections, such as 
continuous water level monitoring system, continuous scour monitoring 
of bridge foundation and 3D scanning of river beds besides inspection 
of bridges by drones and under water inspection of bridges by remote 
operated vehicles.
 The Committee note that Railways are continuing to introduce 
latest technologies for proper upkeep and maintenance of bridges. 

8
They further note that bridge staff are trained for their job through 
theoretical classroom training and practical work at site using tools, 
equipments and machinery. The Committee hope that as assured by 
the Railways, latest technology and expertise in the sphere of bridge 
management/maintenance etc. being adopted across the world, will be 
adopted by the Indian Railways.
C. Use of Modern Technology for Inspection of Bridges
Recommendation (p ara No. 6)
 13. The Committee had recommended as under:–
“The Committee feel that the Ministry should explore the use of modern 
technology for inspection of bridges which may be beneficial in early 
detection of damage and lower maintenance costs. The Committee also 
desire the Ministry to study the modern methods being used by the 
Railways of other countries and endeavour to bring/implement such 
technologies and systems across our own network. The Committee are 
happy to note that the Ministry is utilizing satellite imagery for detecting 
faults on its tracks and feel that they should extend this initiative for 
bridges also which would vastly minimize human error and reduce 
maintenance costs. The Committee wish to put forward the viewpoint 
that to improve or inculcate new bridge technology or newer methods 
of inspection, the Railways must engage with global partners such as 
Railways of other countries and premier institutions such as the Indian 
Institutes of Technology (IITs) etc. Such a collaboration may provide 
stimulus and encourage rail research and lead to innovations in technology 
in respect of bridges. The Committee feel that in addition to introduction 
of new technologies the Ministry should also study their efficacy or impact 
on the system. The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry 
should make a comprehensive survey/study to analyse the benefits as 
well as effectiveness accrued and whether there has been a marked 
improvement in rail/bridge safety as a result of the implementation of 
such technologies.”
 14. In their Action T aken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated 
as under:–
“(1) With a view to modernise the inspection system so as to minimise the 
human intervention and thus subjectivity, Railways has taken effective 
steps in gradually implementing various modern technologies like:
 ● Inspection of Bridges by Drones;

9
 ● Underwater inspection of Bridges by ROV (Remote Operated 
Vehicle);
 ● Continuous Water Level Monitoring System on identified bridges;
 ● Scour Monitoring System;
 ● 3D Mapping of river beds;
 ● Instrumentation of bridges for health monitoring; and
 ● Portable train detection and alarm system.
(2) An EOI has been issued by RDSO for Long Life Paint Systems, which 
is expected to rope in Global firms with proven standards.
(3) All these modern technologies are first put in trial stage in few 
Zonal Railways. RDSO, after study and research on the efficacy of 
these, recommends for regular adoption like Continuous Water Level 
Monitoring System on identified bridges (160 no. of bridges).
(4) Recently, Health Monitoring Systems have been approved on following 
Important Bridges which shall be implemented by 3rd party including 
Global Partners:
 Bogibeel Bridge and Bridge No. 44 in Jiribam – Imphal section of 
NFR.
(5) Also, 3rd party audit of Rail Bridges, ROBs etc. has also been started 
wherein IIT Mumbai and Indore have been roped in for using their 
expertise. 409 no. of bridges have already been inspected in Central 
and Western Railway.
(6) A presentation on the use of Spherical Bearings by one of the 
Global firms Hirun was organized on dt. 14.02.19 in Railway Board 
for dissemination of modern, new technology. This presentation was 
attended by Sr. Management of Railway Board, Northern Railway and 
expert team of RDSO (Bridge Directorate).
(7) In addition, seminars through IPWE, on the important topics regarding 
Bridge Maintenance, Construction etc. are organized which are 
attended by more than 500 delegates across Indian Railways, Global 
Partners etc.”
 15. In their recommendation, the Committee had felt that 
increased use of modern technology for inspection of bridges would 
reduce human dependence and consequently eliminate the problem 
of subjectivity entering into evaluation. They had also felt that 

10
implementation of modern technology would not only help in early 
detection of faults/damage, but also come forth as a cost saving 
measure as well. The Ministry have informed that they are in the 
process of gradual implementation of several new technologies.
 The Committee feel that the initiatives taken by Railways are 
the steps in the right direction, and if implemented in letter and 
spirit, will go a long way in strengthening the bridge network and 
reduce human error as well, which in turn would fortify rail bridges, 
particularly those which are 100 years or older. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to examine the efficacy of these 
initiatives and if found productive, they should be extended to the 
entire rail network. The Committee would like to be kept apprised 
of new technologies/innovations being introduced by the Railways.
 

11
ChapTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (p ara No. 3)
 The Committee find that the Ministry have laid the groundwork for a 
bridge management system. This would serve as a long run structural health 
management system for bridges. The Committee appreciate this endeavour of 
the Ministry, but at the same time they wish to remind the Ministry that the 
deadline of completion i.e., March 2019 should be strictly adhered to in order 
to gain maximum benefit from such an excellent venture. The Committee would 
like to be kept apprised of any action in this regard.
Reply of the Government
 The Bridge Management System (BMS) was sanctioned in 2016-17 at 
a cost of Rs. 10.14 crore. Few modules including Bridge Master Data were 
completely developed and BMS launched on 12.7.2018 with due interaction with 
CBE/NR, Railway Board & CRIS organisations. At present following modules 
exists on the BMS which are being updated:
i. Bridge master with drawing upload
ii. Past bridge inspection upload
iii. Bridge inspection and compliance
iv. Railway Affecting Works/Railway Affecting T anks (RAW/RAT)
v. Bridge water level report.
 The new modules for inspections are being developed simultaneously with 
other IT applications of the Engineering Department. However, the progress of 
the development of these modules in NO WAY affects the inspection, monitoring 
health of the bridges, rehabilitation etc.
Recommendation (p ara No. 4)
 T aking note of the elaborate system of inspection and maintenance laid 
down for bridges across the Indian Railways, the Committee are of the firm 
opinion that bridges being more vulnerable than tracks require a more robust 
system of inspection. According to the Ministry inspection of bridges are multi-
tiered and meticulously inspected under a codified system at fixed intervals of 
time. The Railways treat the physical condition of the bridge as the primary 
indicator while deciding on the quantum of maintenance or rehabilitation. The 

12
Committee also find that till such time as repair/rehabilitation of a bridge is 
complete, the Ministry takes a number of steps to ensure safe passage such as 
speed restrictions. Although very few bridges requiring rehabilitation have speed 
restrictions, yet the Committee feel that in an already congested rail network any 
delay is likely to over-burden the system. Since major repairs take considerable 
periods, prolonged periods of speed restrictions can be counter-productive and 
negatively impact punctuality. Nonetheless it cannot be denied that maintenance 
negligence and delayed actions invariably lead to heavy costs in future or risk 
of deterioration of assets. The Committee acknowledge that the introduction 
of the Indian Railways Projects Sanctions & Management (IRPS&M) system 
has simplified the process of identification of bridges and getting approval of 
the competent authorities for their rehabilitation. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should pragmatically approach the matter by 
striking a balance between maintenance and safety of bridges while at the same 
time adhering to realistic timelines.
Reply of the Government
 As stated in Point Nos. 1 & 2 above, priorities are set for repairs/ 
rehabilitation of bridges based on their URNs. Bridges with Speed Restrictions 
are also given highest priority in rehabilitation programmes. As already stated in 
the report, there are NIL bridges in ORN-1, 233 bridges in ORN-2 and 1287 
in ORN-3. However, not all of these require speed restrictions otherwise. 3758 
nos. of bridges have already been rehabilitated in last 5 years and 734 nos. in 
current financial year, till January 2019.
 However, Bridge Works require Engineering Time Allowance (ETA) for 
which efforts are made by Zonal Railways to complete within allotted timeframe. 
Indian Railways has already implemented web based application called “Indian 
Railways Project Sanctions and Management” (IRPSM). Details of all the 
Bridge Works sanctioned at Railway Board level or at Zonal Railway level are 
available on this portal. Nominated executing agencies or coordinating agencies 
update the progress of each work every month which is periodically reviewed 
at Zonal Railways and Railway Board level to complete the works in a time 
bound manner. A sanctioned work under ORN-2 or higher is programmed for 
completion in 3 to 4 years, but prioritized bridges are tackled in less period 
also. However, sometimes the progress of Bridge Works is not as per planning 
because of various reasons which are not under control of Railways like excessive 
rainfall, flooding, interruption to supply of materials etc. Nevertheless, timely 
completion of the works has always been an endeavour of the Railways and 
various reviews are carried out not only to spend more but also complete the 
bridge works timely.

13
Recommendation (p ara No. 5)
 The Committee find that the Indian Railways depends on a methodical 
system of inspection where conditional ratings are given based on the physical 
condition at the time of assessment by the inspecting authority. The Committee 
also find that the Ministry relies heavily on the visual perception and evaluation 
of the inspecting official. The Committee feel that such a system puts an undue 
heavy strain on the wisdom of the inspector and their adherence to prescribed 
norms/procedures. In such a scenario there is a distinct possibility of subjectivity 
creeping in as perceptions are often open to interpretations. The Ministry have 
also themselves admitted that they do not have a standardised guideline for 
imposing speed restrictions. They, therefore, recommend the Railways to formulate 
definitive guidelines for bridge inspections including those for speed restrictions in 
order to eliminate the need for speculation on the part of the assessing officer. 
Such guidelines should be comprehensive, unambiguous and include all aspects 
or possible scenarios of bridge inspections. Further, the Committee recommend 
that the Railways should design intensive training courses/modules for officials 
connected with bridge inspections keeping in mind the latest technological 
expertise in the sphere of bridge management/ maintenance etc. being adopted 
across the world.
Reply of the Government
 There is an elaborate system of inspection and maintenance of Bridges 
on Indian Railways. These inspections are carried out at various levels. The 
bridges are thoroughly inspected by Assistant Divisional Engineers and detailed 
observations are recorded in Bridge Inspection registers in the prescribed 
proforma. In addition, detailed technical inspection of certain bridges is carried 
out by Section Engineer (Bridges) at specified interval. Instructions are, thereafter, 
given for carrying out repairs of defects noticed during these inspections. Bridge 
Registers are then sent for scrutiny and directions of Divisional Engineers and 
further to Chief Engineer/ Chief Bridge Engineer. Based on observations in the 
registers, Bridges requiring inspection at higher level are again inspected by 
Divisional Engineers and the Chief Engineer/ Chief Bridge Engineer and the 
remedial actions are taken as required.
 Scrutiny and inspection at various levels is a conscious effort in minimizing 
subjectivity.
 However, in order to further minimize subjectivity, if any, in assessment 
of condition of bridge and to assess the suitability of existing bridges for higher 
loading standards and high power locomotives (high longitudinal force), Indian 
Railways has, therefore, started implementing instrumentation on its bridges.

14
Modern Techniques for inspection are already commenced as under:–
 ● Continuous water level monitoring system
 ● Continuous Scour Monitoring of bridge foundation;
 ● 3D Scanning of river beds;
 ● Inspection of bridges by Drones;
 ● Under Water Inspection of bridges by Remote Operated Vehicle 
(ROV).
 Bridge staffs are trained for their jobs both through theoretical class room 
training and practical work at site using the tools, equipments and machinery. 
Training is a continuing process right from the time of recruitment.
 Following training courses at Zonal Railway level, IRICEN level are 
conducted every year for training of all officials due:–
i. Initial courses;
ii. Promotional courses;
iii. Refresher courses;
iv. Special courses.
 The recommendation by the Committee for exposure to global practices 
shall be further carried forward.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para No. 12 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (p ara No. 6)
 The Committee feel that the Ministry should explore the use of modern 
technology for inspection of bridges which may be beneficial in early detection 
of damage and lower maintenance costs. The Committee also desire the Ministry 
to study the modern methods being used by the Railways of other countries 
and endeavour to bring/implement such technologies and systems across our own 
network. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry is utilizing satellite 
imagery for detecting faults on its tracks and feel that they should extend this 
initiative for bridges also which would vastly minimize human error and reduce 
maintenance costs. The Committee wish to put forward the viewpoint that to 
improve or inculcate new bridge technology or newer methods of inspection, the 
Railways must engage with global partners such as Railways of other countries 
and premier institutions such as the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) etc. 

15
Such a collaboration may provide stimulus and encourage rail research and lead 
to innovations in technology in respect of bridges. The Committee feel that in 
addition to introduction of new technologies the Ministry should also study their 
efficacy or impact on the system. The Committee therefore recommend that the 
Ministry should make a comprehensive survey/study to analyse the benefits as 
well as effectiveness accrued and whether there has been a marked improvement 
in rail/bridge safety as a result of the implementation of such technologies.
Reply of the Government
(1) With a view to modernise the inspection system so as to minimise the 
human intervention and thus subjectivity, Railways has taken effective steps in 
gradually implementing various modern technologies like:
 ● Inspection of Bridges by Drones;
 ● Underwater inspection of Bridges by ROV (Remote Operated Vehicle);
 ● Continuous Water Level Monitoring System on identified bridges;
 ● Scour Monitoring System;
 ● 3D Mapping of river beds;
 ● Instrumentation of bridges for health monitoring;
 ● Portable train detection and alarm system.
(2) An EOI has been issued by RDSO for Long Life Paint Systems, which 
is expected to rope in Global firms with proven standards.
(3) All these modern technologies are first put in trial stage in few Zonal 
Railways. RDSO, after study and research on the efficacy of these, recommends 
for regular adoption like Continuous Water Level Monitoring System on identified 
bridges (160 no. of bridges).
(4) Recently, Health Monitoring Systems have been approved on following 
Important Bridges which shall be implemented by 3rd party including Global 
Partners: Bogibeel Bridge and Bridge No. 44 in Jiribam-Imphal section of NFR.
(5) Also, 3rd party audit of Rail Bridges, ROBs etc. has also been started 
wherein IIT, Mumbai, Indore have been roped in for using their expertise. 409 
no. of bridges have already been inspected in Central and Western Railway.
(6) A presentation on the use of Spherical Bearings by one of the Global 
firms Hirun was organized on dt. 14.02.19 in Railway Board for dissemination 
of modern, new technology. This presentation was attended by Sr. Management 
of Railway Board, Northern Railway and expert Team of RDSO (Bridge 
Directorate).

16
(7) In addition, seminars through IPWE, on the important topics regarding 
Bridge Maintenance, Construction etc. are organized which are attended by more 
than 500 delegates across Indian Railways, Global Partners etc.
Recommendation (p ara No. 7)
 The Committee find that under water inspection of bridges are carried 
out only once in every 5 years on bridges which have structures partially 
submerged underwater permanently. The Committee feel that with the pressure 
of expansion of rail traffic such an interval is too large. Heavier/faster trains 
at greater frequency is bound to put greater stress and hasten the wear and 
tear of the bridge structure. Given such a situation, the Committee would like 
the Ministry to consider increasing the frequency of underwater inspections of 
bridges to preserve their worthiness and preventing untoward incidents. The 
Committee also find that under water inspections are carried out by outsourced 
agencies. The Committee do not concur with the Ministry's justification that since 
underwater inspections are highly specialized they are required to be carried out 
by specialized agencies. The contention of the Ministry that since only a small 
percentage of bridges required underwater inspections hence the capability was 
not developed in-house is not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee have 
been informed that the Ministry has started a trial of using a Remote Operated 
Vehicle (ROV) for conducting underwater inspections of bridges. The Committee 
laud this initiative and recommend that the Ministry should give greater impetus 
to proliferation of this technology as it would not only be cost effective but also 
gradually negate the need of physical examination currently being followed. This 
would consequently reduce the dependence on the outsourced agencies.
Reply of the Government
 Committee’s recommendation of proliferation of Under Water Inspection 
using ROV has been noted. With the gradual proliferation of this technology, 
developing the in-house team for such inspections would not be required in 
future. Also, these outsourced agencies who bring in special equipments and 
gadgets are working under direct supervision of experienced, trained Railway 
Supervisors.
Recommendation (p ara No. 8)
 The Committee find that the Indian Railways have dedicated category of 
staff for inspection and maintenance of bridges. However the Committee find 
to their chagrin that there exists a very high rate of vacancy in this category 
of staff. As against a sanctioned strength of 7669, the actual strength is only 
4517 indicating a vacancy of around 40 percent. Admittedly, the lack of 
manpower have negatively affected their inspection routine and most acutely in 

17
the northeast frontier Railway. The Committee feel that this is a grave lapse on 
the part of the Ministry in ensuring safety of rail traffic. As earlier observed, the 
bridges are the most vulnerable link on the Railways and lack of manpower 
in this segment is bound to create gaps in inspection and maintenance which 
may compromise Railway safety. The Committee, therefore, direct the Ministry 
to shake off its inertia and fill up these vacancies in the shortest possible time 
and in the right earnest. The Committee also recommend that till the time such 
vacancies are filled the Ministry should set up some temporary measures like 
filling up these posts through deputation etc. to tide over the shortage. They 
can approach other Government agencies which have bridge features such 
as defence, highway authorities, road agencies etc. to help fill up these posts 
temporarily. The Committee would like to be kept apprised of steps taken in 
this regard.
Reply of the Government
Following steps have been initiated by us to fill up these vacancies:–
i. CRB had written recently to all GMs to submit indents for vacancies 
in Safety Categories vide Board’s letter no. E(NG)II/2009/RR-1  
dt. 05.02.19 under Direct Quota.
ii. All Zonal Railways (GMs) have been advised (with approval of ME) 
for expediting the filling up Selection Quota by CPOs (letter no. 
2017/36CE-II/BR/Vacancy dt.14.02.19) 
iii. A note has been moved vide 2017/36/CE-III/BR/Vacancy dt. 20.02.19 
to PED/Transformation for filling up the vacancies through engaging 
Ex-Servicemen in different categories.
iv. A Committee of 3 SAG Officers, ED/B&S, CTE/NR, EDF(E) has 
been constituted on dt. 15.02.19 with the approval of ME, FC to 
finalize the comments on the recommendations of the 5 member 
committee for rationalizing the yardstick to work out the requirement 
of manpower for Inspection and Maintenance of Bridges on Indian 
Railways.
 It is expected that above steps shall mitigate the problem of vacancies.
Recommendation (p ara No. 9)
 The Committee are of the opinion that natural calamities/hazards like 
earthquakes, fire, cyclones, floods etc. have a greater devastating impact on 
the structural stability of bridges as compared to other rail infrastructure. It 
is seen that even if the bridge is structurally sound yet damage caused by 
natural calamities are amplified due to their vulnerability. These instances not 

18
only cause loss in terms of social, economic and financial terms but they also 
disrupt rail traffic. Further it is pointed out that in certain remote parts of the 
country Railway bridges often form the lone lifeline for communications and 
transportation and any damage to them totally isolates them from the rest of 
the country. Since there is no prevention or control over natural calamities the 
Ministry should have a prior planning for prompt rehabilitation and protection 
from injuries, loss of life, property damage, and destruction of bridges in the 
eventuality of natural calamities.
Reply of the Government
 Bridges on Indian Railways are designed for earthquake/wind forces and 
floods so that they can withstand natural calamities. Moreover, Railways has a 
well-documented Disaster Management Plan. Every Zonal Railway keeps a stock 
of prescribed material, tools and plants at nominated places to meet with any 
emergent situation on account of these natural calamities. Emergency controls 
are set up in respective Zone & Railway Board to monitor the restoration of 
bridge (if involved), Track as early as possible. Assistance of NDRF is a part 
of Disaster Management Plans of each Zonal Railway.
Recommendation (p ara No. 10)
 The Committee find that in the last 3 years the Railways have 
commissioned 8611 new bridges on account of expansion of rail network. 
Moreover 4027 existing bridges have been approved for rehabilitation. The 
Committee also find that in the last 3 years 2347 existing bridges have been 
rehabilitated. The Committee wish to remind the Ministry that with a total bridge 
population of over 1.4 lakh bridges these numbers are highly insignificant and in 
their opinion not proportionate to the number of bridges requiring upgradation. 
As regards the physical performance of bridge works the Committee was 
informed that targets are set on a yearly basis. The Committee are happy to 
note that the Ministry has been achieving the targets and exceeding them in 
some years. They, however, feel that the targets being set by the Ministry are 
too modest and unrealistic and recommend that the Ministry make a realistic 
evaluation of its bridge infrastructure and set targets appropriately. At the same 
time the Committee wish to caution the Ministry against setting ambitious targets 
that neither receive allocation nor abide by timelines. However in terms of 
allocation and utilization the Ministry appears to be falling short. In most years, 
the allocation was reduced at the RE stage significantly yet the Ministry was 
unable to fully utilise the resources. In the light of the fact that the Railways 
have been experiencing severe funds limitations in the last two decades, unspent 
funds point to lack of proper planning by the Ministry in executing works of such 
paramount importance. The Committee are unhappy to note that year after year 

19
there have been a reduction at the RE stage. The Ministry cannot take recourse 
to their oft quoted excuse of lack of funds in this regard. The Committee are of 
the strong opinion that reduction of funds at RE stage points to the inefficacy 
of the planning process of the Ministry or short sightedness in assigning targets. 
The Committee therefore urge the Ministry to keep a strong grip on its finances 
and set realistic targets and goals. The Committee note with concern that with 
the exception of financial year 2014-15, the monies have been greatly reduced. 
They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry take proactive steps in order to 
fully utilize its allocations keeping with the timelines.
Reply of the Government
(i) After sanction of bridge work, several activities are involved in bridge 
rehabilitation work such as preparation and finalization of General 
Arrangement Drawing (GAD), preparation and sanction of detailed 
estimate, land acquisition in some cases, obtaining CRS sanction, 
finalization of tenders, execution of work etc.
(ii) Following are statistics for Plan Head: 32 regarding bridge rehabilitation:
 2001-02 to 2010-11 12650 Nos. rehabilitated.
 Rs. 3419 crore funds under SRSF fully consumed.
 2010-11 to 2017-18 6503 Nos. rehabilitated (106% of T arget 
achieved) Rs. 3295 crore consumed (90% of BG allotted)
(iii) Sanctioning of more bridges under PH: 32 every year is a continuous 
exercise after regular inspection.
ORN-I (NIL) are executed within one year.
 ORN-2 (233) as on 01.04.2018 are executed on programmed basis 
in 3-4 years & also prioritising these on GQ & GD for enhancing 
the throughput.
(iv) The recommendation of Committee for setting up realistic T arget for 
Timelines and also asking for the enhanced Budget Support (RRSK) 
are noted & shall be followed up in true spirit.
(v) Physical targets for 2018-19 set for 900 nos. shall be achieved.
Recommendation (p ara No. 11)
 The Committee find that the Ministry had set up High Level Safety 
Review Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Anil Kakodkar in 2012 
to review the safety of the Indian Railways and recommend improvements 

20
thereto. This Committee had made some recommendations regarding safety and 
maintenance of bridges. However to their disappointment, the Committee find 
that even after a gap of 6 years the Ministry has only partially accepted some of 
these recommendations. The Committee are dissatisfied to note that there have 
been numerous occasions when the Ministry has disregarded or overlooked the 
recommendations of these Committees whose sole purpose is to suggest better 
methods for rail management. They recommend the Ministry to prescribe a time 
bound implementation of the recommendations of this Expert Committee and 
their implementation should be monitored at the highest level. The Committee 
would like to be kept apprised of any actions taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
1. The High Level Safety Review Committee recommended:
i. T aking of Photographs and uploaded in MIS for monitoring the 
condition of bridges;
ii. Fitting of Water Level Gauges and Turbine Flow Meters to 
measure the flow of river; and
iii. Instrumentation of bridges in terms of deflection, water level and 
flow velocity.
2. Going by the recommendations of the Committee, a web-based IT 
application, Bridge Management System (BMS) has been developed 
and launched in 2018. The bridge records are uploaded and as a 
result, all bridge related information is available 24x7 for meaningful 
analysis related to the safety item. Railways has also taken steps 
in installing and commissioning Water Level Monitoring System on 
identified bridges (160 nos.). The system has already been installed on 
104 numbers of bridges. With a view to instrumentation of vulnerable 
bridges for measuring bridge girder deflection/camber, a pilot project 
has also been taken up by Northern Railway.
3. Besides, trials have been conducted at various Zonal Railways on the 
following:
 ● Under Water Inspection of Bridges by Remote Operated Vehicle 
(ROV);
 ● Inspection of bridges using Drones;
 ● 3D scanning of river beds;
 ● Continuous Scour Monitoring;

21
 The implementation of the above technologies is being regularly monitored 
in Railway Board; and Zonal Railways are accordingly chased for expeditious 
implementation of the technologies.
Recommendation (p ara No. 12)
 The Committee find that the Railways have adopted and implemented a 
number of new technologies in the sphere of bridge construction. At the same 
time, they are also trying to develop new technologies under the aegis of the 
‘Make in India’ initiative. They also note that the Ministry is considering the use 
of drones for use in assessing the condition of bridges. The Committee feel that 
such aerial devices are not only cost effective but they are more efficient and 
less hazardous for inspecting staff. They can also be used much more frequently 
than traditional methods of inspections. Moreover 3D mapping of bridges can 
help authorities with long term repair/maintenance plans. The Committee laud 
this unique initiative of the Ministry to harness new technologies and advise 
them to begin its implementation at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
 Railways are making all efforts to implement the world proven new 
technologies in the field of Bridge Inspection & Maintenance. This has already 
been explained in paras 5, 6 & 11 above.

22
ChapTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

23
ChapTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (p ara No. 1)
 The Committee note that the Indian Railways has a staggering 1,47,523 
number of bridges across its immense network. The Committee further note that 
the Indian Railways have classified bridges under three broad categories which 
are based on the breadth of their waterway. Bridges with a linear waterway of 
300 meters are classified as Important Bridges and those with a linear waterway 
of 18 meters are classified as Major Bridges. All other bridges are classified as 
Minor Bridges. This classification effectively relegates 92 percent of the bridges 
in the Indian Railways to the Minor Bridge category. The Committee feel 
that such a categorization is too broad and may lead to exclusion of large 
number of bridges and in view of the fact that there exists different parameters 
for inspections, maintenance etc. of bridges, such a wide difference would 
result in unequal weightage/importance being given to only a few bridges as 
compared to vast majority. The Committee express their reservations on the 
above mentioned classification and recommend that the Ministry should re-
evaluate their classification of bridges in order to bring about some parity. They 
also recommend that this re-evaluation should take into account the changing 
dynamics of modern rail transportation which sees the use of heavier and faster 
trains and higher density of traffic regardless of the measurement of waterways. 
The Committee strongly feel that such a step would result in augmented safety 
and security of bridges.
Recommendation (p ara No. 2)
 The Committee find to their surprise that though the 37,689 number of 
bridges on its network are 100 years or older, yet the Railways do not classify 
them as a special/separate segment. Rather they are kept at par with the existing 
newer/modern bridges when it comes to inspections and maintenance. The 
Committee express serious doubts over such an action and opine that these 
bridges have been planned for lesser loads and service conditions that have 
changed radically over time. Axle loads and traffic density have increased with 
the advent of faster and heavier trains and safety of these old bridges may be 
severely compromised which may lead to safety failures. The Committee are of 
the considered opinion that the (now) obsolete technology and materials used 
in these old bridges may not be compliant with modern rail paraphernalia and 
hence there would be a requirement of a different protocol when it comes to 
their upkeep and sustenance. The Committee also opine that deficiencies related 

24
to aging bridges can become a major concern for their structural safety. As 
such, the Committee do not concur with the contention of the Ministry that the 
age of a bridge has no direct bearing on its safety and it is only the physical 
condition of the bridge that is taken into account while classifying a bridge. 
The Committee wish to remind the Ministry that such a generalization would 
be detrimental to the health of a bridge since the archaic technology/materials 
of these older bridges may not be able to withstand the rigors of modern rail 
transport equipment. It should also be taken into account that these bridges 
have withstood the stress and rigours of over a century suffering corrosion, 
distress, wear and tear. The Committee would like to emphasize that with the 
advent of modern rail transportation, older bridges may be unable to withstand 
higher load and speed, resulting in accidents or compromise with punctuality. 
The Committee also take cognizance of the fact that several of these structures 
have formidable heritage value and are intrinsically linked to the history of the 
country and overuse or misuse of these structures may erode their historical 
value. While the Committee are aware of the commercial concerns as well as 
financial limitations of the Ministry yet they feel that safety is paramount and 
should not be compromised at anytime. They therefore advise the Ministry to 
devise a protocol of inspection and maintenance to include a greater degree of 
safety/safeguards for bridges which come under this category while keeping their 
commercial interests intact.
Reply of the Government
Railway Bridges are classified in the following three types based on their 
waterway:
 Important bridge: Bridges with linear waterway of 300 metres or more or 
a total waterway of 1000 square metres or more and those Bridges considered 
as important by the Principal Chief Engineer/Chief Bridge Engineer, depending 
on considerations such as depth of waterway, extent of river training works and 
maintenance problems are classified as Important Bridges.
 Major bridge: Bridges with total water way of 18 linear metres or more 
or which have a clear opening of 12 linear metres or more in any one span 
are classified as Major Bridges.
 Minor bridge: Bridges which do not fall in the above classifications are 
classified as minor Bridges.
 However, the classification of the bridges or the age of the bridges does 
not have a direct relevance on the Inspection/Maintenance protocol of the 
bridges. There is a well established system of inspection of bridges on Indian 
Railways. All the bridges are inspected twice a year, one before the onset of 

25
monsoon and one detailed inspection after the monsoon. In addition, certain 
bridges are also inspected more frequently depending upon their condition. 
Repair/strengthening/rehabilitation/rebuilding of Railway bridges is a continuous 
process and is undertaken whenever so warranted by their physical condition 
as ascertained during these inspections and not on the basis of age. If the 
corrective/remedial measures are expected to take a long duration due to the 
complexity of the site situation, etc., suitable safety measures like imposing speed 
restrictions and keeping such bridge under close watch are taken till the bridge 
is repaired/strengthened/rehabilitated/rebuilt.
 There exists a Numerical Rating System for assessment of Bridge health. 
Every bridge component of Major and Important bridges is assigned with a 
Conditional Rating Number (CRN). The list of the components is as under:–
1. Foundation and Flooring;
2. Masonry/Concrete in Substructure;
3. Training and Protective work;
4. Bed Blocks;
5. Bearing and expansion arrangement;
6. Superstructure; and
7. Track structure.
 Lower the CRN, more serious is the deteriorated condition of the 
component. From the CRNs of different component of the bridge, an Overall 
Rating Number (ORN) of the bridge as a whole is given. The ORN is the lowest 
of the 7 CRNs of the bridge. For Minor Bridges only ORN is given based upon 
its overall condition.
 Thus equal weightage is being given to the Major, Important bridges by 
rating individual component and then arriving at ORN i.e. lowest of CRN.
 The present system is working satisfactorily since 64 years for all categories 
of bridges in the Indian Railways system.
 It is agreed that the Axle Load and Traffic density has increased with 
heavier train proposed to be run for which planning has already been done as 
under:–
 1. Dedicated Freight Corridor (Eastern and Western Routes) – there are 
776 and 439 bridges respectively which have been identified for strengthening 
to take the higher axle load. Concerned Zonal Railways (ER, ECR, NCR, 
NR, NWR, SER, WR, CR) have already initiated the action in advance for 
strengthening these bridges which are likely to carry higher axle load.

26
 2. 25T routes – there are 1085 nos. of bridges which have been 
identified which are falling on these routes. Concerned Zonal Railways (ER, 
ECoR, SER, SECR, SWR, SCR, SR) have already initiated action in advance 
for strengthening these bridges which are likely to carry higher axle load.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see recommendation para no. 9 of Chapter I)
 

27
ChapTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED
– Nil –
 n ew  d eLhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH
29 November, 2019 Chairperson,
8 Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways.

28
appENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2019-20)
 The Committee met on Thursday, the 28th November, 2019 from  
1430 hrs. to 1500 hrs. in Committee Room ‘62’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Radha Mohan Singh — Chairperson
m emBerS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
 3. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
 4. Shri Suresh Kodikunnil
 5. Smt. Diya Kumari
 6. Smt. Jaskaur Meena
 7. Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal
 8. Smt. Queen Oja
 9. Smt. Keshari Devi Patel
 10. Shri Mukesh Rajput
 11. Shri N. Reddeppa
 12. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
 13. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur
Rajya Sabha
 14. Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha
 15. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar
Secretariat
1. Dr. Kavita Prasad — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Additional Director

29
4. Shri Ram Lal Yadav — Additional Director
5. Smt. Archana Srivastva — Deputy Secretary
 2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the 
draft Report on Action T aken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations of the Committee contained in their 23rd Report on ‘Maintenance 
of Bridges in Indian Railways: A Review’.
 The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Report without any 
modification.
 3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports 
and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

30
appENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
23RD REPORT (16 TH LOK SABHA) ON THE 
SUBJECT “MAINTENANCE OF BRIDGES 
IN INDIAN RAILWAYS: A REVEW”
Total number of Recommendations/Observations:  12
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:
 Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
  Total: 10
  Percentage of Total: 83.33%
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
 Para No. Nil
  Total: Nil
  Percentage of Total: 0
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:
 Para Nos. 1 and 2
  Total: 2
  Percentage of Total: 16.67%
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies are still 
awaited:
 Para No. Nil
  Total: Nil
  Percentage of Total: 0

‘‘All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are  
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament 
House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents      
appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, 
Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) 
and their outlets, The said information is available on website  
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items 
with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop 
(Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building, 
New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website mentioned 
above.’’