 
 
 
 
07 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2025-26) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 4th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Construction and maintenance of Rail tunnels and Bridges 
including Road Over Bridges/Road Under Bridges’] 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT  
 
 
 
                                       
  
             
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
MARCH, 2026/PHALGUNA, 1947 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
 
 
SCR NO.  251 
 
SEVENTH REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2025-26)  
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA    
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 4 th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Construction and maintenance of Rail tunnels and Bridges 
including Road Over Bridges/Road Under Bridges’] 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.03.2026  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.03.2026             
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2026/PHALGUNA, 1947 (SAKA) 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................................ (ii) 
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (iv) 
 
PART-I 
 
CHAPTER I REPORT………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government……………………………………… 
 
13 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………… 
 
32 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration……..  
 
33 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited …… 
34 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on 
23.02.2026 
35 
APPENDIX  
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha)…………………. 
 
37 
 

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2025-26)@ 
 
   Dr. C.M. Ramesh   - Chairperson 
 
                MEMBERS 
 
  LOK SABHA 
  
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Shri T. R. Baalu 
5. Shri Ummeda Ram Beniwal 
6. Shri Chhotelal 
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
11. Shri Khagen Murmu 
12. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
13. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
14. Shri Sudama Prasad 
15. Shri M K Raghavan 
16. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
17. Dr. Swami Sachidanand Hari Sakshi 
18. Dr. Bhola Singh 
19. Shri Bharatbhai Manubhai Sutariya 
20. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
21. Shri Vijayakumar Alias Vijay Vasanth 
  
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Narhari Amin 
23. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
24. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
25. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
26. Dr. K. Laxman 
27. Shri Khiru Mahto 
28. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
29. Smt. Sadhna Singh 
30. Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki 
31. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
@ Constituted w.e.f. 26.09.202 5 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 3290 dated 
01.10.2025.  
(ii)

 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam  - Director 
3. Smt. Savdha Kalia  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)  

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (202 5-26), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Seventh Report on Action Taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Construction and 
maintenance of Rail tunnels and Bridges including Road Over Bridges/Road Under 
Bridges’. 
 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha 
on 11.08.2025.  The Report contained 12 Observations/Recommendations. The 
Ministry of Railways furnished Action Taken Notes on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report on 28.11.2025. 
 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 23.02.2026.  The minutes of the sitting are given in Annexure. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.  
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)
New Delhi; DR. C.M. RAMESH 
23 February, 2026________ Chairperson 
04 Phalguna, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
  

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘Construction and maintenance of Rail tunnels and Bridges including Road 
Over Bridges/Road Under Bridges’.  
 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                   
11th August, 2025. It contained 1 2 Observations/ Recommendations. Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and are categorized 
as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: - 
Rec. Para Nos. 1 to 12  
             Chapter-II  
                                          Total: 12 
Percentage:100 
(ii) Observations/recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: - 
 
         NIL                    
           Chapter-III 
                               Total: 00 
Percentage:00 
         
(iii) Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: - 
 NIL                               
           Chapter-IV 
                Total: 00 
Percentage:00 
(iv) Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies are still awaited:  
           NIL                     
             Chapter-V 
                                 Total: 00 
Percentage:00 

 
 
2 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report be furnished 
to them at the earliest but not l ater than three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier Observations/ 
Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further comments. 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
5. The Committee in their Fourth Report had noted that the Ministry have established 
a mechanism for underwater inspection of bridge sub -structures, particularly for those 
perennially submerged, by engaging third -party specialized agencies and deploying 
advanced technologies such as Remote Operated Robotic Vehicles (RORV) and other 
specialized equipment. The Committee appreciate that underwater repair works have been 
carried out on 98 bridges over the last five years. However, the Committee recommend that 
the Ministry further enhance the capacity and availability of such specialized services, 
ensure periodic review of underwater inspection protocols and explore the adoption of 
newer, more advanced underwater inspection and repair technologies. Currently, the  
quality of underwater structure inspection is heavily dependent on human skill and the 
effectiveness of inspection is not consistently reliable. The Committee urge the expanded 
and extensive use of advanced technologies like RORV which can provide precise location 
and extent of defects while simultaneously minimizing risks to human operators who can 
remotely operate the vehicle from surface. Such technological intervention will improve 
the safety, durability and operational reliability of railway bridges, especially in flood -
prone and vulnerable areas. 
6. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as follows: 
“The substructure of the bridges which are normally under water should be 
inspected by adopting suitable methods which may include engaging of divers and 

 
 
3 
 
special equipment. 
RDSO has issued detail guidelines which outlines the use of Underwater 
Inspection (UWI). The guidelines have also envisaged inspection through 
Remotely Operated  Robotic Vehicle (RORV) which is a modern, technology -
driven method for inspection of substructure components of bridges located under 
water. 
Through RORV technology, inspections can now be carried out remotely 
from the surface, thereby eliminating direct human exposure to underwater  risks 
such as strong currents, low visibility, entanglement hazards, and decompression-
related dangers. The RORV, equipped with high-resolution cameras, sonar sensors, 
and lighting systems, can capture detailed  imagery and data of submerged bridge 
elements such as piers, foundations, and scour zones. This enables objective 
assessment of defects, erosion patterns, and structural deterioration. 
In new report,  specific check lists, schedule of items, firm registered for 
RORV has been incorporated. The format for inspection, criteria for selection of 
particular method and other technical specifications have also been provided in the 
revised report. The BS -96 report provides comprehensive technical guidance  on 
the design, functionality, and field deployment of RORVs, defining standard 
procedures for underwater inspection with safety and operational requirements of 
Indian Railways. The adoption of RORV -based underwater inspection, as 
recommended in  BS-96, marks a significant advancement from conventional 
manual diving methods, which are often hazardous, time -consuming, and limited 
by visibility and depth constraints. 
The RDSO instructions also emphasize the data recording and analysis 
framework, allowing the inspection findings to be integrated with the Bridge 
Management System (BMS). This integration ensures long-term traceability, trend 
analysis, and predictive maintenance planning. 
Thus, the implementation of recommendations contained in BS -96 

 
 
4 
 
represents a major step toward modernization, safety enhancement, and  scientific 
asset management of railway bridge infrastructure.” 
 
7. The Committee appreciate the significant advancements made in strengthening 
underwater bridge inspection practices. While traditional methods relied on divers 
and specialized equipment, the introduction of RDSO’s detailed guidelines on 
Underwater Inspectio n (UWI) has brought greater clarity and uniformity. The 
Committee note that adoption of Remotely Operated Robotic Vehicles (RORVs), as 
highlighted in the BS‑96 report, reflects a commendable shift towards modern, 
technology-driven solutions that enhance safety and precision by eliminating human 
exposure to risks. The inclusion of standardized checklists, schedules, formats, and 
specifications ensures consistency across Indian Railways, while integration with the 
Bridge Management System (BMS) enables traceability and predictive maintenance. 
However, the Committee reiterate its earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry 
to ensure the comprehensive operationalization of Remote Operated Robotic Vehicle 
(RORV) technology for underwater bridge inspections. This should be supported by 
adequate financial provisions, timely procurement of standardized equipment and 
capacity-building of technical personnel through focused training programmes. In this 
connection, it is imperative that the Ministry develop measurable performance 
indicators to assess the quality of underwater inspections, ensure seamless real -time 
integration of RORV -generated data with the Bridge Management System (BMS), 
and establish a mechanism to verify the accuracy and consistency of inspection results. 
The Committee further emphasize the need for sustained technological advancement 
through collaboration with research and innovation agencies to enhance RORV 
efficiency and other technology -enabled inspection methods, particularly in the 
domains of improved imaging, advanced defect detection, and precise scour mapping. 
Such measures would enable a strategic transition from reactive repairs to predictive 
maintenance, with particular relevance for bridges located in flood-prone and high-
vulnerability regions. 

 
 
5 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
8. The Committee in their Fourth Report had noted that as per current norms, escape 
tunnels with adits or lateral exits are provided for tunnels exceeding 3 km in length. The 
Committee also observe that certain existing tunnels, such as Tunnel No. 9 on the 
Lumding-Badarpur section (3.25 km), which carries both passenger and freight traffic, and 
Tunnel No. 57A on the Obulavaripalli -Krishnapatnam section (6.63 km), used for goods 
trains, do not have escape tunnels. The Committee further note that the planning for Tunnel 
No. 9 was undertaken prior to the introduction of the policy mandating such provisions. 
Given the critical importance of passenger and staff safety in case of emergencies, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry examine the feasibility of providing escape 
tunnels or suitable alternative evacuation arrangements for all existing tunnels longer than 
3 km. The Committee also urge that tunnels currently used exclusively for goods 
movement should be considered for escape tunnel provision, bearing in mind the potential 
future use for passenger traffic. Additionally, the Committee observe that Railway s is 
actively expanding its network in regions like the North East, Jammu & Kashmir and other 
mountainous areas where tunnels and bridges constitute a major part of the infrastructure. 
In light of this, the Committee urge the Ministry to conduct a comprehensive review of all 
operational and under -construction railway tunnels — including those shorter than 3 km 
— with priority given to those located in vulnerable zones such as seismic areas, flood -
prone stretches and regions with challenging geology. Whereve r feasible, the Ministry 
should consider the provision of escape routes, cross passages or alternative evacuation 
facilities to enhance safety measures and ensure preparedness for emergencies. Further, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the findings of the team comprising representatives 
from the Railway Board, RDSO and NHAI which is examining the feasibility of utilising 
escape tunnels for road commuters to ensure optimum utilization of the infrastructure being 
developed. 
9. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as follows: 
“Planning for Tunnel No. 9 on Lumding - Badarpur section was undertaken 
prior to the introduction of the policy mandating such provisions. The length is also 

 
 
6 
 
only 250 m extra than the subsequently permitted length (3000m). However good 
approach road, ventilation, lighting and foothpath has been provided as alternative 
measures for safe evacuation. 
Tunnel No. 57A between Obulavaripalli– Krishnapatnam station is presently 
being used only for goods train. But Side pathways (footpaths) have been provided 
continuously on both sides along the entire length of the tunnel. These pathways 
serve as a safe and accessible passage for maintenance personnel in the event of any 
unforeseen circumstance, thereby functioning effectively as an evacuation corridor 
within the main tunnel itself. Moreover, the escape tunnel/adits can be planned at 
later stages if need arises. 
The tunnels having length less than 3 km do not require a separate escape 
route or adits because the two portals (entrances) provide a quick exit for the 
passengers, and the maximum distance to a safe place is limited. However , the 
specific cases are dealt on need basis keeping in view of vulnerability of area such 
as seismic zones, flood prone stretches and region with challenging geology. 
An institutional mechanism for integrated planning of tunnel projects has 
been formed jointly with the Ministry of Road Transport & Highway. Joint Working 
Group comprising representatives from the Ministry of Railways, MoRTH, and 
their respective executing agencies has been proposed for feasibility assessment of 
Rail-and-Road Tunnel Projects at Alignment - Finalization/DPR Stage. Gati Shakti 
Directorate is coordinating from Ministry of Railways.” 
 
10. The Committee, while acknowledging the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure 
evacuation preparedness in tunnels designed prior to the mandatory escape‑tunnel 
provisions, emphasize the importance of adopting a more proactive, forward‑looking, 
and safety‑oriented strategy for the management of long and strategically significant 
tunnels. The Committee urge the Ministry to establish an assessment framework for 
all existing and planned tunnels irrespective of their length taking into account factors 
such as operational usage, traffic density, accident vulnerability , structural 

 
 
7 
 
limitations and prevailing geological conditions.  In cases where evacuation 
preparedness relies on alternatives such as footpaths, adequate illumination, 
ventilation systems, or improved access roads, the Committee recommend that 
systematic safety audits be carried out at regular intervals, with timely up grades 
undertaken to ensure these features remain fully aligned with contemporary safety 
standards.  Furthermore, the Committee desire that the proposed Joint Working 
Group with MoRTH and the respective executing agencies should expedite feasibility 
studies and develop uniform national standards for integrated tunnel planning. These 
standards may include protocols for the shared use of escape tunnels by road and rail 
agencies, thereby ensuring optimal utilization of infrastructure and enhancing 
emergency response capabilities across the network. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
11. The Committee in their Fourth Report had noted the Ministry’s policy framework 
for addressing the provision of Road Under Bridges (RUBs), Foot Over Bridges (FOBs) 
and pedestrian subways at locations where no level crossings (LCs) exist, but where public 
movement continues, either through existing roads  leading up to the railway boundaries 
without LC or at sites where LC have been discontinued. The Committee observe that many 
such locations exist, particularly, where proper roads extend up to railway boundaries, yet 
serve as informal access points for tr espassing. This situation results in recurring safety 
hazards, unauthorized crossings and potential disruption to train operations. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry conduct a comprehensive joint survey of these 
locations across the railway network  to assess safety risks, public demand and traffic 
density. This exercise should be carried out in coordination with State Governments, 
NHAI, and local civic bodies. Based on the survey findings, a time -bound action plan 
should be prepared for the provision of RUBs, limited or restricted height subways (LHSs), 
FOBs or pedestrian subways, wherever technically feasible and operationally essential on 
priority basis. Further the Committee desire that such infrastructure works be integrated 

 
 
8 
 
with nearby road development or urban infrastructure projects to optimize resources 
utilization, improve public access to enhance operational and public safety. 
12. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as follows: 
“As per extant policy dated 19.08.2024, “If the location is a source of 
trespass, affecting safety in train operations, mobility of trains and fixed 
infrastructure of railway, Railway may consider providing suitable subways/FOB 
etc. as per feasibility at railways cost”. Total 300 no. works have already sanctioned 
at non-Level Crossing locations to prevent trespassing.  
However, if any new development works are planned by State Government 
nearby track area, the work for construction of ROB/RUB at the demanded location 
may be taken up on deposit terms provided State Government agrees to bear the 
complete cost of construction and maintenance subject to its feasibility.” 
 
13. The Committee, while recognizing the Ministry’s initiatives and the sanction 
of 300 works at non-Level Crossing locations  to deter trespassing, emphasize the 
necessity of adopting a more structured and anticipatory strategy for managing 
unauthorized movement across railway tracks. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
develop a comprehensive, risk -based mapping of the entire network to identify 
locations where public pathways, village link roads or city streets terminate near 
railway premises and are informally used as crossing routes in the absence of formal 
level crossings. This exercise should be carried out in close coordination with State 
Governments, NHAI, local authorities to ensure accurate identification of existing 
and emerging patterns of pedestrian and vehicular movement . Based on this 
assessment, a prioritized action plan should be formulated to introduce appropriate 
interventions such as Road Under Bridges (RUBs), Limited Height Subways (LHSs), 
Foot Over Bridges (FOBs) or pedestrian subways at technically suitable sites, 
accompanied by definitive timelines and streamlined approval mechanisms.  The 
Committee further emphasize that these measures must be closely coordinated with 
road infrastructure works, smart-city programmes and broader urban/rural mobility 

 
 
9 
 
initiatives to ensure optimal utilization of resources, prevent avoidable duplication 
and provide safe, uninterrupted access for local populations, while simultaneously 
enhancing railway operational safety and efficiency. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
14. The Committee in their Fourth Report had noted the various measures taken by 
Railways to address recurring water-logging problems in Road Under Bridges (RUBs) and 
subways, including integrating adequate drainage systems in new RUBs designs, diversion 
of water to nearby natural drains, provision of humps and cross drains, sealing of joints and 
installation of high-capacity pumps at vulnerable sites. The Committee also appreciate the 
provision of cover sheds at many locations and the systematic inspection of RUBs before 
and after the monsoon to identify and res olve issues. However, despite these efforts the 
Committee observe that water-logging during heavy rainfall remains a significant problem 
in several regions, causing traffic disruptions, safety hazards, and public inconvenience. 
The Committee recommend that  the Ministry prepare a comprehensive inventory of all 
water-logging prone RUBs and subways and prioritize remedial works in a time -bound 
initiative. Further, the Committee urge Railways to actively coordinate with municipal 
bodies and local authorities to  ensure seamless integration of railway drainage with civic 
drainage systems. The Committee also desire the Ministry to establish a clear protocol for 
temporarily halting road traffic during exceptionally heavy rainfall to safeguard 
commuters. 
  
15. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as follows: 
“Railways have taken following remedial measures to mitigate the problem of water 
logging. 
• The inspection of Subways/RUBs is conducted before and after the onset of the 
monsoon. The monitoring of Subways/RUBs to prevent water logging is an 
ongoing process and redressal is undertaken whenever so warranted.  

 
 
10 
 
• Adequate drainage arrangement has been made an integral part of planning of 
new Road under Bridge (RUB)/Subways.  
• To prevent waterlogging, the cover sheds over subways are being providing, 
pump capacity are being enhanced and size of sump are being increased. 
• An Action Plan has been prepared to prevent water logging in Subways/LHS. 
All deficiencies have already been rectified in 1351 nos. subways. 
• In order to provide relief to public in subways which are situated in 
waterlogging prone locations, instructions have been given for constructing 
additional Boxes of lesser depth.  An additional box of lesser depth is also being 
provided for the pedestrian in case of water logging. 
All above measures will help in addressing water-logging problems during rains.” 
16. The Committee while duly noting the remedial measures being undertaken to 
mitigate the problem of water logging reiterates the need  to ensure strict and time-
bound implementation of the Action Plan formulated for preventing water logging in 
Road Under Bridges (RUBs), Subways and Limited Height Subways (LHS). The 
Committee stress that special attention must be accorded to vulnerable locations by 
maintaining round-the-clock readiness of high-capacity pumping arrangements with 
adequate staff, particularly during the peak monsoon period. The need for systematic 
monitoring of the effectiveness of drainage capacities and design adequacies of  
structures by undertaking periodic joint inspections with civic authorities to review 
the condition of drainage channels  and structures to avoid  water-logging risks  
remains cardinal. The Committee are of the view that findings of these inspections 
may be utilized for continuous improvement of existing and proposed  structures 
across railway network . The Committee also desire the Ministry to consider the 
feasibility of formulating a clearly-defined Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP)/guidelines for RUBs, Subways and LHS s for traffic regulation to enhance 
commuter safety, reduce operational disruptions and build resilience against 
recurring monsoon-related challenges. 
 

 
 
11 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
17. The Committee in their Fourth Report had noted that the construction of Road Over 
Bridges (ROBs) and Road Under Bridges (RUBs) faces significant challenges such as land 
acquisition, rehabilitation and resettlement issues, poor coordination among stakeholders, 
delays in approval of General Arrangement Drawings (GADs), shifting of utilities, removal 
of encroachments and obtaining necessary statutory clearances. Moreover, cost -sharing 
complications particularly in the case of older  sanctioned works which often result in 
stalled projects due to the absence of timely response from State Governments regarding 
their share also lead to delays.  The Committee note that as per existing norms, the portion 
of a ROB/RUB falling within railway  land is to be maintained by the Railways, whereas 
the portion beyond railway limits, including the approach roads and lighting, falls under 
the maintenance responsibility of the concerned State Government/road-owning agency or 
local authority. The Committee express concern over the recurring issue of faulty designs, 
water-logging, public inconvenience and traffic stalling in RUBs and stress the need for 
long lasting solutions. While appreciating the efforts of the Railways in adopting 
innovative designs to tackle water-logging and enhance user convenience, the Committee 
feel that more practical and sustainable solutions are required. In light of these challenges, 
the Committee desire the Ministry to establish a structured and institutional mechanism 
with pr oper implementation framework for the active involvement of people’s 
representatives during the planning and execution stages of ROB and RUB projects in a 
constituency. The Committee are of the considered opinion that their engagement will play 
a crucial role in addressing local concerns, ensuring early consensus for land acquisition 
and resettlement, facilitating smoother coordination with State and local authorities for 
utility shifting and clearances thereby help in timely completion and better maintenance of 
RUBs. The Committee are of the view that such participatory planning will lead to more 
efficient, transparent and community-responsive railway infrastructure development. 
 
 

 
 
12 
 
18. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as follows: 
 
“In order to address the problems related to land acquisition, rehabilitation 
and resettlement issues, poor coordination among stakeholders, delays in approval 
of General Arrangement Drawings (GADs), shifting of utilities, removal of 
encroachments and obtaining necessary statutory clearances, the system for sanction 
of works has been changed. Presently, the Detailed Project Report is being prepared 
for all the ROBs/RUBs prior to sanctioning of work. The due diligence is being at 
DPR stage, and various possi ble alternative options for alignment are being 
examined so that such problems are minimized during execution stage.  
The DPR preparation work includes Joint survey for fixing the alignment 
with road owning authorities, utility shifting, Resettlement and rehabilitation if any, 
approach gradients, number of lanes etc.  
Zonal Railways have also been advised for carrying out consultation with all 
stake holders while preparing DPR, and that representations from elected 
representative, if any, may also be considered for better appreciation of ground 
conditions.” 
 
19. The Committee appreciate the Ministry’s initiative to strengthen project 
execution by mandating Detailed Project Reports before sanctioning works. This 
proactive approach, involving joint surveys, stakeholder consultations, and due 
diligence on alignment, utilities, and rehabilitation, ensures better coordination, 
minimizes delays, and enhances transparency, thereby improving safety, efficienc y, 
and accountability in infrastructure development.  The Committee recommend the 
Ministry to develop a standardized and practical framework for meaningful 
coordination with people’s representatives and local authorities during ROB/RUB 
planning and execution. This framework may define clear modalities for consultation 
during alignment finalisation, land acquisition processes, utility shifting plan s and 
review of DPRs to enhance public acceptability and address local constraints at the 
outset. Further, the need to establish a time-bound inter-agency approval mechanism 
with State Governments and concerned civic bodies to minimize delays related to 
cost-sharing decisions, administrative sanctions and statutory clearances  remains 
prime.  
 

 
 
13 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that Indian Railways have established a comprehensive system 
for the inspection and monitoring of bridges, with all the bridges being inspected twice in 
a year, once before the onset of monsoon and another after the monsoon by the designated 
officials supplemented by additional checks for vulnerable structures. The Committee 
further note that the adoption of modern technologies such as drone surveys, 3D riverbed 
scanning and continuous water level monitoring have been adopted for enhancin g the 
reliability and efficiency of inspections. The implementation of the Bridge Management 
System (BMS) for data recording and monitoring has further streamlined decision-making 
and prioritization of rehabilitation works.  The Committee note with appreciation that real 
time monitoring of Anji Bridge, Chenab Bridge and Bogibeel Bridge are being carried out 
using sensors to monitor strain, tilt, wind speed, temperature and other important 
parameters to assess the condition of the bridges and validate their design. The Committee 
desire the Ministry to develop a comprehensive database of railway bridges located in 
vulnerable areas such as flood -prone zones, landslide -prone regions and other high -risk 
locations. The Committee are of the view that these bridges require special inspections 
during the peak monsoon period, in addition to the regular inspections conducted before 
and after the monsoon. The Committee also urge the Ministry to expand the scope of the 
real-time bridge monitoring system to include these b ridges. Furthermore, the Committee 
emphasize the need to strengthen inter-agency coordination particularly with agencies such 
as the IMD, Ministry of Jal Shakti and local authorities to ensure timely information 
exchange, advance warnings and prompt joint action for safeguarding bridge infrastructure 
and ensuring uninterrupted and safe rail operations during adverse weather conditions. 

 
 
14 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Indian Railway has developed the Bridge Management System (BMS) which is a 
comprehensive digital repository and decision-support tool developed for effective 
management of the entire bridge inventory of Indian Railways. It maintains extensive data 
related to design, construction, maintenance history, inspection records, and health 
condition of each bridge. Important ly, the system has specific provisions to identify and 
categorize bridges located in vulnerable and high -risk zones, such as flood -prone areas, 
landslide-prone regions, and other geologically sensitive locations. 
The BMS serves as a central platform for risk- based prioritization, enabling timely 
planning of maintenance, rehabilitation, or  strengthening measures. By integrating 
location-specific vulnerability data, the system allows field units to monitor bridges that 
are exposed to recurrent natural hazards, thereby enhancing the overall safety and 
reliability of the railway infrastructure. 
The Bridges located on flood prone zones are being monitored regularly. Suitable 
provisions in the Indian Railway Bridge Manual (IRBM) for maintaining flood records 
(Soundings, Gauge Reading, Afflux, Velocity, cross  section etc.) and verifying post 
monsoon has been provided (Para 710 & 712). These  records ensure continuous 
assessment of the physical condition and functional safety of the structures. Continuous 
records of the behaviour of large alluvial and other specified rivers and the condition of 
training and protection works of the bridges across them, if any, should be maintained by 
the Assistant Engineer in a “Rivers and floods” register. 
The landslide prone zones are identified at Divisional Level at least once in three years. 
During monsoon, frequent inspection such locations are carried out as required keeping in 
view the past history and the vulnerability. Stationery watchman is also provided round the 
clock on these locations. 
In addition to manual inspections, such bridges have also been brought under the scope 
of the real-time monitoring framework such as continuous water level monitoring system 
which provides live data on water levels thereby assisting in proactive decision - making 

 
 
15 
 
during extreme weather conditions and flood events. 
Effective management of bridge safety in vulnerable areas also relies on continuous 
coordination with various external agencies and authorities, such as : 
(a) Joint Inspections: Annual joint inspections of Railway Affecting Works (RAW) 
and Railway Affecting Tanks (RAT) are conducted in coordination with local 
authorities. These inspections help identify potential threats arising from adjacent 
water bodies, embankments, or hydraulic structures that may impact the stability 
or safety of railway bridges. 
(b) The India Meteorological Department (IMD) regularly disseminates rainfall and 
weather warnings to Divisional Control Offices, facilitating timely alert to field 
staff. 
(c) Continuous monitoring of National Disaster Management (NDEM) and National 
Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) websites is undertaken for real -time flood 
forecasts. 
(d) Central Water Commission (CWC) data on river levels is also regularly reviewed 
to assess the potential risk to bridge structures during high-flow or flood conditions. 
Periodic meetings and coordination mechanisms are in place with IMD, Ministry of Jal 
Shakti, and other concerned local/state authorities for timely exchange of data, early warnings, 
and prompt joint response to safeguard the bridge infrastructure. 
Through integration of field inspection data, Water level data inputs, and external 
agency alerts, BMS acts as the nerve centre for predictive maintenance and disaster resilience. 
It not only facilitates scientific risk assessment and planning but also ensures that the field units 
have access to updated information for preemptive actions, minimizing the possibility of 
failure or service disruption. 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry have established a mechanism for underwater 
inspection of bridge sub -structures, particularly for those perennially submerged, by 
engaging third-party specialized agencies and deploying advanced technologies such as 

 
 
16 
 
Remote Operated Robotic Vehicles (RORV) and other specialized equipment. The 
Committee appreciate that underwater repair works have been carried out on 98 bridges 
over the last five years. However, the Committee recommend that the Ministry further 
enhance the capacity and availability of such specialized services, ensure periodic review 
of underwater inspection protocols and explore the adoption of newer, more advanced 
underwater inspection and repair technologies. Currently, the quality of underwater 
structure inspection is heavily dependent on human skill and the effectiveness of inspection 
is not consistently reliable. The Committee urge the expanded and extensive use of 
advanced technologies like RORV which can provide precise location and extent of defects 
while simultaneously minimizing risks to human operators who can remotely operate the 
vehicle from surface. Such technological intervention will improve the safety, durability 
and operational reliability of railway bridges, especially in flood -prone an d vulnerable 
areas. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The substructure of the bridges which are normally under water should be inspected 
by adopting suitable methods which may include engaging of divers and special 
equipment. 
RDSO has issued detail guidelines which outlines the use of Underwater Inspection 
(UWI). The guidelines have also envisaged inspection through Remotely Operated  
Robotic Vehicle (RORV) which is a modern, technology-driven method for inspection of 
substructure components of bridges located under water. 
Through RORV technology, inspections can now be carried out remotely from the 
surface, thereby eliminating direct human exposure to underwater  risks such as strong 
currents, low visibility, entanglement hazards, and decompression-related dangers. The 
RORV, equipped with high -resolution cameras, sonar sensors, and lighting systems, can 
capture detailed  imagery and data of submerged bridge elements such as piers, 
foundations, and scour zones. This enables objective assessment of defects, erosion 
patterns, and structural deterioration. 

 
 
17 
 
In new report,  specific check lists, Schedule of items, firm registered for RORV 
has been incorporated. The format for inspection, criteria for selection of particular 
method and other technical specifications have also been provided in the revised report. 
The BS-96 report provides comprehensive technical guidance on the design, functionality, 
and field deployment of RORVs, defining standard procedures for underwater inspection 
with safety and operational requirements of Indian Railways. The adoption of RORV -
based underwater inspection, as recommended in BS-96, marks a significant advancement 
from conventional manual diving methods, which are often hazardous, time -consuming, 
and limited by visibility and depth constraints. 
The RDSO instructions also emphasize the data recording and analysis framework, 
allowing the inspection findings to be integrated with the Bridge Management System 
(BMS). This integration ensures long -term traceability, trend analysis, and predictive 
maintenance planning. 
Thus, the implementation of recommendations contained in BS -96 represents a 
major step toward modernization, safety enhancement, and scientific asset management 
of railway bridge infrastructure. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee appreciate the Ministry's efforts to mitigate the environmental 
impact of constructing new railway tunnels and bridges. Notably, the preference for 
elevated alignments to preserve ecology and wildlife as well as the use of steel, a recyclable 
material, for large -span bridges, demonstrates a commitment to sustainability. The 
Committee commend the initiative of constructing Amrit Sarovar by utilizing excavated 
earth from formation works. The Committee are of the view that this innovative approach 
not only ensures the productive use of surplus soil but also contributes significantly to 
water conservation and ecological balance within the p roject area. The Committee 
recognize that the concept of Amrit Sarovar aligns well with sustainable practices, such as 

 
 
18 
 
reducing earth disposal issues, promoting rainwater harvesting, aiding groundwater 
recharge, supporting local biodiversity and creating community water sources. While the 
Committee applaud the concept as sound and potentially highly valuable, its success 
depends on the quality of its execution, ecological planning and post -construction 
maintenance.  Therefore, the Committee strongly emphasize that Amrit Sarovar should not 
be treated as a mere checkbox activity or mere formality for compliance. Instead, it m ust 
involve thorough catchment planning, effective water retention measures, community 
participation and a long -term sustainable maintenance strategy. In light of its multiple 
environmental and community benefits, the Committee recommend that Ministry acti vely 
incorporate the development of Amrit Sarovar  into all major railway infrastructure 
projects, particularly in water-stressed and ecologically sensitive regions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Mission Amrit Sarovar was launched in April 2022 with the ambitious goal of 
constructing/rejuvenating 75 Amrit Sarovars  (ponds) in each district of the country. The 
guidelines for implementation of this mission were jointly issued by various Ministries of 
the Government including Railways. 
Mission Amrit Sarovar works have been taken  up by the States and Districts in 
convergence with the various ongoing schemes of the Government. The Mission has made 
significant contribution in addressing the critical issue of water scarcity and enhancing 
surface and groundwater availability across various regions. These Sarovars have not only 
addressed immediate water needs but also established sustainable water sources, 
symbolizing the commitment to long -term environmental sustainability and community 
wellbeing. 
Under this mission, approx. 21 lakh cubic metre of excavated earth/soil from 72 
Amrit Sarovars across the country was used for construction of new tracks. 
Now, Phase II of Mission Amrit Sarovar has been launched and guidelines dated 
24.02.2025 (ToC-959) have been jointly issued by Railways and M/o Rural Development 

 
 
19 
 
and it is envisaged to continue with a renewed focus on ensuring water availability, with 
community participation (Jan Bhagidaari) at its core, and aims to strengthen climate 
resilience, foster ecological balance, and deliver lasting benefits for future generations. 
Under this Phase II of the mission, Railways in coordination  with District 
Authorities have taken up identification of the location of New Amrit Sarovars from where 
excavated earth/soil can be taken for construction of formation of Railway Projects/Works. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that Tunnel Management System (TuMS) has been developed 
in year 2024 -25 which is a positive step toward the digital management of tunnel 
infrastructure.  The Committee further note that the feeding of Indian Railways tunnel data 
into TuMS has been completed and data validation is currently underway, indicating 
proactive efforts in data management and quality assurance. The Committee desire the 
Railways to ensure regular updation and integrate inspection, maintenance and safety audit 
records into TuMS to enable real -time monitoring, predictiv e maintenance and timely 
decision-making for tunnel infrastructure safety and reliability. The Committee 
recommend the Ministry to expedite the completion of validation of data for all operational 
railway tunnels into the Tunnel Management System (TuMS) an d ensure its full 
operationalization at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Tunnel master module (TuMS): The Tunnel Master  Module (TuMS) has  been 
developed as a specialized application under the Bridge Management  System (BMS) to 
comprehensively cover  all aspects related to the annual inspection, monitoring, and 
maintenance of railway tunnels. The module serves as a centralized digital platform for 
recording, updating, and analysing tunnel-related data across the Indian Railways network. 
Through TuMS, details such as tunnel geometry, structural components, lining 
condition, drainage arrangements, ventilation systems, and safety installations are 

 
 
20 
 
systematically captured and stored. The application also facilitates photographic 
documentation, condition assessment, and grading based on inspection parameters 
prescribed in the Indian Railways codes and manuals. 
Data entry in TuMS is being carried out on a regular basis by the concerned field 
units, ensuring that the inventory and condition  records remain current and authentic. 
Further, a process of data validation and cross -verification has been instituted to ensure 
the accuracy and reliability of the information being uploaded. 
By integrating TuMS with the broader BMS framework, the system enables holistic 
asset management, supports decision -making for maintenance planning, and helps in 
prioritizing rehabilitation or strengthening works. Thus, TuMS  represents a major step 
towards achieving digitally enabled, data -driven management of tunnel infrastructure on 
Indian Railways. 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that as per current norms, escape tunnels with adits  or lateral 
exits are provided for tunnels exceeding 3 km in length. The Committee also observe that 
certain existing tunnels, such as Tunnel No. 9 on the Lumding-Badarpur section (3.25 km), 
which carries both passenger and freight traffic, and Tunnel No. 57A on the Obulavaripalli-
Krishnapatnam section (6.63 km), used for goods trains, do not have escape tunnels. The 
Committee further note that the planning for Tunnel No. 9 was undertaken prior to the 
introduction of the policy mandating such provisions. Gi ven the critical importance of 
passenger and staff safety in case of emergencies, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry examine the feasibility of providing escape tunnels or suitable alternative 
evacuation arrangements for all existing tunnels longer than 3 km. The Committee also 
urge that tunnels currently used exclusively for goods movement should be considered for 
escape tunnel provision, bearing in mind the potential future use for passenger traffic. 
Additionally, the Committee observe that Railway s is actively expanding its network in 
regions like the North East, Jammu & Kashmir and other mountainous areas where tunnels 
and bridges constitute a major part of the infrastructure. In light of this, the Committee urge 

 
 
21 
 
the Ministry to conduct a comprehensive review of all operational and under -construction 
railway tunnels — including those shorter than 3 km — with priority given to those located 
in vulnerable zones such as seismic areas, flood -prone stretches and regions  with 
challenging geology. Wherever feasible, the Ministry should consider the provision of 
escape routes, cross passages or alternative evacuation facilities to enhance safety measures 
and ensure preparedness for emergencies. Further, the Committee would like to be apprised 
of the findings of the team comprising representatives from the Railway Board, RDSO and 
NHAI which is examining the feasibility of utilising escape tunnels for road commuters to 
ensure optimum utilization of the infrastructure being developed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Planning for Tunnel No. 9 on Lumding - Badarpur section was undertaken prior to 
the introduction of the policy mandating such provisions. The length is also only 250 m 
extra than the subsequently permitted length (3000m). However good approach road, 
ventilation, lighting and foothpath has been provided as alternative measures for safe 
evacuation. 
Tunnel No. 57A between Obulavaripalli– Krishnapatnam station is presently being 
used only for goods train. But Side pathways (footpaths) have been provided continuously 
on both sides along the entire length of the tunnel. These pathways serve as a safe and  
accessible passage for maintenance personnel in the event of any unforeseen circumstance, 
thereby functioning effectively as an evacuation corridor within the main tunnel itself. 
Moreover the escape tunnel/adits can be planned at later stages if need arises. 
The tunnels having length less than 3 km do not require a separate escape route or 
adits because the two portals (entrances) provide a quick exit for the passengers, and the 
maximum distance to a safe place is limited. However, the specific cases are dealt on need 
basis keeping in view of vulnerability of area such as seismic zones, flood prone stretches 
and region with challenging geology. 
An institutional mechanism for integrated planning of tunnel projects has been 

 
 
22 
 
formed jointly with the Ministry of Road Transport & Highway. Joint Working Group 
comprising representatives from the Ministry of Railways, MoRTH, and their respective 
executing agencies has been proposed for feasibility assessment of Rail -and-Road Tunnel 
Projects at Alignment - Finalization/DPR Stage. Gati Shakti Directorate is coordinating 
from Ministry of Railways. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
The Committee have reviewed the status submitted by the Ministry regarding the 
construction of Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and Road Under Bridges (RUBs) in major 
Indian cities for the replacement of existing level crossings. The Committee note that out 
of 305 level crossings in 46 cities with populations exceeding 10 lakh, works for 123 have 
been sanctioned. The Committee appreciate the continuous and dynamic approach adopted 
by Railways in sanctioning such works based on operational safety, mobility impact an d 
feasibility. However, the Committee are concerned over the slow pace of implementation 
and completion of these sanctioned projects, which is impeded by delays in land 
acquisition, utility shifting, encroachment clearance, statutory approvals and coordina tion 
with State Governments. Recognizing the critical importance of eliminating level crossings 
in congested urban areas for both rail safety and city traffic management, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry devise a city -specific action plan in collaboration with State 
Governments and urban local bodies to fast -track pending ROB/RUB projects in major 
cities. The Committee further observe that delays in the construction and completion of 
such projects cause public inconvenience, resource wastage and co st escalation. The 
Committee urge the Ministry to ensure elimination of level crossing on National Highways 
on pilot project mode basis with clearly established timelines in coordination with 
NHAI/MORTH. The Committee also urge the Ministry to set clear ti melines, conduct 
periodic joint review meetings with all stakeholders and explore public-private partnership 

 
 
23 
 
(PPP) models to expedite the construction of these vital infrastructure projects, thereby 
ensuring seamless movement of both rail and road traffic. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Zonal Railways have been advised for expeditious construction of ROB/ RUBs in 
major cities falling in their jurisdiction in collaboration with State Governments and urban 
local bodies. 
In order to expedite completion & commissioning of ROB/RUB works, various steps 
have been taken: 
a) Land acquisition and removal of encroachments for ROB/RUBs has been 
covered under special railway projects as per Provisions of The Railway Act. 
b) Instructions have been issued to all zonal railways for entering into running 
contracts for timely identification of utilities and fixed structures coming in the 
alignment of ROB/RUB and their early shifting to fast track the construction of 
ROB/RUB Works. 
c) In ROB works, which are taken up on cost sharing basis, sometimes State 
Governments do not have the requisite funds, and are requesting Railways for 
bearing the 100% cost. Such proposals are being examined and 100% funding 
through Railways is being agreed on case to case basis. 
d) For expediting approvals and other matters, regular meetings are being held 
between Railway & State Government officials. Meetings are also being held 
with MORTH/NHAI on regular basis for addressing issues expeditiously. 
Further, monitoring of these issues is being done by Railway Board.  
e) For expediting NHAI/MORTH projects on National Highways, an online portal 
called “IR-Rail Road Crossing GAD Approval System” has been developed for 
real time monitoring of GAD approvals is presently being used by   
NHAI/MORTH/State agencies. The facility f or online approval of structural 
drawings has also been added in consultation with NHAI/MoRTH in the same 
portal. 

 
 
24 
 
f) For further improving the processes and to reduce delays in execution of works, 
a new portal for approval of QAP/WPSS and stage inspection of steel girder 
fabrication is under development. First phase of the portal, called “Portal for  
Rail Road Inspection & Stage Management – Steel Girder (PRISM -GS)” is 
already under implementation in field.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
The Committee note the Ministry’s submission regarding the challenges faced in 
obtaining consent and financial participation from State Governments and Road Owning 
Authorities for the construction of Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and Road Under Bridges 
(RUBs) on a cost-sharing basis. The Committee appreciate the proactive approach of 
Railways in examining such cases and, wherever feasible and necessary, deciding to fully 
fund these projects in the interest of improving operational safety and train mobility. The 
Committee also note that 52 such cost -sharing projects have already been undertaken at 
100% railway cost. However, considering the critical importance of eliminating level 
crossings to enhance public safety and streamline train operations, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry formulate a structured framework for prioritizing and 
independently funding such critical projects, wherever persistent delays arise due to non -
cooperation or lack of response from State Governments. Additionally, the Committee urge 
the Ministry to strengthen coordination mechanism with State Governments to secure 
timely consent and support for approach alignments, land acquisition and utility shifting. 
The Committee also recommend exploring alternative funding models including central  
assistance schemes for projects of high public utility and importance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In ROB works, which are taken up on cost sharing basis, sometimes State 
Governments do not have the requisite funds, and are requesting Railways for bearing the 
100% cost. Such proposals are being examined and 100% funding through Railways is 

 
 
25 
 
being agreed on case to case basis. 60 nos such proposals have already been sanctioned on 
100 % funding by Railways.    
For expediting approvals and other matters, regular meetings are being held between 
Railway & State Government officials are carried out. Meetings are also being held with 
MORTH/NHAI on regular basis for addressing issues expeditiously. Further, monitoring 
of these issues is being kept by Railway Board.  
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
The Committee note the Ministry’s policy framework for addressing the provision 
of Road Under Bridges (RUBs), Foot Over Bridges (FOBs) and pedestrian subways at 
locations where no level crossings (LCs) exist, but where public movement continues, 
either through existing roads leading up to the railway boundaries without LC or at sites 
where LC have been discontinued. The Committee observe that many such locations exist, 
particularly, where proper roads extend up to railway boundaries, yet serve as informal 
access points for trespassing. This situation results in recurring safety hazards, 
unauthorized crossings and potential disruption to train operations. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry conduct a comprehensive joint survey of these locations 
across the railway network to assess safety risks, public demand and traffic density. This 
exercise should be carried out in coordination with State Governments, NHAI, and local 
civic bodies. Based on the survey findings, a time -bound action plan should be prepar ed 
for the provision of RUBs, limited or restricted height subways (LHSs), FOBs or pedestrian 
subways, wherever technically feasible and operationally essential on priority basis. 
Further the Committee desire that such infrastructure works be integrated with nearby road 
development or urban infrastructure projects to optimize resources utilization, improve 
public access to enhance operational and public safety. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
26 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per extant policy dated 19.08.2024, “If the location is a source of trespass, 
affecting safety in train operations, mobility of trains and fixed infrastructure of railway, 
Railway may consider providing suitable subways/FOB etc. as per feasibility at ra ilways 
cost”. Total 300 no. works have already sanctioned at non -Level Crossing locations to 
prevent trespassing.  
However, if any new development works are planned by State Government nearby 
track area, the work for construction of ROB/RUB at the demanded location may be taken 
up on deposit terms provided State Government agrees to bear the complete cost of 
construction and maintenance subject to its feasibility. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
The Committee note the various measures undertaken by Railways to ease traffic 
congestion and enhance safety at level crossings, including the progressive elimination of 
level crossings through the construction of Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and Road Under 
Bridges (RUBs), regular infrastructure upgradation such as maintenance of road surfaces, 
speed breakers, signage and widening where needed. The Committee appreciate the public 
awareness programs educating the dangers of unauthorized track crossings and promoting 
use of designated pathways. However, the Committee observe that despite complete 
elimination on unmanned level crossing and significant sale up during 2014 -2024 for 
complete elimination of the man level crossing, traffic congestion near several busy l evel 
crossings continues to be a persistent issue, particularly in urban and semi -urban areas. 
Therefore, the Committee urge the Ministry to intensify efforts to expedite sanctioning and 
execution of ROB/RUB projects and prioritize level crossings at high -traffic zones. 
Additionally, the Committee urge the Ministry to collaborate more closely with State 

 
 
27 
 
Governments, municipal bodies and road authorities to integrate railway crossing 
elimination works with local traffic decongestion and urban transport plans. Public 
awareness campaigns should be further expanded using modern communication strategies 
and community outreach to improve compliance and reduce trespassing and congestion 
near level crossings. 
Reply of the Government 
Traffic congestion at busy level crossings is a problem which affects the city 
dwellers as well as Railways. Due to congestion, it is sometimes difficult to close the level 
crossings in time which affects train operations. Zonal railways make regular effor ts to 
regulate the traffic and steps such as improving geometry, such as road widening, improve 
turning radius, removing obstructions such as poles etc.  
There is a lot of focus on sanctioning the works of ROB/RUBs for elimination of 
level crossings. As on 01.04.2025, 4402 Nos of works were sanctioned. This number has 
gone up to 4577 Nos works on date. 
For expediting approvals and other matters, regular meetings are being held between 
Railway & State Government officials. Meetings are also being held with MORTH/NHAI 
on regular basis for addressing issues expeditiously. Further, monitoring of these issues is 
being done by Railway Board. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
The Committee note the various measures taken by Railways to address recurring 
water-logging problems in Road Under Bridges (RUBs) and subways, including 
integrating adequate drainage systems in new RUBs designs, diversion of water to nearby 
natural drains, provision of humps and cross drains, sealing of joints and installation of 
high-capacity pumps at vulnerable sites. The Committee also appreciate the provision of 
cover sheds at many locations and the systemati c inspection of RUBs before and after the 
monsoon to identify and resolve issues. However, despite these efforts the Committee 
observe that water-logging during heavy rainfall remains a significant problem in several 

 
 
28 
 
regions, causing traffic disruptions, safety hazards, and public inconvenience. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry prepare a comprehensive inventory of all water -
logging prone RUBs and subways and prioritize remedial works in a time-bound initiative. 
Further, the Committee urge Railways to actively coordinate with municipal bodies and 
local authorities to ensure seamless integration of railway drainage with civic drainage 
systems. The Committee also desire the Ministry to establish a clear protocol f or 
temporarily halting road traffic during exceptionally heavy rainfall to safeguard 
commuters. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Railways have taken following remedial measures to mitigate the problem of water 
logging. 
• The inspection of Subways/RUBs is conducted before and after the onset of the 
monsoon. The monitoring of Subways/RUBs to prevent water logging is an 
ongoing process and redressal is undertaken whenever so warranted.  
• Adequate drainage arrangement has been made an integral part of planning of 
new Road under Bridge (RUB)/Subways.  
• To prevent waterlogging, the cover sheds over subways are being providing, 
pump capacity are being enhanced and size of sump are being increased. 
• An Action Plan has been prepared to prevent water logging in Subways/LHS. 
All deficiencies have already been rectified in 1351 nos. subways. 
• In order to provide relief to public in subways which are situated in 
waterlogging prone locations, instructions have been given for constructing 
additional Boxes of lesser depth.  An additional box of lesser depth is also being 
provided for the pedestrian in case of water logging. 
All above measures will help in addressing water-logging problems during rains. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
 

 
 
29 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
The Committee note the initiatives by Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya (GSV) bridge 
and tunnel engineering, including the ongoing B.  Tech program in Civil Engineering and 
the successful two -week specialized training on “Design, Fabrication, Launching, and 
Maintenance of Steel Girder Bridges,” benefitting officers from Indian Railways, PSUs, 
and other organizations. The Committee appreciate the proposal to start an M.  Tech 
program in Bridge and Tunnel Engineering from the academic year 2025 -26 and 
recommend the Ministry to ensure timely commencement of this program. The Committee 
also suggest introducing short -term certificate and diploma courses focused on modern 
technologies in bridge and tunnel construction and inspection. The Committee emphasize 
integration of Artificial Intelligence and technology in designing and monitoring 
techniques to build a specialized and skilled technical workforce equipped to manage the 
growing demands and challenges in railway bridge and tunnel infrastructure. Further, the 
Ministry should explore collaborations with specialized global institutes/organizations to 
develop curricula and programmes on cutting edge infrastructure technologies. The 
Committee emphasize that these initiatives will empower indigenous talent and reduce 
reliance on foreign consultants and contribute to more cost effective infrastructure 
development. 
Reply of the Government 
 
(1)  Ministry of Railways has accorded high priority to Bridge and Tunnel engineering 
aspect of railway functioning. Besides B.  Tech program in Civil Engineering, following 
courses have already commenced at GSV: 
• Short duration Training course on 'Design, Fabrication & Maintenance of Steel 
Girder Bridges'. 
• M.Tech program in Bridge and Tunnel Engineering. 
(2)  Further, GSV has been advised to disseminate the knowledge of bridge design and 
construction and to aid capacity building in following way: 
a) Short-term course (2-4 weeks) for Chief Bridge Engineers and their Teams as 

 
 
30 
 
well as officers involved in policy -making on 'Design and Inspection of Steel 
Girder Bridges, Subway Design'. 
b) GSV has further been advised to collaborate with potential Leading Institutes or 
Universities in course content and delivery covering areas of: 
• Modern inspection techniques, structural health monitoring, and underwater 
inspection methods for bridges, and 
• Accelerated construction and maintenance of subways, especially in 
challenging condition such as high water tables. 
c) Inclusion of visit to 4 iconic bridges of the SVDK -SGDN section as part of 2 -
year M.Tech Degree program on Bridge & Tunnel Engineering. 
d) Design of Short -term training program (2 -4 Weeks) capturing technical 
knowledge and practical learnings from USBRL Project, in coordination with 
subject experts involved in the project from KRCL, USBRL and Northern 
Railway. 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
The Committee observe that the construction of Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and 
Road Under Bridges (RUBs) faces significant challenges such as land acquisition, 
rehabilitation and resettlement issues, poor coordination among stakeholders, delays in 
approval of  General Arrangement Drawings (GADs), shifting of utilities, removal of 
encroachments and obtaining necessary statutory clearances. Moreover, cost -sharing 
complications particularly in the case of older sanctioned works which often result in 
stalled projects due to the absence of timely response from State Governments regarding 
their share also lead to delays.  The Committee note that as per existing norms, the portion 
of a ROB/RUB falling within railway land is to be maintained by the Railways, whereas 
the portion beyond railway limits, including the approach roads and lighting, falls under 
the maintenance responsibility of the concerned State Government/road-owning agency or 
local authority. The Committee express concern over the recurring issue of faulty designs, 
water-logging, public inconvenience and traffic stalling in RUBs and stress the need for 
long lasting solutions. While appreciating the efforts of the Railways in adopting 

 
 
31 
 
innovative designs to tackle water-logging and enhance user convenience, the Committee 
feel that more practical and sustainable solutions are required. In light of these challenges, 
the Committee desire the Ministry to establish a structured and institutio nal mechanism 
with proper implementation framework for the active involvement of people’s 
representatives during the planning and execution stages of ROB and RUB projects in a 
constituency.The Committee are of the considered opinion that their engagement will play 
a crucial role in addressing local concerns, ensuring early consensus for land acquisition 
and resettlement, facilitating smoother coordination with State and local authorities for 
utility shifting and clearances thereby help in timely completion and better maintenance of 
RUBs. The Committee are of the view that such participatory planning will lead to more 
efficient, transparent and community-responsive railway infrastructure development. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to address the problems related to land acquisition, rehabilitation and 
resettlement issues, poor coordination among stakeholders, delays in approval of General 
Arrangement Drawings (GADs), shifting of utilities, removal of encroachments and 
obtaining necessary statutory clearances, the system for sanction of works has been 
changed. Presently, the Detailed Project Report is being prepared for all the ROBs/RUBs 
prior to sanctioning of work. The due diligence is being at DPR stage, and various possible 
alternative options for alignment are being examined so that such problems are minimized 
during execution stage.  
The DPR preparation work includes Joint survey for fixing the alignment with road 
owning authorities, utility shifting, Resettlement and rehabilitation if any, approach 
gradients, number of lanes etc.  
Zonal Railways have also been advised for carrying out consultation with all stake 
holders while preparing DPR, and that representations from elected representative, if any, 
may also be considered for better appreciation of ground conditions. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
 

 
 
32 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

 
 
33 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
34 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       New Delhi; DR. C.M. RAMESH 
23 February, 2026________ Chairperson 
04 Phalguna, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
  

 
 
35 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2025-26) 
 
 
The Committee met on Monday, the 23rd February, 2026 from 1200 hrs. to 1 215 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 2, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. C.M. Ramesh – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Shri Ummeda Ram Beniwal 
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
8. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
9. Shri Sudama Prasad 
10. Shri M K Raghavan 
11. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Narhari Amin 
13. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
14. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
15. Dr. K. Laxman 
16. Shri Khiru Mahto 
17. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam  -  Director 
3. Smt. Savdha Kalia  -  Deputy Secretary 

 
 
36 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 4 th 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Construction and maintenance of Rail tunnels and Bridges 
including Road Over Bridges/Road Under Bridges’.  
 
The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Report without any modifications.  
3.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the Report to the 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
    
-------- 
 
 
  

 
 
37 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations - 12 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government –  
Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5 6,7, 8, 9 ,10, 11,12  
 
 
12 
 Percentage of total   
 
 100% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
Para No.  NIL 
 
 NIL 
 Percentage of total   
 
     0% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration –  
Para No.  NIL 
  
     NIL 
 Percentage of total   
 
    0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited -      
Para No.  NIL 
  
     NIL 
 Percentage of total      0% 
 
 