 
 
 
 
9 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2025-26) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 6th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Increasing freight related earnings of Indian Railways and 
development of Dedicated Freight Corridors’] 
 
 
NINTH REPORT  
 
 
 
                                       
  
             
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
AUGUST, 2026/SRAVANA, 1948 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
 
 
SCR NO.  253 
 
NINTH REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2025-26)  
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA    
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 6th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Increasing freight related earnings of Indian Railways and 
development of Dedicated Freight Corridors’] 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2026  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2026             
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2026/SRAVANA, 1948 (SAKA) 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................................ (ii) 
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (iv) 
 
PART-I 
 
CHAPTER I REPORT………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government……………………………………… 
 
11 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………… 
 
33 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration……..  
 
34 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited …… 
35 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on 
06.08.2026 
36 
  

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2025-26)@ 
   Dr. C.M. Ramesh   - Chairperson 
                MEMBERS 
    LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Shri T. R. Baalu 
5. Shri Ummeda Ram Beniwal 
6. Shri Chhotelal 
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
11. Shri Khagen Murmu 
12. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
13. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
14. Shri Sudama Prasad 
15. Shri M K Raghavan 
16. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
17. Dr. Swami Sachidanand Hari Sakshi 
18. Dr. Bhola Singh 
19. Shri Bharatbhai Manubhai Sutariya 
20. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
21. Shri Vijayakumar Alias Vijay Vasanth 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Dr. Alka Gurjar$ 
23. Shri Rajendra Hiralal Jain$ 
24. Shri Mansoor Ali Khan$ 
25. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
26. Shri Upendra Kushwaha# 
27. Dr. K. Laxman 
28. Shri Khiru Mahto 
29. Shri Dilip Kumar Ray$ 
30. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
31. Smt. Sadhna Singh 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
@ Constituted w.e.f. 26.09.2025 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 3290 dated 01.10.2025. 
* Dr. Fauzia Khan retired w.e.f. from 02.04.2026.  
# Shri Upendra Kushwaha retired w.e.f. 09.04.2026 and renominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026. 
^ Shri Narhari Amin and Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki retired w.e.f. 21.06.026. 
$ Dr. Alka Gurjar, Shri Rajendra Hiralal Jain & Shri Dilip Kumar Ray nominated to the 
Committee, and Shri Mansoor Ali Khan nominated vice Shri Mukul Wasnik, w.e.f. 23.07.2026 
(LS Bulletin Part II No. 5724 dated 24.07.2026). 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam  - Director 
3. Smt. Savdha Kalia  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Rudresh Singh Yadav - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)  

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (202 5-26), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Ninth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Increasing freight related 
earnings of Indian Railways and development of Dedicated Freight Corridors’. 
 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 
16.12.2025.  The Report contained 12 Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry 
of Railways furnished Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report on 06.03.2026. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 06.08.2026.  The minutes of the sitting are given in Annexure. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
New Delhi; DR. C.M. RAMESH 
06 August, 2026________ Chairperson 
15 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Sixth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) of Standing Committee on Railways on the subject "Increasing freight related earnings of 
Indian Railways and Development of Dedicated Freight Corridors". 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2025. 
It contained 1 2 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of the Government in respect of all 
recommendations have been received and are categorized as under: - 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: - 
  Rec. Para Nos. 1 to 12                                 Chapter-II 
 Total: 12 
  Percentage:100 
(ii) Observations / recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies: - 
         NIL                Chapter-III 
               Total: 00 
Percentage:00 
 
(iii) Observations / recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: - 
   NIL             Chapter-IV 
                      Total: 00 
Percentage:00 
 (iv) Observations / recommendations in respect of which final replies are still awaited: -  
    NIL                  Chapter-V
                          Total: 00 
Percentage:00 
  

2 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation of 
the Observations / Recommendations accepted by the Government.  The Committee desire 
that Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-
I of this Report be furnished to them at the earliest but not lat er than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier Observations / Recommendations 
which either require reiteration or merit further comments. 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
FREIGHT REVENUE 
5. While noting that freight revenue constitutes a major portion of the total earnings of the 
Indian Railways, the Committee in their sixth report felt that enhancing freight revenue is essential 
not only for generating additional capital to meet modernization requirements but also for keeping 
passenger fares affordable . The Committee on o bserving that structural constraints within rail 
logistics, such as the lack of first -and last-mile connectivity, high costs for short -distance freight 
movement, terminal and mobility constraints impede potential for increasing freight revenue , felt 
that close monitoring of the zone wise targets especially with regard to  mobility will strengthen 
efforts to enhance freight revenue across regions. Accordingly, the Committee recommended that 
the Indian Railways formulate and implement zone specific strategies to attract freight traffic in 
areas with limited mineral movement and industrial activity.  To incentivize modal shift from road 
to rail, Indian Railways may also consider offering discounted tariffs for transportation of zone -
specific goods. 
6. In their action -taken replies furnished to the Committee , the Ministry of Railways have 
stated as under: 
"(a) Policy incentives for increasing modal share and increase freight revenue are as under: 
1. Telescopic rate benefit to domestic coal transported through Rail- Sea- Rail (RSR). 
2. Discount to fly ash: 40%/20% in Open and Flat and charging at LR1 in Covered wagons 
3. Discount in freight for traffic loaded in traditional empty flow directions 

3 
 
4. To enhance modal share in containerized traffic of Tiles,  50% discount is granted in 
haulage charges of empty container laden rakes returning to originating cluster 
5. Bamboo traffic in Covered wagons originating from North East Frontier railways has been 
granted exemption from levy of Busy Season Charge (BSC) w.e.f. 01.08.2025 till 31.03.2026. 
6. Classification of New commodities- new commodities have been added in Goods Traffic 
such as Potassium Sulphate at class 130A, Ammonium Bicarbonate Food Grade at class 140, RUF 
Pitch' at class 145A, Liquefied Isobutylene & Liquefied Ethane at class 165 and Soda Bi-carbonate 
re-classified at class 120. 
7. Gypsum in Containers: to enhance the modal share in containerized traffic of Chemical 
Gypsum, 25% discount is granted in haulage charges of empty containers laden rakes returning to 
originating loading point w.e.f 26.11.25 for a period of one year. 
8. De-notification of Commodities for carriage at Haulage Charge per TEU in 
Containers: Liquefied Isobutylene & Liquefied Ethane and Stainless-steel coil in Containers. 
9. Guidelines were issued for non -levy of Busy Season Charge @15% on goods traffic 
transported in all types of covered wagons during August 2025. 
10. GTKM based rate for Bulk Cement in Tank Containers: A simplified Haulage Rate 
structure for charging as per the following: a) GTKM based charging of rail haulage at a flat rate 
of ₹0.85 per tonne per kilometer (per GTKM) with 80% rebate on empty haulage applicable on 
full rake of empty tank container in the return direction. 
(b) To address structural constraints and mobility issues, measures taken up/being taken are as 
under:  
1. Ensuring adequate availability of rakes/wagons against peak demand 
2. Increasing capacity for carrying additional traffic per wagon. Length  of freight trains has 
also been increased to increase throughput per train. 
3.  For augmenting network capacity, address mobility constraints and ensure first and last 
mile connectivity, multi-tracking on busy routes, ROR, bypass on congested junctions are being 
taken up. Dedicated Freight corridors are also being operationalized. Upgradation of yards and 
terminals is being taken up as well.   
4.  Use of Information Technology, as part of digitization of freight, is being increased in 
freight operations to improve monitoring and utilisation of assets.  

4 
 
5. Induction of locomotives of higher horsepower and wagons of increased loadability and 
speed 
6. Improvement in maintenance practices of wagons and locomotives resulting in increased 
availability of loco and rolling stock for traffic use. 
7. Training staff and officers to adopt new technologies and management practices to provide 
reliable freight services." 
7.  The Committee note the measures being undertaken by the Ministry of Railways to 
enhance freight revenue and increase the modal share of rail transport. The Committee 
further appreciate the efforts being made to augment network capacity through multi -
tracking, operationalization of Dedicated Freight Corridors, modernization of yards and 
terminals, induction of higher -capacity rolling stock, and greater use of information 
technology in fr eight operations. However, in their Sixth Report, the Committee had also 
recommended that the Ministry formulate and implement zone-specific strategies to enhance 
freight traffic, particularly in regions with limited mineral movement and industrial activity. 
The Committee would like to be a pprised of the measures taken in this regard and the 
progress achieved.  
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
FREIGHT TRANSPORT CHARGES 
8. The Committee in their sixth report  observed that determining freight rates is a highly 
complex exercise requiring a careful balance between revenue generation and the strategic need to 
counter competition from road transport and other modes of freight transportation in India . The 
Committee observed that the last revision of freight rates was undertaken in 2018 and that rates 
have remained unchanged since then. The Committee while appreciating the various freight policy 
initiatives undertaken by Indian Railways to promote goods movement via rail as w ell as 
substantial investments made over the years in expanding the railway network, urged the Ministry 
to undertake an annual comprehensive assessment of freight rates taking into account commodity 
wise competitiveness, prevailing market demand, and operational costs. Based on such assessment, 
the Committee recommended rationalization of freight rates to enhance competitiveness vis a vis 
road transport. 

5 
 
9. In their action-taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
"Indian Railways, as a national transporter, operates in a competitive multi -modal transport 
ecosystem while discharging its commercial functions and social obligations. In this context, 
concessional freight rates are extended to essential commodities such as Salt , Sugar, Foodgrains 
and Edible oils, as well as the long -standing 6% freight concession applicable for traffic booked 
to and from the North Eastern Region since 1983, aimed at supporting regional development and 
economic integration. 
The Committee has noted that the last revision of freight rates was done in 2018 and that rates 
have remained largely unchanged thereafter. This conscious and measured approach has been 
undertaken to parallelly fulfill multiple objectives, mainly encouraging growth in freight loading, 
enhancing freight earnings, expanding the freight basket and maintaining competitiveness in the 
evolving market in key sectors.  
Ministry of Railways has taken various measures to increase competitiveness based on prevailing 
market demand. Some of them are as under:  
• Telescopic rate benefit to Domestic Coal movement in Rail- Sea-Rail (RSR) mode, 
• Reclassification of commodities –Soda Ash Dense/Light, etc.  
• Liberalised Automatic Freight Rebate Scheme in Traditional Empty Flow Directions, 
• Rationalization of Merry-Go- Round,  
• Concession in Short Lead Traffic,  
• Discount in freight to Fly Ash /Bed Ash traffic booked in Open/flat Stock & 
covered      wagons,  
• De-notification of commodities for carriage at Haulage rate per TEU in container, 
• Rationalisation of Haulage rate of Automobile traffic, 
• Policy for Cargo Aggregation- Cargo Aggregator Transportation Product, 
• Rationalisation of rate for transportation of Bulk cement in tank container. 
• Rationalisation of Dynamic pricing i.e levy of Busy Season Charge on freight and container 
traffic. 
• Roll on Roll off policy for Ro-Ro/ ToT (Trucks on Train) 

6 
 
• Rationalisation of two point and multi point loading for freight and automobile traffic. 
Further, as an internal mechanism, periodic data -driven assessments are carried out with regular 
inputs from the field units (Zonal Railways/Divisional Railways) and Business Development 
Units. These assessments form the basis for targeted policy interventions, including rationalization 
of freight rates, introduction of incentive schemes and rate review, wherever desired." 
10. The Committee note the Ministry's response that Indian Railways operates in a 
competitive multi -modal transport environment while simultaneously discharging its 
commercial and social obligations. The Committee also acknowledge  the various policy 
initiatives undertaken to enhance the competitiveness of rail freight, including commodity 
reclassification, freight concessions, rationalization of haulage rates, incentives for short lead 
traffic, cargo aggregation policies, rationalisation of dynamic pricing measures, and 
concessions for specific commodities and traffic streams.  Ministry in their action taken 
replies have asserted that periodic data-driven assessments are carried out with inputs from 
Zonal Railways, Divisional Railways and Business Development Units to facilitate policy 
interventions, freight rate rationalization and incentive schemes, wherever considered 
necessary. While appreciating these initiatives, the Committee  desire that the Railways  
institutionalize a structured annual review of freight rates, supported by comprehensive 
analysis of commodity -wise demand, market competition, logistics costs and operational 
expenditure.  
Recommendation (Para No. 7)  
COAL EVACUATION PROJECTS 
11.  The Committee had observed that coal transportation forms a significant portion of Indian 
Railways freight earnings. The Committee had noted that  challenges such as non -availability of 
requisite rakes, delays in rail connectivity projects and last mile connectivity issues continue to 
hinder efficiency. The Committee note d that a Public Private Partnership (PPP) policy for Rail 
Connectivity and Capacity Augmentation was introduced in 2012 and that this policy is currently 
under revision. The Committee recommend ed that Indian Railways undertake a comprehensive 
assessment of capacity augmentation requirements of coal transport routes for enhancing over all 
efficiency and reliability of coal transport by Rail. 

7 
 
12.  In their action-taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
“Indian Railways accords high priority to coal transportation and is continuously augmenting 
capacity to meet the growing demand. Adequate rakes are being made available for transportation 
of coal for Coal India Ltd. and other consumers, supported by sustained in duction of wagons and 
facilitation of private investment under the Private Wagon Investment Scheme. Simultaneously, 
railway infrastructure works related to coal transportation, involving an investment of ₹25,207 
crore across 17 ongoing projects, are under various stages of execution, reflecting sustained efforts 
towards capacity augmentation and continued financial support for these initiatives. 
Commissioning of First Mile Connectivity projects and increased coal loading through Rapid 
Loading Systems have significantly improved evacuation efficiency by reducing terminal 
detention and improving rake turnaround. Further, the National Coal Logistics Plan and Policy, 
launched on 29.02.2024, provides a comprehensive framework for identification of bottlenecks 
and monitoring of logistics projects through regular inter -ministerial reviews to ensure efficient 
coal evacuation in line with increasing coal production.” 
13. The Committee note the substantial priority being accorded to coal transportation 
wherein adequate efforts are being made to ensure availability of rakes and wagons. The 
Committee further appreciate the facilitation of private investment under the Private Wagon 
Investment Scheme and investment of ₹25,207 crore across 17 ongoing projects towards 
capacity augmentation. Besides, in troduction of rapid loading systems for improving 
evacuation efficiency and rake turnaround time shall also give impetus to fre ight 
transportation through railways. The Committee desire to know whether the framework 
introduced through the National Coal Logistics Plan and Policy shall also be applied to 
modernize India's coal transportation through an interconnected, multimodal network. The 
Committee may also be apprised of the status of the Public Private Partnership (PPP) policy 
for Rail Connectivity and Capacity Augmentation as introduced in 2012 which is being 
revised.  
 
 
 

8 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9)  
DIVERSIFICATION OF FREIGHT BASKET 
14. The Committee note d that Indian Railways’ freight earnings are predominantly derived 
from the transportation of limited set on commodities such as coal, iron ore and cement. The 
Committee further observe d that the year -on-year revenue growth from coal and iron ore is 
gradually decelerating. The Committee fe lt that a broader commodity basket is essential for 
ensuring sustainable growth as it provides cushioning against fluctuations in the demand and usage 
of specific commodities. The Committee urge d Indian Railways to conduct a comprehensive 
analysis of its existing freight portfolio, identify commodities with low rail modal share but high 
growth potential, assess their specific logistical requirements and address operational bottlenecks 
that hinder their movement by rail. The Committee further recommended that the Ministry 
intensify outreach to sectors such as FMCG, e-commerce, fly ash to expand rail’s footprint in areas 
meaningful to successfully diversify its freight basket. Indian Railways must ensure efficient 
operations, reliable services, appropriate wagons availability, competitive pricing, a supportive 
logistics ecosystem and technology -driven, consumer centric services. The Committee 
8mphasized that diversification is imperative for long term sustainability.  
Reply of the Government 
15. In their action-taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
 Railways are continuously reviewing its freight basket with a view to identifying potential 
commodities having low rail modal share but significant growth volume. The notable increase in 
automobile traffic, carried by rail, is the outcome of sustained engagement with the automobile 
industry, rationalization of freight rates, development of dedicated Gati Shakti Cargo Terminals 
(GCTs) and induction of special ized rolling stock. Detailed analyses are being undertaken for 
specific commodity groups to assess their logistical characteristics, service expectations, and 
operational requirements, including transit time sensitivity, handling needs, and first -mile/last-
mile connectivity. Based on such assessments, measures are being taken to address operational 
bottlenecks and to improve end-to-end service delivery. 
Indian Railways has initiated several targeted interventions which includes: 

9 
 
• Introduction of rationalized and simplified Gross Tonnes (GTKM) based rate for haulage 
of bulk cement in tank containers, 
• Discount on empty haulage of containers transporting Chemical Gypsum traffic and Tiles 
traffic, 
• Limited period exemption on levy of Busy Season Charge (BSC) on Bamboo traffic in 
Covered wagons originating from North East Frontier railways, 
• De-notification of Stainless Steel in Coil form for transportation in containers,  
• Telescopic rate benefit for domestic Coal movement in Rail-Sea-Rail (RSR) mode, 
• Liberalized Automatic Freight Rebate Scheme in Traditional Empty Flow Directions, 
• Station-to-Station Rates Policy, 
• Concession in Short Lead Traffic, 
• Discount in freight to Fly Ash/Bed Ash traffic booked in Open/flat Stock & covered 
wagons, 
• De-notification of commodities for carriage at Haulage rate per TEU in container, 
• Policy for Cargo Aggregation-Cargo Aggregator Transportation Product, etc. 
Further, Railways continues to engage proactively with industry stakeholders through 
consultations, commodity-specific interaction customer interaction to better understand their 
logistical requirements and align rail services accordingly.  
Diversification of the freight basket holds significant priority for the long -term sustainability 
and growth of Indian Railways. In order to cater to more customers, more trains are being run.  
Further, infrastructure upgrade e.g. multi tracking, New Rail flyovers are being continuously 
added. 
Average freight trains per day during previous years are as under: 
Years Average number of freight train per day 
2021-22 4968 
2022-23 5947 
2023-24 6430 
2024-25 6785 

10 
 
16. The Committee note that Indian Railways are continuously reviewing their freight 
basket to identify commodities with low rail modal share but significant growth potential. 
The Committee further appreciate the various targeted interventions, including rationalised 
haulage rates for bulk cement, discounts on empty haulage of containers transporting  
chemical gypsum and tiles, liberalized automatic freight rebate Scheme in traditional empty 
flow directions, concessions for short lead traffic  amongst others. The Committee also take 
note of the Ministry's assertion  that detailed analyses are being undertaken for specific 
commodity groups to assess their logistical characteristics, service expectations, and 
operational requirements, including transit time sensitivity, handling needs, and first -
mile/last-mile connectivity. Based on such assessments, measures are being taken to address 
operational bottlenecks and to improve end -to-end service delivery . The Committee 
appreciate the Ministry's recognition that diversification of the freight basket is critical for 
the long-term sustainability of Indian Railways. The Committee expect the Ministry to keep 
it informed of the detailed commodity -specific action plans being formulated by Indian 
Railways to diversify their freight basket and expand its share in emerging freight segments. 
 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 1)  
The Committee note that freight revenue constitutes a major portion of the total earnings 
of the Indian Railways. It is primarily due to the freight income that the Railways are able to keep 
passenger fares affordable for the general public. The Committee feel that enhancing freight 
revenue is essential not only for generating additional capital to meet modernization requirements 
but also for keeping passenger fares affordable. The Committee understand that rail-based freight 
movement is more economical and  environmentally sustainable compared to road transport. 
However, they observe that structural constraints within rail logistics, such as the lack of first-and 
last-mile connectivity, high costs for short -distance freight movement, terminal and mobility 
constraints impede potential for increasing freight revenue. The Committee have been apprised of 
various initiatives undertaken by Indian Railways to augment freight revenue. These include 
modernization of infrastructure such as freight terminals and yards, upgradation of rolling stock, 
digitization of freight operations, development of Dedicated Freight Corridors and investment in 
technology to augment operational efficiency. The Committee note that the freight revenue has 
shown a consistent upward trend over the past decade except during the Covid -19 affected years. 
However, the rate of growth varies significantly across different zones. For instance, East Central 
and South East Central Zones have nearly doubled their freight earnings since 2015-16, while other 
zones have seen only marginal growth. The Committee are aware that a substantial portion of 
freight revenue is derived from the transporting commodities such as coal, iron ore, cement, food 
grains. They are of the view that close monitoring of the zon e wise targets especially with regard 
to mobility will strengthen efforts to enhance freight revenue across regions. Furthermore, the 
Committee recommend that the Indian Railways formulate and implement zone specific strategies 
to attract freight traffic i n areas with limited mineral movement and industrial activity.  To 
incentivize modal shift from road to rail, Indian Railways may also consider offering discounted 
tariffs for transportation of zone-specific goods.  
 
 

12 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) Policy incentives for increasing modal share and increase freight revenue are as under: 
 
1) Telescopic rate benefit to domestic coal transported through Rail- Sea- Rail (RSR). 
2) Discount to fly ash: 40%/20% in Open and Flat and charging at LR1 in Covered wagons 
3) Discount in freight for traffic loaded in traditional empty flow directions 
4) To enhance modal share in containerized traffic of Tiles,  50% discount is granted in 
haulage charges of empty container laden rakes returning to originating cluster 
5) Bamboo traffic in Covered wagons originating from North East Frontier railways has been 
granted exemption from levy of Busy Season Charge (BSC) w.e.f. 01.08.2025 till 
31.03.2026. 
6) Classification of New commodities- New commodities have been added in Goods Traffic 
such as Potassium Sulphate at class 130A, Ammonium Bicarbonate Food Grade   at class 
140, RUF Pitch' at class 145A, Liquefied Isobutylene & Liquefied Ethane at class  165 and 
Soda Bi-carbonate re-classified at class 120. 
7) Gypsum in Containers: to enhance the modal share in containerized traffic of Chemical 
Gypsum, 25% discount is granted in haulage charges of empty containers laden rakes 
returning to originating loading point w.e.f 26.11.25 for a period of one year. 
8) De-notification of Commodities for carriage at Haulage Charge per TEU in Containers 
: Liquefied Isobutylene & Liquefied Ethane and Stainless steel coil in Containers. 
9) Guidelines were issued for non -levy of Busy Season Charge @15% on goods traffic 
transported in all types of covered wagons during August 2025. 
10) GTKM based rate for Bulk Cement in Tank Containers: A simplified Haulage Rate 
structure for charging as per the following: a) GTKM based charging of rail haulage at a 
flat rate of ₹0.85 per tonne per kilometre (per GTKM) with 80% rebate on empty haulage 
applicable on full rake of empty tank container in the return direction. 
 
(b) To address structural constraints and mobility issues, measures taken up/being taken 
are as under:  
 

13 
 
1. Ensuring adequate availability of rakes/wagons against peak demand 
2. Increasing capacity for carrying additional traffic per wagon. Length  of freight trains has 
also been increased to increase throughput per train. 
3.  For augmenting network capacity, address mobility constraints and ensure first and last 
mile connectivity, multi-tracking on busy routes,  ROR, bypass on congested junctions are 
being taken up. Dedicated Freight corridors are also being operationalized. Upgradation of 
yards and terminals is being taken up as well.   
4.  Use of Information Technology, as part of digitization of freight, is being increased in 
freight operations to improve monitoring and utilisation of assets.  
5. Induction of locomotives of higher horsepower and wagons of increased loadability and 
speed 
6. Improvement in maintenance practices of wagons and locomotives resulting in increased 
availability of loco and rolling stock for traffic use. 
7. Training staff and officers to adopt new technologies and management practices to provide 
reliable freight services. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
The Committee observe that determining freight rates is a highly complex exercise 
requiring a careful balance between revenue generation and the strategic need to counter 
competition from road transport and other modes of freight transportation in India. The Committee 
are aware about the obligations of Indian Railways as a national carrier and acknowledge its role 
in supporting critical sectors of the economy by offering concessional freight rates for the 
transportation of essential commodities such as salt, sugar, foodgrains, edible oils. The Committee 
further note that Indian Railways have been providing 6% freight concessions on all goods booked 
to and from North Eastern region since 1983. The Committee observe that the last revision of 
freight rates was undertaken in 2018 and that rates have remained unchanged since then. This 
approach reflects a strategic intent to balance multiple objectives like encouraging higher freight 

14 
 
volumes, managing financial constraints, maintaining competitive pricing and responding to 
prevailing economic conditions. The Committee appreciate the various freight policy initiatives 
undertaken by Indian Railways to promote goods movement via rail as well as substantial 
investments made over the years in expanding the railway network. In this context, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to undertake an annual comprehensive assessment of freight rates taking into 
account commodity wise competitiveness, prevailing market demand, and operational costs. Based 
on such assessment, the Committee recommend rationalization of freight rates  to enhance 
competitiveness vis a vis road transport. 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways, as a national transporter, operates in a competitive multi-modal transport 
ecosystem while discharging its commercial functions and social obligations. In this context, 
concessional freight rates are extended to essential commodities such as Salt, Sugar, Foodgrains 
and Edible oils, as well as the long -standing 6% freight concession applicable for traffic booked  
to and from the North Eastern Region since 1983, aimed at supporting regional development and 
economic integration. 
The Committee has noted that the last revision of freight rates was done in 2018 and that 
rates have remained largely unchanged thereafter. This conscious and measured approach has been 
undertaken to parallelly fulfill multiple objectives, mainly encouraging growth in freight loading, 
enhancing freight earnings, expanding the freight basket and maintaining competitiveness in the 
evolving market in key sectors.  
Ministry of Railways has taken various measures to increase competitiveness based on 
prevailing market demand. Some of them are as under:  
• Telescopic rate benefit to Domestic Coal movement in Rail- Sea-Rail (RSR) mode, 
• Reclassification of commodities –Soda Ash Dense/Light, etc.  
• Liberalised Automatic Freight Rebate Scheme in Traditional Empty Flow Directions, 
• Rationalization of Merry-Go- Round,  
• Concession in Short Lead Traffic,  

15 
 
• Discount in freight to Fly Ash /Bed Ash traffic booked in Open/flat Stock & 
covered      wagons,  
• De-notification of commodities for carriage at Haulage rate per TEU in container, 
• Rationalisation of Haulage rate of Automobile traffic, 
• Policy for Cargo Aggregation- Cargo Aggregator Transportation Product, 
• Rationalisation of rate for transportation of Bulk cement in tank container. 
• Rationalisation of Dynamic pricing i.e levy of Busy Season Charge on freight and container 
traffic. 
• Roll on Roll off policy for Ro-Ro/ ToT (Trucks on Train) 
• Rationalisation of two point and multi point loading for freight and automobile traffic. 
Further, as an internal mechanism, periodic data -driven assessments are carried out with 
regular inputs from the field units (Zonal Railways/Divisional Railways) and Business 
Development Units. These assessments form the basis for targeted policy interventions, including 
rationalization of freight rates, introduction of incentive schemes and rate review, wherever 
desired.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 The Committee take note of the various initiatives undertaken by Indian Railways to 
increase its freight related earnings. Among these, the implementation of the Traditional Empty 
Flow Direction Scheme is commendable, enabling the utilization of empty wago ns in the return 
direction at discounted freight rates. The Committee are of the opinion that Railways should 
leverage advanced data science technologies and data analytics to identify and develop algorithms 
of instances where wagons are likely to return empty and accordingly offer location based and 
dynamic discounts on real time basis to optimize wagon utilization. The Committee appreciate the 
introduction of Roll on – Roll off (RO -RO) services wherein loaded or empty trucks are 

16 
 
transported on railway bogies for transportation of different commodities by rail. The Committee 
feel that this initiative would help in providing last mile connectivity and significantly reduce 
pollution caused by operation of diesel trucks. To further promote RO-RO services, the Committee 
urge Indian Railways to offer incentives and undertake infrastructure upgrades including the 
development of RO-RO specific wagons and enhancement of terminal facilities. The Committee 
recommend that Indian Railways explo re avenues for increasing its non -fare revenue, thereby 
supplementing its overall earning. In particular, the Committee suggest that advertising on rail 
coaches and wagons be pursued earnestly as a viable revenue generating initiative. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Revenue enhancement on Indian Railways is a continuous process depending on various 
factors. Indian Railways has taken major steps to increase Non -fare Revenue (NFR) through 
advertisement and Innovative Ideas like 
i. Advertisement through Rail Display Network (RDN) at stations. 
ii. Advertisement through Out of Home (OOH). 
iii. Advertisement on Mobile Assets like coaches and inside/exterior surfaces of 
trains/locomotives. 
iv. Innovative solutions to enhance passengers satisfactions like Provision for sleeping pods, 
Single Brand Premium Outlet, Kiosk for providing facility for booking auto & Taxis, 
Providing E-Wheel chair facility on payment basis, Health Kiosk, Medical store to  sell 
Generic medicines. 
It may also be noted that efforts like award of contract through e-auction and delegation of 
powers to Zone/Division for implementation of various revenue generating initiatives have 
supported achievement of annual NFR target, as Rs. 657.85 Cr was earned a gainst the target of 
Rs. 665 Cr. in FY 2024-25. 
Further, with reference to advertisement on mobile assets (rail coaches and wagons), 
specific policy framework (Policy dated 10.01.2017 and 02.08.2021) is in place. A Memorandum 
of Understanding (MoU dated 01.05.2024) has also been signed with Central Bure au of 

17 
 
Communication (CBC) to award contracts of Government advertisement on Mobile assets. Zonal 
Railways have earned a total revenue of Rs. 142.40 Cr from Advertisement on Mobile Asset (Z -
612) during last 03 years (FY 22-23 to FY 24-25). 
Recommendation (Para No. 4)  
The Committee note that wagon fleet of Indian Railway plays an important role in ensuring 
efficiency of day-to-day freight operations. Wagons are specifically designed to transport a wide 
range of commodities including coal, steel, foodgrains, petroleum products. The Committee 
emphasize that the timely availability of suitable wagons is essential for the efficient movement of 
goods by rail. The Committee note that the Indian Railways currently operate approximately 4.27 
lakh wagons of various types. The Com mittee appreciate the ongoing induction of around 30000 
wagons annually. However, in the context of Coal transportation, Coal India Ltd has informed the 
Committee of its requirement for additional wagons to meet the targeted coal evacuation of 900 
MT in FY 2025 -26. NTPC Ltd has also indicated concerns regarding the availability of BOBR 
rakes which facilitate faster unloading.  Similarly, the Food Corporation of India (FCI) has 
highlighted the need for non -damaged wagons to ensure the safe transport of food grains, 
particularly to prevent damage due to water percolation.The Committee note that the Indian 
Railways have introduced schemes enabling private entities such as port operators, automobile 
manufacturers, oil producers, aluminum, cement and steel produc ers, mine owners, power 
generating companies, logistics service providers to invest in wagons. To date 640 rakes have been 
procured through various schemes. The Committee observe that increased private sector 
participation can significantly improve the timely availability of necessary wagons. In this regard, 
the Committee urge Indian Railways to actively promote private sector investment in wagons by 
setting a tangible target for promoting private ownership of wagons. The Committee feel that 
Indian Railways  may incentivise private ownership of wagons by offering rebates on freight 
charges. Furthermore, the Committee recommend that issues such as rail fractures, weld fractures 
and wagon related deficiencies be addressed promptly. Additionally, a comprehensive assessment 
of future wagon requirements be undertaken and a strategic roadmap devised to ensure timely 
procurement and availability of wagons incorporating inputs from key sectors that rely on 
Railways for freight transportation. 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways remains committed to strengthening wagon availability and enhancing 
future planning to meet the growing freight transportation needs of the country. 
Indian Railways operate a large and diversified wagon fleet catering to the transportation 
requirements of major commodities such as coal, steel, foodgrains, petroleum products and other 
bulk traffic. Wagon availability is ensured through continuous monito ring of the existing fleet, 
optimal utilisation of pooled wagons and regular induction of new wagons in line with assessed 
traffic requirements and operational feedback from Zonal Railways. 
Movement of critical commodities like coal and foodgrains is accorded high priority. Coal 
evacuation requirements, including demand for specialised wagons, are met through close 
coordination with coal -producing and consuming agencies and focused operationa l planning. 
Similarly, safe and timely movement of foodgrains is ensured through advance planning and 
deployment of fit and serviceable wagons. 
To augment wagon availability, following policies have been implemented by Railways 
for promoting private ownership of rakes and increase revenue from freight: 
i. General Purpose Wagon Investment Scheme (GPWIS) – To allow investment for procurement 
of General Purpose Wagons by End users, Public Sector Undertaking (PSUs), Port Owner, 
Logistics Providers and Mines Owners. The scheme permits eligible investors to invest in 
minimum of one rake of general purpose wagon in any of the desired ci rcuit(s) to carry any 
commodity in these rakes. 
Total wagons inducted: 22,733 approx. 
No. of rakes : 374 approx. 
ii. Liberalized Special Freight Train Operators (LSFTO) Schemes: Liberalized Special Freight 
Train Operators (LSFTO) Scheme has been started in the year 2020. The objective of the policy is 
to increase Railways share in transportation of non conventional traffic in high capacity and special 
purpose wagons to increase the commodity base of Rail Traffic. This policy provides an 

19 
 
opportunity to logistics service providers or manufacturer to invest in wagons and use advantages 
of rail transport of selected commodity to create a win-win situation for railways and themselves. 
Total wagons inducted: 8,362 approx. 
No. of rakes : 149 approx. 
iii. Automobiles Freight Train Operator (AFTO) Scheme: Automobile Freight Train Operator 
Scheme permits procurement and operation of special purpose rakes by private parties for 
transportation of automobiles sector. 
Total wagons inducted : 1,416 approx. 
No. of rakes : 48 approx. 
Thus, Wagon Procurement under these schemes is continuing as per customers’ requisition 
and requirements with suitable rebates. These initiatives have strengthened and diversified wagon 
availability, expanded the freight basket and enhanced customer participation.  
Wagon maintenance issues such as rail/weld fractures are being addressed through 
enhanced monitoring systems including Wheel Impact Load Detectors (WILD) and Hot Box 
Detectors (HBDs). 
Future wagon requirements are assessed centrally by Railway Board through periodic 
reviews based on projected freight traffic, operational experience, inputs from key freight -
dependent sectors, traffic trends, network capacity, wagon mobility, renewal prog rammes and 
prevailing economic conditions, to guide timely procurement and induction planning. 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 The Committee note that freight movement through Indian Railways encounters 
considerable congestion challenges, leading to prolonged turnaround times that adversely impact 
revenue generation. Several key routes across the railway network are highly saturat ed. The 
prioritisation of passenger trains further reduces the average speed of freight trains. The Committee 
observe that the average speed of freight trains on Indian Railway network was 23.8 Km/h in 2024-

20 
 
25. While appreciating the steps taken to enhance train speeds such as infrastructure upgrades, 
modernization of rolling stock, doubling and multi-tracking of critical sections and high -density 
corridors and operational streamlining, the Committee urge the Ministry to fastrack these 
initiatives to improve the Railways’ competitiveness of rail freight and facilitate modal shift from 
the road to rail. The Committee are of the view that expanding network capacity through the 
addition of rail lines and the adoption of advanced signaling technologies is imperative to alleviate 
congestion on the existing rail network. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that Indian 
Railways prioritize capacity augmentation projects in sections where train speeds are notably low, 
to ensure more efficient freight movement.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Railway  projects  are  sanctioned  on the basis of remunerativeness,  traffic projections, 
last    mile    connectivity,    missing    links    and    alternate routes, augmentation of 
congested/saturated lines, demands raised by State Governments, Central Ministries, Members of 
Parliament, other public representatives, Railway’s own operational requirement, socio-economic 
considerations etc. depending upon throwforward of ongoing projects and overall availability of 
funds. 
 
During the last three years i.e. FY 2022 -23, 2023-24, 2024-25 and the current FY, 217 
Multi-tracking projects of total length 9,611 Km costing approx. Rs. 1,85,051 Crore have been 
sanctioned across the country. 
 
These Multi tracking projects will enhance line capacity, provide additional passenger and 
freight traffic, enable faster movement of goods and services, reduce operational bottlenecks,  
improve logistics efficiency, increase in direct and indirect employment opportunities for the 
people of the region, reduces operational bottlenecks, develop tourism industry and increase 
industrial activities in the region. 
Recommendation (Para No. 6)  
The Committee are of the opinion that the provision of modern facilities for loading, 
unloading and storage is critical to enhancing freight movement through rail. Such infrastructure 
helps minimize delays and damages, thereby improving overall efficiency.  The Committee are 

21 
 
aware that many railway yards across the Indian Railways’ network lack these essential facilities. 
It is imperative that Indian Railway focus on equipping all its yards with basic infrastructure such 
as proper approach roads, solid platforms, leak proof ro ofings. The Committee note that Indian 
Railways had launched Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal policy to encourage private participation in 
the development of freight terminals on both railway and private land. The Committee are pleased 
to observe that 108 Gati Shakti Cargo Terminals have already been commissioned with additional 
terminals under development. They are of the view that the setting up of Gati Shakti Cargo 
Terminals be actively promoted as these terminals have the potential to significantly transform 
India’s rail logistics ecosystem by boosting freight volumes and generating additional revenue for 
the railways. The Committee urge Indian Railways to take proactive measures to promote the 
setting up of such terminals aimed at linking various regions and industrial hubs across the country 
with emphasis on last mile connectivity. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Continuous efforts are being made to upgrade freight handling infrastructure in railways 
in a phased manner, subject to operational priority and availability of resources. Works such as 
improvement of approach roads, development of solid platforms, provision of covered sheds/leak-
proof roofing and other basic amenities are being taken up under various Plan Heads and through 
zonal initiatives. Work of infra improvement is in process at 842 terminals of IR. 
To supplement more freight handling infrastructure and to accelerate capacity creation, 
Indian Railways has launched the Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal (GCT) Policy, which encourages 
private participation in the development of freight terminals on both railway and private land. Till 
30.11.2025, 120 GCTs have already been commissioned, with a number of additional terminals at 
various stages of approval and development. These terminals are contributing to improved cargo 
handling, enhanced customer convenience and incremental freight traffic.  
Indian Railways is actively promoting the setting up of GCTs by simplifying procedures, 
providing time -bound approvals through digital platforms and facilitating last -mile rail 
connectivity to industrial hubs, logistics parks and production centers. Zonal Railways have been 
advised to proactively identify potential locations and engage with stakeholders to expand the 
GCT network across regions. These measures are expected to strengthen the rail logistics 

22 
 
ecosystem, increase freight volumes and generate additional revenue for Indian Railways, in line 
with the Committee’s observations and objectives. 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 The Committee observe that coal transportation forms a significant portion of Indian 
Railways freight earnings. Railways continue to be the preferred mode of coal movement due to 
its capacity to handle bulk consignments and its cost effectiveness compared to road transport. 
However, challenges such as non-availability of requisite rakes, delays in rail connectivity projects 
and last mile connectivity issues continue to hinder efficiency. The Committee note that a Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) policy for Rail Connectivity and Capacity Augmentation was introduced 
in 2012 and that this policy is currently under revision. Presently the Joint Venture (JV) Model 
and Customer Funded Model of PPP framework offer opportunities for public sector undertakings 
(PSUs) such as Coal India Ltd., NTPC Ltd. to invest in coal evacuation projects. The Committee 
also note that Indian Railways are prioritising critical coal evacuation projects as these are vital 
for improving rail connectivity, reducing logistic costs and ensuring efficient supply of coal across 
the country. The Committee recommend that Indian Railways undertake a comprehensive 
assessment of capacity augmentation requirements of coal transport routes for enhancing overall 
efficiency and reliability of coal transport by Rail. 
  
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways accords high priority to coal transportation and is continuously 
augmenting capacity to meet the growing demand. Adequate rakes are being made available for 
transportation of coal for Coal India Ltd. and other consumers, supported by sustai ned induction 
of wagons and facilitation of private investment under the Private Wagon Investment Scheme. 
Simultaneously, railway infrastructure works related to coal transportation, involving an 
investment of ₹25,207 crore across 17 ongoing projects, are under various stages of execution, 
reflecting sustained efforts towards capacity augmentation and continued financial support for 
these initiatives. 
Commissioning of First Mile Connectivity projects and increased coal loading through 
Rapid Loading Systems have significantly improved evacuation efficiency by reducing terminal 

23 
 
detention and improving rake turnaround. Further, the National Coal Logistics Plan and Policy, 
launched on 29.02.2024, provides a comprehensive framework for identification of bottlenecks 
and monitoring of logistics projects through regular inter -ministerial reviews to ensure efficient 
coal evacuation in line with increasing coal production. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see recommendation Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation (Para No. 8)  
 The Committee observe that fly ash, a byproduct of coal combustion in thermal power 
plants, presents a significant opportunity for Indian Railways to enhance its freight revenue. 
Recognizing the growing demand of transporting f ly ash from thermal power stations to cement 
plants the Committee note that Indian Railways have increased the concession on fly ash 
transported in Open/ Flat wagons from 20% to 40% when backloaded at unloading terminals as an 
incentive to promote rail-based movement. However, the Committee take note of the submission 
made by NTPC Ltd, the largest power producer in India, which highlights its conti nued reliance 
on road transport for moving fly ash from its power plants. In light of this, the Committee urge 
Indian Railways to proactively identify key supply -and-demand clusters for fly ash, analyse the 
factors contributing to its low modal share in fl y ash transportation and formulate targeted 
strategies to increase rail -based transportation of fly ash. Furthermore, the Committee 
acknowledge the environmental challenges associated with fly-ash transportation, particularly due 
to its lightweight nature and potential to become airborne, leading to pollution.  Therefore, it is 
imperative that only specially designed railway wagons are used for transporting fly ash and that 
all relevant environmental regulations are strictly adhered to during its transit. The Indian Railways 
may also study the possibility to suitably modify the existing rakes used for transportation of coal, 
so that they can safely transport fly ash to the intended destination on return from power plants. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Key Supply-and-Demand Clusters Identified:  Based on ongoing engagement with Zonal 
Railways and major Fly Ash producers and consumers, the following key clusters have been 
identified: 

24 
 
 
Supply Clusters: Major Fly Ash generation is concentrated in thermal power plant belts located in: 
• East Coast Railway - Talcher region and Jharsuguda (Odisha) and Simhadri (Andhra 
Pradesh) 
• South East Central Railway- Korba belt (Chhattisgarh) 
• North Central / East Central Railway interface (Vindhyachal–Rihand–Singrauli region) 
• South Central Railway (Ramagundam and Yadadri region) 
• Central Railway- Bhusawal and Nashik region 
• East Central Railway (ECR) zone- Sonbhadra cluster (UP) including Anpara&Obra 
 
 These regions host major NTPC and State GENCO plants generating substantial surplus 
Fly Ash. Top five states with highest generation of Fly Ash are Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Uttar 
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Maharsashtra. 
Demand Clusters: Demand is primarily concentrated in: 
• National Highway & Expressway corridors - Significant consumption for embankment 
works  
• Cement manufacturing units across distant locations 
• Brick & construction sector 
• Delhi/NCR region – Infrastructure and construction projects 
• Large infrastructure corridors where Fly Ash is used for embankment and construction. 
 
 Top five states with highest Fly Ash utilization are Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra contributing to more than 50% of the total fly-ash utilization in 
the country. 
2) Factors Contributing to Low Modal Share of Rail:  The key factors impacting rail -based 
movement include: 
• Inadequate rail loading infrastructure at TPPs, particularly non -availability of silos and 
mechanised handling facilities 
• Mandatory utilization guidelines requiring Fly Ash supply within a 300 km radius for use 
in NHAI projects, landfills, mine filling etc., which encourages road -based short lead 
movement. 

25 
 
• Operational challenges in ensuring assured and continuous rake loading. 
 
3) Targeted Strategies to Increase Rail Share: The following targeted measures are being 
undertaken: 
• Freight incentive schemes: 
- 40% concession on NTR for Fly Ash booked in trainload in open (bulk/bagged) and flat 
(bagged) wagons for rakes released /unloaded/backloaded at the perticular terminal. 
- 20% concession on the same when rake is supplied from other location/terminal. 
- 12% freight rebate admissible to approved operators under the LSFTO scheme. 
• Zonal Railways such as SCR, CR and ECoR have been tasked with identifying and 
operationalising new Fly Ash loading streams to enhance monthly rake movement  
• NTPC and other production units have been encouraged to coordinate with stakeholders 
for sustained evacuation through rail and to target minimum assured rake loading from key 
plants  
• Major state power generation corporations are being approached for extending support 
towards commencement of Fly Ash loading through Indian Railways from major power 
plants. 
• Targeted interactions with major consumers are being done to encourage stakeholders to 
adopt rail as a mode of transport for Fly Ash. 
 Wagons suitable for transportation of cement and fly ash  have already been designed by 
RDSO and operational over Indian Railways. The current population as on 18.02.2026 of these 
wagons is as under: 
S.No. Wagon Type Railway 
owned 
Privately 
owned 
Total holding 
1 BCCW 0 1079 1079 
2 BCFC 128 253 381 
3 BCFCM 0 1102 1102 
4 BCFCM1 0 897 897 
  Total 128 3331 3459 
  

26 
 
 The salient feature of these commodity specific wagons designed for transportation of 
cement and fly ash are as follows: 
  
a. Easy loading and unloading process  - Modern design BCFCM1 wagon enables direct loading 
and from the silos at Power Plant & unloading directly in the storage facility of Cement Plants 
from these wagons equipped with air assisted gravity discharge. 
  
b. Effective utilization - 
Since all the above wagons are also designed for cement transportation, effective utilization of 
these wagons is possible by cement loading and transportation after fly ash unloading at cement 
plants. 
  
c. Environment friendly transportation - There is no possibility of pollution due to leakage of 
airborne fly ash particles during transportation due to covered and air -tight chamber design of 
these wagons. Therefore, fly ash transportation utilizing these wagons is pollution free and also 
there is no possibility of moisture contamination of bulk fly ash in these wagons 
  
 With regard to transportation of fly ash in open wagons, it is stated that in cases where 
transportation through specially designed wagons is not feasible, fly ash may be transported in 
open category wagons with an appropriate covering arrangement to preve nt air pollution and 
moisture contamination en -route. In this connection, standard guidelines for application of 
tarpaulin for covering of open/hopper wagons have already been prepared and forwarded to 
Railways to implement it on the trial basis. Based on the feedback received from Railways requisite 
modification/improvement for regular implementation will be incorporated in the guidelines. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that Indian Railways’ freight earnings are predominantly derived from 
the transportation of limited set on commodities such as coal, iron ore and cement. The Committee 
further observe that the year -on-year revenue growth from coal and ir on ore is gradually 
decelerating. The Committee feel that a broader commodity basket is essential for ensuring 

27 
 
sustainable growth as it provides cushioning against fluctuations in the demand and usage of 
specific commodities. To enhance its earnings, Indian Railways need to expand its focus beyond 
bulk goods and target commodities that are currently transported pri marily by road. Diversifying 
into segments such as automobiles, Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) and e -commerce 
offers significant potential to boost revenue and reduce overdependence on a narrow range of 
freight categories. The Committee appreciate the notable increase in automobile traffic transported 
by rail which have been facilitated through proactive  industry engagement, rationalization of 
freight rates, development of dedicated Gati Shakti Cargo Terminals, functioning as co -located 
stockyards and the induction of double decker wagons to maximize vehicles capacity per rake. The 
Committee urge Indian Railways to conduct a comprehensive analysis of its existing freight 
portfolio, identify commodities with low rail modal share but high growth potential, assess their 
specific logistical requirements and address operational bottlenecks that hinder their movement by 
rail. Additionally, the Committee recommend that the Ministry intensify outreach to sectors such 
as FMCG, e -commerce, fly ash to expand rail’s f ootprint in areas meaningful to successfully 
diversify its freight basket. Indian Railways must ensure efficient operations, reliable services, 
appropriate wagons availability, competitive pricing, a supportive logistics ecosystem and 
technology-driven, consumer centric services. The Committee emphasise that diversification is 
imperative for long term sustainability.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Railways are continuously reviewing its freight basket with a view to identifying potential 
commodities having low rail modal share but significant growth volume. The notable increase in 
automobile traffic, carried by rail, is the outcome of sustained enga gement with the automobile 
industry, rationalization of freight rates, development of dedicated Gati Shakti Cargo Terminals 
(GCTs) and induction of specialized rolling stock. Detailed analyses are being undertaken for 
specific commodity groups to assess th eir logistical characteristics, service expectations, and 
operational requirements, including transit time sensitivity, handling needs, and first -mile/last-
mile connectivity. Based on such assessments, measures are being taken to address operational 
bottlenecks and to improve end-to-end service delivery. 
Indian Railways has initiated several targeted interventions which includes: 

28 
 
• Introduction of rationalized and simplified Gross Tonnes (GTKM) based rate for haulage 
of bulk cement in tank containers, 
• Discount on empty haulage of containers transporting Chemical Gypsum traffic and Tiles 
traffic, 
• Limited period exemption on levy of Busy Season Charge (BSC) on Bamboo traffic in 
Covered wagons originating from North East Frontier railways, 
• De-notification of Stainless Steel in Coil form for transportation in containers,  
• Telescopic rate benefit for domestic Coal movement in Rail-Sea-Rail (RSR) mode, 
• Liberalized Automatic Freight Rebate Scheme in Traditional Empty Flow Directions, 
• Station-to-Station Rates Policy, 
• Concession in Short Lead Traffic, 
• Discount in freight to Fly Ash/Bed Ash traffic booked in Open/flat Stock & covered 
wagons, 
• De-notification of commodities for carriage at Haulage rate per TEU in container, 
• Policy for Cargo Aggregation-Cargo Aggregator Transportation Product, etc. 
Further, Railways continues to engage proactively with industry stakeholders through 
consultations, commodity -specific interaction customer interaction to better understand their 
logistical requirements and align rail services accordingly.  
Diversification of the freight basket holds significant priority for the long -term 
sustainability and growth of Indian Railways. In order to cater to more customers, more trains are 
being run.  Further, infrastructure upgrade e.g. multi tracking, New Rail flyovers are being 
continuously added. 
Average freight trains per day during previous years are as under: 

29 
 
Years Average number of freight train per day 
2021-22 4968 
2022-23 5947 
2023-24 6430 
2024-25 6785 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
Recommendation (Para No. 10)  
The Committee observe that the creation of Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFCs) has the 
potential to revolutionise rail freight transportation by offering high -speed and high -capacity 
tracks, thereby significantly reducing transit times and logistics costs. The Committee note that 
the development of DFCs represents the single largest infrastructure initiative undertaken by 
Indian Railways. The Committee also note that the Eastern DFC spanning 1337 km. from 
Ludhiana to Sonnagar primarily serves to coal and min eral traffic from Eastern India and the 
Western DFC covering 1506 km from Jawaharlal Nehru Port in New Mumbai to Dadri near Delhi, 
facilitate the movement of port traffic from the western coast to the northern hinterland . The 
Committee are pleased to note that EDFC has been completed and WDFC is nearing completion. 
These corridors have played a pivotal role in decongesting the existing rail network, enhancing the 
speed of freight trains and increasing the share of Indian railway in freight transportation. T he 
Committee take note of role played by DFC network in managing both passenger and freight trains 
during MahaKumbh. The Committee are aware that Detailed Project Report (DPR) for three 
additional freight corridors that will cater to specific commodities and span key regions across the 
country have already been finalised and are currently under review by the Railway Board. 
Recognizing that development of DFCs is highly capital intensive, the Committee emphasize the 
importance of evaluating economic returns relative to investment and overall project cost. The 
Committee note that the Sonnagar-Danakuni section of the EDFC was initially planned under the 

30 
 
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model. However, due to limited interest from the private sector, 
Indian Railways had to abandon the PPP model and opt for government equity funding. Given the 
substantial capital requirement of DFC projects and the need for budgetary support across various 
railway infrastructure and modernization initiatives, the Committee recommend that the Indian 
Railways make concerted efforts to attract private sector investment for future DFCs by offering 
commercially viable and attractive terms.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways has formulated the Participative Policy, 2012 to facilitate private 
sector participation in the development of rail connectivity through various Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) models, namely Non -Government Rail (NGR), Joint Venture (JV), Customer 
Funded Model, BOT and BOT (Annuity). 
State Governments and Local Bodies are also eligible to participate as stakeholders in the 
development of new line and gauge conversion projects under the said policy. 
Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) projects are highly capital intensive and the sanction of 
any new DFC project is subject to approval based on technical feasibility, financial and economic 
viability, traffic projections and availability of funds and financing options. 
Accordingly, the provisions of the Participative Policy and PPP models shall be leveraged 
at the time of sanction and implementation of future DFC projects, wherever found feasible, in 
order to attract private investment through commercially viable and PPP-friendly frameworks. 
Recommendation (Para No. 11)  
The Committee note that approximately 2741 Km of Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) 
has already been commissioned. Freight loading and revenue generation on the DFC network have 
witnessed a significant uptrend in recent years. The corridors have facilitated faster movement of 
goods from industrial hubs to ports and from coal mines to thermal power plants. Notably the 
operation of double stacked container trains has also been introduced on the DFC network. The 
Committee observe that the speed of freight trains on the DFC network was 37 Km/h in 2024-25, 
making a substantial improvement over the speeds achieved on the conventional Railway network. 
However, the Committee feel that there is considerable scope of further improvement. The 
Ministry have outlined sever al initiatives aimed at increasing the average speed of trains on the 

31 
 
DFC network including the elimination of level crossings, deployment of 100 km/h capable 
wagons and implementation of the kavach safety system. The Committee urge Indian Railways to 
adopt a timely well -coordinated approach to ensure the effective execution  of these measures, 
thereby improving the overall efficiency of the DFC network. Furthermore, the Committee are of 
the view that all future DFC projects must integrate the efficiency enhancing measure, currently 
being implemented post operationalization in to the planning and design stages from the outset. 
Further, the Committee recommend that Indian Railways prioritize the development of new feeder 
routes and undertake capacity augmentation of existing feeder routes to ensure seamless 
connectivity between major industrial hubs and the DFC network. 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways is undertaking capacity augmentation of existing feeder routes through 
infrastructure strengthening and operational improvements to ensure seamless movement of 
freight between major industrial hubs and the DFC network. 
Recommendation (Para No. 12)  
The Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL), entrusted with 
the operation and maintenance of Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFCs), has raised concerns 
regarding the availability of crew for train operations on the DFC network. The Co mmittee 
observe that the fully electrified DFCs equipped with dedicated high -capacity tracks exclusively 
for freight was conceptualized to significantly reduce transit times and enhance the efficiency of 
freight movement. The Committee feel that this visio n could be impacted if operational 
bottlenecks particularly those related to crew availability are not promptly addressed. The 
Committee note that as per directives issued by the Railway Board, Indian Railways are 
responsible for providing both crew and mo ving infrastructure for DFC operations. The 
Committee emphasize the shortage of crew needs to be urgently resolved to minimize delays, 
improve throughputs and ensure uninterrupted freight movement across the DFC network.  
Accordingly, the Committee urge In dian Railways to take necessary and effective measures to 
ensure the availability of adequate crew required for the smooth operation of trains on the DFC 
network.  
 

32 
 
Reply of the Government 
A total of 28,769 vacancies of Assistant Loco Pilot (ALP) and 6560 vacancies of Goods 
Train Manager have been notified in 2024 and 2025. CBTs are in different stages of completion. 
A substantial number of ALPs have already been selected against 18,799 vacancies advertised in 
2024. The shortage of crew should be addressed substantially because of the above measures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

34 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
New Delhi; DR. C.M. RAMESH 
06 August, 2026________ Chairperson 
15 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
  

36 
 
ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2025-26) 
The Committee met on Thursday, the 6 th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 2, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. C.M. Ramesh – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Shri Ummeda Ram Beniwal 
5. Shri Chhotelal 
6. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
7. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
9. Shri Khagen Murmu 
10. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
11. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
12. Shri Sudama Prasad 
13. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
14. Dr. Bhola Singh 
15. Shri Bharatbhai Manubhai Sutariya 
16. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
17. Dr. Alka Gurjar 
18. Shri Rajendra Hiralal Jain 
19. Shri Mansoor Ali Khan 
20. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
21. Dr. K. Laxman 
22. Shri Khiru Mahto 
23. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
24. Smt. Sadhna Singh 
 
 
 

37 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi - Joint Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam  -  Director  
3. Smt. Savdha Kalia  -  Deputy Secretary 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports :-  
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in their 6 th Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Increasing freight 
related earnings of Indian Railways and development of Dedicated Freight 
Corridors’.  
(ii) *****   *****   *****   ***** 
The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Reports without any modifications.  
3.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the Reports to the 
Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned.  
    
-------- 
 
 