 
 
1 
 
05 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2024-25) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 3 rd Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Railways’] 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT  
 
 
 
                                       
  
             
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
AUGUST, 2025/ SHRAVAN, 1947 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
2 
 
SCR NO.  249 
 
FIFTH REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2024-25)  
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA    
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 3 rd Report of 
the Standing Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Railways’] 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2025  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2025             
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2025/SHRAVAN, 1947 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................................ 1 
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. 6 
 
PART-I 
 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………… 
 
7 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government                                                               
 
25 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply……………………………………………………… 
 
69 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration……..  
 
70 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited …… 
71 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on 
07.08.2025 
72 
APPENDIX  
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha)…………………. 
 
74 

 
 
4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2024-25)@ 
 
   Dr. C.M. Ramesh   - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Shri T. R. Baalu 
5. Shri Ummeda Ram Beniwal 
6. Shri Chhotelal 
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
11. Shri Khagen Murmu 
12. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
13. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
14. Shri Sudama Prasad 
15. Shri M K Raghavan 
16. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
17. Dr. Swami Sachidanand Hari Sakshi 
18. Dr. Bhola Singh 
19. Shri Bharatbhai Manubhai Sutariya 
20. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
21. Shri Vijayakumar Alias Vijay Vasanth 
  
     Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad 
23. Shri Narhari Amin 
24. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
25. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
26. Dr. K. Laxman 
27. Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak 
28. Smt. Sadhna Singh 
29. Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki 
30. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
31. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
…………………………………………………………………………………… 
@ Constituted w.e.f. 26.09.2024 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 841 dated 
26.09.2024. 

 
 
5 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam  - Director 
3. Smt. Savdha Kalia  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2024 -25), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Fifth Report on Action Taken by Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Third Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘’Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Railways”. 
 
2. The Third Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 
10.03.2025.  The Report contained 19 Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry of 
Railways furnished Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report on 11.07.2025. 
 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 07.08.2025.  The minutes of the sitting are given in Annexure. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.  
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee 
on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       New Delhi; DR. C.M. RAMESH 
       07 August, 2025________ Chairperson 
       16 Shravan, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
  

 
 
7 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Third Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on 
'Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Railways'.  
 
2. The Third Report was presented to the Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on   10th 
March 2025. It contained 19 Observations/ Recommendations. Replies of the Government 
in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:- 
Rec.        Para Nos. 1 to 19  
             Chapter-II  
                                          Total: 19 
Percentage:100 
(ii) Observations / recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies:- 
 
         NIL                    
           Chapter-III 
                               Total: 00 
Percentage:00 
         
(iii) Observations / recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:- 
 NIL                               
            Chapter-IV 
                Total: 00 
Percentage:00 
(iv) Observations / recommendations in respect of which final replies are still 
awaited:-  
           NIL                     
             Chapter-V 
                                 Total: 00 
Percentage:00 

 
 
8 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the Observations / Recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapte r-I of this Report be furnished 
to them at the earliest but not later than three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier Observations / 
Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
5. In their Third Report, the Committee had noted that the Operating Ratio (OR) is an 
effective tool to gauge the financial health and reflect the overall performance of the 
Railways. Operating Ratio indicates how much the Railways spend to earn a rupee and the 
percentage of gross working expenses to gross earn ings should be as low as possible. The 
Committee observe d that from the year 2022 -23, the Railways Operating Ratio ha d 
continuously been above 98% besides showing an upward trend. For the  year 2024-25, 
Operating Ratio wa s estimated to be 98.90%. The Committee observe d that for 2025 -26 
the Railways had projected a target of 98.43% for its Operating Ratio which continues to 
be above 98%.  Therefore, the Committee desire d the Ministry of Railways to take  
proactive measures to improve the Operating Ratio by enhancing revenue generation and 
controlling working expenses. Efforts should be made to increase freight and passenger 
traffic revenues through innovative pricing strategies, improved service quality, and better 
utilization of existing assets. The Committee urged t he Ministry to focus on reducing 
Ordinary Working Expenses by adopting cost -effective technologies, optimizing energy 
consumption, utilizing renewable energy for traction, diversifying non fare revenue sources 
while focusing on asset optimization and modernization of th e railway network and 
streamlining operational processes. 
  

 
 
9 
 
6. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee , the Ministry of Railways 
have stated as follows: 
“Improving the operating ratio is always a priority for Railways. To improve 
operating ratio, Railways need to increase earnings along with measures to control 
expenditure. Railway has invested record capex in the last five years to enhance IR’s 
capacity by  creating New lines, Doubling, procuring/manufacturing Wagons, Coaches, 
Locomotives etc. The Ministry has set an ambitious target of 3000 MT of loading by 2030. 
The Ministry is also working to increase the share of Sundry revenue (non -fare revenue) 
in IR’s total receipts which is around 3.8% in 2023 -24.  The other endeavour includes 
initiatives aimed at maximizing revenue receipts like expansion of commodity basket 
through creation of Business Development Units (BDUs) at the Ministry, Zonal and 
Divisional l evels for better coordination for movement of bulk commodities like coal, 
effective and innovative marketing strategies to capture more traffic.  
To enhance passenger revenue with a view to ensuring optimum utilisation of 
available accommodation, various initiatives like running of special trains, introduction of 
Vande Bharat and Amrit Bharat trains, augmentation of on -board capacity, introduction 
and rationalisation of Flexi-fare scheme in premium trains, periodical review of reservation 
quota wherever required, extension of Alternate Train Accommodation Scheme known as 
VIKALP have also been undertaken. Railways have also taken various measures to 
increase freight and Non fare revenue such as  introduction of Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal 
Policy featuring liberalized provisions,  Wagon Investment Schemes,  the launch of the 
Goods Shed Rating Dashboard, introduction of e-Auction Policy for Commercial Earning 
& Non Fare Revenue contracts,  special focus on e -Commerce and FMCG,  inclusion of 
certain popular ecommerce commodities (e.g. cosmetics, lithium ion batteries, battery 
powered vehicles etc.) in the Red Tariff,  revised guidelines issued for Liberalis ed 
Automatic Freight Rebate scheme for traffic loaded in empty flow direction etc. 
To control expenditure, measures are being regularly taken in Railways in order to 
ensure savings in the operating expenditure. Expenditure management on Railways aims 
at better manpower management for improving per capita productivity, electrification of 

 
 
10 
 
railway track, introducing HOG rakes, rationalizing repair and maintenance of rolling 
stock, efficient utilization of assets etc. Apart from this, rigorous monitoring of expenditure 
on monthly basis is done to control expenditure. Due to progressive electr ification of 
Railway tracks, more than Rs. 4700 cr. has been saved under Diesel traction in FY 2023 -
24 alone. 
As a result, operating ratio of Railways improved to 98.43% in 2023-24 and 98.22% 
(provisional) in 2024-25. 
Railways is committed to be self -sufficient and financially resilient by increasing 
earnings, reducing the Ordinary Working Expenses and proactively using technologies 
which are modern and cost effective”. 
7. The Committee note the various initiatives undertaken by the Ministry of 
Railways to improve the Operating Ratio, including substantial capital investment 
for capacity enhancement, rationalisation of passenger and freight services, 
expansion of the non -fare revenue base and several cost -control measures such as 
electrification, manpower management and adoption of modern technologies. While 
appreciating these efforts the Committee remain concerned that the Operating Ratio 
continues to be critically high and above the desirable level. This underscores the need 
for more focused implementation, regular and timely reviews of outcomes and the 
exploration of new strategic avenues for financial improvement. The Committee , 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry undertake a time -bound, outcome-oriented 
review of all initiatives aimed at improving the Operating Ratio to as sess their cost-
benefit effectiveness. The Committee further urge the Ministry to prepare a clear 
roadmap with measurable targets for each revenue generation and expenditure 
control strategy. Additionally, t he Committee recommend that  the Ministry 
accelerate the development of Gati Shakti Multi -Modal Cargo Terminals (GCTs) , 
and ensure seamless last-mile connectivity to ports, industrial zones and warehouses. 
The Ministry should also adopt  innovative marketing strategies to capture a greater 
share of freight traffic for railways; substantially increase sundry revenue beyond the 
current 3.8% by exploring new avenues particularly commercial utilization of vacant 

 
 
11 
 
land; fast-track the use of renewable energy sources (such as solar and wind) for both 
traction and non-traction energy need to reduce  electricity costs and  analyse the 
operational cost ratios and service efficiencies of global railway systems and adopting 
practices that are sustainable and adaptable to Indian conditions. 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
8.  In their earlier Report the Committee had noted that Indian Railways has achieved 
significant progress in several areas, particularly in new line construction, where 925 km 
were completed against a target of 700 km in 2024-25, demonstrating strong performance. 
The Committee observed that the removal of traffic bottlenecks is a key focus area of the 
2025-26 railway budget. They further note d that the throw -forward for doubling works 
stands at Rs. 32,000 crore. Regarding doubling projects, the Committee found that against 
a target of 2,900 km, only 1,134 km (39.10%) was achieved during 2024 -25 (up to 
December 2024). While the Budget Estimate (BE) for doubling was Rs. 29,312 crore, it 
was revised upward at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage to Rs. 31,036.86 crore, with actual 
utilization reaching Rs. 22,918.57 crore (73.85% of RE) (up to December 2024). The 
Committee acknowledged that doubling is a long -term asset essential for improving train 
speeds and serving as a significant revenue multiplier. However, they o bserved that while 
the financial utilization of the budget stands at nearly 74%, the physical achievement of 
the target is a merely39%. The Committee desired to be apprised of the factors leading to 
this disparity. They urge d the Railways to exercise due diligence in identifying and 
addressing obstacles to ensure seamless project execution. This includes streamlining land 
acquisition, expediting clearances, and leveraging modern construction technologies to 
facilitate the time ly completion of doubling proje cts, thereby effectively reducing traffic 
congestion. The Committee also expect ed the Railways to ensure full utilization of the 
budget sanctioned and achievement of the physical targets set for doubling of lines in 2024-
25. 
 
9. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee , the Ministry of Railways 
have stated as follows: 

 
 
12 
 
 
DOUBLING 
  
Year Target (in Kms)  Achievement (in Kms) 
2024-25 2900 
  
 
1977 
  
  
Year Budget Estimate 
(in Rs. Crore) 
Revised Estimate 
(in Rs. Crore) 
Expenditure 
(in Rs. Crore) 
Utilization % 
2024-25 29312 31036 32791 105 
  
The actual expenditure incurred under Plan Head Doubling is more than the Budget 
and Revised Estimate for FY 2024-25. However, the Physical achievement is  68% of the 
target set for FY 2024-25 as completion of any Railway project depends on various factors 
like quick land acquisition by State Government, forest clearance by officials of forest 
department, deposition of cost share by State Government in cost sharing projects, priority 
of projects, s hifting of infringing utilities, statutory clearances from various authorities, 
geological and topographical conditions of area, law and order situation in the area of 
project(s) site, number of working months   in  a year for particular project site due to  
climatic conditions etc. 
Various steps taken by the Government for speedy approval and implementation of 
Railway projects include (i) setting up of Gati Shakti units (ii) prioritisation of projects (iii) 
substantial increase in allocation of funds on priority projects (iv) delegat ion of powers at 
field level (v) close  monitoring  of  progress  of project at various levels, and (vi) regular 
follow up with State Governments and concerned authorities for expeditious land 
acquisition, forestry and Wildlife clearances and for resolving  other issues pertaining to 
projects. This has led to substantial increase in rate of commissioning since 2014. 
 
10. The Committee appreciate the full utilization of the budget allocated for the 
doubling of railway lines. The Committee also note the Ministry’s submissions that  
completion of any Railway project depends on several factors including timely land 
acquisition by State Government, forest clearance s, deposition of cost share by State 

 
 
13 
 
Government in cost sharing projects, projects  prioritization, shifting of infringing 
utilities, statutory clearances from various authorities, geological and topographical 
conditions, law and order situation at project site s and the  number of work able 
months  in  a year due to climatic conditions. However , the Committee urge the 
Ministry to address the disparit ies between total expenditure incurred and the 
physical progress achieved in doubling railway lines , as this project is crucial for 
increasing capacity and remov ing bottlenecks in the Indian Railways network.  In 
view of the significant progress  made and the record budget allocations for 
infrastructure development , the Committee reiterate the need f or a coordinated 
approach to monitor and overcome challenges in track doubling to successfully  
achieve the physical targets earmarked. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
11. The Committee in their Third Report had noted that Railways has been steadily 
replacing conventional ICF coaches with safer and more efficient LHB coaches and 
producing only LHB coaches since April, 2018. The Committee also appreciate d that 
Railways has introduced Vande Bharat Sleeper and Amrit Bharat trains with enhanced 
safety features and modern passenger amenit ies. The Committee had  been apprised that 
after successful trials and commissioning of first prototype rakes of Vande Bharat Sleeper 
and Amri t Bharat 2.0, series production of these rakes will be done for which 
manufacturing plans are already in place.  To address the persistent issue of unmet 
production targets for coaches and wagons, the Committee recommended that the Railways 
significantly increase manufacturing capacity at existing units and explore the creation of 
new production facilities in areas lacking them. As such the BE for production units stands 
at 4623 crores therefore the Committee also desire the Ministry to encourage Public-Private 
Partnerships (PPP) to bring in advanced coach-building technologies. The Committee also 
desired that enough thrust be given to investing in skill development programs and 
collaborating with technical institutes to train workers in modern production techniques 

 
 
14 
 
and automation. Though the Committee we re happy to note that Railways has exported 
rolling stocks of the value of Rs. 608.70 crore to Mozambique and Sri Lanka during 2022-
2023, the Committee desired the Railways to expand their business operation in exporting 
of rail components to enhance revenue without making any compromise on fulfilling of 
indigenous demand for rolling stock. To bolster freight operations, the Committee 
recommended the Railways to scale up the production of wagons and containers to meet 
growing logistical needs at the production units. 
 
12. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee , the Ministry of Railways 
have stated as follows: 
“Presently, the ongoing works related to capacity augmentation of Coach and 
Wagon Production Units have been sanctioned at an anticipated cost of Rs. 1670.78 Crores 
in Indian Railways. 
Skill development is a continuous process in Production Units. Production Units 
have been advised to conduct regular/ periodic training/ refresher course of technical staff 
engaged in production activities for improving the safety aspect, quality and relia bility of 
Rolling Stock by utilizing the in-house resources as well as by roping in Industrial experts 
and academia.  
Around 13000 staff h ave been provided with regular/ periodic training in the year 
2024-25 till February, 2025 in Production Units of Indian Railways. 
Wagon induction is a continuous process which is based on traffic load requirement 
as advised by Traffic Directorate on a year to year basis. Aimed at ensuring wagon 
availability to meet growing freight loading needs, procurement of more than 1 lakh 
wagons have been arranged from various private firms, PSUs and railway workshops in 
the past 3 years. This has been achieved through proper planning taking all rising to 
occasion through augmentation manufacturing facilities. Even in house manufacturing of 
wagons by Railway workshop and Railway PSUs have been promoted not only to 
manufacture wagons in urgent demand but in developing proto of new design improved 

 
 
15 
 
wagons. Further enhancement of wagon production by workshops and Railway controlled 
PSU will be taken care of to meet growing wagon demands.” 
 
13. The Committee note the initiatives undertaken by the Railways to augment the 
capacity of Coach and Wagon Production Units, and appreciate the ongoing efforts 
to impart skill development training to approximately 13,000 personnel during 2024-
25. However, the Committee are of the view that investment in production capacity 
must be strategically aligned with the ambitious rollout of next-generation trains such 
as the Vande Bharat Sleeper and Amrit Bharat 2.0, as well as the increasing demand 
for freight transportation. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to formulate 
a time -bound roadmap for capacity augmentation through expansion of existing 
facilities, establishment of new units  and targeted modernisation initiatives. The 
Committee again emphasize the importance of  developing a skilled workforce 
equipped to meet the technological requirements of new-generation rolling stock and 
the need to explore export opportunities for rolling stock and components, without 
compromising domestic needs. Furthermore, the Committee desire that a structured 
and institutionalised mechanism be put in place to synchronise production capacity 
with the projected growth in passenger and freight operations over the coming 
decade. 
Recommendation (Para No. 14)  
 
14. The Committee in their earlier report had  appreciated the introduction of Joint 
Parcel Product – Rapid Cargo Service (JPP-RCS) as a transformative step in e-Commerce 
and FMCG logistics through technology-driven freight solutions. To maximize its impact 
for better revenue generation, the Committee desire d the Railways to expand service 
coverage to high-demand industrial and commercial hubs, ensuring frequent and reliab le 
operations. The Committee felt that strengthening the Virtual Aggregation Platform (VAP) 
with seamless integration for aggregators and India Post will further enhance efficiency. 
The Committee observe d that upgrading parcel handling infrastructure is essential to 

 
 
16 
 
improve service quality and competitiveness in e -Commerce and FMCG logistics which 
shall help the railways expand its customer base in this segment.  The Committee 
recommended that the Ministry of Railways consider establishing a real-time performance 
monitoring mechanism, adopt dynamic pricing models and foster continuous collaboration 
with potential logistics partners for optimum performance under the Joint Parcel Product 
– Rapid Cargo Service (JPP-RCS). 
 
15. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as follows: 
“Based on the traffic potential and utilization of the existing JPP -RCS services, 
increase in the frequency of JPP -RCS train no. 00111/00112 (Bhivandi Road Sankrail -
Bhivandi Road) from weekly to bi-weekly has been approved. 
In order to expand the service coverage, more routes are being explored in 
consultation with stakeholders. Efforts are on to make the VAP more robust. 
Under the Umbrella work 2024-25, Rs. 2,500 crores has been allocated for provision 
of facilities related to Parcel Shed (including Goods Shed) under the Plan Head -53. 
Processing and sanctioning works under this umbrella allocation is currently in its initi al 
stages.  
Performance of the JPP-RCS is regularly monitored by the Zonal Railways as well 
as Railway Board. Various interactive sessions are also conducted regularly with 
stakeholders to get their feedback and suggestions for improvement in the Policy. 
Further, in order to improve utilization of the JPP -RCS services (operational on 04 
routes), and to divert the traffic from road to rail, provision of discount in freight by 50% 
of the JP - Scale in return direction, and charging of freight at JP Scale +35%  for the 
roundtrip have been introduced as a pilot project (effective from 01.04.2025).” 
 
16. The Committee note the proactive measures taken by the Ministry of Railways 
to enhance the Joint Parcel Product – Rapid Cargo Service (JPP -RCS), including 
increased service frequency on select routes, pilot initiatives such as dynamic freight 
discounts and a substantial budgetary allocation of Rs. 2,500 crores under Plan Head-

 
 
17 
 
53 for parcel handling infrastructure. The Committee also observe that the service is 
currently operational on four routes and that infrastructure augmentation is still in 
its early stage s. The Committee urge the Ministry to expedite the execution  of 
infrastructure works under the approved allocation, operationalize additional high -
potential routes within a set time frame, strengthen real time performance monitoring 
mechanism and scale up pricing strateg ies based on performance outcomes . The 
Committee reiterate the  need for early strengthening of the Virtual Aggregation 
Platform (VAP) to enable seamless integration with logistics partners and India Post 
thereby expanding the service’s reach and efficiency. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15)  
 
17. The Committee in their Third Report had  noted that Railways has made significant 
strides in material management through digitization, decentralized procurement and 
streamlined inventory control. The Committee also note d that while the efficiency of 
warehouse operations has improved with modern infrastructure and IT -driven inventory 
tracking (IMMS, UDM, IREPS), challenges remain in procurement via GeM. The 
Committee observed that surplus stock values have increased over the last three years and 
feel a need for more proactive disposal mechanisms. While recognizing the benefits of 
decentralized procurement, the Committee note d the persistent problems with GeM, 
specifically payment delays, bid management inefficiencies, and inadequate post -contract 
recovery. To enhance efficiency and for smooth material management, the Committee 
desired the Ministry of Railways to focus on resolving these GeM issues alongside 
optimizing demand forecasting, expediting surplus stock liquidation, and improving post -
contract financial reconciliation. 
 
18. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as follows: 
“Ministry of Railways regularly communicates with GeM to address issues faced 
by Railway buyers which is an ongoing process and is done from time to time.  Recently, 

 
 
18 
 
vide letter dated 26.12.2024, a list of various issues were communicated to GeM covering 
areas such as payment processing, bid management and contracts, post contract 
management, tracking and consignment, system interface, policy and procedures etc.   In 
their reply dated 08.01.2025, GeM has assured that they are developing a new system 
namely GeM 2.0 and resolution of these issues including demand linking, clubbing and 
post contract recoveries will be provided in the new system.  Once the new system, GeM 
2.0, is launched by GeM, feedback of buyers will once again be obtained on these issues 
and the same will be taken up with GeM if issues persist. 
As far as surplus stock liquidation is concerned, because of significant changes in 
design due to technological developments, there is an increase in surplus stocks. Rules and 
instructions are already in place for liquidation of such surplus stock, which s hall be 
liquidated in due course of time.” 
 
19. The Committee note the Ministry’s ongoing engagement with GeM and 
acknowledge the planned rollout of GeM 2.0, which is expected to address key 
operational challenges such as payment delays, bid management and post -contract 
recoveries. However, the Committee observe that the resolution of existing 
inefficiencies remain contingent on the future implementation and subsequent 
evaluation of GeM 2.0 , resulting in a lack of immediate relief . The Committee , 
therefore recommend that the Ministry establish a dedicated monitoring cell to track 
the progress and effectiveness of GeM 2.0 post-launch and ensure that any unresolved 
issues are promptly addressed. The Committee are also concerned that surplus stock 
is rising due to rapid technological advancements and therefore, urge the Ministry to 
adopt a more dynamic and time -bound approach to stock liquidation . The Ministry 
may consider revising relevant rules and instructions to incorporate demand 
forecasting, leverage predictive analytics thereby minimizing stock obsolescence and 
improving inventory turnover and stock liquidation. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16)  

 
 
19 
 
 
20. The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that the total cost of Mumbai -
Ahmedabad High-Speed Rail (MAHSR) project was estimated at Rs.1,08,000 crores and 
the final project cost will be ascertained only after awarding all contract packages and 
associated timelines. The Committee also note d that an expenditure of Rs.71,116 crores 
has been incurred so far on MAHSR Project as on January, 2025 and the overall physical 
progress stands at 48.55%, with key construction activities ongoing, including viaducts, 
tunnels and station buildings. The Committee fu rther noted that the project has achieved 
significant progress, with 100% land acquisition completed and all civil contracts awarded. 
The Committee were informed that workforce training is underway, with core staff training 
in Japan and additional training at the High -Speed Rail Training Institute in Vadodara. 
Shinkansen is a specialized technology of Japan and some components under Make -in-
India Policy are also being utilized. The Committee recommended the Ministry to expedite 
the finalization of remaining  contract packages and associated works to ensure timely 
completion of the MAHSR Project. The Committee also desire d the Ministry to address 
potential bottlenecks, such as delays in utility shifting and construction challenges, to avoid 
cost overruns and ensure the project stays on track. To support the long-term sustainability 
of high -speed rail operations, the Committ ee desire d that indigenous manufacturing of 
Shinkansen technology components under the Make -in-India initiative be expanded. 
Additionally, t he Ministry should prioritize the development of a skilled workforce by 
scaling up training programs at HSRTI Vadodara and leveraging international expertise. 
For upcoming HSR projects, the Committee recommend ed that feasibility studies be 
conducted, innovative financing models may be explored, and funding may be secured 
before sanctioning new corridors. Further, the Committee desired that the Ministry should 
focus on completing the MAHSR Project as a benchmark for future high -speed rail 
initiatives in India. 
 
21. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as follows: 

 
 
20 
 
Government of India has sanctioned 508 KM long Mumbai -Ahmedabad High 
Speed Rail (MAHSR) project in December , 2015 to be executed with technical and 
financial cooperation from Government of Japan. National High Speed Rail corporation 
Limited (NHSRCL) was set up with authorized share capital of ₹ 20,000 cr with share of 
Government of India as 50% and the two States (Gujarat & Maharashtra) 25% each. 
Project shall be implemented with the provision of Japanese Yen loan to the extent 
of about 81% of total project cost with repayment period of 50 years and further grace 
period of 15 years @ interest rate of 0.1% p.a. and remaining shall be provided in terms of 
Equity. 
The current status of MAHSR project is as under: 
•  100% (i.e. 1389.49 Ha) land has been acquired for Mumbai - Ahmedabad 
High Speed Rail (MAHSR). 
•   Construction work is in progress on elevated viaducts, major river bridges, 
station buildings, and Tunnels. 
•   383 km of pier construction, 317 km of girder casting and 286 km of girder 
launching have been completed. 
•   Work of the only tunnel in Gujarat has been completed. Out of 21 km long 
tunnel in Maharashtra, work of 2.7 km has been completed by New Austrian 
Tunnelling Method (NATM). 
•   The overall physical progress of the project is approx. 50.5%. 
•   The execution of MAHSR Project is monitored/reviewed regularly 
•  Bullet train project is a very complex and technology intensive project. 
•  Timelines for the completion of the project can be reasonably ascertained 
after the completion of all associated works of Civil Structures, Track, 
Electrical, Signalling & Telecommunication and supply of Trainsets. 
22. The Committee acknowledge the substantial physical progress made in the 
execution of the Mumbai-Ahmedabad High-Speed Rail (MAHSR) project, including 
100% land acquisition, ongoing construction of critical infrastructure and near ing 
50.5% overall completion. The Committee also note the favorable long-term financial 

 
 
21 
 
terms under the Japanese Yen loan and the establishment of NHSRCL as the 
dedicated implementing agency. While appreciating the enormous scale of such an 
ambitious project, the Committee observe that despite significant advances, the 
project timeline remains uncertain due to the interdependence  of multiple ongoing 
works. The Committee urge the Ministry to prioritize the finalization of remaining 
contract packages,  ensure strict monitoring of inter -agency coordination  and 
establish clear timelines to fast tra ck completion . The Committee reiterate the 
importance of expanding indigenous manufacturing of Shinkansen components 
under the Make-in-India initiative and scaling up the skilled workforce through 
enhanced training programmes at HSRTI Vadodara. Furthermore, for future high -
speed rail corridors, the Committee emphasize the need for robust planning including 
comprehensive feasibility studies and  stakeholder consultations to ensure the 
replicability of the MAHSR as a benchmark project. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18)  
 
23. In their  Third Report, t he Committee noted that the plan outlay for Training and 
Human Resource Development (HRD) in 2025-26 has been kept at Rs. 301 crore. In 2024-
25, the actual expenditure was Rs. 133.50 crore (upto December, 2024) against the Revised 
Estimate (RE) of Rs. 197.52 crore, while in  2023-24, the actual expenditure stood at Rs. 
101.93 crore against an RE of Rs. 242 crore. Under the Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh 
(RRSK), the gross expenditure on Training/HRD works at the RE stage in 2024 -25 was 
Rs. 146.96 crore, whereas the Budget Estim ate (BE) for 2025 -26 is Rs. 185 crore.  The 
Committee acknowledge d the ongoing training programs as essential for developing a 
skilled workforce to manage and maintain High -Speed Rail (HSR) operations, with 
specialized training already in progress in Japan. Additionally, training for other O&M 
staff is being conducted by  the trained core O&M personnel at the High -Speed Rail 
Training Institute (HSRTI) in Vadodara. As the Indian Railways undergoes a critical 
transition phase with the adoption of new technologies, the Committee desired the Ministry 

 
 
22 
 
for optimum utilization of allocated funds. The Committee also desire d the Ministry to 
equip railway personnel with up -to-date skills and knowledge and enable them to handle 
the complexities of modern railway operations, ensuring a competent and efficient 
workforce to enhance safety and operational efficiency. The Committee recommended the 
Railways to formulate comprehensive training programs incorporating advanced teaching 
methodologies and designing futuristic training modules.  Furthermore, the Committee  
urged the Ministry to collaborate with premier training institutes in India and abroad to 
provide world-class training, ensuring that railway personnel are well -equipped to meet 
emerging challenges and technological advancements in the sector. 
 
24. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as follows: 
“Indian Railways have an extensive network of 8 Centralised Training Institutes and 
158 Other Training Institutes across the country to address training needs of approx. 12 
lacs railway personnel. Upgradation/creation of training infrastructure is a continu ous 
process. In view of rationalization of Railway Training Centres, existing railway training 
institutes needs to be upgraded as Multi -disciplinary Zonal/Divisional Training 
Institutes and there is a consistent fund demand from railways. Efforts are bein g made 
through regular interactions with zonal railways to ensure need -based fund allocation and 
their utmost utilisation.  
During FY 2024-25, an expenditure of Rs. 140 crores was made against the revised 
outlay of Rs. 144 crores. For current fiscal 2025 -26, an outlay of Rs. 301 crores has been 
kept for Training and HRD.  
During 2023 -24, about 5.19 lakh employees have undergone different training 
modules viz. initial, promotional, refresher & specialized.  
Indian Railways is making significant strides in overcoming the challenges, it faces 
in training its workforce. By investing in modern infrastructure, adopting new learning 
methods like simulator  training, and upskilling instructors, it is gradually overco ming 
limitations related to resources and skilled personnel.   Simulator training  enhances their 

 
 
23 
 
ability to respond to emergencies, improves decision -making, and provides opportunities 
for continual learning and improvement. 
Indian Railways has also embraced  e-learning techniques. This includes online 
training modules on iGOT Karmayogi Platfrom, which are accessible on anytime -
anywhere basis, making training more accessible and flexible. To ensure the effectiveness 
of the training programs, the training modules are regularly updated and upgraded.  
  Further, as safe train operation is the top most priority of Indian Railways,  special 
emphasis is laid on the training of safety category employees. Detailed training 
modules including on Kavach system  as per prescribed periodicity are available for 
respective categories at initial and promotional stages along with refresher courses as well 
as specialized training courses, laying emphasis on practical aspects which help them in 
skill upgradation and ass imilation with related advanced technology,  keeping a focus on 
overall safety and passenger experience. These modules are also updated keeping in view 
the technological changes in working practice.” 
 
25. The Committee note the efforts made by the Ministry to strengthen the training 
ecosystem through an extensive network of training institutes, increased adoption of 
simulator-based and e -learning modules and regular upskilling of instructors. The 
Committee appreciate that approximately 5.19 lakh personnel underwent various 
training programs during 2023 –24, with special emphasis on  safety -related 
categories.  However, the Committee reiterate that despite consistent fund allocation, 
actual expenditure in past years has fallen short of the revised estimates, indicating a 
need for more effective fund utilization and planning. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to ensure timely and optimum utilization of allocated funds under both 
general and RRSK heads by adopting a result -oriented monitoring framework. 
Additionally, the Ministry should further scale up advanced training methodologies, 
particularly in simulation and digital platforms, and upgrade existing institutes into 
Multi-disciplinary Training Centres aligned with future technological requirements. 
The Committee also desire that strategic collaborations be established with premier 

 
 
24 
 
national and international training institutions to design world -class, future -ready 
modules that equip railway personnel with the skills needed for modern, technology-
intensive operations. 
 
  

 
 
25 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
  
The Indian Railways ranks among the largest rail networks globally. Beyond its 
transportation role, Indian Railways has been a cornerstone of India’s socio -economic 
progress and a driver of diverse economic activities. It offers an affordable travel option to 
people across all economic strata, particularly benefiting the economically disadvantaged, 
while managing a vast workforce and striving to meet customer expectations.  In a 
populous and welfare state like India, the growth of Railways holds significanc e that 
extends beyond simple numerical or economic evaluations. The Railway Budget 2025 -26 
aimed at fostering comprehensive multi -modal transport planning that encompasses 
highways, railways and inland waterways. The Demands for grants for the year 2025 –26 
of the Ministry of Railways were tabled in the House on 03.02.2025. The Committee 
undertook a detailed scrutiny of Demands for grants (2025 -26) pertaining to Ministry of 
Railways. The recommendations of the Committee have been summarised in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Noted. 
   Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
The Committee observe that the Ministry of Railways' demands for 2025-26 amount 
to Rs. 8 ,19,511.30 crores, with a significant focus on capital expenditure aimed at 
infrastructure development, modernization, and asset replacement. The revenue 
expenditure is largely driven by recurring costs, particularly Provident Fund, Pension, and 
Other Retirement Benefits and Operating Expenses – Traffic, highlighting the Ministry's 

 
 
26 
 
emphasis on employee welfare and operational efficiency. The Committee also note that a 
considerable portion of the budget is allocated to Repairs and Maintenance across various 
categories, such as Permanent Way, Motive Power, Carriages, Wagons, Plant, and  
Equipment, underscoring the commitment to maintaining existing infrastructure. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Railways prioritize the efficient utilization of 
capital expenditure to accelerate infrastructure development, modernization, and a sset 
replacement, ensuring timely completion of projects and avoiding cost overruns. To 
optimize revenue expenditure, the Committee desire the Ministry to streamline recurring 
costs, particularly in Operating Expenses – Traffic and Fuel, by adopting energy -efficient 
technologies and exploring cost -saving measures without compromising service quality. 
The Committee feel that addressing the growing burden of Provident Fund, Pension, and 
Other Retirement Benefits through long-term reforms or dedicated funding mechanisms is 
essential to manage future liabilities. The Committee also emphasize the need to enhance 
Repairs and Maintenance practices by investing in predictive and preventive maintenance 
technologies to improve asset lifespan and reduce long -term costs. The Committee also 
urge the Ministry to focus on staff welfare initiatives to boost employee morale and 
productivity while maintaining fiscal discipline and strategic alignment in all financial 
allocations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Optimizing Revenue expenditure and enhancing repairs and maintenance activities 
Indian Railways accords high priority to repairs and maintenance related activities 
to ensure safe operation of trains and safety of passengers. Keeping in view accelerated 
focus and enhancing safety, the fund provision for repairs and maintenance related 
activities has been increasing over the years. The repairs and maintenance related activities 
are part of Ordinary Working Expenses (OWE) of the Railways. OWE mainly cover 
expenditure under repairs and maintenance activities of railway assets, operating expenses, 
Fuel cost, expenditure on Staff welfare amenities, Pensionary Charges etc. It is endeavor 

 
 
27 
 
on part of the Railway to provide sufficient fund allocation under OWE for smooth train 
operation. Further, Railway is taking various steps to optimize revenue expenditure which 
are as under:- 
➢ Rigorous monitoring of expenditure w.r.t. the monthly budget proportions based on 
Spending Limits.  
➢ Implementation of the guidelines on expenditure control & management circulated 
by the Ministry of Finance on the Railways also. 
➢ Optimizing expenditure in areas such as contractual payment, overtime allowance, 
purchase of material etc. 
➢ Progressive electrification and reduction in expenditure under HSD oil, optimizing 
the fuel consumption, Energy Audit, etc. 
➢ Improvement in inventory management 
➢ Prioritization of expenditure on works for better use of available resources. 
➢ Better asset utilization. 
➢ Improving staff productivity by better man-power planning 
Energy efficient technologies  
Indian Railways is moving towards technological advancement, resulting in various 
initiatives to achieve energy efficiency which includes range of energy efficient 
technologies like switching over to production of three phase electric locomotives, EMU 
etc. with regenerative features, use of head on generation (HOG) technology, use of LED 
lights in building & coaches and use of star rated appliances etc.  
Efficient utilization of CAPEX 
MOR has a multilayered procedure for efficient utilization of Capital expenditure. 
The focus of the Government is on expeditious completion of projects so that their benefits 
are reaped at the earliest.  Projects related to capacity augmentation are one of the important 
priority areas of CAPEX. These relate to construction of New Lines, 
Doubling/Tripling/Multi tracking of railway lines, and electrification projects. For 
sanctioning works under this category, a corridor based approach has been devised under 
the PM Gati Shakti - National Master Plan for Multi-modal Connectivity. These pertain to 

 
 
28 
 
High Density Network route, Energy Corridor, Port Connectivity, Hilly Area & Border 
Area Corridors etc. Projects under the specific corridors are being sanctioned keeping in 
view their specific requirement. 
• Focus will also be on fast execution of safety related works of Track 
Renewal, Bridges and Signalling & Telecommunication, including 
development and installation of advanced technology like Kavach.  Rashtriya 
Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK), a dedicated fund to cater to safety related 
works, has been introduced by Government of India since 2017-18 to ensure 
earmarked funding of such projects. 
• Modernisation of rolling stock is another important focus area for IR. Latest 
technology trainsets like semi -high speed Vande Bharat, Vande Bharat 
Sleeper trains, Amrit Bharat Trains, Namo Bharat Rapid Rail etc. are being 
manufactured by Indian Railways under Rolling Stock Programme.  
• Fund provision for works under Customer Amenities is also likely to witness 
substantial allocation to cater to many works of redevelopment of stations 
under Amrit Bharat Stations Scheme.  
• Adequate funds are also to be provided for works relating to Staff Welfare & 
Training. 
•  Funds will also be allocated for IT projects under Computerisation and 
Railway Research. 
Pension & other retirement benefits 
As regard to Pension & other retirement benefits is concerned, Ministry of Railway 
is the only Ministry which bears its pension liability from its own revenue receipts. 
Sufficient appropriation under Pension Fund for meeting the pension liabilities is bein g 
made. Further, Ministry of Railways is an administrative Ministry on pensionary matter 
and follows the policy/instructions of the Nodal Department on pensionary matters i.e. 
Department of Pension and Pensioners’ Welfare.   
 
 

 
 
29 
 
Staff Welfare and amenities 
Staff Welfare and amenities is also accorded high priority.  Under Staff Welfare and 
amenities, an amount of Rs. 10,968 cr under Revenue Section and Rs.833 cr under Capital 
Section is provided in Budget Estimates 2025-26. Under capacity building programme, an 
amount of Rs.301 cr for Training/Human Resource Development under Capital Section is 
provided in Budget Estimates 2025 -26. Further, Indian Railways runs and manages 68 
Railway Schools, besides one Degree College at Lallaguda, Secunderabad. These Schools 
are being operated purely as a staff welfare measure and provide quality education at 
subsidized cost to wards of Railway employees as well as non-Railway wards. In addition 
to this, 93 Kendriya Vidyalayas are also functional in Railway premises catering  to the 
educational needs of students residing in the vicinity of these schools. 
Indian Railways is unquestionably the largest civil employer in the country. As on 
March 31, 2024, IR has a workforce of 12,52,180 employees out of which 99,809 are 
women employees. A wide range of women oriented welfare measures including regular 
conduct of Seminars, Camps and Training Programmes with specific financial assistance 
from Staff Benefit Fund  (SBF) have been undertaken on Indian Railways. A number of 
Crèches, Changing Rooms, Tiffin Rooms and Separate Rest Rooms have been made 
available at workp laces/offices for the children and Women employees. SBF Committee 
has a policy of rewarding meritorious women employees by giving Cash Award during 
celebration of International Women’s Day at Headquarters as well as in Divisions of Zonal 
Railways. In addit ion, Handicraft Centres are being operated to impart vocational skills 
like stitching, weaving, beauty culture and making stationary items etc., as welfare measure 
for female members of Railway employees’ families with a view to help them get wider 
career opportunities or self -employment. A specific outlay of Rs. 3.26 Crore was 
earmarked for ‘Women Empowerment Activities’ under SBF in the Budget for financial 
year 2023-24. 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry has set the Annual Plan for the year 2025-26 
at Rs. 2,65,200 crore which remains the same as that in the previous financial year 2024 -

 
 
30 
 
25. This includes Rs. 2,52,200 crore as Gross Budgetary Support (GBS), comprising 
Rs.200 crore for the Nirbhaya Fund and Rs. 10,000 crore under the Rashtriya Rail 
Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK). Internal Resources contribute Rs. 3000 crore including Rs.1000 
crore R ailway’s contribution for RRSK, while Rs. 10,000 crore comes from Extra 
Budgetary Resources (EBR).  The Committee also note that t he thrust of the Annual Plan 
2025-26 continues to be on removal of traffic bottlenecks, safety enhancement works and 
improvement of customer amenities and for this purpose, the plan heads New lines 
(Rs.32235 crore), doubling (Rs.32000 crore), track renewals (Rs.22800 crore), safety 
works of Level Crossings (Rs.706 crore), Road Over/Under Bridges (Rs.7000 crore), signal 
and telecom (Rs.6800 crore) and customer amenities (Rs.12118 crore) have been allotted 
funds under Budgetary Sources in BE 2025 -26.  The Committee stress the importance of 
ensuring efficient utilization of the budget through a well -planned strategy prioritizing 
capacity expansion and safety enhancement. The Committee are of the view that the thrust 
areas should also remain technological advancements and execution of automatic train 
protection systems. The Committee urge the Ministry to continue with its focus on safety 
investments, par ticularly under the Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK), track 
renewals, level crossings, signal modernization, enhancing station infrastructure and 
passenger experience.  The Committee expect full utilization of the budget allocation made 
in 2024 -25 whic h stands at 83% as on 31.01.2025 and desire the Ministry for timely 
execution of projects to prevent cost overruns.  
 
Reply of the Government 
As Against allocated Gross Budgetary support of Rs. 2,52,000 crore in 2024-25, an 
expenditure of Rs. 2,52,221 crore (100.09%) has been incurred. Thus, the budget allocation 
has been fully utilized. 
 
Annual Plan is compiled by the Planning Directorate in coordination with concerned 
executive directorates and is forwarded to Budget Directorate for finalization. Annual plan 
takes into consideration all priority areas like safety, capacity augmentation,  customer 

 
 
31 
 
amenities etc. After the budget is finalized, its utilization is carried out by respective 
executive directorates. Based on the utilization, Revised Estimate (RE) is prepared by the 
Budget Directorate in coordination with executive directorates. Monthly Ca pital 
Expenditure (Capex) reports are used for monitoring of budget utilization. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4)  
 
The Committee observe that the trend from previous years shows that the Ministry 
has not been able to generate enough internal resources as for 2022 -23, actual internal 
resource generation was Rs. 3400 crore against Rs. 4300 crore at RE (2022 -23); further, 
for the year 2023-24, actual internal resource generation was Rs. 2943 crore against     Rs. 
3000 crore at RE (2023-24). Similarly, in 2024-25, actual is Rs. 767 crore (till 31.01.2025) 
against RE of Rs. 3000 crore.  In the year 2025 -26, internal resource generation has been 
targeted Rs. 3000 crore at BE stage.  The internal resource generation has shown a 
downward trajectory since 2022 -23. The Committee understand that low generation of 
revenue from Internal Resources gradually compels Railway to depend m ore on either 
Budgetary Support or Extra Budgetary Support in the form of borrowings, further 
compelling them to bear extra interest liability. In view of the same, the Committee would 
urge the Ministry to explore and review all possible areas where resources can be mobilized 
with a view to increase their internal resources and ensure gradual reduction of dependence 
on Gross Budget Allocation/EBR to the extent possible. The Committee stress that the 
Ministry should prioritise completion and commissioning of remunerative projects, besides 
exploring other commercially viable avenues that would not put the Railways under 
financial duress. The Committee expect hike in internal resource generation through the 
steps initiated by Railways to improve non -fare earnings viz. commercial development of 
vacant land and monetization of railway assets. The Committee desire the Railways to 
implement the measures enumerated to the Committee with unwavering commitment and 
strive to generate revenue from internal resources thereby fostering a more self -sufficient 
and financially resilient railway system. 

 
 
32 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In 2022-23, Railways internal resource was Rs. 3217 cr. which grew to Rs. 4060 cr. 
in 2023 -24. In RE 2024 -25, Ministry targeted internal resource of Rs. 2141 cr. after 
meeting additional expenditure of Rs. 1358.69 cr. on account of interest payment of loan  
taken due to Covid related resource gap in 2020 -21. As per the prelims estimates, internal 
resource in 2024-25 will be higher than that estimated at RE stage and as per provisional 
figures it will be Rs. 3142 cr. For the next FY 2025-26, the Ministry set an ambitious target 
of Rs. 4541 cr. from internal resources to supplement Capex. 
Though internal resources are increasing year -on-year in post Covid period, it 
remains inadequate for Capex requirement of IR which is being met largely from GBS. 
Railways are making efforts to enhance internal resource generation to supplement 
capex. In this direction, Railway is taking steps to increase earnings along with measures 
to control expenditure. Railway has invested record capex in the last five years to enhance 
IR’s capacity by creating New lines, Doubling, procuring/manufacturing Wagons, 
Coaches, Locomotives etc. The Ministry has set an ambitious target of 3000 MT of loading 
by 2030. The Ministry is also working to increase the share of Sundry revenue ( non-fare 
revenue) in IR’s total receipts which is around 3.8% in 2023-24. Other endeavours include 
initiatives aimed at maximizing revenue receipts like expansion of commodity basket, 
Creation of Business Development Units (BDUs) at the Ministry, Zonal and  Divisional 
levels for better coordination for movement of bulk commodities like coal, effective and 
innovative marketing strategies to capture more traffic. 
 
To enhance passenger revenue, with a view to ensuring optimum utilisation of 
available accommodation, various initiatives like running of special trains, introduction of 
Vande Bharat and Amrit Bharat trains, augmentation of on -board capacity, introduction 
and rationalisation of Flexi-fare scheme in premium trains, periodical review of reservation 
quota wherever required, extension of Alternate Train Accommodation Scheme known as 

 
 
33 
 
VIKALP have also been undertaken. Railways have also taken various measures to 
increase freight and Non fare revenue such as  introduction of Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal 
Policy featuring liberalized provisions,  Wagon Investment Schemes,  the launch of the 
Goods Shed Rating Dashboard,   introduction of e-Auction Policy for Commercial Earning 
& Non Fare Revenue contracts,  special focus on e -Commerce and FMCG,  Inclusion of 
certain popular ecommerce commodities (e.g. cosmetics, lithium ion batteries, battery 
powered vehicles etc.) in the Red Tariff,  revised guidelines issued for Liberalised 
Automatic Freight Rebate scheme for traffic loaded in empty flow direction etc. 
To control expenditure, measures are being regularly taken in Railways in order to 
ensure savings in the operating expenditure. Expenditure management on Railways aims 
at better manpower management for improving per capita productivity, electrification of 
railway track, introducing HOG rakes, rationalizing repair and maintenance of rolling 
stock, efficient utilization of assets etc. Apart from this, rigorous monitoring of expenditure 
on monthly basis is done to control expenditure. Due to progressive electr ification of 
Railway tracks more than Rs. 4700 cr. has been saved under Diesel traction in FY 2023 -
24 alone. 
Due to the combined effects, internal resource generation in 2024 -25 is more than 
that in RE 2024-25. Railways is committed to achieve the target set for FY 2025-26 through 
the measures enumerated to the Committee and thereby achieve the target of 3000 MT of 
loading by 2030 making Railway self-sufficient and financially independent. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that railway projects are highly capital intensive which require 
huge allocation from GBS for execution. Since internal revenue generation has shown a 
static/downward trend over the years Indian Railways have no option but to resort to EBR 
to fund their projects. The Committee understand that Indian Railway has not resorted to 
borrowings under EBR to save on lease charges and that the investment through GBS will 

 
 
34 
 
allow Railway to augment capacity without increasing its repayment liabilities. The 
Committee desire ensuring of optimum utilization of the GBS with strict fiscal discipline 
to ensure Railways become financially sustainable. The Committee note that during 2025-
26, the Ministry has not resorted to borrowing for financing of key segments such as rolling 
stock acquisition. The Committee also note that during the past years the EBR(P) financing 
has shown downward/static trend. The Committee desire that the Ministry may continue 
using market borrowing judiciously while ensuring that the absence of EBR support does 
not hinder the funding of critical and strategic projects, including the expansion and 
development of railway infrastructure. They recommend the Ministry of Railways to 
explore the option of supplementing GBS with market borrowing by leveraging private 
sector expertise. This can be achieved by streamlining regulatory processes to develop and 
operate railway infrastructure, which will help in the advancement, modernization, and 
faster implementation of railway projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Indian Railways has traditionally been financed through GBS and Internal 
Resources.  In addition, IR have been raising Extra budgetary resources by: (i) borrowings 
through Indian Railway Finance Corporation (IRFC) since its inception in 1987 to finance 
procurement of rolling stock assets, (ii) borrowings in the form institutional finance from 
2015-16 primarily for financing viable projects of Doubling and Electrification and (iii) 
public-private partnership, joint ventures, and purchase of equity and bonds by private 
sector.  Extra budgetary resources funded more than 50% of capital expenditure between 
2017-18 and 2020-21.  This reliance has increased debt servicing obligation of Railways 
which is crowding out the space for productive expenditure.  As Govern ment of India 
started enhancing GBS allocation to MoR w.e.f. FY 2021-22, MoR reviewed its financing 
pattern of the projects/RSP and decided to do away with investing borrowed funds in 
projects.  With this decision, MoR is able to divert the savings achieved on leasing charges 

 
 
35 
 
to finance various projects.  However, suggestion of the Committee is noted for compliance 
in case of future necessities. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6)  
 
The Committee observe that the net earnings of Railways have remained marginal 
in the financial years 2022 –23 and 2023–24. For 2024–25, BE was Rs. 2800 crore which 
has been revised downward to Rs. 1341.31 crore.  Whereas, for 2025-26, the projected net 
revenue stands at Rs. 3041.31. A key factor contributing to this scenario is the subdued 
income from the passenger sector. The budget projections for the year 2025 -26 indicate 
passenger revenue at Rs. 92,800 crores, significantly lower than the estimated frei ght 
revenue of Rs. 1,88,000 crores.  The Committee recognize the need for Railways to 
enhance its financial sustainability while continuing to provide efficient and affordable 
services. To achieve this, the Committee desire the Ministry to explore alternative avenues 
to boost passenger revenues by including service -based revenue generation, improved 
onboard amenities thereby increasing of passenger base by allowing passenger transition 
from road and air transport to more sustainable railway alternatives.  A dditionally, the 
Committee stress the importance of a detailed evaluation of operational expenditures linked 
to passenger services and a strategic improvised approach to cost optimization through 
efficiency improvement, technology integration and better as set utilization to maintain 
affordability while strengthening overall financial viability. The Committee also iterate the 
need for expansion of commodity basket of railways beyond the conventional in wake of 
record capex investment to enhance IR’s capacity  by creating New lines, Doubling, 
procuring/manufacturing Wagons, Coaches, Locomotives etc . for a robust revenue 
generation. It is pertinent that more freight cargo is attracted by improving connectivity 
with ports and industrial hubs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

 
 
36 
 
In the post Covid period, revenues from passenger segment is increasing year -on-
year. In 2024 -25, passenger revenue was Rs. 75,367.52 cr. (provisional) which was Rs. 
70,693.33 cr. in 2023-24 and Rs.63,416.85 cr. in 2022-23. For next FY 2025-26, Railways 
has targeted a passenger revenue of Rs. 92800 cr. based on 7573.56 million passengers and 
1311 billion passenger KMs. 
To increase the Net Revenue, the Ministry is taking steps to increase the traffic 
revenue and on the other hand optimise its operational expenditure. The endeavours include 
initiatives aimed at maximizing revenue receipts like expansion of commodity basket 
through creation of Business Deve lopment Units (BDUs) at the Ministry, Zonal and 
Divisional levels for better coordination for movement of bulk commodities like coal, 
effective and innovative marketing strategies to capture more traffic. Railway has invested 
record capex to enhance IR’s c apacity by creating New lines, Doubling, 
procuring/manufacturing Wagons, Coaches, Locomotives etc.  
To enhance passenger revenue with a view to ensuring optimum utilisation of 
available accommodation, various initiatives like running of special trains, augmentation 
of on -board capacity, introduction and rationalisation of Flexi -fare scheme in premium 
trains, periodical review of reservation quota wherever required, extension of Alternate 
Train Accommodation Scheme known as VIKALP have also been undertaken. To cater to 
the need of passengers, special trains are run during Diwali, Chhath, Holi, Summer and 
Holiday season.  
Railways have also taken various measures to increase freight and Non fare revenue 
such as  introduction of Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal Policy featuring liberalized provisions,  
Wagon Investment Schemes,  the launch of the Goods Shed Rating Dashboard, 
introduction of e-Auction Policy for Commercial Earning & Non Fare Revenue contracts,  
special focus on e -Commerce and FMCG,  inclusion of certain popular ecommerce 
commodities (e.g. cosmetics, lithium ion batteries, battery powered vehicles etc.) in the 
Red Tariff,  revised guidelines issued for Liberalised Automatic Freight Rebate scheme for 
traffic loaded in empty flow direction etc. 

 
 
37 
 
To control expenditure, measures are being regularly taken in Railways in order to 
ensure savings in the operating expenditure. Expenditure management on Railways aims 
at better manpower management for improving per capita productivity, electrification of 
railway track, introducing HOG rakes, rationalizing repair and maintenance of rolling 
stock, efficient utilization of assets etc. Apart from this rigorous monitoring of expenditure 
on monthly basis is done to control expenditure. Due to progressive electri fication of 
Railway tracks more than Rs. 4700 cr. has been saved under Diesel traction in FY 2023 -
24 alone. 
To attract more freight Cargo the Ministry is working on 3 Economic Railway 
Corridors- Energy, Mineral and Cement corridors (192 Projects); Port connectivity 
corridors (42 Projects) and High Traffic Density corridors (200 Projects) for enabling 
Multi-Modal connectivity. Through these 3 corridors, about 40,000 Km of new track will 
be laid in next 8-10 years which will increase the Railways freight loading and will also be 
beneficial for the country. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
The Operating Ratio (OR) is an effective tool to gauge the financial health and 
reflect the overall performance of the Railways. Operating Ratio indicates how much the 
Railways spend to earn a rupee and the percentage of gross working expenses to gross 
earnings should be as low as possible. The Committee observe that from the year 2022-23, 
the Railways Operating Ratio has continuously been above 98% besides showing an 
upward trend. For the year 2024 -25, Operating Ratio is estimated to be 98.90%. The 
Committee observe that for 2025-26 the Railways have projected a target of 98.43% for its 
Operating Ratio which continues to be above 98%.  Therefore, the Committee desire the 
Ministry of Railways to take proactive measures to improve the Operating Ratio by 
enhancing revenue generation and controlling working expenses. Efforts should be made 
to increase freight and passenger traffic revenues through innovative pricing strategies, 
improved service quality, and better utilization of existing assets. The Ministry should also 

 
 
38 
 
focus on reducing Ordinary Working Expenses by adopting cost -effective technologies, 
optimizing energy consumption, utilizing renewable energy for traction, diversifying non 
fare revenue sources while focusing on asset optimization and modernization of the railway 
network and streamlining operational processes. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
Improving the operating ratio is always a priority for Railways. To improve 
operating ratio, Railways need to increase earnings along with measures to control 
expenditure. Railway has invested record capex in the last five years to enhance IR’s 
capacity by  creating New lines, Doubling, procuring/manufacturing Wagons, Coaches, 
Locomotives etc. The Ministry has set an ambitious target of 3000 MT of loading by 2030. 
The Ministry is also working to increase the share of Sundry revenue (non -fare revenue) 
in IR’s total receipts which is around 3.8% in 2023 -24.  The other endeavour includes 
initiatives aimed at maximizing revenue receipts like expansion of commodity basket 
through creation of Business Development Units (BDUs) at the Ministry, Zonal and 
Divisional l evels for better coordination for movement of bulk commodities like coal, 
effective and innovative marketing strategies to capture more traffic.  
To enhance passenger revenue with a view to ensuring optimum utilisation of 
available accommodation, various initiatives like running of special trains, introduction of 
Vande Bharat and Amrit Bharat trains, augmentation of on -board capacity, introduction 
and rationalisation of Flexi-fare scheme in premium trains, periodical review of reservation 
quota wherever required, extension of Alternate Train Accommodation Scheme known as 
VIKALP have also been undertaken. Railways have also taken various measures to 
increase freight and Non fare revenue such as  introduction of Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal 
Policy featuring liberalized provisions,  Wagon Investment Schemes,  the launch of the 
Goods Shed Rating Dashboard, introduction of e-Auction Policy for Commercial Earning 
& Non Fare Revenue contracts,  special focus on e -Commerce and FMCG,  inclusion of 
certain popular ecommerce commodities (e.g. cosmetics, lithium ion batteries, battery 

 
 
39 
 
powered vehicles etc.) in the Red Tariff,  revised guidelines issued for Liberalised 
Automatic Freight Rebate scheme for traffic loaded in empty flow direction etc. 
To control expenditure, measures are being regularly taken in Railways in order to 
ensure savings in the operating expenditure. Expenditure management on Railways aims 
at better manpower management for improving per capita productivity, electrification of 
railway track, introducing HOG rakes, rationalizing repair and maintenance of rolling 
stock, efficient utilization of assets etc. Apart from this, rigorous monitoring of expenditure 
on monthly basis is done to control expenditure. Due to progressive electr ification of 
Railway tracks, more than Rs. 4700 cr. has been saved under Diesel traction in FY 2023 -
24 alone. 
As a result, operating ratio of Railways improved to 98.43% in 2023-24 and 98.22% 
(provisional) in 2024-25. 
Railways is committed to be self -sufficient and financially resilient by increasing 
earnings, reducing the Ordinary Working Expenses and proactively using technologies 
which are modern and cost effective. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8)  
The Committee note that Indian Railways has achieved significant progress in 
several areas, particularly in new line construction, where 925 km were completed against 
a target of 700 km in 2024-25, demonstrating strong performance. The Committee observe 
that the removal of traffic bottlenecks is a key focus area of the 2025 -26 railway budget. 
They further note that the throw -forward for doubling works stands at Rs. 32,000 crore. 
Regarding doubling projects, the Committee find that against a target of 2,900 km, only 
1,134 km (39.10%) was achieved during 2024 -25 (up to December 2024). While the 
Budget Estimate (BE) for doubling was Rs. 29,312 crore, it was revised upward at the 
Revised Estimate (RE) stage to Rs. 31,036.86 crore, with actual utilization reachin g Rs. 
22,918.57 crore (73.85% of RE) (up to December 2024). The Committee acknowledge that 
doubling is a long -term asset essential for improving train speeds and serving as a 

 
 
40 
 
significant revenue multiplier. However, they observe that while the financial utilization 
of the budget stands at nearly 74%, the physical achievement of the target is a merely 39%. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the factors leading to this disparity. They urge 
the Railways to exercise due diligence in identifying and addressing obstacles to ensure 
seamless project execution. This includes streamlining land acquisition, expediting 
clearances, and leveraging modern construction technologies to f acilitate the timely 
completion of doubling projects, thereby effectively reducing traffic congestion. The 
Committee also expect the Railways to ensure full utilization of the budget sanctioned and 
achievement of the physical targets set for doubling of lines in 2024-25. 
Reply of the Government 
 DOUBLING 
  
Year Target (in Kms)  Achievement(in Kms) 
2024-25 2900 
  
 
1977 
  
  
Year Budget Estimate 
(in Rs. Crore) 
Revised Estimate 
(in Rs. Crore) 
Expenditure 
(in Rs. Crore) 
Utilization % 
2024-25 29312 31036 32791 105 
  
The actual expenditure incurred under Plan Head Doubling is more than the Budget 
and Revised Estimate for FY 2024-25. However, the Physical achievement is  68% of the 
target set for FY 2024-25 as completion of any Railway project depends on various factors 
like quick land acquisition by State Government, forest cle arance by officials of forest 
department, deposition of cost share by State Government in cost sharing projects, priority 
of projects, shifting of infringing utilities, statutory clearances from various authorities, 
geological and topographical conditions of area, law and order situation in the area of 
project(s) site, number of working months   in  a year for particular project site due to 
climatic conditions etc. 
Various steps taken by the Government for speedy approval and implementation of 
Railway projects include (i) setting up of Gati Shakti units (ii) prioritisation of projects (iii) 

 
 
41 
 
substantial increase in allocation of funds on priority projects (iv) delegation of powers at 
field level (v) close  monitoring  of  progress  of project at various levels, and (vi) regular 
follow up with State Governments and concerned authorities for exp editious land 
acquisition, forestry and Wildlife clearances and for resolving other issues pertaining to 
projects. This has led to substantial increase in rate of commissioning since 2014. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) was introduced in 
2017-18 with a corpus of Rs. 1 lakh crore and an annual outlay of Rs. 20,000 crore.  The 
projects taken up under this fund relate to Track Renewal, Bridges, Signalling, Rolling 
Stock and Training & Amenities for safety critical staff. The Government extended RRSK 
for another five-year term beyond 2021 -22, with Rs. 45,000 crore from Gross Budgetary 
Support (GBS).  The Committee also note that Gross Budgetary Resource contribution for 
RRSK has been kept as Rs.10,000 crore and in addition to this Railway’s contribution for 
RRSK has been kept as Rs.1000 cr ore.  The Committee observe that the extension of the 
period of RRSK and the GBS should be best utilized to strike a balanced approach to 
improve training and human resource development, ensure renewal, replacement and 
upgradation of critical safety assets. The Committee desire the Ministry to establish yearly 
targets and strict timelines for optimum performance -based disbursement of funds to 
ensure timely execution and output oriented approach for best utilization of the extended 
period and budget grant under RRSK. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Budget allocation under RRSK is based on the projections made by the 
concerned executive directorates and field units. These projections are made by field units 
considering the fund requirements for training, renewal, replacement and upgradation of 

 
 
42 
 
critical safety assets. RRSK funds are utilized mainly for execution of works under plan  
heads Traffic Facilities, Road Over/Under Bridges, Track Renewal, Bridge Works, 
Signalling & Telecom Works etc, including procurement of Rolling Stock. 
A document of ‘Output-Outcome Framework’ is prepared based on inputs received 
from the custodian directorates of various plan  heads, which includes target -based 
indicators for both Output and Outcome. These are set by the concerned executive 
directorates.  
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
  
The Committee note that safety works related to Level Crossings (LCs) and Road 
Over/Under Bridges (ROBs/RUBs) are key focus areas in the Annual Plan for 2025 -26, 
with allocations of Rs. 706 crore and Rs. 7,000 crore, respectively. During 2024-25,     Rs. 
710 crore was allocated at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage for LC safety works, but only 
Rs. 476 crore was utilized as of January 2025. Similarly, for ROBs/RUBs, the Budget 
Estimate (BE) of Rs. 9,275 crore was revised downward to Rs. 7,474 crore at the RE stage, 
with actual utilization standing at Rs. 5,338 crore (till January 2025). The Committee 
observe that the Railways have consistently fallen short of achieving their physical targets 
for the closure of manned level crossings since 2021-22, highlighting the need for focused 
attention in this area. 
 
Emphasizing the importance of full utilization of allocated funds and adherence to 
physical targets, the Committee acknowledge the numerous challenges faced by the 
Railways in constructing ROBs and RUBs. These challenges include land acquisition, 
shifting of public utilities, design-related issues, and resistance from local populations. The 
Committee stress that addressing these obstacles is crucial for the timely completion of 
these critical safety projects. Additionally, the Committee note that despite the construction 
of ROBs, many level crossings remain operational due to difficulties faced by the 
pedestrians in covering long distances on foot to use ROBs, leading them to continue using 
level crossings despite safety risks. 

 
 
43 
 
The Committee also observe that persistent issue of waterlogging in RUBs, causes 
significant inconvenience to the public. They recommend the early adoption of Condition-
Based Maintenance or Predictive Maintenance systems, replacing the current Time-Based 
Maintenance approach. To mitigate waterlogging, the Committee urge the Railways to 
allocate sufficient budgetary provisions for structural improvements, including adjusting 
bridge heights, incorporating advanced technology, and implementing efficient draina ge 
systems, alongside regular maintenance. 
Furthermore, the Committee observe that the absence of an effective grievance 
redressal mechanism exacerbates these issues, leaving local residents with unresolved 
concerns. Challenges such as inadequate approaching roads and traffic congestion near 
railway stations further compound the difficulties faced by commuters and residents. To 
address these issues, the Committee recommend that the Railways actively involve people's 
representatives and local authorities in identifying and resolving problems related to ROBs 
and RUBs. Their input can serve as a bridge between the Railways and affected 
communities, ensuring that solutions are practical and inclusive. The Committee also urge 
the Railways to establish a robust grievance redressal mechanism to effectively address the 
concerns of local populations.  
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Elimination of level crossings (LCs) is an ongoing process and done by providing 
ROBs/RUBs in lieu of LCs or through direct closure (for low traffic LCs) or by diversion 
of road traffic to nearby ROB/RUB/ LC. 
Earlier, elimination of Manned Level Crossings was by Diversion Road/ Merger & 
Closure had a major role, however, now, the elimination process consists mainly by 
construction of Road over Bridges/Road under Bridges (ROBs/ RUBs). Basically, easy 
sites for LC elimination (due to low TVU or lower demand) have been mostly identified 

 
 
44 
 
and eliminated in last few years. Most of the remaining LCs are having site specific issues 
which needs more detailed study and major works (ROB cum LHS etc.) for elimination. 
Further, Completion & commissioning of ROB/RUB works depends on various 
factors like cooperation of  State Governments in giving  consent for closure of LC,  fixing 
of approach alignment, approval of General Arrangement Drawing (GAD), land 
acquisition, removal of encroachment, shifting of infringing utilities, statutory clearances 
from various authorities,  law and order situation in the area of project/work sites,  duration 
of working season in a year for the particular project/area   due to climatic condit ions 
etc.  All these factors affect the completion time of the projects/works. 
Further, it is to be noted that the Ministry has set an ambitious target for construction 
of ROBs/ RUBs since last few years to improve the safety of and mobility of road users/ 
trains, which is evident from the progress of ROB/ RUB works. During 2024-25, total 1263 
nos. ROBs/ RUBs were constructed which is 17.16 % higher than ROBs/RUBs constructed 
during 2023-24. 
Additionally, railway has revised policy for sanction of works and faster execution 
to eliminate LCs at fast pace. New policy letters dated 2.3.23 & 19.08.2024 also facilitate 
the charging cost of land acquisition involving private land, R&R and utility sh ifting 
required for construction of ROB/RUB to estimate of ROB/RUBs works sanctioned on 
100% cost of Railway. 
These revised polic ies also facilitate the sanction of additional works for 
rectification, improvement and up gradation in already complete works including making 
good the deficiency. Additional works may include such as providing additional ROB/ 
LHS/ FOB/ Ramp/ Subway where ROB/ RUB has been commissioned. Additional works 
for RUBs may include solution for water-logging and other functional problems. 
In light of revised policy, no. of additional works is being planned/ sanctioned to 
facilitate road users, and to attend the already constructed subway for prevention of water-
logging. 

 
 
45 
 
The grievance redressal is a continuous & dynamic process. All the grievances 
regarding LCs/ROBs/RUBs/water-logging in RUBs and subways as received are examined 
and necessary action based on the site condition is taken. 
Further, to involve people’s representatives and local authorities in identifying and 
resolving problems related to ROBs and RUBs, a policy letter has been issued wherein, it 
has been decided that while preparing the Technical Feasibility Report/ DPR, the 
representation from elected representatives if any, may also be considered for better 
appreciation of ground conditions. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11)  
 
The Committee note that Railways has been steadily replacing conventional ICF 
coaches with safer and more efficient LHB coaches and producing only LHB coaches since 
April, 2018. The Committee also appreciate that Railways has introduced Vande Bharat 
Sleeper and Amrit Bharat trains with enhanced safety features and modern passenger 
amenities. The Committee has been apprised that after successful trials and commissioning 
of first prototype rakes of Vande Bharat Sleeper and Amrit Bharat 2.0, series production 
of these rakes will be done for which manufacturing plans are already in place.  To address 
the persistent issue of unmet production targets for coaches and wagons, the Committee 
recommend that the Railways significantly increase manufacturing capacity at existing 
units and explore the creation of new production facilities in areas lacking them. As such 
the BE for production units stands at 4623 crores therefore the Committee also desire the 
Ministry to encourage Public -Private Partnerships (PPP) to bring i n advanced coach -
building technologies. The Committee desire that enough thrust be given to investing in 
skill development programs and collaborating with technical institutes to train workers in 
modern production techniques and automation. Though the Comm ittee are happy to note 
that Railways has exported rolling stocks of the value of Rs. 608.70 crore to Mozambique 
and Sri Lanka during 2022 -2023, the Committee desire the Railways to expand their 
business operation in exporting of rail components to enhance revenue without making any 

 
 
46 
 
compromise on fulfilling of indigenous demand for rolling stock. To bolster freight 
operations, the Committee recommend the Railways to scale up the production of wagons 
and containers to meet growing logistical needs at the production units.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Presently, the ongoing works related to capacity augmentation of Coach and Wagon 
Production Units have been sanctioned at an anticipated cost of Rs. 1670.78 Crores in 
Indian Railways. 
Skill development is a continuous process in Production Units. Production Units 
have been advised to conduct regular/ periodic training/ refresher course of technical staff 
engaged in production activities for improving the safety aspect, quality and relia bility of 
Rolling Stock by utilizing the in-house resources as well as by roping in Industrial experts 
and academia.  
Around 13000 staff h ave been provided with regular/ periodic training in the year 
2024-25 till February, 2025 in Production Units of Indian Railways. 
Wagon induction is a continuous process which is based on traffic load requirement 
as advised by Traffic Directorate on a year to year basis. Aimed at ensuring wagon 
availability to meet growing freight loading needs, procurement of more than 1 lakh 
wagons have been arranged from various private firms, PSUs and railway workshops in 
the past 3 years. This has been achieved through proper planning taking all rising to 
occasion through augmentation manufacturing facilities. Even in house manufacturing of 
wagons by Railway workshop and Railway PSUs have been promoted not only to 
manufacture wagons in urgent demand but in developing proto of new design improved 
wagons. Further enhancement of wagon production by workshops and Railway controlled 
PSU will be taken care of to meet growing wagon demands. 
Comments of the Committee 

 
 
47 
 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12)  
 
The Committee note that presently, the stations over Indian Railways are being 
developed under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme. This scheme envisages development of 
stations on a continuous basis with a long -term approach and involves preparation of 
master plans and their implementation in phases to improve the amenities at the stations.  
The Committee further note that 1337 stations have been identified for development under 
this scheme and out of these, tenders for development works have been awarded and works 
are in progress at 1202 stations. The Committee are aware that the redevelopment of 
railway stations is complex, involving passenger and train safety and requiring various 
statutory clearances from urban/local bodies and these factors affect the completi on time, 
and therefore, no specific timeframe has been indicated. The Committee also note that Rani 
Kamlapati station in the state of Madhya Pradesh has been developed under Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) Model and 15 railway stations are also being expl ored for development 
on PPP Mode. The Committee also note that against the target of 453 stations during 2024-
25, only one station could be upgraded till December, 2024.  Therefore, the Committee 
desire the Ministry to establish a dedicated task force to oversee project timelines, ensuring 
regular communication between contractors, local authorities and railway officials to 
address potential bottlenecks promptly. The Committee also desire the railways to engage 
with local representatives and concerned State  Government early in the planning process 
to secure necessary clearances and foster a collaborative environment, reducing 
bureaucratic delays.  The Committee urge the Ministry to evaluate the success of stations 
developed under the PPP model, like Rani Kam alapati Railway Station, to identify best 
practices and potential scalability of the same to other stations while attracting private 
investment and expertise. The Committee further recommend that the redevelopment of 
stations under the scheme focus on improving crowd management to prevent any untoward 
incidents. This should include the provision of multiple and adequately spacious entry/exit 

 
 
48 
 
points, well-positioned security checkpoints, proper lighting, and clear signage. Railways 
should also ensure sufficient deployment of personnel to maintain smooth and efficient 
passenger movement, enhancing both safety and convenience. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Railway launched Amrit Bharat Station Scheme for the redevelopment 
of stations. This scheme envisages development of stations on a continuous basis with a 
long-term approach. It involves preparation of master plans and their implementation in 
phases to improve the amenities at the stations like improvement of station access, 
circulating areas, waiting halls, toilets, lift/escalators as necessary, platform surfacing and 
cover over platform, cleanliness, free Wi -Fi, kiosks for local products through schemes 
like ‘One Station One Product’, better passenger information systems, executive lounges, 
nominated spaces for business meetings, landscaping, etc. keeping in view the necessity at 
each station. The scheme also envisages improvement of building, integrating the station 
with both sides of the city, multimodal integration, amenities for Divyangjans, sustainable 
and environment friendly solutions, provision of ballastless tracks, etc. as per necessity, 
besides phasing, feasibility and creation of city centre at the station in the long term. 
So far, 1337 stations have been identified under this Scheme, out of which first 
phase work has been completed at 105 stations, while work is in progress at 1109 stations. 
Upgradation/development of railway stations is complex in nature involving safety 
of passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances such as fire clearance, 
heritage, tree cutting, airport clearance, etc. The progress also gets affected due t o 
brownfield related challenges such as shifting of utilities (involving water/sewage lines, 
optical fibre cables, gas pipe lines, power/signal cables, etc.), infringements, operation of 
trains without hindering passenger movement, speed restrictions due t o works carried out 
in close proximity of tracks and high voltage power lines, etc. and these factors affect the 
completion time. Therefore, no time frame can be indicated for stations under this Scheme. 

 
 
49 
 
A robust system of reporting of progress achieved and identifying bottlenecks 
affecting timely delivery and execution of project is already in place. Monitoring of works 
is done through dedicated portal of Indian Railway Project Sanction and Management 
(IRPSM) and capturing issues faced by Zonal Railways through their letters, monthly 
reports, meetings etc. for prompt disposal including requisite approvals. Further, regular 
communications including coordination issues with different stakeholders are being d one 
at Zonal/Divisional level through review/co -ordination meetings, Video Conferences 
(VCs) and periodical site inspections etc. 
Identification of Railway stations for inclusion under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, 
involves deliberations at Divisional level, Zonal headquarter level and finally at Railway 
Board level in the Ministry of Railways. The process also involves appropriate 
consultations with stakeholders and various inputs received from general public, local 
bodies, State Government and public representatives are suitably incorporated in the 
planning as per feasibility, requirement etc.  
Rani Kamalapati Railway station was developed under Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) mode and commissioned in 2021 and is working satisfactorily. Based on the 
experience gained from the redevelopment of Rani Kamalapati Railway Station on PPP 
mode, Ministry  of Railways has identified 15 Nos. railway stations located in major 
cities/towns for exploring redevelopment under PPP mode. Further, the proposal for 
redevelopment of Vijayawada railway station through PPP mode has been submitted for 
appraisal of Public Private Partnership Appraisal Committee (PPPAC). The other Railway 
stations are being redeveloped based on the surrounding growth. 
Master plans for stations under this scheme are generally developed with the help 
of experts like architects/traffic planners/experienced consultants etc. for station 
approaches improvement through Metro, RRTS, BRTS, ropeways, waterways etc. to 
ensure smooth access by widening of roads, remova l of unwanted structures, properly 
designed visible signages, dedicated pedestrian pathways, well planned parking areas, 
improved lighting etc. with necessary liaison with concerned local authorities. All these 

 
 
50 
 
are being well taken care of for improved crowd management through multiple adequately 
spacious entry/exit points, well positioned checkpoints with proper lighting and clear 
signage. 
Railway is dedicated for ensuring safe and convenient passenger experience so as 
to maintain smooth and efficient passenger movement by way of standard signages/display 
boards including train indicator boards and coach guidance systems/boards with good 
visibility and public announcement system. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13)  
 
The Committee observe that freight remains the backbone of Indian Railways, 
contributing nearly 65% of its revenue. The Committee note that Coal, Iron Ore and 
Cement constitute more than 60% of freight loading and revenue generation through freight 
operation.  The Committee are aware that Railways is pursuing the goal of enhancing 
modal share of Railways in the non -bulk and non -conventional commodities.  The 
Committee feel the urgent need to improve average speed of freight trains which has been 
25 km/h dur ing 2023 -24.  To enhance freight traffic, the Committee recommend a 
commercially viable, market-driven approach, with a focus on diversification beyond bulk 
commodities. Additionally, the Committee stress the need for prioritizing Dedicated 
Freight Corridors (DFCs) development and usage to ease congestion on high-density routes 
and improve freight efficiency. The Committee recommend the Railways to introduce a 
freight service model, similar to the passenger segment, offering varied options based on 
cost, sp eed and service levels. This may include high -speed and time -sensitive cargo 
transport with assured delivery timelines for high -value goods, regular freight operations 
with competitive pricing for bulk and general cargo, cost -effective and slower transit 
options for price -sensitive customers etc.  By providing flexible freight solutions, 
customers can choose services based on urgency, cost considerations and logistic needs. 
Also, integrating digital tracking, seamless multimodal connectivity and value -added 

 
 
51 
 
services like doorstep delivery will enhance competitiveness and attract more freight traffic 
for railways. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Indian Railways have taken many measures to increase network capacity including 
infrastructure projects such as Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) and Western 
Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) to create dedicated freight path to give exclusive 
access to freight trains.  
 Further, the following capacity enhancement works and rolling stock programs, 
among others, are planned and being executed, which upon completion, will reduce transit 
time of freight trains and lead to better freight trains speed: 
 (1) Doubling/Multi – Tracking on critical sections and high- density network. 
(2)  Provision of Rail flyover and Bypass lines at junction stations. 
(3) Induction of higher horsepower locomotives. 
 (4) Induction of higher capacity and high speed wagons. 
 (5) Improvement to terminals and their connectivity to trunk routes. 
 Ministry of Railways has taken up construction of two Dedicated Freight  
Corridors  (DFC)   viz.   Eastern   Dedicated    Freight Corridor (EDFC) from Ludhiana 
to Sonnagar (1337 Km) and the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) from 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Terminal (JNPT) to Dadri (1506 Km). Out of total 2843 Km, 2741 
Route Kilometers (96.4%) has been commissioned and operational. The work in balance 
section has been taken up. 
 Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) Project has positive impact on transportation 
and logistics sector as it enabled enhanced movement of Double Stack Container (DSC) 
trains, higher axle load trains, faster access of northern hinterland by Western Ports and 
development of new terminals/linkages with industries along the DFC. The Eastern DFC 
mostly caters to mineral traffic from Eastern India. These developments enabled 
reduction in logistic cost. 

 
 
52 
 
 DFC has contributed to creating additional paths on the conventional network 
by diverting freight traffic to EDFC and WDFC. Traffic on DFC in 2024 -25 (till 
February, 2025) has reached to 352 average trains per day. In Feb ruary, 2025, 371 
average trains per day were run. As a result, Railways have been able to run additional 
goods and coaching services over its network with better punctuality.  
 The measures undertaken by Indian Railway (IR) towards diversification of 
commodity basket include the following; 
1.  Policy for enhancing Rail modal share in Automobile traffic : For better 
utilization of Automobile carrying stocks, the haulage rate for Automobile stocks (NMG) 
have been rationalized. Rate of BCACBM has also been rationalized by notifying single 
stack and double stack haulage rate. 
 The Charging of 2-wheeler when loaded in NMGHS wagons at par with NMG 
wagons when loaded in single deck. 
 To enhance the ease of doing business and to improve the wagon turn around 
mandatory weighment in case of automobile wagons loaded with motor vehicles has been 
dispensed with. 
2.  Measures for enhancing the modal share of Container Traffic:  
• To promote containerization for less than full rake of container trains, Mini 
Rake Facility has been introduced in Container train. Minimum composition of 
such mini rake is 25 wagons and charging is done at applicable haulage rate. 
• Weighment of empty container has been dispensed with from 15.04.2024. 
• Stainless Steel in Coil form has been de-notified. This will now be charged 
at ‘Haulage charge per TEU’ basis, which is lesser than ‘Container Class Rate 
(CCR)’. 
• To enhance the modal share in containerized traffic of Tiles, 50% discount 
has been granted in haulage charges of empty container laden rakes returning to 
originating cluster after transporting the Tiles traffic to destination 

 
 
53 
 
 3.  Measures to facilitate loading of Bulk Cement Traffic : In order to promote 
movement of Bulk cement (Cement in loose form) in container and thereby increasing 
the modal share of this commodity, haulage rates have been rationalized.  
4.  Concession on Fly Ash Traffic: 
 In order to arrest the high demand of transportation of Fly ash from Thermal 
power station to cement plants, concession on Fly Ash in Open/ Flat wagons enhanced 
from 20% to 40% when back loaded at the particular terminal from 27.12.24.  
Fly Ash when transported in Covered wagons is charged at class LR1.  
5. Cargo Aggregator Transportation Product: 
 To facilitate cargo aggregation and thereby, expand the commodity basket on 
Railway, a new transportation product “Cargo Aggregator Transportation Product” is 
introduced which allows loading of multiple type commodities in Covered wagons such 
as BCN/BCNA/BCNAHS group and BCNHL group charged at train load rates. 
 
6. Concession on Short Lead Traffic: 
 To attract short distance traffic, short lead concession has been granted for traffic 
up to 100 Km at the rate of 50%, 25% and 10% for traffic booked up to 0-50 KM, 51-75 
KM and 76 -90 KM respectively except for Coal & Coke and Iron ore traffic.  Zonal 
Railway is empowered to enter into the agreement. 
7. Station to Station Policy: 
 In order to attract more traffic and augment earnings, Station to Station rates are 
adopted for  a specific stream of traffic for a particular commodity   for movement 
between a specific originating and destination points. 
 It is applicable for the existing  as well as new traffic and the maximum 
percentage of discount under STS is up to 30% for incremental traffic and for retention 
traffic a maximum of 15% can be granted. 
8.  Traditional Empty Flow Direction (TEFD) Scheme: 

 
 
54 
 
 For utilization of empty wagons in return direction for loading at discounted 
freight rate, revised guidelines were issued. Under this policy, 15-20% discount in freight 
is granted on traffic loaded in notified empty flow directions w.e.f. 01.04.2024. 
 Automobile traffic (i.e. New Modified Goods (NMG) group stock) is also 
eligible for rebate @ 20% under TEFD (Traditional Empty Flow Direction) Automatic 
Freight Rebate scheme. 
9.  Other initiatives are as under: 
Certain new commodities have been classified in the goods tariff to capture 
additional traffic such as Polyhalite (All Types), Tender Coconut, Truck Mixers, 
LD and GCP Sludge, Sulphur Coated Urea, Phosphogypsum and Plastic Waste. 
  New transportation product with enhanced permissible carrying capacity (PCC) 
such as BCNHL, BFNS, BOXNEL, BLSS, etc. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14)  
 
The Committee appreciate the introduction of Joint Parcel Product – Rapid Cargo 
Service (JPP-RCS) as a transformative step in e -Commerce and FMCG logistics through 
technology-driven freight solutions. To maximize its impact for better revenue generation, 
the Committee desire the Railways to expand service coverage to high -demand industrial 
and commercial hubs, ensuring frequent and reliable operatio ns. The Committee feel that 
strengthening the Virtual Aggregation Platform (VAP) with seamless integration for 
aggregators and India Post will further enhance efficiency. The Committee observe that 
upgrading parcel handling infrastructure is essential to i mprove service quality and 
competitiveness in e-Commerce and FMCG logistics which shall help the railways expand 
its customer base in this segment.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry of 
Railways may consider establishing a real-time performance monitoring mechanism, adopt 
dynamic pricing models and foster continuous collaboration with potential logistics 
partners for optimum performance under the Joint Parcel Product – Rapid Cargo Service 
(JPP-RCS). 

 
 
55 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Based on the traffic potential and utilization of the existing JPP -RCS services, 
increase in the frequency of JPP -RCS train no. 00111/00112 (Bhivandi Road Sankrail -
Bhivandi Road) from weekly to bi-weekly has been approved. 
In order to expand the service coverage, more routes are being explored in 
consultation with stakeholders. Efforts are on to make theVAP more robust. 
Under the Umbrella work 2024-25, Rs. 2,500 crores has been allocated for provision 
of facilities related to Parcel Shed (including Goods Shed) under the Plan Head -53. 
Processing and sanctioning works under this umbrella allocation is currently in its initi al 
stages.  
Performance of the JPP-RCS is regularly monitored by the Zonal Railways as well 
as Railway Board. Various interactive sessions are also conducted regularly with 
stakeholders to get their feedback and suggestions for improvement in the Policy. 
Further, in order to improve utilization of the JPP -RCS services (operational on 04 
routes), and to divert the traffic from road to rail, provision of discount in freight by 50% 
of the JP - Scale in return direction, and charging of freight at JP Scale +35%  for the 
roundtrip have been introduced as a pilot project (effective from 01.04.2025). 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
  
The Committee note that Railways has made significant strides in material 
management through digitization, decentralized procurement and streamlined inventory 
control. The Committee also note that while the efficiency of warehouse operations has 
improved w ith modern infrastructure and IT -driven inventory tracking (IMMS, UDM, 
IREPS), challenges remain in procurement via GeM. The Committee observe that surplus 
stock values have increased over the last three years and feel a need for more proactive 

 
 
56 
 
disposal mechanisms. While recognizing the benefits of decentralized procurement, the 
Committee are concerned to note the persistent problems with GeM, specifically payment 
delays, bid management inefficiencies, and inadequate post-contract recovery. To enhance 
efficiency and for smooth material management, the Committee desire the Ministry of 
Railways to focus on resolving these GeM issues alongside optimizing demand forecasting, 
expediting surplus stock liquidation, and improving post-contract financial reconciliation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways regularly communicates with GeM to address issues faced 
by Railway buyers which is an ongoing process and is done from time to time.  Recently, 
vide letter dated 26.12.2024, a list of various issues were communicated to GeM covering 
areas such as payment processing, bid management and contracts, post contract 
management, tracking and consignment, system interface, policy and procedures etc.   In 
their reply dated 08.01.2025, GeM has assured that they are developing a new system 
namely GeM 2.0 and resolution of these issues including demand linking, clubbing and 
post contract recoveries will be provided in the new system.  Once the new system, GeM 
2.0, is launched by GeM, feedback of buyers will once again be obtained on these issues 
and the same will be taken up with GeM if issues persist. 
As far as surplus stock liquidation is concerned, because of significant changes in 
design due to technological developments, there is an increase in surplus stocks. Rules and 
instructions are already in place for liquidation of such surplus stock, which s hall be 
liquidated in due course of time. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16)  
 
The Committee note that the total cost of Mumbai -Ahmedabad High -Speed Rail 
(MAHSR) project was estimated at Rs.1,08,000 crores and the final project cost will be 
ascertained only after awarding all contract packages and associated timelines. The 

 
 
57 
 
Committee also note that a n expenditure of Rs.71,116 crores has been incurred so far on 
MAHSR Project as on January, 2025 and the overall physical progress stands at 48.55%, 
with key construction activities ongoing, including viaducts, tunnels and station buildings. 
The Committee further note that the project has achieved significant progress, with 100% 
land acquisition completed  and all civil contracts awarded. The Committee have been 
informed that workforce training is underway, with core staff training i n Japan and 
additional training at the High-Speed Rail Training Institute in Vadodara. Shinkansen is a 
specialized technology of Japan and some components under Make-in-India Policy are also 
being utilized.  The Committee recommend the Ministry to expedite the finalization of 
remaining contract packages and associated works to ensure timely completion of the 
MAHSR Project. The Committee also desire the Ministry to address potential bottlenecks, 
such as delays in u tility shifting and construction challenges, to avoid cost overruns and 
ensure the project stays on track. To support the long-term sustainability of high-speed rail 
operations, the Committee desire that indigenous manufacturing of Shinkansen technology 
components under the Make -in-India initiative b e expanded. Additionally, the Ministry 
should prioritize the development of a skilled workforce by scaling up training programs 
at HSRTI Vadodara and leveraging international expertise. For upcoming HSR projects, 
the Committee recommend that feasibility st udies be conducted, innovative financing 
models may be explored, and funding may be secured before sanctioning new corridors. 
Further, the Committee desire that the Ministry should focus on completing the MAHSR 
Project as a benchmark for future high-speed rail initiatives in India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India has sanctioned 508 KM long Mumbai -Ahmedabad High 
Speed Rail (MAHSR) project in December , 2015 to be executed with technical and 
financial cooperation from Government of Japan. National High Speed Rail corporation 
Limited (NHSRCL) was set up with authorized share capital of ₹ 20,000 cr with share of 
Government of India as 50% and the two States (Gujarat & Maharashtra) 25% each. 

 
 
58 
 
Project shall be implemented with the provision of Japanese Yen loan to the extent 
of about 81% of total project cost with repayment period of 50 years and further grace 
period of 15 years @ interest rate of 0.1% p.a. and remaining shall be provided in terms of 
Equity. 
The current status of MAHSR project is as under: 
•  100% (i.e. 1389.49 Ha) land has been acquired for Mumbai - Ahmedabad 
High Speed Rail (MAHSR). 
•   Construction work is in progress on elevated viaducts, major river bridges, 
station buildings, and Tunnels. 
•   383 km of pier construction, 317 km of girder casting and 286 km of girder 
launching have been completed. 
•   Work of the only tunnel in Gujarat has been completed. Out of 21 km long 
tunnel in Maharashtra, work of 2.7 km has been completed by New Austrian 
Tunnelling Method (NATM). 
•   The overall physical progress of the project is approx. 50.5%. 
•   The execution of MAHSR Project is monitored/reviewed regularly 
•  Bullet train project is a very complex and technology intensive project. 
•  Timelines for the completion of the project can be reasonably ascertained 
after the completion of all associated works of Civil Structures, Track, 
Electrical, Signalling & Telecommunication and supply of Trainsets. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 22 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
  
The Committee note that Railways have prepared a National Rail Plan to develop a 
'future-ready' railway system through extensive infrastructure augmentation, with a focus 
on increasing freight traffic to 3000 MT and passenger traffic to 10 billion by 2030,  while 
segregating freight and passenger services via Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFCs). The 
Committee observe that key enhancements include raising freight train speeds to 100 

 
 
59 
 
kmph, expanding rail connectivity to industrial hubs, ports, and mines, introducing high -
capacity rolling stock and powerful locomotives, and increasing passenger train speeds to 
160-200 kmph with the gradual replacement of long -distance coaches by high-speed train 
sets, thereby reducing travel time by 20 -25%. The Committee further note that other 
initiatives include expanding the railway network to 72,000 route km, redeveloping 1337 
stations under the Amrit Bharat Scheme, operationalizing India's first hig h-speed rail 
between Mumbai and Ahmedabad, eliminating manned level crossings, installing the 
KAVACH safety system, and implementing predictive maintenance. Sustainability goals 
include achieving 100% electrification, net -zero carbon emissions by 2030, and  
introducing over 50 hydrogen -powered trains.  The Committee urge the Ministry to 
prioritize freight optimization by enhancing last -mile connectivity and incentivizing 
industries to shift to rail transport. The Committee emphasize the need for rapid 
deployment of KAVACH safety systems and predictive maintenance to enhance 
operational efficiency and safety. Additionally, the Committee highlight the importance of 
Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) in ensuring financial sustainability for station 
modernization, freight terminals, and hydrogen -powered trains, as well as in adopting 
energy-efficient technologies to achieve net -zero emissions. The Committee recommend 
the Ministry to ensure optimum budget allocation in tune with targets set in the National 
Rail Plan , timely execution of infrastructure projects including DFCs, development of 
high-speed rail network and station redevelopment, with a robust monitoring framework 
to track progress effectively. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The National Rail Plan (NRP) is a long -term strategy by Indian Railways to create 
a future-ready railway system by 2030. It guides concerned executive directorates on the 
infrastructure and rolling stock requirements based on traffic forecasts. Executing 
directorates set their targets in line with the NRP and accordingly the optimum budget will 

 
 
60 
 
get allocated as per the project requirements . The details of key enhancements/initiatives 
are given below:- 
Public Private Partnership  
Ministry of Railways has formulated a Participative Policy, 2012 to attract 
investments, improve efficiency and to unleash faster development and completion of 
track, rolling stock manufacturing, station development and delivery of passenger freight 
services. The policy encompasses five (05) Public Private Partnership models viz. Non -
Government Railway (NGR), Joint Venture (JV), Customer funded model, BOT and BOT-
annuity models. State Governments/Local bodies/PSUs have also participated as 
stakeholder for t he development of new lines/gauge conversion projects under the 
participative policy of Ministry of Railways.  The PPP mode has been found to be quite 
successful in Railways, especially in providing last mile rail connectivity to many ports 
and industrial clusters. 
 
Till Now, 17 projects of Rs.16,434 crore have been completed through PPP model 
and 8 projects of Rs.16,614 crore are under implementation including coal connectivity 
and port connectivity projects. 
Energy Efficiency 
Indian Railways has taken various initiatives to achieve energy efficiency which 
includes range of energy efficient technologies like switching over to production of three 
phase electric locomotives, EMU etc. with regenerative features, use of head on generation 
(HOG) technology, use of LED lights in buildings & coaches and use of star rated 
appliances etc. 
Sanctioning of Railway projects is a continuous and dynamic process of Indian 
Railway. Railway infrastructure projects are taken up on the basis of remunerativeness, 
traffic projections, last mile connectivity, missing links and alternate routes, augmentation 
of congested/saturated lines socio-economic considerations etc. depending upon liabilities 
of ongoing projects, overall availability of funds and competing demands. 

 
 
61 
 
As on 01.04. 2025, there are 431 (154 New Line, 33 Gauge Conversion and 244 
Doubling) sanctioned projects of total length 35,966 Km, costing  approx. Rs.  6.75 lakh 
crore, out of which, 12,769 Km length has been commissioned and an expenditure of 
approx. Rs. 2.91 lakh crore has been incurred upto March, 2025. The summary is as under:- 
Plan Head No of 
Projects 
Total 
Length 
NL/GC/DL 
(km) 
Length 
Commissioned 
till Mar'25  
(Km) 
Total Exp 
upto Mar'25 
(in Rs. Cr) 
New lines 154 16,142 3,036 1,45,318 
Gauge conversion 33 4,180 2,997 22,753 
Doubling 244 15,644 6,736 1,22,858 
TOTAL 431 35,966 12,769 2,90,929 
 
Station Development 
  Rani Kamalapati Railway station was developed under Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) mode and commissioned in 2021 and is working satisfactorily. Based on the 
experience gained from the redevelopment of Rani Kamalapati Railway Station on PPP 
mode, Ministry of Railways has identified 15 Nos. railway stations located in major 
cities/towns for exploring redevelopment under PPP mode. Further, the proposal for 
redevelopment of Vijayawada railway station through PPP mode has been submitted for 
appraisal of Public Private Partnership Appraisal Committee (PPPAC). The other Railway 
stations are being redeveloped based on the surrounding growth. 
Upgradation/development of railway stations is complex in nature involving safety 
of passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances such as fire clearance, 
heritage, tree cutting, airport clearance, etc. The progress also gets affected due t o 
brownfield related challenges such as shifting of utilities (involving water/sewage lines, 
optical fibre cables, gas pipe lines, power/signal cables, etc.), infringements, operation of 
trains without hindering passenger movement, speed restrictions due t o works carried out 
in close proximity of tracks and high voltage power lines, etc. and these factors affect the 
completion time. Therefore, no time frame can be indicated for stations under this Scheme. 

 
 
62 
 
A robust system of reporting of progress achieved and identifying bottlenecks 
affecting timely delivery and execution of project is already in place. Monitoring of works 
is done through dedicated portal of Indian Railway Project Sanction and Management 
(IRPSM) and capturing issues faced by Zonal Railways through their letters, monthly 
reports, meetings etc. for prompt disposal including requisite approvals. Further, regular 
communications including coordination issues with different stakeholders are being d one 
at Zonal/Divisional level through review/co -ordination meetings, Video Conferences 
(VCs) and periodical site inspections etc. 
Freight Handling 
To improve the efficiency of rail freight handling at the terminals, Indian Railway 
has adopted two-pronged approach: encouraging private sector to develop the modern rail 
freight terminals under Gati Shakti Multi -Modal Cargo Terminal (GCT) policy and 
augmenting/ upgrading the infrastructure at railway owned goods sheds.   Till 30.04.2025, 
103 GCTs have already been commissioned.   Further, a work of Rs.12000 crore has been 
sanctioned for development of customer amenities at the goods sheds all across the country. 
  With respect to speeds, Indian Railways have taken many measures to increase 
network capacity including infrastructure projects such as Eastern Dedicated Freight 
Corridor (EDFC) and Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) to create dedicated 
freight path to give exclusive access to freight trains. 
  Further, the following capacity enhancement works and rolling stock programs, 
among others, are planned and being executed, which upon completion, will reduce transit 
time of freight trains and lead to better freight trains speed: 
 (1)  Doubling/Multi – Tracking on critical sections and high-density network. 
(2)  Provision of Rail flyover and Bypass lines at junction stations. 
(3)  Induction of higher horsepower locomotives. 
(4)  Induction of higher capacity and high speed wagons. 
(5) Improvement to terminals and their connectivity to trunk routes. 
KAVACH IMPLEMENTATION ON INDIAN RAILWAYS 

 
 
63 
 
1. Kavach is an indigenously developed Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system. 
Kavach is a highly technology intensive system, which requires safety certification of 
highest order (SIL-4). 
2. Kavach aids the Loco Pilot in running of train within specified speed limits by 
automatic application of brakes in case Loco Pilot fails to do so and also helps the trains 
to run safely during inclement weather. 
3. The first field trials on the passenger trains were started in February , 2016. Based on 
the experience gained and Independent Safety Assessment of the system by 
Independent Safety Assessor (ISA), three firms were approved in 2018 -19, for supply 
of Kavach Ver 3.2. 
4. Kavach was adopted as National ATP system in July, 2020. 
5. Implementation of Kavach System involves following Key Activities: 
a. Installation of Station Kavach at each and every station, block section. 
b. Installation of RFID Tags throughout the track length. 
c. Installation of telecom Towers throughout the section. 
d. Laying of Optical Fibre Cable along the track. 
e. Provision of Loco Kavach on each and every Locomotive running on Indian 
Railways.  
6. Based on deployment of Kavach version 3.2 on1465 RKm on south central Railway, 
lot of experience was gained. Using that further improvements were made. Finally, 
Kavach specification version 4.0 was approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024. 
7. Kavach version 4.0 covers all the major features required for the diverse railway 
network. This is a significant milestone in safety for Indian Railways. Within a short 
period, IR has developed, tested and started deploying Automatic Train Protection 
System. 
8. Progress of Key items comprising Kavach system on Indian Railways upto Feb ruary, 
2025 is as under: - 
S.N. Items Progress 

 
 
64 
 
i Laying of Optical Fibre Cable 5743 Km 
ii Installation of Telecom Towers 540 Nos. 
iii Provision of Kavach at Stations 664 Nos. 
iv Provision of Kavach in Loco 795 Locos 
v Installation of Track side equipment 3727 Rkm 
 
9. Next phase of Kavach implementation is planned as under:- 
a. Project for equipping 10,000 Locomotives has been finalized. 69 number of 
loco sheds have been prepared for equipping with Kavach. 
b. Bids for track side Works of Kavach for approximately 15,000 RKm have been 
invited covering all GQ, GD, HDN and identified sections of Indian Railways, 
out of which works of 1865 RKm have been awarded.  
10. Currently, 3 OEMs are approved for supply of Kavach System. To increase capacity 
and scale of implementation, trials and approval of more OEMs are at different stages. 
11. Specialized training programme on Kavach are being conducted at centralized training 
institutes of Indian Railways to impart training to all concerned officials. By now more 
than 20,000 technicians, operators and engineers have been trained on Kavach 
technology. Courses have been designed in collaboration with IRISET. 
Predictive Maintenance System for Railway Signalling Assets. 
1. Remote Diagnostic & Predictive Maintenance System (RDPMS) is an Artificial 
Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML) -based predictive maintenance system 
designed to enhance the reliability and efficiency of railway signaling assets. It 
enables real -time monito ring, failure prediction, and data -driven maintenance 
planning, minimizing unexpected failures.  
2. The system generates automated alerts to maintenance teams, facilitating proactive 
action, and supports remote diagnostics.  
3. The initial deployment of RDPMS in Signalling has been done at around 100 stations. 
Based on the experience gained, several improvements have been identified, leading 

 
 
65 
 
to a revision of the Functional Requirement Specification (FRS), which is under issue, 
to make the system more effective for signaling assets.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18)  
 
The Committee note that the plan outlay for Training and Human Resource 
Development (HRD) in 2025 -26 has been kept at Rs. 301 crore. In 2024 -25, the actual 
expenditure was Rs. 133.50 crore (upto December, 2024) against the Revised Estimate 
(RE) of Rs. 197.52 crore, while in 2023-24, the actual expenditure stood at Rs. 101.93 crore 
against an RE of Rs. 242 crore. Under the Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK), the 
gross expenditure on Training/HRD works at the RE stage in 2024 -25 was Rs. 146.96 
crore, whereas the Budget Estimate (BE) for 2025 -26 is Rs. 185 crore.  The Committee 
acknowledge the ongoing training programs as essential for developing a skilled workforce 
to manage and maintain High -Speed Rail (HSR) operations, with specialized training 
already in progress in Japan. Additionally, training for other O&M staff is being conducted 
by the trained core O&M personnel at the High -Speed Rail Training Institute (HSRTI) in 
Vadodara. As the Indian Railways undergoes a critical transition phase with the adoption 
of new technologies, the Committee desire the Ministry for optimum utilization of 
allocated funds. The Committee also desire the Ministry to equip railway personnel with 
up-to-date skills and knowledge and enable them to handle the complexities of modern 
railway operations, ensuring a competent and efficient workforce to enhance safety and 
operational efficiency. The Committee recommend the Railways to formulate 
comprehensive training programs incorporating advanced teaching methodologies and 
designing futuristic training modules.  Furthermore, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
collaborate with premier training institutes in India and abroad to provide world -class 
training, ensuring that railway personnel are well -equipped to meet emerging challenges 
and technological advancements in the sector. 
 
 

 
 
66 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Indian Railways have an extensive network of 8 Centralised Training Institutes and 
158 Other Training Institutes across the country to address training needs of approx. 12 
lacs railway personnel. Upgradation/creation of training infrastructure is a continu ous 
process. In view of rationalization of Railway Training Centres, existing railway training 
institutes needs to be upgraded as Multi -disciplinary Zonal/Divisional Training 
Institutes and there is a consistent fund demand from railways. Efforts are being  made 
through regular interactions with zonal railways to ensure need -based fund allocation and 
their utmost utilisation.  
During FY 2024-25, an expenditure of Rs. 140 crores was made against the revised 
outlay of Rs. 144 crores. For current fiscal 2025 -26, an outlay of Rs. 301 crores has been 
kept for Training and HRD.  
 
During 2023 -24, about 5.19 lakh employees have undergone different training 
modules viz. initial, promotional, refresher & specialized.  
Indian Railways is making significant strides in overcoming the challenges, it faces 
in training its workforce. By investing in modern infrastructure, adopting new learning 
methods like simulator  training, and upskilling instructors, it is gradually overcoming 
limitations related to resources and skilled personnel.   Simulator training  enhances their 
ability to respond to emergencies, improves decision -making, and provides opportunities 
for continual learning and improvement. 
Indian Railways has also embraced  e-learning techniques. This includes online 
training modules on iGOT Karmayogi Platform, which are accessible on anytime -
anywhere basis, making training more accessible and flexible. To ensure the effectiveness 
of the training programs, the training modules are regularly updated and upgraded.  
  Further, as safe train operation is the top most priority of Indian Railways,  special 
emphasis is laid on the training of safety category employees.  Detailed training 
modules including on Kavach system  as per prescribed periodicity are available for 

 
 
67 
 
respective categories at initial and promotional stages along with refresher courses as well 
as specialized training courses, laying emphasis on practical aspects which help them in 
skill upgradation and assimilation with related advanced technology,  keeping a focus on 
overall safety and passenger experience. These modules are also updated keeping in view 
the technological changes in working practice. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 25 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
  
The Committee note that budget estimates for Railway Research for year 2025 -26 
has been kept at Rs. 60.60 Crore at BE stage.  The Committee further note that the Railways 
have been unable to utilize the allocated funds for research during the past three years 
despite the budget allocation being conservative. Against Revised Estimates of 107 Crore 
in 2022-23, 67 Crore in 2023 -24 and Rs. 72.01 Crore in 2024 -25, the actual expenditure 
was Rs. 39.12 Crore, Rs. 28.33 Cr ore and Rs. 27.17 Crore (till December, 2024) 
respectively. The Committee in their first Report on Demands for Grants (2024 -25) had 
recommended the Ministry to take urgent steps to increase the scope of its Research & 
Development activities to ensure the modernisation and assimilation of latest technologies 
in Indian Railways.  The Committee considered Research & Development a crucial and 
strategic investment for the long-term modernization of Railways, essential for enhancing 
operational efficiency, ensuri ng safety and fostering technological self -reliance.  
Therefore, the Committee reaffirm their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to 
effectively utilize the allocated funds to achieve the desired objectives besides recognizing 
research as a long  term crucial investment for modernization of Indian Railways thereby 
augmenting its allocation in Railway Research. 
 
 
 

 
 
68 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee’s recommendations and emphasis placed on Research and 
Development in Indian Railways are noted.  In year 2024-25, fund utilisation of PH -18 is 
Rs. 42.44 Crore which is more than the expenditure of previous two years.  Further, it is 
reiterated that a number of projects are being developed under RDSO's stewardship where 
the sanctions were provided to Zonal Railways in other Plan Heads, while specifications 
development, Offer/Vendor appraisal and Prototype validation were conducted by RDSO. 
Also, major R&D expenditure is related to manpower, which is charged to Revenue. 
Revenue expenditure on R&D activities in RDSO  for FY 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25 
were Rs. 393.15 Crore, 417.29 Crore and 463.05 Crore respectively.  The Centres for 
Railway Research (CRRs) are being established at IITs. CRR is functional at 
IIT/Kharagpur and CRR at IIT, Kanpur and Roorkee are likely to be ready in the coming 
fiscal 2025-26 leading to improved Research efforts. 
 

 
 
69 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

 
 
70 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
71 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       New Delhi; DR. C.M. RAMESH 
      07 August, 2025________ Chairperson 
       16 Shravan, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 

 
 
72 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2024-25) 
 
 
The Committee met on Thursday, the 7 th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 3, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. C.M. Ramesh – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Shri Ummeda Ram Beniwal 
5. Shri Chhotelal 
6. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
7. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
8. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
9. Shri Khagen Murmu 
10. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
11. Shri Sudama Prasad 
12. Shri M K Raghavan 
13. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
14. Dr. Bhola Singh 
15. Shri Bharatbhai Manubhai Sutariya 
16. Shri Vijayakumar Alias Vijay Vasanth 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
17. Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad 
18. Shri Narhari Amin 
19. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
20. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
21. Dr. K. Laxman 
22. Smt. Sadhna Singh 
23. Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki 
 
 
 
 

 
 
73 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam  -  Director 
3. Smt. Savdha Kalia  -  Deputy Secretary 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports :- 
 
(i) *****  *****  *****  ***** 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in their 3 rd Report (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025 -26) 
of the Ministry of Railways'.  
 
The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Reports without any modifications.  
3.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the Reports to the 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
    
-------- 
* Not related to the Report 
 
  

 
 
74 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD 
REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) ON "DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS" 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations - 19 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the  Government –  
Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5 6,7, 8,9 ,10, 11,12 ,13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 
 
19 
 Percentage of total    100% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
Para No.  NIL 
 
 NIL 
 Percentage of total        0% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration –  
Para No.  NIL  
 
 
     NIL 
 Percentage of total       0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies 
are still awaited -      
Para No.  NIL  
 
     NIL 
 Percentage of total      0% 
 
 
 