 
 
 
 
10 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2025-26) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 8th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2026-2027) of the Ministry of Railways’] 
 
 
TENTH REPORT  
 
 
 
                                       
  
             
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
AUGUST, 2026/SRAVANA, 1948 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
 
 
SCR NO.  254 
 
TENTH REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2025-26)  
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA    
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 8th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2026-2027) of the Ministry of Railways’] 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2026  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2026            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2026/SRAVANA, 1948 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................................ (ii) 
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (iv) 
 
PART-I 
 
CHAPTER I REPORT………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government……………………………………… 
 
25 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………… 
 
88 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration……..  
 
89 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited …… 
90 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on 
06.08.2026 
91 
  

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2025-26)@ 
   Dr. C.M. Ramesh   - Chairperson 
                MEMBERS 
    LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Shri T. R. Baalu 
5. Shri Ummeda Ram Beniwal 
6. Shri Chhotelal 
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
11. Shri Khagen Murmu 
12. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
13. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
14. Shri Sudama Prasad 
15. Shri M K Raghavan 
16. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
17. Dr. Swami Sachidanand Hari Sakshi 
18. Dr. Bhola Singh 
19. Shri Bharatbhai Manubhai Sutariya 
20. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
21. Shri Vijayakumar Alias Vijay Vasanth 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Dr. Alka Gurjar$ 
23. Shri Rajendra Hiralal Jain$ 
24. Shri Mansoor Ali Khan$ 
25. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
26. Shri Upendra Kushwaha# 
27. Dr. K. Laxman 
28. Shri Khiru Mahto 
29. Shri Dilip Kumar Ray$ 
30. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
31. Smt. Sadhna Singh 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
@ Constituted w.e.f. 26.09.2025 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 3290 dated 01.10.2025. 
* Dr. Fauzia Khan retired w.e.f. from 02.04.2026.  
# Shri Upendra Kushwaha retired w.e.f. 09.04.2026 and renominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026. 
^ Shri Narhari Amin and Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki retired w.e.f. 21.06.026. 
$ Dr. Alka Gurjar, Shri Rajendra Hiralal Jain & Shri Dilip Kumar Ray nominated to the 
Committee, and Shri Mansoor Ali Khan nominated vice Shri Mukul Wasnik, w.e.f. 23.07.2026 
(LS Bulletin Part II No. 5724 dated 24.07.2026). 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam  - Director 
3. Smt. Savdha Kalia  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)  

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (202 5-26), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Tenth Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants (2026 -2027) of 
the Ministry of Railways’. 
 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha 
on 10.03.2026.  The Report contained 17 Observations/Recommendations. The 
Ministry of Railways furnished Action Taken Notes on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report on 03.07.2026. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 06.08.2026.  The minutes of the sitting are given in Annexure. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
New Delhi; DR. C.M. RAMESH 
06 August, 2026________ Chairperson 
15 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
  

1 
 
 CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighth Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of Railways’.  
 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                   
10th March, 2026 . It contained 1 7 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:- 
Rec. Para Nos. 1 to 17 
                    Chapter-II 
                                      Total: 17 
Percentage:100 
 
(ii) Observations/recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: - 
 
         NIL                   
         Chapter-III 
                            Total: 00 
Percentage:00 
         
(iii) Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: - 
 
 NIL                              
         Chapter-IV 
            Total: 00 
Percentage:00 
 
(iv) Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies are still awaited:  
 
    NIL                   
         Chapter-V
                          Total: 00 
Percentage:00 
 

2 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report be 
furnished to them at the earliest but not later than three months of the presentation 
of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier Observations/ 
Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further comments. 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
EXTRA BUDGETARY RESOURCES (EBR)  
5. The Committee observe d that resource generation through Extra Extra 
Budgetary Resources (Public Private Partnership) over the past few years has met or 
surpassed the targets . The Committee note d that internal revenue generation has 
remained largely stagnant in recent years, necessitating reliance on GBS in addition to 
EBR for financing ongoing and expansion projects.  While appreciating the Ministry 
for having exercised financial prudence by limiting borrowings under EBR in order to 
avoid additional lease liabilities and priorit izing GBS to augment capacity without 
increasing repayment burdens , the Committee recommend ed the Ministry to adopt a 
calibrated and project-specific approach towards PPP-based investments, ensuring that 
critical and capacity-enhancement projects are not delayed due to funding constraints. 
The Committee note d and appreciate d the renewed focus of Indian railways on 
attracting private investments via different models, the results of which shall be visible 
in coming years. The Committee therefore desire d the Ministry to identify 
commercially viable and revenue-generating projects for private participation, explore 
the feasibility of evolving appropriate risk -sharing mechanisms to safeguard the 
interests of private investors, and streamline approval and regulatory processes to attract 
credible private investment.  
 

3 
 
6. In their Action Taken Replies furnished to the Committee , the Ministry of 
Railways have stated as follows: 
Ministry of Railways has formulated a Participative Policy, 2012 to encourage 
the private participation in developing rail connectivity by associating strategic partners 
and other investors. The policy encompasses five Public Private Partnership models 
such as Non -Government Rail (NGR), Joint Venture (JV), Customer funded model, 
BOT and BOT-annuity models. State Governments/Local bodies may also participate 
as potential stakeholder for the development of new lines/gauge conversion project 
under the participative policy of MoR. Realizing the need to attract more PPP projects 
in the railways, the Board has decided to add two more models, i.e. Development 
Partner (DPM) and Hybrid Annuity (HAM). 
So far, 18 projects of Rs. 16,686 crore have been completed through PPP model. 
7 projects of Rs.16,362 crore are under implementation including coal connectivity and 
port connectivity projects. 
Further, Ministry of Railways has included 54 projects in the PPP Project 
Pipeline for execution under PPP mode. The details of the projects areas under. 
 
S.N. Name of Project TPC (₹ 
Cr) 
Project 
Status 
Likely Bid 
1 Godda–Pakur/Nagarnabi new 
line (ER) 
4,165 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
2 Haridaspur–Paradip doubling 
(ECoR) 
2,281 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q2) 
3 Shivpur–Kathautia doubling 
(ECR) 
717 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q3) 
4 Balaram–Putagadia–Tentuloi 
new line (ECoR) 
1,404 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q2) 
5 Luburi–Tentuloi–Budhapank 
new line (ECoR) 
3,943 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
6 Tikiri–Kutrumali new line 
(ECoR) 
1,151 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
7 Surat (Gothangam)–Hazira 
new line (WR) 
2,553 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
8 Manuguru–Ramagundam 
new line (SCR) 
4,014 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q3) 
9 Jajpur–Keonjhar Road–
Dhamra Port new line 
(ECoR) 
2,987 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 

4 
 
10 Guntakal–Wadi 3rd & 4th 
line (SCR) 
4,364 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
11 Guntakal–Ballari 3rd & 4th 
line (SCR) 
1,264 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q3) 
12 Hospete–Ballari 3rd & 4th 
line (SWR) 
2,150 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
13 Cuttack–Badabanda 3rd & 
4th line (ECoR) 
2,285 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
14 Gamaria–Chandil 3rd & 4th 
line (SER) 
1,167 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
15 Angul–Sukinda doubling 
(ECoR) 
1,626 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
16 Gadchiroli–Sirpur new line 
(SECR) 
4,342 DPR under 
preparation 
2028-29 (Q3) 
17 Itarsi–Manikpur 3rd line 
(WCR) 
9,562 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
18 Champa–Korba 3rd line 
(SECR) 
755 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
19 Gondia–Nagpur 4th line 
(SECR) 
3,838 DPR under 
preparation 
2028-29 (Q4) 
20 Uslapur–Pendra Rd 3rd line 
(SECR) 
1,279 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
21 Adilabad–Gadchandur new 
line (SCR) 
979 DPR under 
preparation 
2028-29 (Q4) 
22 Bhadrak–Haridaspur 4th line 
(ECoR) 
1,583 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q2) 
23 Haridaspur–Vizianagaram 
4th line (ECoR) 
8,321 DPR under 
preparation 
2028-29 (Q3) 
24 Surendranagar–Pipavav 
doubling 
4,000 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q3) 
25 Vijayawada Station 
Redevelopment 
742 Bid invited Nov-25 
26 Avadi Station 
Redevelopment 
127 DPR under 
preparation 
May-26 
27 Tambaram Station 
Redevelopment 
420 DPR under 
preparation 
Jun-26 
28 Andheri Station 
Redevelopment 
1,057 DPR under 
preparation 
Nov-26 
29 Bengaluru Station 
Redevelopment 
850 DPR under 
preparation 
Dec-26 
30 Kalyan Station 
Redevelopment 
504 DPR under 
preparation 
Feb-27 
31 Chennai Central Station 
Redevelopment 
500 DPR under 
preparation 
Apr-27 

5 
 
32 Dadar Station 
Redevelopment 
400 DPR under 
preparation 
Mar-27 
33 Coimbatore Station 
Redevelopment 
400 DPR under 
preparation 
Dec-26 
34 Bhopal Station 
Redevelopment 
400 DPR under 
preparation 
Feb-27 
35 Vadodara Station 
Redevelopment 
300 DPR under 
preparation 
Jun-27 
36 Gati Shakti Cargo Terminals 
(65 locations) 
4,550 IPA given 2025-26 
37 Gati Shakti Cargo Terminals 
(50 locations) 
3,675 IPA given 2026-27 
38 Gati Shakti Cargo Terminals 
(40 locations) 
3,086 IPA given 2027-28 
39 Wagon induction – private 
(50 rakes) 
1,100 In progress 2025-26 
40 Wagon induction – private 
(40 rakes) 
924 Pre-DPR 2026-27 
41 Wagon induction – private 
(30 rakes) 
728 Pre-DPR 2027-28 
42 Container rakes – private (36 
rakes) 
576 In progress 2025-26 
43 Container rakes – private (30 
rakes) 
480 Pre-DPR 2026-27 
44 Container rakes – private (25 
rakes) 
400 Pre-DPR 2027-28 
45 Manufacturing of 100 
MEMU rakes, Kazipet 
8,200 Pre-DPR Mar-27 
46 Locomotive mega 
maintenance depots (8) 
9,600 Pre-DPR Dec-27 
47 Trainset maintenance depots 
(7) 
21,000 Pre-DPR Dec-27 
48 Wagon maintenance depots 
(16) 
6,400 Pre-DPR Dec-27 
49 1000 MW RTC Renewable 
Power 
20,000 Bids finalised Dec-25 
50 800 MW Solar Power 
Madhogarh & Orai 
4,800 Bids to be 
invited 
Mar-26 
51 500 MW Solar Power 
Pavagada 
3,000 400 MW 
commissioned  
PPA May-22 
52 800 MW Thermal Power 
Nabinagar 
10,900 Pre-DPR Jun-27 
53 400 MW Hydro Power 
Anjaw 
4,800 Pre-DPR Dec-26 

6 
 
54 Budget Hotel at Kevadia, 
Gujarat 
53 Bid finalised Construction 
in progress 
 TOTAL 1,80,703  
 
 
7.  The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry to broaden 
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) models through the introduction of the 
Development Partner Model (DPM) and Hybrid Annuity Model (HAM), in 
addition to the existing PPP frameworks and note the inclusion of various projects 
in the PPP Project Pipeline, reflecting sustained efforts to enhance private sector 
participation in railway infrastructure. The Committee are of the view that these 
initiatives have the potential to significantly au gment investment  to support 
capacity expansion across the railway network. However, the Committee reiterate 
the need to streamline and simplify approval and regulatory processes and to 
evolve balanced risk -sharing mechanisms that strengthen investor confidence 
while safeguard ing the long -term financial interests of Indian Railways. The 
Committee, therefore, feel the need to establish a dedicated monitoring framework 
for timely resolution of contractual, regulatory, financial and implementation -
related bottlenecks so that projects progress as per schedule. The Ministry may 
consider to undertake periodic and model-specific evaluation of the performance 
of various PPP models, identify best practices emerging from successful projects, 
and suitably incorporate such practices across other PPP models to improve their 
commercial viability and overall effectiveness in mobilising private investment.  
The Committee also emphasize the need  to encourage greater participation of 
State Governments and Local Bodies in the dev elopment of new lines and gauge 
conversion projects under the participative policy of the Ministry of Railways. As 
these entities have a shared interest in regional development  rather than purely 
commercial viability therefore their involvement shall facilitate resolution of issues 
relating to land acquisition, statutory clearances and utility shifting, thereby 
contributing to the timely execution of such projects. 
 
 
 

7 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
EXPENDITURE AND OPERATING RATIO (OR)  
8. The Committee note d that the revenue expenditure of Indian Railways has 
increased substantially over the years. However, the Committee appreciate d the 
proactive steps being taken by Indian railway by adopting the two-pronged approach of 
increasing revenue and reducing expenditure and recommend ed that sustained efforts 
be made to reduce Ordinary Working Expenses by promoting energy efficiency, 
expanding the use of predictive and technology -driven maintenance systems including 
AI system to minimize repair and breakdown costs, and strengthening skill development 
initiatives to enhance workforce productivity and operational efficiency. The 
Committee further observed that the Railways have taken several initiatives to improve 
the Operating Ratio. The Committee also note d that from the year 2022 -23, the  
Railways Operating Ratio has continuously been above 98% besides showing an 
upward trend. Therefore, the Committee desired the Ministry to boost freight revenue 
through better utilization of DFCs and expansion into non -bulk cargo, strengthening 
non-fare revenue through structured asset monetization, station redevelopment and 
commercial use of railway land. The Committee empha sized timely completion of 
capacity augmentation projects to avoid cost overruns and need for linking capital 
investment to measurabl e revenue outcomes to ensure sustainable financial 
improvement. 
 
9. In their Action Taken Replies furnished to the Committee , the Ministry of 
Railways have stated as follows: 
“1. Measures to increase freight revenue and traffic revenue : To increase the 
revenue, the following measures have been taken to increase capacity and hence 
revenue: 
• Removing bottlenecks in operations by yard remodelling, construction of bypass/ 
chord lines, rail flyovers etc. 
• The construction of two Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFC) viz. Eastern 
Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) from Ludhiana to Sonnagar (1337 Km) and 

8 
 
the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) from Jawaharlal Nehru Port 
Terminal (JNPT) to Dadri (1506 Km). The work on both EDFC and WDFC has 
been completed. 
• Indian Railways has taken up electrification of Railway lines in a mission mode. 
So far, about 99.4% of Broad Gauge (BG) network has been electrified.  
• Procurement of Wagons and Locomotives: To increase freight carrying capacity, 
large numbers of IR wagons have been procured and locomotives have been 
manufactured. During 2014 to 2025, about 2 lakh wagons have been procured 
and more than 10,000 locomotiv es have been added for increasing freight 
loading and mobility. 
• Industry participation in investment in General Purpose Wagons, Special 
Purpose/High-Capacity wagons and Automobile carrier wagons for cement, oil, 
steel, fly -ash, automobile etc. So far, around 250 rakes of special purpose 
wagons, 385 rakes of general -purpose wagons and 51 rakes of automobile 
wagons have been inducted. 
• Policy on Bulk Cement Handling Terminals: A dedicated policy has been issued 
to promote bulk movement of cement through rail by facilitating development of 
specialized terminals and deployment of suitable wagons. This is expected to 
improve logistics eff iciency, reduce handling costs, and enhance rail share in 
cement transportation. 
• For asset monetisation, the Gati Shakti Multi -Modal Cargo Terminal (GCT) 
Policy has been launched to promote private participation in development of 
cargo terminals. So far, 128 GCTs have been commissioned and further in -
principle approvals (IPAs) for 292 more locations have been given. 
• Development of cargo related facilities on Railway land: Long -term leasing (25 
years, extendable up to 50 years) of spare railway land has been permitted for 
development of logistics infrastructure such as warehouses, processing units, and 
aggregation facilities through a competitive bidding process. This enables better 
asset utilisation and generates non -fare revenue. The guidelines have been 
framed under schedule ‘3’ of GCT Policy.  

9 
 
• Rail Parcel App: An app-based platform for Railways’ parcel logistics has been 
launched by South Central Railway on 25.02.2026, on pilot project basis at 17 
locations across 7 cities viz. Hyderabad, Vishakhapatnam, Vijaywada, Guntur, 
Rajahmundry, Bengaluru & Chennai, for a period of 01 year from the date of 
implementation. The app enables a seamless, end -to-end service by delivery 
partners through online booking and digital payments at the convenience of the 
customers obviating the need of bringing the pa rcels physically to the Railway 
premises and the associated paper work. It is further planned to introduce the 
App on pan-India basis shortly. 
• Door-to-Door services - CONCOR, a PSU under Ministry of Railways is also 
providing Door-to-Door parcel services by utilizing the JPP -RCS over Delhi -
Kolkata and Mumbai -Kolkata sectors.  CONCOR is also providing Door -to-
Door logistics under a pilot project at Sonik Goods shed. 
• Ensuring increased availability of rakes/wagons against demand. 
• Use of Information Technology in freight operations to improve monitoring and 
utilization of assets. 
• Induction of higher horse power locomotives. 
• Improvement in maintenance practices of wagons and locomotives resulting in 
increased availability of loco and rolling stock for traffic use. 
• Improvement in track and signalling standards to carry higher volume of traffic. 
• Training of staff and officers to adopt the new technology and management 
practices. 
• Commercial development of vacant railway land by RLDA. 
As a result of all these measures, Railways achieved a loading of 1668 MT in 
2025-26 thus becoming 2nd largest freight carrier railway in the world. 
Various steps have been taken to increase non -fare revenue of Indian Railways, 
such as entrustment of Integrated Station Facility Management (ISFM) to RLDA and 
Zonal Railways at re -developed stations for improved station management, 
identification and optimum utilization of Out of Home Advertisement (OOHA) and Rail 
Display Network (RDN) Assets, allowing Zonal Railways to set up Premium Brand 
Outlets, awarding of various new innovative contracts by Zonal Railways under New, 

10 
 
Innovative Non-Fare Revenue Ideas Scheme (NINFRIS), etc. Railways earned Rs. 712 
cr from Advertisement and Publicity in 2025-26. 
In addition to the above, Indian Railways is also undertaking concerted efforts 
to enhance non-fare revenue through monetization of land assets, primarily via the Rail 
Land Development Authority (RLDA). Key initiatives include optimal utilization of 
railway land through integrated master planning of railway colonies, identification of 
surplus land parcels for commercial development and redevelopment of railway stations 
by leveraging built-up area and airspace. 
Further, planning approaches such as Transit Oriented Development (TOD) and 
development of Multi -Modal Transport Hubs (MMTH) are being adopted, wherever 
feasible, to unlock additional development potential and enhance commercial viability 
of projects. 
Efforts are also being made to identify land parcels with high commercial 
potential and to structure projects in a manner that attracts private sector participation 
through transparent and competitive processes, while ensuring long -term value 
realization for Indian Railways. In addition, policy frameworks and approval processes 
have been streamlined to facilitate faster implementation of such projects. 
These initiatives are aimed at sustainable and market -driven enhancement of 
non-fare revenue, in alignment with the objective of optimal assets utilization and 
revenue generation for Indian Railways. By virtue of these efforts, Railways earned Rs. 
2763 cr. from land related items in 2025 -26 and Railways Sundry revenue (Non -Fare 
Revenue) has increased to Rs. 12388.73 cr. in 2025-26 which was only Rs. 6067.96 cr. 
in 2021-22. 
To improve Operating Ratio and Net Revenue, Railway is also taking various 
steps to optimize revenue expenditure as given below:- 
• Rigorous monitoring of expenditure w.r.t. the monthly budget proportions based 
on Spending Limits.  
• Optimizing expenditure in areas such as contractual payment, overtime 
allowance, purchase of material etc. 
• Progressive electrification and reduction in expenditure under HSD oil, 
optimizing the fuel consumption, Energy Audit, etc. 

11 
 
• Improvement in inventory management 
• Prioritization of expenditure on works for better use of available resources. 
• Better asset utilization. 
• Improving staff productivity by better man-power planning. 
Due to the above measures, Indian Railway generated a surplus of Rs. 2,461 cr. 
(provisional) in 2025-26 after meeting all the operational expenditure including pension 
and Operating Ratio was 98.31% against RE target of 98.82%. 
Skill Development Initiatives :  Indian Railways have taken several measures to 
enhance work productivity, motivation and professional competencies of railway 
employees through structured capacity building and advanced training. Capacity 
building and skill upgradation are continuous and institutionalized processes supported 
by a well-established training framework across Indian Railways. 
2.  Indian Railways have developed a comprehensive training ecosystem providing 
training interventions at various stages of the career to ensure skilling, re -skilling and 
up-skilling of employees. For this purpose, extensive training infrastructure has been 
created in the form of Centralised Training Institutes (CTIs), Multi -disciplinary Zonal 
Training Institutes (MDZTIs), Multi -disciplinary Divisional Training Institutes 
(MDDTIs) and specialised training centres, which conduct induction, refresher, 
promotional and technical training programmes at different stages of service. 
3.  Training modules are designed to strengthen employees’ competencies and 
equip railway personnel with the skills required for modern, technology -intensive 
railway operations. These modules are also periodically updated to incorporate new 
technologies in railway operations and maintenance. 
4.  Specialised initiatives such as the Centre of Excellence on Kavach at IRISET, 
courses on emerging technologies (including Data Science, AI applications, Big Data 
Analytics, Block chain, and Cloud Computing, etc.) in collaboration with C -DAC, and 
Mission Rail Karmayogi for behavioural and service -orientation training of frontline 
staff further contribute to improving productivity and efficiency. Employees are also 
encouraged to undertake online learning through digital platforms such as the 
iGOTKarmayogi por tal for continuous up -skilling and re -skilling. In addition, 
motivational and wellness initiatives, including yoga sessions, physical fitness activities 

12 
 
2024/E(Trg)/41/18 I/3152869/2026 and stress -management programmes during 
training and at workplaces, are promoted to enhance employee well-being and morale. 
5.  Through sustained investment in people and infrastructure, IR is always 
committed to develop a skilled, adaptive, and technology -driven workforce capable of 
meeting the growing demands of safe, efficient, and modern railway operations.” 
 
10.  The Committee note the comprehensive measures initiated by the Ministry 
to augment freight and non -fare revenue, optimize expenditure, expand capacity 
through Dedicated Freight Corridors and cargo terminals, asset monetization and 
commercialization of railway land, besides strengthening workforce skills through 
various capacity-building programmes. The Committee also note that these 
measures have enabled Indian Railways to achieve an Operating Ratio, marginally 
better than the revised estimate  of the y ear 2025 -26. While appreciating these 
efforts, the Committee observe that the Operating Ratio continues to remain at a 
relatively high level, indicating the need for sustained improvement in operational 
efficiency and financial performance. The Committee, therefore, emphasize the 
need to explore the feasibility to develop a zone -wise and business -segment-wise 
performance monitoring framework  with clearly defined annual targets for 
freight and traffic revenue , energy consumption, asset utilization and non -fare 
revenue generation, so that best -performing practices can be identified and 
replicated across the railway network. The Ministry may consider to 
institutionalize periodic outcome assessment of major capacity augmentation and 
asset monetization initiatives, including Dedicated Freight Corridors, Gati Shakti 
Cargo Terminals and station redevelopment projects, to evaluate whether the 
anticipated traff ic, revenue and efficiency gains are being realized and to take 
timely corrective measures wherever required. The Ministry may also consider to 
take concerted measures to enhance industry participation in investment across 
various types of wagons and expedite the completion of Gati Shakti Multi -Modal 
Cargo Terminals for which in-principle approvals have already been granted. The 
Committee are o f the view that timely implementation of these initiatives would 
facilitate a sustainable reduction in the Operating Ratio over the coming years. 

13 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
NEW RAILWAY LINES 
11. The Committee commend ed Indian Railways for the successful completion of 
the Udhampur–Srinagar–Baramulla Rail Link (272 km), providing seamless and all -
weather connectivity to the Kashmir Valley and the Bhairabi –Sairang (51.38 km) line 
connecting Aizawl in Mizoram, thereby stren gthening national integration and 
providing access to remote regions. While acknowledging that projects are executed 
zone-wise and obtaining necessary clearances along with timely land acquisition by 
State Governments is a critical factor, the Committee re commended a structured 
mechanism incorporating improved project planning and monitoring, parallel 
processing of approvals and clearances, prioritization of high -impact connectivity 
projects, focused execution of corridors with economic impact and seamless financing  
to ensure timely completion/achievement of targets established. The Ministry may also 
study the applicability of the model of National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) 
on project execution and PPP models in planning and undertaking key railway projects 
for new tracks including Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFCs) and High -Speed Rail 
corridors.  The Committee further desired the Ministry to adopt a targeted and scientific 
approach for systematic consideration of proposals for new railway lines received from 
State Governments, Central Ministries, public representatives, as well as those arising 
from Railways own operational re quirements. While examining such proposals, due 
weightage may be accorded to factors such as traffic projections, bridging of missing 
links, provision of alternate routes and augmentation of congested or saturated 
corridors. 
 
12. In their Action Taken Replies furnished to the Committee , the Ministry of 
Railways have stated as follows: 
“Capacity enhancement of railway network has been taken up by Indian 
Railways in a big way during last 11 years. The details of commissioning/laying of new 
track across Indian Railways is given below:- 
 

14 
 
Period New track Commissioned Average commissioning of new tracks 
2009-14 7,599 Km 4.2 Km/day 
2014-25 34,428 Km 8.6 Km/day (more than 2 times) 
  
As on 01.04.2025, across Indian Railways, 431 Railway infrastructure projects (154 
New Line, 33 Gauge Conversion and 244 Doubling) of total length 35,966 Km, 
costing approx. ₹6.75 lakh crore are sanctioned. The summary is as under:- 
Category No of 
Projects 
Total 
Length 
NL/GC/DL 
(km) 
Length 
Commissioned 
till Mar’25 
(Km) 
Total Exp upto 
Mar’25 
(₹in Crore) 
New Lines 154 16,142 3,036 1,45,318 
Gauge 
Conversion 33 4,180 2,997 22,753 
Doubling / 
Multitracking 244 15,644 6,736 1,22,858 
Total 431 35,966 12,769 2,90,929 
  
For monitoring of sanctioned projects, Indian Railways has developed a portal - 
Indian Railways Projects Sanctions & Management (IRPSM). Regular data feeding on 
IRPSM is ensured for close monitoring of projects. Integration of IRPSM with other 
portals such as PMG, IIG etc . through APIs has also been taken up to ensure single 
source of data entry and improve reliability of project monitoring. 
  Completion of Railway projects depends on various factors which include the 
following:  
• Land acquisition by State Government 
• Forest clearance  
• Shifting of infringing utilities 
• Statutory clearances from various authorities  
• Geological and topographical conditions of area 
• Law and order situation in the area of project site 
• Number of working months in a year for particular project site etc. 
All these factors affect the completion time and cost of the projects. 

15 
 
Various steps taken by the Government for effective and speedy implementation 
of rail projects include:  
• Substantial increase in allocation of funds. 
• Delegation of powers at field level. 
• Close monitoring of progress of project at various levels. 
• Regular follow up with State Governments and concerned authorities for 
expeditious land acquisition, forestry and Wildlife clearances and for resolving 
other issues pertaining to projects. 
 
13.  The Committee note the substantial progress made by the Ministry in 
expanding the railway network, with commissioning of new tracks at an 
accelerated pace .  The Committee further note  the development of the Indian 
Railways Projects Sanctions & Management (IRPSM) portal for improved 
monitoring of infrastructure projects. The Committee also note the various 
administrative measures undertaken by the Ministry, including enhanced 
budgetary support, delegation of powers to field units, close monitoring of projects 
and regular coordination with State Governments for expeditious land acquisition 
and statutory clearances. The Committee are of the view that every major railway 
project requires to be monitored through clearly defined parameters covering land 
acquisition, statutory and forest clearances, tendering, execution and 
commissioning. The Ministry may consider to leverage  IRPSM portal to identify 
projects facing persistent bottlenecks and bring them under a dedicated 
monitoring mechanism involving periodic coordination with the concerned State 
Governments and concerned authorities to ensure timely resolution of issues. The 
Ministry may also consider to undertake post-commissioning evaluation of major 
new line and multitracking projects to assess the realization of projected traffic, 
revenue generation  and regional connectivity, and to utilize the findings for 
improving project planning, prioritization and execution of future railway new 
line and multitracking projects. 
 
 

16 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
REDEVELOPMENT OF RAILWAY STATIONS 
 
14. The Committee note d that the Ministry of Railways have launched the Amrit 
Bharat Station Scheme for phased redevelopment of railway stations across the country 
under which 1,337 stations have been identified and 172 stations have been completed 
while work is in progress at 1 ,072 stations.  The Committee desire d that station 
redevelopment works be implemented in a phased manner under a structured project 
monitoring framework for each station, incorporating physical and financial progress 
tracking, periodic field inspections, r eporting of shortfalls against prescribed targets, 
identification of underlying causes, and time -bound corrective measures. The 
Committee further emphasised the establishment of robust institutional mechanisms to 
prevent cost overruns and avoidable delays through improved project planning and 
inter-agency coordination.  The Committee also recommend ed that comprehensive 
traffic management plans and stringent safety protocols be mandatorily implemented to 
ensure minimal disruption to passenger movement and tr ain operations during the 
construction phase.  Further, the Committee underscore d the need for periodic 
assessment of passenger satisfaction and post -redevelopment impact evaluation, 
particularly with regard to amenities, accessibility, cleanliness and safety standards. The 
Committee also recommend ed that feedback and grievance redressal mechanisms be 
formed as an integral part of the station redevelopment process to ensure continuous 
improvement. The Committee further recommend ed that station redevelopment  plans 
be based on assessment of passenger traffic patterns, projected demand and future 
growth potential of the city or region concerned, so as to ensure that the upgraded 
infrastructure remains scalable, demand-responsive and aligned with local development 
needs. 
 
15. In their Action Taken Replies furnished to the Committee , the Ministry of 
Railways have stated as follows: 
“Ministry of Railways has launched Amrit Bharat Station Scheme for 
redevelopment of stations with a long-term approach. The scheme involves preparation 

17 
 
of master plans and their implementation in a phased manner to improve the amenities 
at the stations keeping in view the necessity at each station with a horizon of 40 to 60 
years. The scheme envisages sustainable and environment friendly solutions, provision 
of ballastless tracks etc. as per necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city 
centre at the station in the long term. 
  So far, 1340 stations have been identified for development under this scheme 
and works have been completed at 208 stations and works are in progress at 1046 
stations. 
Indian Railways has a well  established and robust mechanism to monitor 
implementation of projects including their reviews, inspection, check for quality of 
works and audits. Works are carried out adhering to the standards and specifications 
laid down in various codes and manuals. Inspections/audits/checks are carried out from 
time to time by various agencies/officials/multi -disciplinary teams as per laid down 
instructions and actions for correction are taken immediately. This is a continuous and 
ongoing process. 
Under the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, Indian Railways is adopting a phased, 
passenger-centric redevelopment strategy to address space constraints, utility shifting, 
and operational continuity at brownfield stations. Holistic master planning of station 
estate and functional zoning ensures efficient use of railway land. Detailed utility 
mapping and advance diversion planning are undertaken in coordination with local 
agencies to avoid service disruptions. Construction is executed in carefully sequenced 
phases so that train operations and essential passenger amenities remain functional. 
Temporary facilities, clear signage, and crowd management measures are deployed to 
minimize inconvenience during the redevelopment period with necessary safety 
measures. 
Suggestions / Representations, both formal and informal, for Railway projects / 
works across the country are received on the basis of demands raised by State 
Governments, Members of Parliament, Ministries of Central Government, elected 
representatives, Railways' own requirements, organizations / rail users etc., at various 

18 
 
levels including Railway Board, Zonal Railways, Division Office etc. Receipt of such 
suggestions / representations is a continuous and dynamic process and these are 
examined and action as found feasible and justified is taken from time to time. Amrit 
Bharat Station Scheme envisages development with a long term approach. Accordingly, 
various requirements of each station are analysed while preparing the master plans and 
appropriate planning and phasing of works are done. 
  Further, development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations 
on Indian Railways is a continuous and ongoing process and works in this regard are 
undertaken as per requirement, subject to inter -se priority and availability of funds. 
Development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of a station is carried out 
based on category of station / condition / traffic handled etc. 
  Development / Upgradation of railway stations is complex in nature involving 
safety of passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances such as fire 
clearance, heritage, tree cutting, airport clearance etc. The progress also gets affected 
due to brownfield related challenges such as shifting of utilities (involving 
water/sewage lines, optical fibre cables, gas pipe lines, power/signal cables, etc.), 
infringements, operation of trains without hindering passenger movement, speed 
restrictions due to works carried out in close proximity of tracks and high voltage power 
lines, etc. and these factors affect the completion time. 
  Cleanliness is a continuous process and every endeavour is made to keep the 
stations premises in properly maintained and clean condition. Various measures have 
been taken for passenger satisfaction and grievance redressal regarding cleanliness at 
stations which includes: 
• Rail Madad portal has been developed to enable passengers to highlight their 
needs and seek assistance on passenger amenities, cleanliness, security etc, on 
mobile app or through SMS irrespective of class of travel.  In Rail Madad, 
passengers can seek redressal through multiple channels such as Helpline 
number-139, RailMadad Web, App and SMS. Further, feedback of cleanliness 
is also taken through Rail Madad portal which is real time passenger grievance 
redressal mechanism. 

19 
 
• Passenger awareness campaigns are regularly conducted across Indian Railways 
for encouraging them to dispose garbage in dustbins provided in trains & 
stations. 
• Regular inspections are conducted at Divisional level, HQ level and Railway 
Board Level for monitoring cleanliness at stations and suitable measures are 
taken to address the shortcomings.” 
 
16.  The Committee note the progress made under the Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme and the long -term and phased approach of the Ministry towards station 
redevelopment, supported by master planning, structured execution, quality 
monitoring, passenger facilitation and grievance redressal mechanism. The 
Committee also note that redevelopment works are being undertaken while 
maintaining train operations and essential passenger amenities despite the 
challenges associated with utility shifting. The Committee further note that works 
are carried out in accordance with the standards and specifications prescribed in 
various codes and manuals. However, the Committee are of the view that these 
codes and manuals should be reviewed periodically and revised, wherever 
necessary, to align with evolving requirements in a timely manner. The Ministry 
may consider to develop a station performance assessment framework for all 
redeveloped stations, incorporating measurable indicators such as passenger 
footfall, utilization of passenger amenities, accessibility for persons with 
disabilities, cleanliness standards, commercial space occupancy, maintenance and 
passenger feedback. The Committee urge the Ministry that assessment emerging 
from stations where redevelopment has been completed be systematically 
documented and disseminated  as standard practices for ongoing and future 
projects. The Committee also emphasize the need  to strengthen integration of 
redeveloped stations with local transport systems and city infrastructure through 
regular coordination with State Governments and local bodies so that the optimum 
benefits of station redevelopment are realized in terms of seamless passenger 
mobility, improved connectivity and enhanced commercial potential. 
 

20 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
RAIL FREIGHT STRATEGY UNDER THE NATIONAL RAIL PLAN 
17. The Committee noted that Gati Shakti Multi Modal Cargo terminal policy issued 
in December, 2021 and subsequently revised in December, 2022 and January, 2026, 
provides framework for development of rail freight terminals equipped with modern 
facilities including mechanized handling. The Committee further noted that in order to 
improve the efficiency of rail freight handling at the terminals, Indian Railway has 
adopted two-pronged approach of encouraging private sector to develop the modern rail 
freight terminals and augmenting/upgrading the infrastructure at railway owned goods 
sheds. While appreciating these efforts, the Committee recommend ed the Ministry to 
accord higher priority to increasing rail’s modal share in freight through creation of an 
extensive and commercially viable network of privately operated and railway-supported 
GCTs. The Committee further recommend ed simplification and standardization of 
siding approval procedures, along with ensuring time -bound rail connectivity from the 
nearest railhead to upcoming terminals. From an operational perspective, the 
Committee emphasize d the need for technology -driven mechanized loading and 
unloading systems, assured and predictable rake supply and seamless multimodal 
integration with ports and major road corridors to reduce dwell time and enhance 
reliability of freight movement. The Comm ittee also recommend ed instituting a 
performance-based monitoring framework for terminals, incorporating measurable 
indicators such as turnaround time, rake availability and utilization, degree of 
mechanization, safety compliance and customer satisfaction, so that the policy not only 
expands infrastructure capacity but also leads to higher freight earnings and improved 
asset utilization. 
 
18. In their Action Taken Replies furnished to the Committee , the Ministry of 
Railways have stated as follows:  
“The recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee have been examined in light of the 
revised Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal Policy and introduction of Cargo Related Facilities 
Policy. Railways concur with the need to enhance rail's modal share and have 

21 
 
incorporated several enabling provisions in revised GCT policy including extension of 
concession period up to 50 years, simplified migration of existing terminals, 
redevelopment of underutilized Railway assets, and streamlined connectivity with 
defined cost-sharing mechanisms. Delegation of powers to DRMs and rationalization 
of procedures have further simplified siding approvals and ensured faster, time -bound 
connectivity.  
The policy also emphasizes development of modern, mechanized terminals, 
multimodal integration, and improved operational efficiency through expanded 
Common User Facilities and flexibility in value -added services. Introduction of CRF 
framework enables devel opment of logistics infrastructure on Railway land with 
Guaranteed Railway Freight, improving first/last -mile connectivity. Performance 
monitoring through measurable indicators, digital systems for traffic assessment, and 
continued focus on rake availabili ty and customer -centric services are expected to 
enhance reliability, reduce dwell time, and improve overall freight earnings and asset 
utilization.” 
 
19.  The Committee note the initiatives taken by the Ministry through the 
revised Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal (GCT) Policy and the Cargo Related Facilities 
(CRF) framework to promote private participation, simplify terminal approvals, 
strengthen rail connectivity and facilitate the development of modern, mechanized 
freight handling infrastructure. The Committee also note the measures taken 
towards delegation of powers, rationalization of procedures, redevelopment of 
railway assets and promotion of multimodal  integration to improve operational 
efficiency and enhance the competitiveness of rail freight. While acknowledging 
these initiatives, the Committee are of the view that their effectiveness should be 
assessed through measurable improvements in freight movement, asset utilization 
and modal shift from road to rail.  Therefore, the Ministry may consider to 
establish a structured monitoring mechanism for periodic commodity -wise and 
corridor-wise assessment of freight traffic handled through Gati Shakti Cargo 
Terminals to facilitate targeted interventions for improving terminal utilization. 
The Ministry may also consider to actively promote the integration of Gati Shakti 

22 
 
Cargo Terminals with industrial corridors, logistics parks, warehousing clusters 
and major production centres to strengthen first and last -mile connectivity and 
develop integrated logistics ecosystems for enhancing rail freight earnings. The 
Committee emphasize the need to ensure adherence to prescribed timelines for 
grant of siding approvals and completion of rail connectivity to upcoming 
terminals, supported by periodic review at the appropriate level to address 
implementation bottlenecks. They may also consider the feasibility of development 
of a digital performance dashboard covering all operational GCTs and CRFs, 
incorporating measurable indicators such as terminal capacity utilization, rake 
turnaround time, rake availability, degree of mechanization, connectivity with 
industrial clusters, ports and major road corridors, safety compliance and 
customer satisfaction. The Committee are of the view that s uch a dashboard may 
serve as a tool for regular performance monitoring and timely corrective 
measures, including capacity augmentation, operational improvements and better 
coordination among all the concerned. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
HIGH SPEED RAIL NETWORK IN INDIA  
 
20. The Committee noted that the cost of the 508 km Mumbai  Ahmedabad High 
Speed Rail (MAHSR) project, approved in 2015 at Rs. 97,636 crore, has increased 
mainly due to taxes and cess, rolling stock and signalling, inflation, and higher land 
acquisition and rehabilitation costs, with the revised estimate under sanction.  The 
Committee further noted that the development of E10 series of Shinkansen is underway. 
The Committee appreciated the decision to start the operation using B28 (Bharat made 
Bullet Trainset) and efforts are underway to start operation using B28 (Bha rat made 
Bullet, 280 kmph) for Surat to Vapi (97 km) in August, 2027. The Committee 
recommended the Ministry to adopt a robust execution framework to ensure effective 
inter-agency coordination, early identification and resolution of bottlenecks, and 
expeditious completion of utility shifting works. While noting the various steps taken 

23 
 
by the Railways under Make in India Initiative in indigenising soft and hard skills 
amongst other innovations, the Committee recommended accelerated indigenisation of 
high speed rail components and institutionalised capacity -building efforts through 
expansion of training programmes at the High Speed Rail Training Institute, Vadodara, 
and by leveraging international expertise. The Committee recommended the Railways 
to undertake a comprehensive study of successful high-speed rail networks in countries 
where such systems are operating efficiently. The Committee appreciated the forward-
looking vision of Indian Railways in announcing new High-Speed Rail corridors in the 
Budget 2026–27 while emphasizing that land acquisition and other statutory clearances 
should be completed prior to the sanctioning of projects, so as to ensure time -bound 
implementation and safeguard financial viability 
 
21. In their Action Taken Replies furnished to the Committee , the Ministry of 
Railways have stated as follows:  
“Presently, the Mumbai -Ahmedabad High Speed Rail (MAHSR) Project (508 
km) is under execution. Entire land (1389.5 Ha.) for MAHSR project has been acquired. 
All Statutory Clearances have been obtained. All 1651 utilities have been shifted. The 
delay in land acquisition in the State of Maharashtra has impacted the project till 2021. 
The land acquisition picked up in 2022 in Maharashtra. The progress of the project is 
in full swing. 
Further, to strengthen national transport infrastructure, provide a fillip to regional 
connectivity, economic growth, tourism, investment and employment generation, and 
encourage modal shift from road and air transport to rail, the Government has 
announced the development of the following seven new High -Speed Rail (HSR) 
corridors in the Union Budget 2026-27: - 
(i) Mumbai–Pune 
(ii) Pune–Hyderabad 
(iii) Hyderabad–Bengaluru 
(iv) Hyderabad–Chennai 
(v) Chennai–Bengaluru 
(vi) Delhi–Varanas 

24 
 
(vii) Varanasi–Siligur 
Updation of cost, alignment etc. in DPRs for the four(04) corridors are underway and 
for remaining three(03) corridors, DPRs are under preparation. 
Being highly capital intensive, the decision to sanction any HSR 
Corridor/Project depends on many factors such as outcome of DPR, techno -economic 
feasibility studies and availability of resources such as financing options etc.” 
22. The Committee note the efforts being made by the Ministry of Railways in 
completion of the Mumbai-Ahmedabad High Speed Rail (MAHSR) Project spread 
over 508 kms. Further the Committee also appreciate the efforts being made to 
strengthen the national transport in frastructure in order to encourage shift from 
road and air transport to rail. However, the Committee may be apprised of the 
efforts being made to accelerate indigenisation of high -speed rail components as 
also capacity -building efforts being undertaken thr ough expansion of training 
programmes at the High -Speed Rail Training Institute, Vadodara, by leveraging 
international expertise. The Committee reiterate the Railways to undertake a 
comprehensive study of successful high -speed rail networks in countries where 
such systems are operating efficiently. The Ministry may like to apprise the 
Committee of the efforts being undertaken for such study for its future High-Speed 
Rail (HSR) corridors as announced in the Union Budget 2026-27. 
 
    
  

25 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
Indian Railways, widely regarded as the backbone of India’s transport system, 
continues to strengthen national connectivity and fuel economic growth through its 
expansive network. The 2026 –27 budget underscores the Government’s firm 
commitment to moderniza tion and expansion, reflecting a strategic focus on 
infrastructure development and long -term sustainability. The annual plan emphasizes 
removal of traffics bottlenecks, capacity augmentation, and safety improvements, with 
major allocations for new lines, d oubling works, track renewals, and significant 
investments in safety works, bridges, and signaling. Overall, a substantial amount has 
been earmarked for capacity augmentation, customer amenities and rolling stock. The 
National Rail Plan envisions a future -ready system with dedicated freight corridors, 
enhanced train speeds, expanded connectivity to industrial hubs, redevelopment of 
1,337 stations, advanced safety systems like KAVACH, elimination of level crossings, 
predictive maintenance, full electrificati on, and net zero carbon emissions by 2030. 
Landmark projects already completed include the Udhampur–Srinagar–Baramulla link 
connecting Kashmir, the Bhairabi–Sairang line linking Mizoram’s capital Aizawl, and 
the New Pamban Bridge, India’s first vertical li ft sea bridge. The Demands for Grants 
for the year 2026 –27 of the Ministry of Railways were tabled in the House on 2 nd 
February, 2026. The Committee thereafter undertook a detailed scrutiny of these 
Demands, examining both revenue and capital provisions in light of the objectives of 
modernization, capacity augmentation, and safety enhancement across the railway 
network. F ollowing its deliberations, the Committee have formulated a set of 
recommendations, which are summarized in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Noted. 

26 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry has set the Annual Plan for the year 2026-
27 at Rs. 2,93,030 crore which is more than the Revised Estimates for 2025 -26 by 
Rs.27,830 crore. This includes Rs. 2,78,030 crore as Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) 
including Rs. 10,000 crore under the Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK). Internal 
Resources contribute Rs. 3000 crore including Rs.1000 crore Railway’s contribution 
for RRSK, while Rs. 12,000 crore comes from Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR).  The 
Committee further note that the focus of the Annual Plan 2026 –27 continues to be on 
expanding, modernizing and enhancing the operational efficiency of railway. 
Accordingly, allocations have been made under key plan heads such as New Lines (Rs. 
36,722 crore), Doubling (Rs. 37,750 crore), Track Renewals (Rs. 22,853 crore), Rolling 
Stock (Rs. 65,497 crore), Safety Works of Level Crossings (Rs. 800 crore), Road 
Over/Under Bridges (Rs. 8,225 crore), Customer Amenities (Rs. 11,972 crore) and 
Signal & Telecom Works (Rs. 7,500 crore) under Budgetary Sources in BE 2026 –27. 
While noting that utilization of the 2025–26 budgetary allocation stands at around 90% 
till January, 2026, the Committee recommend full and optimal utilization of budgetary 
resources and urge the Ministry to ensure timely execution of projects to avoid time and 
cost overruns. The Committee emphasize an adoption of safety first and technology 
driven infrastructure approach. The Committee further recommend that priority be 
accorded to new lines, gauge conversion, doublin g works, and timely completion of 
Dedicated Freight Corridors to ensure expansion of the railway network. Alongside 
these measures, modernization of rolling stock and enhancement of customer amenities 
should remain a key focus. The Committee also emphasize  the need for a forward -
looking approach that integrates sustainability and green initiatives, human resource 
development, urban transport integration, and resource mobilization, while ensuring 
financial sustainability at the core of the annual targets set by Indian Railways. 
Reply of the Government: 
 
1. Capacity enhancement and Safety: The focus of the Government is on 
expeditious completion of projects so that their benefits are reaped at the earliest.  
Projects related to capacity augmentation are one of the important priority areas of 

27 
 
CAPEX. These relate to construction of New Lines, Doubling/Tripling/Multi tracking 
of railway lines, and electrification projects removing bottlenecks in operations by yard 
remodelling, construction of bypass/ chord lines, rail flyovers etc. 
For sanctioning works under this category a corridor based approach has been 
devised under the PM Gati Shakti - National Master Plan for Multi -modal 
Connectivity. These pertain to High Density Network route, Energy Corridor, Port 
Connectivity, Hilly Area &  Border Area Corridors etc. Projects under the specific 
corridors are being sanctioned keeping in view their specific requirement. The 
construction of two Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFC) viz. Eastern Dedicated Freight 
Corridor (EDFC) from Ludhiana to Son nagar (1337 Km) and the Western Dedicated 
Freight Corridor (WDFC) from Jawaharlal Nehru Port Terminal (JNPT) to Dadri (1506 
Km). The work on both EDFC and WDFC has been completed. 
Significant allotment has been made in the key plan heads viz New Lines (Rs. 
36722 crores ), Doubling (Rs. 37750 crore) , Track Renewals (Rs. 22853 crore), 
Rolling Stock (Rs. 65497 crore), Safety works of Level Crossings (Rs. 800 crore), 
Road Over/Under Br idges (Rs. 8225 crore), Customer Amenities (Rs. 11972 crore) 
and Signal & Telecom Works (Rs. 7500 crore) under Budgetary Sources in BE 2026 -
27 to ensure the funds for completion of ongoing projects and to avoid cost and time 
overruns.    The allotment of Rs. 2,65,200 cr. for the FY 2025-26 has been fully utilized.  
Similar efforts will continue in 2026 -27 also where optimum utilization of resources 
and timely completion of project will be ensured. 
The capital expenditure (Capex) on infrastructure in railways has received 
tremendous boost and Gross Budgetary Support has increased to Rs. 2,78,030 cr. in 
2026-27. The fast pace of infrastructure augmentation by IR has been a result of 
substantial increa se in allocation of funds and various steps being taken by the 
Government. Capacity enhancement of Railway network has been taken up by Indian 
Railways in a big way.  
Safety remain a focus area for Ministry of Railways.  Focus will also be on fast 
execution of safety related works of Track Renewal, Bridges and Signalling & 
Telecommunication, including development and installation of advanced technology 
like Kavach. The expenditure on Safety related activities comprises both Revenue and 

28 
 
Capital Segments of Railway Budget. In RE 2025 -26, expenditure on Safety was Rs. 
1,17,693 cr. 
Modernisation of rolling stock is another important focus area for IR. Latest 
technology trainsets like semi-high speed Vande Bharat, Vande Bharat Sleeper trains, 
Amrit Bharat Trains, Namo Bharat Rapid Rail etc. are being manufactured by Indian 
Railways under Rolling Stock Programme. 
Financial Sustainability: Indian Railways meet its revenue expenditure including 
pension expenditure from its own receipts. In the aftermath of Covid, Railway is 
continuously generating surplus after meeting all the revenue expenditure including 
pension expenditure. In 2025-26, Indian Railway generated a surplus of Rs. 2,461 cr. 
(provisional) after meeting all the operational expenditure including pension despite 
the fact that passenger services remain subsidized. 
Human Resource Development: Indian Railways have taken several measures to 
enhance work productivity, motivation and professional competencies of railway 
employees through structured capacity building and advanced training. Capacity 
building and skill upgradation are continuous and institutionalized processes supported 
by a well-established training framework across Indian Railways. 
2.  Indian Railways have developed a comprehensive training ecosystem providing 
training interventions at various stages of the career to ensure skilling, re -skilling and 
up-skilling of employees. For this purpose, extensive training infrastructure has been 
created in the form of Centralised Training Institutes (CTIs), Multi-disciplinary Zonal 
Training Institutes (MDZTIs), Multi -disciplinary Divisional Training Institutes 
(MDDTIs) and specialised training centres, which conduct induction, refresher, 
promotional and technical training programmes at different stages of service. 
3.  Training modules are designed to strengthen employees’ competencies and 
equip railway personnel with the skills required for modern, technology -intensive 
railway operations. These modules are also periodically updated to incorporate new 
technologies in railway operations and maintenance. 
4.  Specialised initiatives such as the Centre of Excellence on Kavach at IRISET, 
courses on emerging technologies (including Data Science, AI applications, Big Data 
Analytics, Block chain, and Cloud Computing, etc.) in collaboration with C-DAC, and 

29 
 
Mission Rail Karmayogi for behavioural and service -orientation training of frontline 
staff further contribute to improving productivity and efficiency. Employees are also 
encouraged to undertake online learning through digital platforms such as the iGOT 
Karmayogi portal for continuous up-skilling and re-skilling. In addition, motivational 
and wellness initiatives, including yoga sessions, physical fitness activities 
2024/E(Trg)/41/18 I/3152869/2026 and stress -management programmes during 
training and at workplaces, are promoted to enhance employee well-being and morale. 
5.  Through sustained investment in people and infrastructure, IR is always 
committed to develop a skilled, adaptive, and technology-driven workforce capable of 
meeting the growing demands of safe, efficient, and modern railway operations. 
Green Initiatives: Indian Railways (IR) is committed for energy conservation and to 
increase energy efficiency. In this direction, some of the measures taken are as follows: 
(a).  Indian Railway's approach covers different aspects of energy efficiency in non-
traction installations which is broadly centered around following: 
(i)  Indian Railways has so far achieved 100% LED lighting across its offices, 
Railway Stations, service buildings and residential colonies, resulting in significant 
energy savings and reduced electricity consumption. The adoption of LED lighting has 
improved illumination quality while contributing to cost efficiency and environmental 
sustainability. 
(ii)  Energy Efficiency in equipment and appliances: Procurement of BEE 5 -Star 
rated appliances, BLDC fans, Variable Frequency Drives, energy efficiency motors 
and pumps along with other energy efficiency measures. 
(iii)  Shunya/Shunya+ compliant Buildings:  All existing buildings having 
connected load more than 30 kW to be made, as far as possible, BEE Shunya/Shunya+ 
label. As a part of this initiative, 106 railway buildings have been awarded the Shunya 
Plus label (Net Positive Energy Buildings) by the Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) 
up to October 2025. In addition, 100 railway buildings have been awarded the Shunya 
label (Net Zero Energy Buildings) by BEE. 
(iv)  Capacity building and awareness: Periodic training of staff on sustainability, 
energy efficiency & renewable technologies to foster an energy-conscious culture. 
(v)  Investment Grade Energy Audit (IGEA):  Conducting Investment Grade 

30 
 
Energy Audit of Railway Buildings by BEE empanelled energy auditors for 
identification of energy efficiency measures and its implementation. 
(b).  Simultaneously, a strong focus has been given on increasing the use of 
renewable energy sources, particularly solar and wind power, through large -scale 
installations, power procurement thereby reducing dependence on conventional energy 
sources. 
(c).  In recognition of its significant achievements in the field of energy 
conservation, Indian Railways has received 11 NECA awards in 2024 and 7 NECA 
awards in 2025 in 3 categories. In addition, 42 Railway Stations and 39 other Railway 
buildings have been cer tified as Green Buildings by CII -IGBC. These awards 
acknowledge the sustained efforts of Indian Railways in adopting energy -efficient 
technologies, promoting renewable energy thereby reinforcing its commitment to 
environmental sustainability and national energy conservation goals. 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee note the persistent shortfall in internal resource generation over 
the past few years. Against the Revised Estimates of Rs. 3000 crore for 2023 –24, the 
actual generation stood at Rs. 2943 crore; for 2024 –25, actual receipts were Rs. 1988 
crore and in 2025–26, Rs. 2028 crore has been realized up to January, 2026 against RE 
of Rs. 3,000 crore. Notwithstanding this trend, the target for internal resource generation 
has been retained at Rs. 3,000 crore at the BE stage for 2026–27. The Committee, while 
appreciating the various measures undertaken to augment internal resources despite 
nearly 90% of expenditure being classified as inelastic and committed, are of the 
considered view that any shortfall in internal resources may compel the Ministry to 
curtail or reallocate budgetary provisions from planned heads. Such adjustments, in 
turn, could adversely impact the timely execution of projects for which allocations were 
originally envisaged, thereby impacting the overall pace of modernization and 
expansion of the railway network. The Committee further observe that inadequate 
internal resource generation increases reliance on Gross Budgetary Support. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend the Ministry to undertake a comprehensive review of all 
potential avenues for resource mobilization , with focused efforts on improving 
operational efficiency, enhancing returns from commercially viable initiatives, 

31 
 
augmenting non-fare revenue and optimization of terminal and logistics infrastructure 
for freight earning.  The Committee note that expanding network capacity, removing 
bottlenecks, developing freight corridors and cargo terminals, and introducing freight -
specific policies are important steps. Improving procurement and maintenance of 
rolling stock, tracks, and signaling is also necessary. These measures should be carried 
out in a time-bound and outcome-oriented manner. Doing so will help Indian Railways 
generate more internal resources which will protect the financial stability of the 
Railways and ensure steady funding for both ongoing projects and future growth 
initiatives. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Capex requirement of Indian Railways is huge considering the funds required 
for infrastructural projects in the entire country. Therefore, Railways are dependent 
mainly on GBS provided by the government for its Capex requirements. With regard to 
concern of the Hon’ble Committee regarding reallocation of funds from various Plan 
heads, it is submitted that there is adequate allocation of funds under GBS for Capex 
under various Plan heads. 
Regarding committed inelastic expenditure, it is submitted that such revenue 
expenditure is met fully from Railways’ internal resources.  However, the below given 
efforts are being made to increase the internal resources on regular basis. 
Measures to increase internal resources:  Railways is always striving to increase the 
internal resources. In this direction, following measures have been taken to increase 
capacity and hence revenue: 
• Removing bottlenecks in operations by yard remodelling, construction of bypass/ 
chord lines, rail flyovers etc. 
• The construction of two Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFC) viz. Eastern 
Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) from Ludhiana to Sonnagar (1337 Km) and 
the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) from Jawaharlal Nehru Port 
Terminal (JNPT) to Dadri (1506 Km). The work on both EDFC and WDFC has 
been completed. 

32 
 
• Indian Railways has taken up electrification of Railway lines in a mission mode. 
So far, about 99.4% of Broad Gauge (BG) network has been electrified.  
• Procurement of Wagons and Locomotives:  To increase freight carrying 
capacity, large numbers of IR wagons have been procured and locomotives have 
been manufactured. During 2014 to 2025, about 2 lakh wagons have been 
procured and more than 10,000 locomotives have been added for increasing 
freight loading and mobility. 
• Industry participation in investment in General Purpose Wagons, Special 
Purpose/High-Capacity wagons and Automobile carrier wagons for cement, oil, 
steel, fly -ash, automobile etc. So far, around 250 rakes of special purpose 
wagons, 385 rakes of general -purpose wagons and 51 rakes of automobile 
wagons have been inducted. 
• Policy on Bulk Cement Handling Terminals:  A dedicated policy has been 
issued to promote bulk movement of cement through rail by facilitating 
development of specialized terminals and deployment of suitable wagons. This 
is expected to improve logistics efficiency, reduce handling costs, and enhance  
rail share in cement transportation. 
• Under the Gati Shakti Multi -Modal Cargo Terminal (GCT) Policy –2026, 
development of cargo terminals has been significantly liberalized to attract 
private investment and ensure faster capacity creation. The policy provides for 
simplified approval mechanisms, extended concession period, and flexibility in 
terminal design and operations. It also facilitates development of terminals both 
on Railway and non -Railway land, thereby enabling expansion of the terminal 
network closer to production and consumption cen ters. Simultaneously, 
upgradation of Goods Sheds under PH -53 is being undertaken to enhance 
mechanization, handling efficiency, and customer facilities, leading to higher 
throughput and reduced turnaround time. These measures, along with freight -
specific policies (e.g. bulk cement handling terminals) are being implemented to 
diversify the freight basket and improve asset utilization. Collectively, these 
initiatives are expected to optimize terminal capacity, enhance operational 
efficiency, and strengthen th e logistics ecosystem, thereby contributing to 

33 
 
increased freight loading and improved internal resource generation for Indian 
Railways. 
• Rail Parcel App: An app-based platform for Railways’ parcel logistics has been 
launched by South Central Railway on 25.02.2026, on pilot project basis at 17 
locations across 7 cities viz. Hyderabad, Vishakhapatnam, Vijaywada, Guntur, 
Rajahmundry, Bengaluru & Chennai, for a period of 01 year from the date of 
implementation. The app enables a seamless, end -to-end service by delivery 
partners through online booking and digital payments at the convenience of the 
customers obviating the need of bringing the pa rcels physically to the Railway 
premises and the associated paper work. It is further planned to introduce the 
App on pan-India basis shortly. 
• Door-to-Door services - CONCOR, a PSU under Ministry of Railways is also 
providing Door-to-Door parcel services by utilizing the JPP -RCS over Delhi -
Kolkata and Mumbai -Kolkata sectors.  CONCOR is also providing Door -to-
Door logistics under a pilot project at Sonik Goods shed. 
• Ensuring increased availability of rakes/wagons against demand. 
• Use of Information Technology in freight operations to improve monitoring and 
utilization of assets. 
• Induction of higher horse power locomotives. 
• Improvement in maintenance practices of wagons and locomotives resulting in 
increased availability of loco and rolling stock for traffic use. 
• Improvement in track and signalling standards to carry higher volume of traffic. 
• Training of staff and officers to adopt the new technology and management 
practices. 
• Commercial development of vacant railway land by RLDA. 
As a result of all these measures, Railways achieved a loading of 1668 MT in 
2025-26 thus becoming 2nd largest freight carrier railway in the world. 
Various steps have been taken to increase non -fare revenue of Indian Railways, 
such as entrustment of Integrated Station Facility Management (ISFM) to RLDA and 
Zonal Railways at re -developed stations for improved station management, 
identification and optimum utilization of Out of Home Advertisement (OOHA) and Rail 

34 
 
Display Network (RDN) Assets, allowing Zonal Railways to set up Premium Brand 
Outlets, awarding of various new innovative contracts by Zonal Railways under New, 
Innovative Non-Fare Revenue Ideas Scheme (NINFRIS), etc. Railways earned Rs. 712 
cr from Advertisement and Publicity in 2025-26. 
In addition to the above, Indian Railways is also undertaking concerted efforts 
to enhance non-fare revenue through monetization of land assets, primarily via the Rail 
Land Development Authority (RLDA). Key initiatives include optimal utilization of 
railway land through integrated master planning of railway colonies, identification of 
surplus land parcels for commercial development and redevelopment of railway stations 
by leveraging built-up area and airspace. 
Further, planning approaches such as Transit Oriented Development (TOD) and 
development of Multi -Modal Transport Hubs (MMTH) are being adopted, wherever 
feasible, to unlock additional development potential and enhance commercial viability 
of projects. 
Efforts are also being made to identify land parcels with high commercial 
potential and to structure projects in a manner that attracts private sector participation 
through transparent and competitive processes, while ensuring long -term value 
realization for Indian Railways. In addition, policy frameworks and approval processes 
have been streamlined to facilitate faster implementation of such projects. 
These initiatives are aimed at sustainable and market -driven enhancement of 
non-fare revenue, in alignment with the objective of optimal assets utilization and 
revenue generation for Indian Railways. By virtue of these efforts, Railways earned Rs. 
2763 cr from land related items in 2025 -26 and Railways Sundry revenue (Non -Fare 
Revenue) has increased to Rs. 12388.73 cr. in 2025-26 which was only Rs. 6067.96 cr. 
in 2021-22. 
Further, Railway is also taking various steps to optimize revenue expenditure as given 
below:- 
• Rigorous monitoring of expenditure w.r.t. the monthly budget proportions based 
on Spending Limits.  
• Optimizing expenditure in areas such as contractual payment, overtime 
allowance, purchase of material etc. 

35 
 
• Progressive electrification and reduction in expenditure under HSD oil, 
optimizing the fuel consumption, Energy Audit, etc. 
• Improvement in inventory management 
• Prioritization of expenditure on works for better use of available resources. 
• Better asset utilization. 
• Improving staff productivity by better man-power planning. 
Due to the above measures, Indian Railways generated a surplus of Rs. 2,461 cr. 
(provisional) in 2025-26 after meeting all the operational expenditure including pension 
despite the fact that subsidy is given on the passenger services. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
The Committee observe that resource generation through Extra Extra Budgetary 
Resources (Public Private Partnership) over the past few years has met or surpassed the 
targets and note that for 2023–24, actual generation was Rs. 16,625 crore against RE of 
Rs. 17,000 crore, in 2024–25, with actual generation of Rs. 15,049 crore against RE of 
Rs. 10,000 crore, and in 2025 –26, where Rs. 10940 crore has been realized up to 
January, 2026 against RE of Rs. 10,000 crore. The target for EBR (P) generation has 
now been kept at Rs. 12,000 crore at the BE stage for 2026 –27. The Committee note 
that internal revenue generation has remained largely stagnant in recent years, 
necessitating reliance on GBS in addition to EBR for financing ongoing and expansion 
projects. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry has exercised financial prudence 
by limiting borrowings under EBR in order to avoid additional lease liabilities and is 
prioritizing GBS to augment capacity without increasing repayment burdens. In this 
context, the Comm ittee recommend the Ministry to adopt a calibrated and project -
specific approach towards PPP -based investments, ensuring that critical and capacity -
enhancement projects are not delayed due to funding constraints. The Committee note 
and appreciate the renew ed focus of Indian railways on attracting private investments 
via different models, the results of which shall be visible in coming years. The 
Committee therefore desire the Ministry to identify commercially viable and revenue -
generating projects for priva te participation, explore the feasibility of evolving 

36 
 
appropriate risk-sharing mechanisms to safeguard the interests of private investors, and 
streamline approval and regulatory processes to attract credible private investment.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Railways has formulated a Participative Policy, 2012 to encourage 
the private participation in developing rail connectivity by associating strategic partners 
and other investors. The policy encompasses five Public Private Partnership models 
such as Non -Government Rail (NGR), Joint Venture (JV), Customer funded model, 
BOT and BOT-annuity models. State Governments/Local bodies may also participate 
as potential stakeholder for the development of new lines/gauge conversion project 
under the participative policy of MoR. Realizing the need to attract more PPP projects 
in the railways, the Board has decided to add two more models, i.e. Development 
Partner (DPM) and Hybrid Annuity (HAM). 
So far, 18 projects of Rs. 16,686 crore have been completed through PPP model. 
7 projects of Rs.16,362 crore are under implementation including coal connectivity and 
port connectivity projects. 
Further, Ministry of Railways has included 54 projects in the PPP Project 
Pipeline for execution under PPP mode. The details of the projects areas under. 
 
S.N. Name of Project TPC (₹ 
Cr) 
Project 
Status 
Likely Bid 
1 Godda–Pakur/Nagarnabi new line (ER) 4,165 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
2 Haridaspur–Paradip doubling (ECoR) 2,281 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q2) 
3 Shivpur–Kathautia doubling (ECR) 717 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q3) 
4 Balaram–Putagadia–Tentuloi new line 
(ECoR) 
1,404 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q2) 
5 Luburi–Tentuloi–Budhapank new line 
(ECoR) 
3,943 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
6 Tikiri–Kutrumali new line (ECoR) 1,151 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
7 Surat (Gothangam)–Hazira new line 
(WR) 
2,553 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
8 Manuguru–Ramagundam new line 
(SCR) 
4,014 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q3) 
9 Jajpur–Keonjhar Road–Dhamra Port 
new line (ECoR) 
2,987 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
10 Guntakal–Wadi 3rd & 4th line (SCR) 4,364 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 

37 
 
11 Guntakal–Ballari 3rd & 4th line (SCR) 1,264 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q3) 
12 Hospete–Ballari 3rd & 4th line (SWR) 2,150 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
13 Cuttack–Badabanda 3rd & 4th line 
(ECoR) 
2,285 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
14 Gamaria–Chandil 3rd & 4th line (SER) 1,167 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
15 Angul–Sukinda doubling (ECoR) 1,626 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
16 Gadchiroli–Sirpur new line (SECR) 4,342 DPR under 
preparation 
2028-29 (Q3) 
17 Itarsi–Manikpur 3rd line (WCR) 9,562 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
18 Champa–Korba 3rd line (SECR) 755 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
19 Gondia–Nagpur 4th line (SECR) 3,838 DPR under 
preparation 
2028-29 (Q4) 
20 Uslapur–Pendra Rd 3rd line (SECR) 1,279 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q4) 
21 Adilabad–Gadchandur new line (SCR) 979 DPR under 
preparation 
2028-29 (Q4) 
22 Bhadrak–Haridaspur 4th line (ECoR) 1,583 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q2) 
23 Haridaspur–Vizianagaram 4th line 
(ECoR) 
8,321 DPR under 
preparation 
2028-29 (Q3) 
24 Surendranagar–Pipavav doubling 4,000 DPR prepared 2027-28 (Q3) 
25 Vijayawada Station Redevelopment 742 Bid invited Nov-25 
26 Avadi Station Redevelopment 127 DPR under 
preparation 
May-26 
27 Tambaram Station Redevelopment 420 DPR under 
preparation 
Jun-26 
28 Andheri Station Redevelopment 1,057 DPR under 
preparation 
Nov-26 
29 Bengaluru Station Redevelopment 850 DPR under 
preparation 
Dec-26 
30 Kalyan Station Redevelopment 504 DPR under 
preparation 
Feb-27 
31 Chennai Central Station 
Redevelopment 
500 DPR under 
preparation 
Apr-27 
32 Dadar Station Redevelopment 400 DPR under 
preparation 
Mar-27 
33 Coimbatore Station Redevelopment 400 DPR under 
preparation 
Dec-26 
34 Bhopal Station Redevelopment 400 DPR under 
preparation 
Feb-27 
35 Vadodara Station Redevelopment 300 DPR under 
preparation 
Jun-27 
36 Gati Shakti Cargo Terminals (65 
locations) 
4,550 IPA given 2025-26 
37 Gati Shakti Cargo Terminals (50 
locations) 
3,675 IPA given 2026-27 

38 
 
38 Gati Shakti Cargo Terminals (40 
locations) 
3,086 IPA given 2027-28 
39 Wagon induction – private (50 rakes) 1,100 In progress 2025-26 
40 Wagon induction – private (40 rakes) 924 Pre-DPR 2026-27 
41 Wagon induction – private (30 rakes) 728 Pre-DPR 2027-28 
42 Container rakes – private (36 rakes) 576 In progress 2025-26 
43 Container rakes – private (30 rakes) 480 Pre-DPR 2026-27 
44 Container rakes – private (25 rakes) 400 Pre-DPR 2027-28 
45 Manufacturing of 100 MEMU rakes, 
Kazipet 
8,200 Pre-DPR Mar-27 
46 Locomotive mega maintenance depots 
(8) 
9,600 Pre-DPR Dec-27 
47 Trainset maintenance depots (7) 21,000 Pre-DPR Dec-27 
48 Wagon maintenance depots (16) 6,400 Pre-DPR Dec-27 
49 1000 MW RTC Renewable Power 20,000 Bids finalised Dec-25 
50 800 MW Solar Power Madhogarh & 
Orai 
4,800 Bids to be 
invited 
Mar-26 
51 500 MW Solar Power Pavagada 3,000 400 MW 
commissioned  
PPA May-22 
52 800 MW Thermal Power Nabinagar 10,900 Pre-DPR Jun-27 
53 400 MW Hydro Power Anjaw 4,800 Pre-DPR Dec-26 
54 Budget Hotel at Kevadia, Gujarat 53 Bid finalised Construction 
in progress 
 TOTAL 1,80,703  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee observe that the net earnings of the Railways for 2024 –25 were 
estimated at Rs. 2800 crore at the Budget Estimates (BE) stage, which was subsequently 
revised downward to Rs. 1341 crore at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage, while the 
actual realization stood at Rs. 2660 crore. For 2025–26, the BE was pegged at Rs. 3041 
crore, later revised downward to Rs. 1957 crore at the RE stage. For 2026–27, the target 
has been fixed at Rs. 3000 crore. The Committee note that passenger services continue 
to be operated with a substantial social obligation component, with an average subsidy 
of about 45 per cent, and that several uneconomical routes are maintained in order to 
ensure connectivity to remote and rural regions of the country. The Committee further 
observe that since 2022 –23, the Railways has undertaken record levels of capital 

39 
 
expenditure, with significant investments directed towards new line construction, track 
doubling, electrification, augmentation of rolling stock and adoption of modern 
signalling systems. The Committee acknowledge that such capital investments are not 
merely routine expenditures but constitute long-term strategic assets aimed at enhancing 
capacity, efficiency, safety and sustainable growth of the Indian Railways. However, 
the Committee are of the view that improving financial sustainability in Indian Railways 
requires a balanced and result driven approach to both revenue augmentation and 
expenditure control. The Committee further stress that the substantial capital outlay on 
new lines, doubling, rolling stock, and Dedicated Freight Corridors must be effectively 
translated into measurable outcomes, particularly in terms of traffic growth and revenue 
enhancement. Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry to take concrete steps to 
narrow the gap between passenger earnings and operating costs without compromising 
affordability for vulnerable sections through a segment -wise review of passenger 
operations to identify services that can be commercially strengthened through better 
capacity utilisation, demand -based fare management and targeted introduction of 
premium services. Further monetisation of non -fare avenues through measures like 
advertisements/hoardings at stations and inside trains, leasing land for commercial 
development and setting up ATMs should be further explored .  In freight segment, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to focus on increasing freight capacity and market share. 
While continuing with the impetus on infrastructure strengthening and modernization, 
focus needs to be to reduce maintenance costs. The Committee also recommend 
implementing of modern IT and AI based systems to improve asset utilization and 
reduce, for instance, energy costs and manpower optimization. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Steps to narrow the gap between passenger earnings and operating costs 
without compromising affordability for vulnerable sections : Railways are running 
different types of train services like suburban locals/ordinary, non -suburban 
local/ordinary, Mail/Express, Superfast trains, Garib Rath, Gatimaan, Rajdhani, 
Shatabdi, Duronto, Mahamana, Amrit Bharat, Vande Bharat, Vande Bharat Sleep er, 
Namo Bharat Rapid Rail. Humsafar, Tejas, Special trains on special charges etc. 

40 
 
Railways always strive to provide affordable services to all strata of society. 
Accordingly, it operates different categories of train services to cater to the travel needs 
of various categories of society which include trains with lower fare to give benef it to 
underprivileged section of the society and also trains with enhanced facilities. 
Indian Railways gave subsidy of Rs. 60,239 crore on passenger tickets in 2024 -
25. This amounts to concession of 43% on an average, to every person, travelling on 
Railways. In other words, if the cost of providing service is Rs. 100, then the price of 
ticket is Rs. 57 only. This subsidy is continuing for all passengers. Further, concessions 
beyond this subsidy amount are continuing for many categories like 4 categories of 
Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjans), 11 categories of patients and 8 categories of 
students. 
Further, basic passenger fare for passenger train services has been rationalized 
w.e.f 26.12.2025 with no increase in non suburban second class ordinary fare upto 215 
km subject to certain conditions, 2 paisa per kilometer in Mail/Express Non -AC and 2 
paisa per kilometer in AC classes increase has been made. No increase has been made 
in single journey fare of suburban services and season ticket fare of both suburban and 
non suburban sections. 
In addition, Zonal Railways are empowered to downgrade sleeper class coaches 
as unreserved sleeper class or unreserved/reserved second class based on the occupancy 
and also to declare AC-3tier coaches (running vacant/in locked condition on particular 
section) as AC chair Car on particular section on AC chair Car fare. 
Measures to increase internal resources:  To increase the internal resource, the 
following measures have been taken to increase capacity and hence revenue: 
• Removing bottlenecks in operations by yard remodelling, construction of bypass/ 
chord lines, rail flyovers etc. 
• The construction of Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) from Ludhiana 
to Sonnagar (1337 Km) and Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) from 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Terminal (JNPT) to Dadri (1506 Km) has been taken up.  
• Indian Railways has taken up electrification of Railway lines in a mission mode. 
So far, about 99.4% of Broad Gauge (BG) network has been electrified.  

41 
 
• Procurement of Wagons and Locomotives: To increase freight carrying capacity, 
large numbers of IR wagons have been procured and locomotives have been 
manufactured. During 2014 to 2025, about 2 lakh wagons have been procured 
and more than 10,000 locomotiv es have been added for increasing freight 
loading and mobility. 
• Industry participation in investment in General Purpose Wagons, Special 
Purpose/High-Capacity wagons and Automobile carrier wagons for cement, oil, 
steel, fly -ash, automobile etc. So far, around 250 rakes of special purpose 
wagons, 385 rakes of general -purpose wagons and 51 rakes of automobile 
wagons have been inducted. 
• Policy on Bulk Cement Handling Terminals: A dedicated policy has been issued 
to promote bulk movement of cement through rail by facilitating development of 
specialized terminals and deployment of suitable wagons. This is expected to 
improve logistics eff iciency, reduce handling costs, and enhance rail share in 
cement transportation. 
• For asset monetisation, the Gati Shakti Multi -Modal Cargo Terminal (GCT) 
Policy has been launched to promote private participation in development of 
cargo terminals. So far, 128 GCTs have been commissioned and further in -
principle approvals (IPAs) for 292 more locations have been given. 
• Development of cargo related facilities on Railway land: Long -term leasing (25 
years, extendable up to 50 years) of spare railway land has been permitted for 
development of logistics infrastructure such as warehouses, processing units, and 
aggregation facilities through a competitive bidding process. This enables better 
asset utilisation and generates non -fare revenue. The guidelines have been 
framed under schedule ‘3’ of GCT Policy.  
• Rail Parcel App: An app-based platform for Railways’ parcel logistics has been 
launched by South Central Railway on 25.02.2026, on pilot project basis at 17 
locations across 7 cities viz. Hyderabad, Vishakhapatnam, Vijaywada, Guntur, 
Rajahmundry, Bengaluru & Chennai, for a period of 01 year from the date of 
implementation. The app enables a seamless, end -to-end service by delivery 
partners through online booking and digital payments at the convenience of the 

42 
 
customers obviating the need of bringing the parcels physically to the Railway 
premises and the associated paper work. It is further planned to introduce the 
App on pan-India basis shortly. 
• Door-to-Door services - CONCOR, a PSU under Ministry of Railways is also 
providing Door-to-Door parcel services by utilizing the JPP -RCS over Delhi -
Kolkata and Mumbai -Kolkata sectors.  CONCOR is also providing Door -to-
Door logistics under a pilot project at Sonik Goods shed. 
• Ensuring increased availability of rakes/wagons against demand. 
• Use of Information Technology in freight operations to improve monitoring and 
utilization of assets. 
• Induction of higher horse power locomotives. 
• Improvement in maintenance practices of wagons and locomotives resulting in 
increased availability of loco and rolling stock for traffic use. 
• Improvement in track and signalling standards to carry higher volume of traffic. 
• Training of staff and officers to adopt the new technology and management 
practices. 
• Commercial development of vacant railway land by RLDA. 
As a result of all these measures, Railways achieved a loading of 1668 MT in 
2025-26 thus becoming 2nd largest freight carrier railway in the world. 
Various steps have been taken to increase non -fare revenue of Indian Railways, 
such as entrustment of Integrated Station Facility Management (ISFM) to RLDA and 
Zonal Railways at re -developed stations for improved station management, 
identification and optimum utilization of Out of Home Advertisement (OOHA) and Rail 
Display Network (RDN) Assets, allowing Zonal Railways to set up Premium Brand 
Outlets, awarding of various new innovative contracts by Zonal Railways under New, 
Innovative Non-Fare Revenue Ideas Scheme (NINFRIS), etc. Railways earned Rs. 712 
cr from Advertisement and Publicity in 2025-26. 
In addition to the above, Indian Railways is also undertaking concerted efforts 
to enhance non-fare revenue through monetization of land assets, primarily via the Rail 
Land Development Authority (RLDA). Key initiatives include optimal utilization of 
railway land through integrated master planning of railway colonies, identification of 

43 
 
surplus land parcels for commercial development and redevelopment of railway stations 
by leveraging built-up area and airspace. 
Further, planning approaches such as Transit Oriented Development (TOD) and 
development of Multi -Modal Transport Hubs (MMTH) are being adopted, wherever 
feasible, to unlock additional development potential and enhance commercial viability 
of projects. 
Efforts are also being made to identify land parcels with high commercial 
potential and to structure projects in a manner that attracts private sector participation 
through transparent and competitive processes, while ensuring long -term value 
realization for Indian Railways. In addition, policy frameworks and approval processes 
have been streamlined to facilitate faster implementation of such projects. 
These initiatives are aimed at sustainable and market -driven enhancement of 
non-fare revenue, in alignment with the objective of optimal assets utilization and 
revenue generation for Indian Railways. By virtue of these efforts, Railways earned Rs. 
2763 cr from land related items in 2025 -26 and Railways Sundry revenue (Non -Fare 
Revenue) has increased to Rs. 12388.73 cr. in 2025-26 which was only Rs. 6067.96 cr. 
in 2021-22. 
Further, Railway is also taking various steps to optimize revenue expenditure as 
given below:- 
• Rigorous monitoring of expenditure w.r.t. the monthly budget proportions based 
on Spending Limits.  
• Optimizing expenditure in areas such as contractual payment, overtime 
allowance, purchase of material etc. 
• Progressive electrification and reduction in expenditure under HSD oil, 
optimizing the fuel consumption, Energy Audit, etc. 
• Improvement in inventory management 
• Prioritization of expenditure on works for better use of available resources. 
• Better asset utilization. 
• Improving staff productivity by better man-power planning. 

44 
 
Due to the above measures, Indian Railway generated a surplus of Rs. 2,461 cr. 
(provisional)in 2025-26 after meeting all the operational expenditure including pension 
despite the fact that subsidy is given on the passenger services. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that the revenue expenditure of Indian Railways has 
increased substantially over the years, rising from Rs.1,38,236 crore in 2020 –21 to a 
projected Rs.2,99,500 crore in 2026 –27. However, the Committee appreciate the 
proactive steps being taken by Indian railway by adopting the two-pronged approach of 
increasing revenue and reducing expenditure and recommend that sustained efforts be 
made to reduce Ordinary Working Expenses by promoting energy efficiency, 
expanding the use of predictive and technology-driven maintenance systems including 
AI system to minimize repair and breakdown costs, and strengthening skill development 
initiatives to enhance workforce productivity and operational efficiency. The 
Committee further observe that the Railway s have taken several initiatives to improve 
the Operating Ratio, such as enhancing freight capacity and efficiency through network 
expansion, modernization of rolling stock, rationalizing repair and maintenance of 
rolling stock, development of cargo terminals under the Gati Shakti Multi-Modal Cargo 
Terminal (GCT)’ policy, etc. The Committee also note that from the year 2022 -23, the 
Railways Operating Ratio has continuously been above 98% besides showing an 
upward trend. For the year 2025 -26, Operating Ratio  is estimated to be 98.82%. The 
Committee observe that for 2026-27 the Railways have projected a target of 98.40% for 
its Operating Ratio which continues to be above 98%.  Therefore, the Committee desire 
the Ministry to boost freight revenue through better  utilization of DFCs and expansion 
into non -bulk cargo, strengthening non -fare revenue through structured asset 
monetization, station redevelopment and commercial use of railway land. The 
Committee emphasize timely completion of capacity augmentation proje cts to avoid 
cost overruns and need for linking capital investment to measurable revenue outcomes 
to ensure sustainable financial improvement. 
 
 
 

45 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Measures to increase freight revenue and traffic revenue : To increase the 
revenue, the following measures have been taken to increase capacity and hence 
revenue: 
• Removing bottlenecks in operations by yard remodelling, construction of bypass/ 
chord lines, rail flyovers etc. 
• The construction of two Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFC) viz. Eastern 
Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) from Ludhiana to Sonnagar (1337 Km) and 
the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) from Jawaharlal Nehru Port 
Terminal (JNPT) to Dadri (1506 Km). The work on both EDFC and WDFC has 
been completed. 
• Indian Railways has taken up electrification of Railway lines in a mission mode. 
So far, about 99.4% of Broad Gauge (BG) network has been electrified.  
• Procurement of Wagons and Locomotives: To increase freight carrying capacity, 
large numbers of IR wagons have been procured and locomotives have been 
manufactured. During 2014 to 2025, about 2 lakh wagons have been procured 
and more than 10,000 locomotiv es have been added for increasing freight 
loading and mobility. 
• Industry participation in investment in General Purpose Wagons, Special 
Purpose/High-Capacity wagons and Automobile carrier wagons for cement, oil, 
steel, fly -ash, automobile etc. So far, around 250 rakes of special purpose 
wagons, 385 rakes of general -purpose wagons and 51 rakes of automobile 
wagons have been inducted. 
• Policy on Bulk Cement Handling Terminals: A dedicated policy has been issued 
to promote bulk movement of cement through rail by facilitating development of 
specialized terminals and deployment of suitable wagons. This is expected to 
improve logistics eff iciency, reduce handling costs, and enhance rail share in 
cement transportation. 
• For asset monetisation, the Gati Shakti Multi -Modal Cargo Terminal (GCT) 
Policy has been launched to promote private participation in development of 

46 
 
cargo terminals. So far, 128 GCTs have been commissioned and further in -
principle approvals (IPAs) for 292 more locations have been given. 
• Development of cargo related facilities on Railway land: Long -term leasing (25 
years, extendable up to 50 years) of spare railway land has been permitted for 
development of logistics infrastructure such as warehouses, processing units, and 
aggregation facilities through a competitive bidding process. This enables better 
asset utilisation and generates non -fare revenue. The guidelines have been 
framed under schedule ‘3’ of GCT Policy.  
• Rail Parcel App: An app-based platform for Railways’ parcel logistics has been 
launched by South Central Railway on 25.02.2026, on pilot project basis at 17 
locations across 7 cities viz. Hyderabad, Vishakhapatnam, Vijaywada, Guntur, 
Rajahmundry, Bengaluru & Chennai, for a period of 01 year from the date of 
implementation. The app enables a seamless, end -to-end service by delivery 
partners through online booking and digital payments at the convenience of the 
customers obviating the need of bringing the pa rcels physically to the Railway 
premises and the associated paper work. It is further planned to introduce the 
App on pan-India basis shortly. 
• Door-to-Door services - CONCOR, a PSU under Ministry of Railways is also 
providing Door-to-Door parcel services by utilizing the JPP -RCS over Delhi -
Kolkata and Mumbai -Kolkata sectors.  CONCOR is also providing Door -to-
Door logistics under a pilot project at Sonik Goods shed. 
• Ensuring increased availability of rakes/wagons against demand. 
• Use of Information Technology in freight operations to improve monitoring and 
utilization of assets. 
• Induction of higher horse power locomotives. 
• Improvement in maintenance practices of wagons and locomotives resulting in 
increased availability of loco and rolling stock for traffic use. 
• Improvement in track and signalling standards to carry higher volume of traffic. 
• Training of staff and officers to adopt the new technology and management 
practices. 
• Commercial development of vacant railway land by RLDA. 

47 
 
As a result of all these measures, Railways achieved a loading of 1668 MT in 
2025-26 thus becoming 2nd largest freight carrier railway in the world. 
Various steps have been taken to increase non -fare revenue of Indian Railways, 
such as entrustment of Integrated Station Facility Management (ISFM) to RLDA and 
Zonal Railways at re -developed stations for improved station management, 
identification and optimum utilization of Out of Home Advertisement (OOHA) and Rail 
Display Network (RDN) Assets, allowing Zonal Railways to set up Premium Brand 
Outlets, awarding of various new innovative contracts by Zonal Railways under New, 
Innovative Non-Fare Revenue Ideas Scheme (NINFRIS), etc. Railways earned Rs. 712 
cr from Advertisement and Publicity in 2025-26. 
In addition to the above, Indian Railways is also undertaking concerted efforts 
to enhance non-fare revenue through monetization of land assets, primarily via the Rail 
Land Development Authority (RLDA). Key initiatives include optimal utilization of 
railway land through integrated master planning of railway colonies, identification of 
surplus land parcels for commercial development and redevelopment of railway stations 
by leveraging built-up area and airspace. 
Further, planning approaches such as Transit Oriented Development (TOD) and 
development of Multi -Modal Transport Hubs (MMTH) are being adopted, wherever 
feasible, to unlock additional development potential and enhance commercial viability 
of projects. 
Efforts are also being made to identify land parcels with high commercial 
potential and to structure projects in a manner that attracts private sector participation 
through transparent and competitive processes, while ensuring long -term value 
realization for Indian Railways. In addition, policy frameworks and approval processes 
have been streamlined to facilitate faster implementation of such projects. 
These initiatives are aimed at sustainable and market -driven enhancement of 
non-fare revenue, in alignment with the objective of optimal assets utilization and 
revenue generation for Indian Railways. By virtue of these efforts, Railways earned Rs. 
2763 cr. from land related items in 2025 -26 and Railways Sundry revenue (Non -Fare 
Revenue) has increased to Rs. 12388.73 cr. in 2025-26 which was only Rs. 6067.96 cr. 
in 2021-22. 

48 
 
To improve Operating Ratio and Net Revenue, Railway is also taking various 
steps to optimize revenue expenditure as given below:- 
• Rigorous monitoring of expenditure w.r.t. the monthly budget proportions based 
on Spending Limits.  
• Optimizing expenditure in areas such as contractual payment, overtime 
allowance, purchase of material etc. 
• Progressive electrification and reduction in expenditure under HSD oil, 
optimizing the fuel consumption, Energy Audit, etc. 
• Improvement in inventory management 
• Prioritization of expenditure on works for better use of available resources. 
• Better asset utilization. 
• Improving staff productivity by better man-power planning. 
Due to the above measures, Indian Railway generated a surplus of Rs. 2,461 cr. 
(provisional) in 2025-26 after meeting all the operational expenditure including pension 
and Operating Ratio was 98.31% against RE target of 98.82%. 
Skill Development Initiatives :  Indian Railways have taken several measures to 
enhance work productivity, motivation and professional competencies of railway 
employees through structured capacity building and advanced training. Capacity 
building and skill upgradation are continuous and institutionalized processes supported 
by a well-established training framework across Indian Railways. 
2.  Indian Railways have developed a comprehensive training ecosystem providing 
training interventions at various stages of the career to ensure skilling, re -skilling and 
up-skilling of employees. For this purpose, extensive training infrastructure has been 
created in the form of Centralised Training Institutes (CTIs), Multi -disciplinary Zonal 
Training Institutes (MDZTIs), Multi -disciplinary Divisional Training Institutes 
(MDDTIs) and specialised training centres, which conduct induction, refresher, 
promotional and technical training programmes at different stages of service. 
3.  Training modules are designed to strengthen employees’ competencies and 
equip railway personnel with the skills required for modern, technology -intensive 
railway operations. These modules are also periodically updated to incorporate new 
technologies in railway operations and maintenance. 

49 
 
4.  Specialised initiatives such as the Centre of Excellence on Kavach at IRISET, 
courses on emerging technologies (including Data Science, AI applications, Big Data 
Analytics, Block chain, and Cloud Computing, etc.) in collaboration with C -DAC, and 
Mission Rail Karmayogi for behavioural and service -orientation training of frontline 
staff further contribute to improving productivity and efficiency. Employees are also 
encouraged to undertake online learning through digital platforms such as the 
iGOTKarmayogi por tal for continuous up -skilling and re -skilling. In addition, 
motivational and wellness initiatives, including yoga sessions, physical fitness activities 
2024/E(Trg)/41/18 I/3152869/2026 and stress -management programmes during 
training and at workplaces, are promoted to enhance employee well-being and morale. 
5.  Through sustained investment in people and infrastructure, IR is always 
committed to develop a skilled, adaptive, and technology -driven workforce capable of 
meeting the growing demands of safe, efficient, and modern railway operations. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
The Committee notes that removal of traffic bottlenecks has been accorded 
priority in the Budget 2026 –27, with a significant increase in the throw -forward for 
doubling works, rising to Rs. 37,750 crore over the previous year. However, the 
Committee observe that against a target of 2,600 km for 2025 –26, 573 km (22.04%) 
was completed up to December 2025, while financial utilization stood at Rs. 21,457.27 
crore, i.e., 73.92% of the Revised Estimate of Rs. 29,026 crore. The Committee 
acknowledge that doubling projects are long-gestation assets involving land acquisition, 
statutory clearances and complex execution in high -density corridors which effect the 
completion time as well as cost estimates.  However, the Committee stress the need to 
minimize the gap betwe en expenditure incurred and corresponding physical 
achievement. Doubling of lines is a critical capacity augmentation measure with direct 
implications for operational safety, congestion reduction and revenue growth. The 
Committee therefore expect that in 2 026–27, budgetary allocations will be optimally 

50 
 
utilized with commensurate achievement of physical targets. Accordingly, t he 
Committee recommend that Ministry of Railways strengthen pre -construction 
preparedness, particularly in respect of land acquisition and statutory clearances, 
improve coordination with State authorities and other allied agencies to avoid delays, 
and ensure stage-wise monitoring of doubling projects. The Committee further urge the 
Ministry to prioritize the implementation of doubling projects on capacity -constrained 
and freight -intensive routes in a focused mission mode manner, while leveraging 
modern mechanized construction technologies to accelerate execution. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Capacity enhancement of railway network has been taken up by Indian 
Railways in a big way during last 11 years. The details of commissioning/laying of 
new track across Indian Railways is given below:- 
 
Period New track Commissioned Average commissioning of new tracks 
2009-14 7,599 Km 4.2 Km/day 
2014-25 34,428 Km 8.6 Km/day (more than 2 times) 
  
As on 01.04.2025, across Indian Railways, 431 Railway infrastructure projects 
(154 New Line, 33 Gauge Conversion and 244 Doubling) of total length 35,966 Km, 
costing approx. ₹6.75 lakh crore are sanctioned. The summary is as under:- 
Category No of 
Projects 
Total 
Length 
NL/GC/DL 
(km) 
Length 
Commissioned 
till Mar’25 
(Km) 
Total Exp upto 
Mar’25 
(₹in Crore) 
New Lines 154 16,142 3,036 1,45,318 
Gauge 
Conversion 
33 4,180 2,997 22,753 
Doubling / 
Multi-tracking 
244 15,644 6,736 1,22,858 
Total 431 35,966 12,769 2,90,929 
  

51 
 
Some of the recently completed Projects are as follows: 
S. No. Name of project Length 
(in Kms) 
1 Udhampur- Srinagar- Baramulla new line 272 
2 Bhairabi - Sairang New Line 51 
3 Deoband - Roorkee New Line 27 
4 Churu - Ratangarh Doubling 43 
5 Tori-Shivpur 3rd Line 44 
6 Araria - Galgalia New Line 110 
7 Himmatnagar - Khedbrahma Guage Conversion 55 
8 Bahraich- Nanpara -Nepalganj Guage Conversion 56 
9 Domingarh- Gorakhpur -Kusumi 3rd Line & Gorakhpur -
Nakaha Doubling 
21 
10 Vijapur - Ambaliyasan Guage Conversion 43 
11 Pune- Miraj -Londa Doubling 467 
12 Manmad - Jalgaon 3rd Line 160 
13 Phephna –Indara- Mau -Shahganj Doubling 150 
14 Adraj -Moti -Vijapur Guage Conversion 40 
15 Katni -Bina 3rd Line 279 
16 Gandhidham- Adipur Quadrupling 21 
17 Khatuwas - Narnaul Doubling 24 
18 Penukonda- Dharmavaram Doubling 42 
  
During last three years i.e. FY 2022 -23, 2023-24, 2024-25 and the current FY 
2025-26, 306 projects (53 New Line, 17 Gauge Conversion and 236 Doubling) of total 
length 13,968 Km have been sanctioned across Indian Railways. 
 Some of the major projects sanctioned are as follows: 
SN Project Name Cost 
(₹ in 
Crore) 
1 Chopan – Chunar doubling (102 Km) 1,553 

52 
 
2 Guntur – Bibinagar doubling (239 Km) 3,238 
3 Mudkhed – Medchal & Mahbubnagar – Dhone doubling (418 Km) 5,655 
4 Samakhiali – Gandhidham Quadrupling (53 Km) 1,571 
5 Merta City – Ras & Bypass at Merta Road new  line (56 Km) 1,038 
6 Lumding – Furkating doubling (140 Km) 2,334 
7 Ajmer – Chanderiya doubling (178 Km) 1,813 
8 Motumari – Vishnupuram with RoR doubling (100 Km) 1,746 
9 Bikramshila – Katareah new line with new bridge on river ganga (26 
Km)  
2,549 
10 Gunupur – Therubali new line (74 Km) 1,326 
11 Malkangiri – Pandurangapuram new line (174 Km)  4,109 
12 Badampahar – Kendujhargarh new line (82 Km) 2,106 
13 Junagarh – Nabarangpur new line (116 Km) 3,274 
14 Buramara – Chakulia new line (60 Km) 1,639 
15 Jalna – Jalgaon new line (174 Km) 7,105 
16 Bangriposi – Gorumahisani new line (86 Km) 2,549 
17 Chandil – Anara – Damodar 3rd line (121 Km) 2,170 
18 Bargarh Road – Nawapara Road new line (138 Km) 2,926 
19 Sardega – Bhalumuda new double line (37 Km) 1,360 
20 Varanasi – Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Multitracking with rail cum road 
bridge on river ganga (15 Km) 
2,642 
21 Jalgaon – Manmad 4th line (160 Km) 2,773 
22 Bhusawal – Khandwa 3rd & 4th line (131 Km) 3,514 
23 Sambalpur – Jarapada 3rd & 4th line (127 Km) 3,916 
24 Jharsuguda – Sason 3rd & 4th line (35 Km) 1,181 
25 Gondia – Ballarshah doubling (240 Km) 4,819 
26 Kharsia – Naya Raipur – Parmalkasa 5th & 6th line (278 Km) 8,741 
27 Wardha – Balharshah Quadrupling (135 Km) 2,381 
28 Ballari – Chikjajur doubling (185 Km) 3,342 

53 
 
29 Koderma – Barkakana doubling (133 Km) 3,063 
30 Itarsi – Nagpur 4th line (297 Km) 5,451 
31 Dangoaposi – Jaroli 3rd & 4th line (43 Km) 1,752 
32 Secunderabad – Wadi 3rd & 4th line (173 Km) 5,012 
33 Furkating – New Tinsukia doubling (194 Km) 3,634 
34 Bakhtiyarpur – Rajgir – Tilaiya doubling (104 Km) 2,192 
35 Gondia – Dongargarh 4th line (84 Km) 2,223 
36 Wardha – Bhusawal 3rd & 4th line (314 Km) 9,197 
37 Hosapete – Bellary quadrupling (65 Km) 2,372 
38 Kasara – Manmad 3rd & 4th line (131 Km) 10,154 
39 Punarakh – Kiul 3rd & 4th line (50 Km) 2,668 
40 Gamharia – Chandil 3rd & 4th line (55 Km) 1,168 
41 Sainthia- Pakhur 4th Line (81 Km) 1,569 
42 Santragachi- Kharagpur 4th line (111 Km) 2,905 
43 Nergundi – Barang &Khurda Road – Vizianagaram 3rd line (385 Km)  5,618 
44 Son Nagar – Andal 3rd and 4th Line (375 Km)  13,606 
45 Gorakhpur Cantt – Valmiki Nagar doubling (96 Km) 1,270 
46 Jaipur – Sawai Madhopur doubling (131 Km) 1,269 
47 Luni – Samdari – Bhildi doubling (272 Km) 3,531 
48 Narkatiaganj – Raxaul – Sitamarhi – Darbhanga & Sitamarhi – 
Muzaffarpur doubling (256 Km)  
4,553 
49 Prayagraj (Iradatganj) – Manikpur 3rd line (84 Km) 1,640 
50 Tirupati – Pakala – Katpadi doubling (104 Km) 1,332 
51 Ratlam – Nagda 3rd and 4th line (41 Km) 1,018 
52 Aluabari Road – New Jalpaiguri 3rd & 4th line (57 Km) 1,786 
53 Aurangabad (Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar) – Parbhani (177 Km) 2,179 
54 Bhagalpur – Dumka – Rampurhat doubling (177 Km) 3,169 
55 Itarsi – Bina 4th line (237 Km) 4,329 
56 Vadodara – Ratlam 3rd & 4th line (259 Km) 8,885 

54 
 
57 Devbhumi Dwarka (Okha) – Kanalus doubling (141 Km) 1,457 
58 Badlapur – Karjat 3rd and 4th line (32 Km) 1,324 
59 Delhi – Ambala Cantt 3rd & 4th line (194 Km)  5,983 
60 Gondia – Jabalpur doubling (231 Km) 5,236 
61 Manmad – Indore new line (360 Km) 18,529 
62 Errupelam – Amaravati – Nambur new line (57 Km) 2,245 
63 Vadhavan Port and New Palghar station new double line (22 Km) 1,507 
64 Deshalpar – Hajipir – Luna and Vayor – Lakhpat new line (145 Km) 2,526 
  
Completion of Railway project/s depends on various factors which include the 
following: 
• Land acquisition by State Government 
• Forest clearance  
• Shifting of infringing utilities 
• Statutory clearances from various authorities  
• Geological and topographical conditions of area 
• Law and order situation in the area of project site 
• Number of working months in a year for particular project site etc.  
All these factors affect the completion time and cost of the project/s. 
  Various steps taken by the Government for effective and speedy implementation 
of rail projects include: 
• Substantial increase in allocation of funds. 
• Delegation of powers at field level. 
• Close monitoring of progress of project at various levels. 
• Regular follow up with State Governments and concerned authorities for 
expeditious land acquisition, forestry and Wildlife clearances and for resolving 
other issues pertaining to projects. 
 

55 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
 
The Committee commends Indian Railways for the successful completion of the 
Udhampur–Srinagar–Baramulla Rail Link (272 km), providing seamless and all -
weather connectivity to the Kashmir Valley and the Bhairabi –Sairang (51.38 km) line 
connecting Aizawl in Mizoram, thereby strengthening national integration and 
providing access to remote regions. The Committee note that against the RE of Rs. 
30,632 crore for New Lines in 2025 –26, expenditure up to December, 2025 stands at 
Rs. 22,339.89 crore (73% approx.) wi th physical progress of 345 km(50% approx.) 
against the annual target of 700 km. The Committee note that the same has been 
rationalized in the 2026 -27 budget as BE for 2026 –27 has been further augmented to 
Rs. 36,721.6 crore with a target of 500 km. The Committee further observe that physical 
achievements during 2023 –24 and 2024 –25 exceeded targets. While acknowledging 
that projects are executed zone -wise and obtaining necessary clearances along with 
timely land acquisition by State Governments is a critica l factor, the Committee 
recommend a structured mechanism incorporating improved project planning and 
monitoring, parallel processing of approvals and clearances, prioritization of high -
impact connectivity projects, focused execution of corridors with economic impact and 
seamless financing to ensure timely completion/achievement of targets established. The 
Ministry may also study the applicability of the model of National Highways Authority 
of India (NHAI) on project execution and PPP models in planning and undertaking key 
railway projects for new tracks including Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFCs) and 
High-Speed Rail corridors.  The Committee further desire the Ministry to adopt a 
targeted and scientific approach for systematic consideration of proposals for  new 
railway lines received from State Governments, Central Ministries, public 
representatives, as well as those arising from Railways own operational requirements. 
While examining such proposals, due weightage may be accorded to factors such as 
traffic pr ojections, bridging of missing links, provision of alternate routes and 
augmentation of congested or saturated corridors. 
 
 
 

56 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Capacity enhancement of railway network has been taken up by Indian Railways 
in a big way during last 11 years. The details of commissioning/laying of new track 
across Indian Railways is given below:- 
 
Period New track Commissioned Average commissioning of new tracks 
2009-14 7,599 Km 4.2 Km/day 
2014-25 34,428 Km 8.6 Km/day (more than 2 times) 
  
As on 01.04.2025, across Indian Railways, 431 Railway infrastructure projects (154 
New Line, 33 Gauge Conversion and 244 Doubling) of total length 35,966 Km, 
costing approx. ₹6.75 lakh crore are sanctioned. The summary is as under:- 
Category No of 
Projects 
Total 
Length 
NL/GC/DL 
(km) 
Length 
Commissioned 
till Mar’25 
(Km) 
Total Exp upto 
Mar’25 
(₹in Crore) 
New Lines 154 16,142 3,036 1,45,318 
Gauge 
Conversion 33 4,180 2,997 22,753 
Doubling / 
Multitracking 244 15,644 6,736 1,22,858 
Total 431 35,966 12,769 2,90,929 
  
For monitoring of sanctioned projects, Indian Railways has developed a portal - 
Indian Railways Projects Sanctions & Management (IRPSM). Regular data feeding on 
IRPSM is ensured for close monitoring of projects. Integration of IRPSM with other 
portals such as PMG, IIG etc through APIs has also been taken up to ensure single 
source of data entry and improve reliability of project monitoring. 
  Completion of Railway projects depends on various factors which include the 
following:  
• Land acquisition by State Government 
• Forest clearance  
• Shifting of infringing utilities 

57 
 
• Statutory clearances from various authorities  
• Geological and topographical conditions of area 
• Law and order situation in the area of project site 
• Number of working months in a year for particular project site etc. 
All these factors affect the completion time and cost of the projects. 
Various steps taken by the Government for effective and speedy implementation 
of rail projects include:  
• Substantial increase in allocation of funds. 
• Delegation of powers at field level. 
• Close monitoring of progress of project at various levels. 
• Regular follow up with State Governments and concerned authorities for 
expeditious land acquisition, forestry and Wildlife clearances and for resolving 
other issues pertaining to projects. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
The Committee note that safety works related to Level Crossings (LCs) and Road 
Over/Under Bridges (ROBs/RUBs) are key focus areas in the Annual Plan for 2026-27, 
with allocations of Rs. 800 crore and Rs. 8225 crore, respectively. During 2025 -26, 
allocation had been kept as Rs. 700 crore at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage for LC 
safety works and Rs. 471.78 crore has been utilized as of December, 2025. Similarly, 
for ROBs/RUBs, allocation had been kept as Rs. 7734 crore at the RE stage, with actual 
utilization standing at Rs. 5637.59 crore (till December, 2025). The Committee note 
that the targets fixed for elimination of manned level crossings have not been fully met 
and emphasize the necessity for renewed focus and strengthened execution to ensure 
timely completion of these critical safety works. The Committee, while acknowledging 
the progress made by Indian Railways in road safety works, construction of Road Over 

58 
 
Bridges (ROBs)/Road Under Bridges (RUBs) and elimination of manned Level 
Crossings, emphasize the need for full utilization of allocated funds and adherence to 
physical targets. The Committee note the persistent challenges such as land acquisition, 
utility shifting, statutory clearances, cost-sharing issues with State Governments, local 
resistance, inadequate approach roads, traffic congestion and recurring waterlogging in 
RUBs while stress that these obstacles must be addressed through a time -bound, 
mission-mode approach with strengthened coordination among Railways, State 
Governments and road owning authorities and streamlined approvals. The Committee 
recommend to prioritize ROB/RUB works on high -density routes, incorporating site -
specific engineering solu tions and improved drainage systems at the design stage to 
avoid water logging in RUBs, shifting towards condition -based or predictive 
maintenance, and establishing a robust grievance redressal mechanism with active 
involvement of people’s representatives and local authorities to ensure timely 
completion of these critical infrastructure projects. 
Reply of the Government 
Govt. has prioritized LCs elimination either by providing ROBs/ RUBs in lieu 
of LCs or through direct closure (for low traffic LCs) or by diversion of road traffic to 
nearby ROB/RUB/LC depending upon the site conditions. 
           In 2025-26, the budget utilization for ROBs/RUBs works is as follows: 
                                                                                        (₹ in Cr.) 
Budget Estimate 
(BE) 
Revised 
Estimate (RE) 
Final 
Expenditure 
% w.r.t. 
RE 
7000 7748 7585 98% 
 
As a result of the focused initiatives of the Government, substantial progress has 
been recorded in road safety works, particularly in the construction of Road Over 
Bridges (ROBs) / Road Under Bridges (RUBs) and the elimination of manned Level 
Crossings. The progress during 2025–26 in respect of construction of ROBs/RUBs and 
closure of Level Crossings is detailed below:  
                                                                                         
 
 

59 
 
(In Nos.) 
Particulars 
 
ROBs 
Constructed 
 
RUBs 
Constructed 
 
LCs 
Closure 
 
Target 300 800 800 
Progress 355 799 726 
         It is seen that the progress of works exceeds targets. However, the progress of 
LCs closure is slightly below target as multiple works e.g. RUBs/two wheelers ROBs 
etc. in addition to regular ROB are required for closing one Level Crossing. 
In order to further increase the progress work, (by identifying issues at inception 
stage itself) Railways have taken following measures: 
(i)    DPR has been made mandatory for all ROBs/RUBs works which includes survey 
of land/utilities, examining various options to establish most feasible alignment, 
consultation with stakeholders. This will help avoid delays.  
(ii)   Joint survey is being done with concerned State Govt./Road Owning Authority 
before finalizing the General Arrangement Drawing  (GAD) to ensure smooth 
execution.   
(iii)   Consultations are being held with people’s representatives at planning as well as 
execution stages during site visits and regular meetings.  
(iv)   Standardization of superstructure, substructure and foundation drawings for 
various combinations of span, skewness and width of road on Railway portion has been 
done to avoid delays during the design approval. A compendium of design has being 
issued, which  can be directly adopted by Road owning agencies for expeditious 
planning. 
(v)   To avoid water logging in subways, sustained efforts are being made to identify 
and address all factors which lead to water logging including implementing a 
comprehensive drainage plan for each subway. Further, RDSO has issued 
comprehensive guidelines in report No. BS-138- R1 incorporating latest water proofing 
methods. 
(vi)   For Online monitoring of water logging of subways, a new module has been 
developed in Bridge Management System (BMS). 

60 
 
(vii)  Critical issues in ROBs/RUBs works are being addressed through regular 
coordination meetings with State Governments, district administration and concerned 
local authorities 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
The Committee appreciate the introduction of advanced rolling stock such as 
Vande Bharat Express (Sleeper) and Amrit Bharat Express, incorporating enhanced 
safety features and modern passenger amenities aimed at inducting high -capacity, 
lightweight, sturdy and faster trains. The Committee note that during 2025 –26 (up to 
December, 2025), production of Locomotives, Coaches and Wagons stood at 1404, 
5,855 and 25,326 against annual targets of 1826, 9665 and 26,000 respectively. The 
Budget Estimate (BE) for Rolling Stock for 2025–26 was enhanced to Rs. 63,373 crore 
at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage, while actual expenditure stood at Rs. 50,135.40 
crore up to December, 2025. For 2026–27, the BE has been kept at Rs. 65,496.6 crore.  
Considering the shortfall against annual targets, the Committee recommend 
augmentation and modernization of Production Units to ensure timely achievement of 
rolling stock targets and strengthening indigenisation and skill development aligned to 
next-generation technologies. The Committe e also observe that while manufacturing 
capabilities have advanced significantly, the maintenance ecosystem in Zonal 
workshops must be strengthened commensurately. Therefore, the Committee desire the 
Ministry to prioritise workshop modernization through in duction of advanced 
diagnostic equipment, digital maintenance systems and structured technical training 
modules. A formal mechanism for seamless transfer of technology and technical know-
how from Production Units to workshops should be institutionalised to  ensure 
reliability, safety, reduction in maintenance time and cost for optimal lifecycle 
performance of rolling stock.  The Committee further with regard to rolling stock 
recommend for modernization efforts beyond core mechanical systems to ancillary and 
passenger-facing components so that coach interiors, finishing and overall aesthetics 
are aligned with the technological standards of modern rolling stock, thereby enhancing 
passenger experience and service quality. 
 

61 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Rolling Stock production (Locomotives, Coaches & Wagons) for the year 
2025-26 is as under: 
  
Indian Railways has significantly increased its coach production to an all -time 
high of 8018 coaches in 2025 -26 against the production of 7237 coaches in 2024 -25. 
There is an overall increase of 11 % in the production of coaches (including Distributed 
Power Rolling Stock coaches) across various coach Production Units of Indian 
Railways over the previous year.   
There is an overall increase of 14 % in the production of Locomotives in 2025 -
26 over 2024-25 across different Loco Production Units of Indian Railways. 
The actual expenditure for Rolling Stock till Feb'26 is Rs. 64134 Cr against the 
Revised Estimate of Rs. 63373 Cr.  
As regards the augmentation and modernisation of Production Units is 
concerned, this is a continuous process on Indian Railways and undertaken on a need 
basis. Presently, works costing Rs. 7737 Crores are under execution for the 
augmentation and modernisation of various Production Units. In addition to this, coach 
manufacturing units at Latur and Kazipet have also been set up to further augment the 
production capacity. 
Railway Workshops are being progressively modernized through the induction 
of Industry 4.0 (IoT -enabled) based advanced equipment and digital maintenance 
practices. Advanced technologies for inspection, testing and condition monitoring of 
rolling stock are being implemented across Indian Railways supported by digital data 
platforms for real-time data capture and analysis. For real time condition monitoring of 
rolling stock, installation of wayside equipment such as HAHW, WILD, OMRS, 
Machine Vision etc. are being carried out. 
Rolling Stock Production 2024-25 Production 2025-26 % Increase 
Coach 7237 8018 11 
Locomotive 1681 1914 14 
Wagon 41927 34755 - 

62 
 
Specifications, technical circulars, modification instructions and maintenance 
manuals issued from time to time by RDSO ensures dissemination and upgradation of 
technical know-how of Workshops. 
Further, Indian Railways continuously strives to impart training to its employees 
in latest technologies through in-house and external resources. 
Modernization and Improvement/up -gradation of Rolling Stock to enhance 
safety, convenience and comfort of passengers is also a continuous and ongoing 
process on Indian Railways. 
  The work of replacement of earlier ICF coaches with safer and more modern 
LHB coaches has been taken up in a phased manner. Technologically superior LHB 
coaches have better riding, improved aesthetics and features like Lightweight design, 
Anti climbing, Air suspension (Secondary) with failure indication system, stainless 
steel shell and disc brake system etc. 
  To further improve travel experience of the passengers, Indian Railways have 
introduced indigenously designed and manufactured Vande Bharat Chair Car, Vande 
Bharat Sleeper, Amrit Bharat and Namo Bharat Rapid Rail trains with advanced safety 
features and pa ssenger amenities like jerk free semi -permanent coupler, Kavach, 
centrally controlled automatic plug doors, etc. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways have launched the Amrit 
Bharat Station Scheme for phased redevelopment of railway stations across the country 
under which 1,337 stations have been identified and 172 stations have been completed 
while work i s in progress at 1,072 stations.  The Committee desire that station 
redevelopment works be implemented in a phased manner under a structured project 
monitoring framework for each station, incorporating physical and financial progress 
tracking, periodic fie ld inspections, reporting of shortfalls against prescribed targets, 
identification of underlying causes, and time -bound corrective measures. The 
Committee further emphasise the establishment of robust institutional mechanisms to 
prevent cost overruns and a voidable delays through improved project planning and 
inter-agency coordination.  The Committee also recommend that comprehensive traffic 

63 
 
management plans and stringent safety protocols be mandatorily implemented to ensure 
minimal disruption to passenger movement and train operations during the construction 
phase.  Further, the Committee underscore the need for periodic assessment of 
passenger satisfaction and post -redevelopment impact evaluation, particularly with 
regard to amenities, accessibility, cleanliness and safety standards. The Committee also 
recommend that feedback and grievance redressal mechanisms be formed as an integral 
part of  the station redevelopment process to ensure continuous improvement.  The 
Committee further recommend that station redevelopment plans be based on assessment 
of passenger traffic patterns, projected demand and future growth potential of the city 
or region concerned, so as to ensure that the upgraded infrastructure remains sc alable, 
demand-responsive and aligned with local development needs. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Railways has launched Amrit Bharat Station Scheme for 
redevelopment of stations with a long-term approach. The scheme involves preparation 
of master plans and their implementation in a phased manner to improve the amenities 
at the stations keeping in view the necessity at each station with a horizon of 40 to 60 
years. The scheme envisages sustainable and environment friendly solutions, provision 
of ballastless tracks etc. as per necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city 
centre at the station in the long term. 
  So far, 1340 stations have been identified for development under this scheme 
and works have been completed at 208 stations and works are in progress at 1046 
stations. 
Indian Railways has a well established and robust mechanism to monitor 
implementation of projects including their reviews, inspection, check for quality of 
works and audits. Works are carried out adhering to the standards and specifications 
laid down in various codes and manuals. Inspections/audits/checks are carried out from 
time to time by various agencies/officials/multi -disciplinary teams as per laid down 
instructions and actions for correction are taken immediately. This is a continuous and 
ongoing process. 

64 
 
Under the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, Indian Railways is adopting a phased, 
passenger-centric redevelopment strategy to address space constraints, utility shifting, 
and operational continuity at brownfield stations. Holistic master planning of station 
estate and functional zoning ensures efficient use of railway land. Detailed utility 
mapping and advance diversion planning are undertaken in coordination with local 
agencies to avoid service disruptions. Construction is executed in carefully sequenced 
phases so that train operations and essential passenger amenities remain functional. 
Temporary facilities, clear signage, and crowd management measures are deployed to 
minimize inconvenience during the redevelopment period with necessary safety 
measures. 
Suggestions / Representations, both formal and informal, for Railway projects / 
works across the country are received on the basis of demands raised by State 
Governments, Members of Parliament, Ministries of Central Government, elected 
representatives, Railways' own requirements, organizations / rail users etc., at various 
levels including Railway Board, Zonal Railways, Division Office etc. Receipt of such 
suggestions / representations is a continuous and dynamic process and these are 
examined and action as  found feasible and justified is taken from time to time. Amrit 
Bharat Station Scheme envisages development with a long term approach. Accordingly, 
various requirements of each station are analysed while preparing the master plans and 
appropriate planning and phasing of works are done. 
  Further, development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations 
on Indian Railways is a continuous and ongoing process and works in this regard are 
undertaken as per requirement, subject to inter -se priority and availability of funds. 
Development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of a station is carried out 
based on category of station / condition / traffic handled etc. 
  Development / Upgradation of railway stations is complex in nature involving 
safety of passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances such as fire 
clearance, heritage, tree cutting, airport clearance etc. The progress also gets affected 
due to brownfield related challenges such as shifting of utilities (involving 
water/sewage lines, optical fibre cables, gas pipe lines, power/signal cables, etc.), 

65 
 
infringements, operation of trains without hindering passenger movement, speed 
restrictions due to works carried out in close proximity of tracks and high voltage power 
lines, etc. and these factors affect the completion time. 
  
Cleanliness is a continuous process and every endeavour is made to keep the 
stations premises in properly maintained and clean condition. Various measures have 
been taken for passenger satisfaction and grievance redressal regarding cleanliness at 
stations which includes: 
• Rail Madad portal has been developed to enable passengers to highlight their 
needs and seek assistance on passenger amenities, cleanliness, security etc, on 
mobile app or through SMS irrespective of class of travel.  In Rail Madad, 
passengers can seek redressal through multiple channels such as Helpline 
number-139, RailMadad Web, App and SMS. Further, feedback of cleanliness 
is also taken through Rail Madad portal which is real time passenger grievance 
redressal mechanism. 
• Passenger awareness campaigns are regularly conducted across Indian Railways 
for encouraging them to dispose garbage in dustbins provided in trains & 
stations. 
• Regular inspections are conducted at Divisional level, HQ level and Railway 
Board Level for monitoring cleanliness at stations and suitable measures are 
taken to address the shortcomings. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
The Committee observe that freight remains the backbone of Indian Railways, 
contributing about 65% of its revenue. The Committee note that Coal, Iron Ore, Cement, 
Iron and Steel constitute about 70% of freight loading and revenue generation through 
freight operation.  The Committee note that Dedicated Freight Corridors Corporation 
of India Limited is running 406 trains per day and handling approximately 13% of 

66 
 
Indian Railway traffic. The Committee view that announcement of the Dankuni –Surat 
Dedicated Freight Corridor in Budget, 2026 represents a strategically significant 
expansion of the freight network and its timely execution and cost control will ensure 
economic and operational benefits, including decongestion of conventional routes and 
improved freight efficiency. The Committee are aware that Railways have implemented 
various policies for promoting non -bulk cargo segments such as automobiles, 
containers, parcels and fast-moving commercial goods. The Committee appreciate the 
product specific policies being designed which are enhancing freight earnings and 
recommend further strengthening of transport policy/model for light and low -density 
cargo to increase market share for Indian railways in commodity transportation. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to take concerted efforts in minimizing transit delays, 
lowering inventory holding requirements, reducing wastage and degradation of goods 
during transit and further simplify business processes. The Committee recommend the 
Ministry to accord priority for integration of freight corridors with industrial corridors, 
ports and multimodal logistics facilities to maximize logistics efficiency and long-term 
financial sustainability.  The Committee also r ecommend the Indian Railways to scale 
up the Joint Parcel Product –Rapid Cargo Service (JPP -RCS) on high -demand routes 
and expand the model to other commercially viable corridors across the country. The 
Committee urge the Ministry to strengthen partnerships with other logistics aggregators 
on similar lines to enhance connectivity and augment asset utilisation. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Railways has taken construction of two Dedicated Freight Corridors 
(DFC) viz. Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) from Ludhiana to Sonnagar 
(1337 Km) and the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) from Jawaharlal 
Nehru Port Terminal (JNPT) to Dadri (1506 Km). 
EDFC has been completed and commissioned. In WDFC, 1404 RKm out of total 
1506 RKm has been completed and commissioned. The balance work on WDFC from 
Vaitarna-JNPT section (102 Rkm) has been taken up. 
Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) Project will have positive impact on 
transportation and logistics sector as it will enable enhanced movement of Double Stack 

67 
 
Container (DSC) trains, higher axle load trains, faster access of northern hinterland by 
Western Ports and development of new terminals/linkages with industries along the 
DFC. The Eastern DFC will mostly cater to mineral traffic from Eastern India. These 
developments will enable reduction in logistic cost. 
Presently, the ‘JPP -RCS’ services are operational on 07 different routes viz. 
Surat Narayanpur Anant, Bhivandi Road -Sankrail, Patel Nagar -Chitpur, Udhna -
Sankrail, Budgam-Adarsh Nagar, Devlali-Danapur (as JPP-RCS Mix train comprising  
VPs and GS coaches) an d Bhivandi Road-Sankrail (as JPP-RCS Mix train comprising  
VPs and GS coaches). 
Operation of ‘JPP-RCS’ services are planned on the basis of market demand and 
operational feasibility. In order to explore the potential routes, interactive sessions are 
held with stakeholders at Division/ HQ level as well as Board level. 
Further, in order to popularize these services, the freight charges were revised 
downwardly and discount in empty direction was also introduced over certain sectors. 
Besides, the financial eligibility criteria for registration as Aggregator has been 
withdrawn and the empanelment fee has been reduced to Rs. 10,000/-. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
The Committee note that Gati Shakti Multi Modal Cargo terminal policy issued 
in December, 2021 and subsequently revised in December, 2022 and January, 2026, 
provides framework for development of rail freight terminals equipped with modern 
facilities including mechanized handling. The Committee also note that till date, a total 
of 124 GCTs have already been commissioned, 290 are in process. Besides 846 goods 
sheds of Railway are being improved and a work of Rs.14,500 crore has been sanctioned 
for development of customer amenities at the goods sheds and parcel offices during 
2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025 -26. The Committee further note that in order to improve 
the efficiency of rail freight handling at the terminals, Indian Railway has adopted two-
pronged approach of encouraging private sector to develop the modern rail freight 
terminals and augmenting/upgrading the infrastructure at railway owned goods sheds. 
While appreciating these efforts, the Committee recommend the Ministry to accord 
higher priority to increas ing rail’s modal share in freight through creation of an 

68 
 
extensive and commercially viable network of privately operated and railway-supported 
GCTs. The Committee further recommend simplification and standardization of siding 
approval procedures, along with ensuring time-bound rail connectivity from the nearest 
railhead to upcoming terminals. From an operational perspective, the Committee 
emphasize the need for technology-driven mechanized loading and unloading systems, 
assured and predictable rake supply and seamless multimodal integration with ports and 
major road corridors to reduce dwell time and enhance reliability of freight movement. 
The Committee also recommend instituting a performance -based monitoring 
framework for terminals, incorporating measurable indicators such as turnaround time, 
rake availability and utilization, degree of mechanization, safety compliance and 
customer satisfaction, so that the policy not only expands infrastructure capacity but 
also leads to higher freight earnings and improved asset utilization. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee have been examined in light of 
the revised Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal Policy and introduction of Cargo Related 
Facilities Policy. Railways concur with the need to enhance rail's modal share and have 
incorporated several enabling provisions in revised GCT policy including extension of 
concession period up to 50 years, simplified migration of existing terminals, 
redevelopment of underutilized Railway assets, and streamlined connectivity with 
defined cost-sharing mechanisms. Delegation of powers to DRMs and rationalization 
of procedures have further simplified siding approvals and ensured faster, time -bound 
connectivity.  
The policy also emphasizes development of modern, mechanized terminals, 
multimodal integration, and improved operational efficiency through expanded 
Common User Facilities and flexibility in value -added services. Introduction of CRF 
framework enables devel opment of logistics infrastructure on Railway land with 
Guaranteed Railway Freight, improving first/last -mile connectivity. Performance 
monitoring through measurable indicators, digital systems for traffic assessment, and 
continued focus on rake availabili ty and customer -centric services are expected to 

69 
 
enhance reliability, reduce dwell time, and improve overall freight earnings and asset 
utilization. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
The Committee observe that Indian Railways has undertaken substantial 
measures towards upgradation of track and signalling infrastructure, including adoption 
of modern track structures, mechanised maintenance, deployment of Electronic 
Interlocking, Automatic Block Signalling and large -scale rollout of the indigenously 
developed Kavach system. The financial outlay under Signalling & Telecom has shown 
a consistent upward trend, with actual expenditure exceeding budget estimates, 
reflecting prioritisation of safety and capacity enhancement.  During the year 2025-26, 
Rs. 6500 crore (RE) have been allocated for Signalling & Telecom related works, out 
of which Rs. 5354.30 crore has been spent till January, 2026. The allocation is Rs. 7500 
crore for the year 2026 -27.  For Kavach works, funds utili zed so far up to December, 
25 is Rs. 2,573.36 crores. The Committee note that Kavach version 4.0 has been 
successfully commissioned on 1297 Route Kilometers, covering the high density Delhi- 
Mumbai and Delhi -Howrah routes. The track side Kavach implementation work has 
been taken up on 23,360 RKM covering all GQ, GD, HDN and identified sections of 
Indian Railways. Tender has been finalised for equipping 6,300 Electric Locomotives 
with Kavach version 4.0 and another tender for equipping 2,679 Diesel Locomotives is 
under finalization.  The Committee desire the Ministry to ensure time-bound completion 
of ongoing track renewal and signalling projects through project monitoring 
mechanisms with clearly defined physical and financial  targets. The Committee also 
desire the Ministry to expedite large -scale deployment of Kavach across high -density 
and high -risk routes, strengthen indigenous manufacturing capacity and ensure 
adequate training of personnel to maximise safety outcomes. The Committee further 
recommend that impact assessments be undertaken for measures implemented towards 
the upgradation of track and signalling infrastructure to evaluate reduction in accidents, 
improvement in punctuality and enhancement in line capacity. 

70 
 
Reply of the Government 
Track Renewal: 
All track renewal projects are processed, examined and sanctioned through a 
unified digital platform developed by Indian Railways, known as the Indian Railways 
Projects Sanctions & Management (IRPSM) system. This ensures that a uniform set of 
criteria is applied across all Zonal Railways in a transparent and systematic manner 
Track renewal targets are set at the beginning of each year based on safety 
priorities, resource availability and overall annual goals assigned to Zonal Railways. 
These targets are monitored and reviewed regularly by the Railway Board to ensure 
timely progress and adherence. 
For execution, mechanized methods are widely adopted to improve the speed of 
work, maintain high quality standards and enhance overall effectiveness. 
Track Maintenance 
(i)  Track Maintenance is being carried out by latest technology track machines 
which includes Rail Grinding Machine (RGM), High Output Plain Track & Turnout 
Tampers and Track Relaying Machine (TRT, TLE and PCCM). 
(ii)  Monitoring of track parameters is being done through regular runs of Track 
Recording Cars (TRC) to ascertain optimal maintenance requirements. 
(a) 7 no. Track recording cars (TRCs) are available including 3 number ITMS 
(Integrated Track Monitoring System). 
(b) Further, 7 nos. ZITMS (Integrated Track Monitoring System with Zero 
Speed) is under supply, out of which one ZITMS has been commissioned 
recently. 
Oscillation Monitoring System (OMS) run is being carried out by Railways for 
comprehensive health assessment of track. 
(iii)  Procurement of 16 Nos. Turnout Geometry Measurement Trolley for continuous 
recording of track parameters in yards is in progress. 
(iv)  Presently all the monitoring data is being fed in Track Management System 
(TMS). 
Signalling: 

71 
 
Strengthening, upgradation, modernisation and improvement of Signalling 
infrastructure is a continuous and ongoing process over Indian Railways. Indian 
Railway is continuously modernizing current infrastructure of its signalling system with 
current status as under: 
1.  Electrical/Electronic Interlocking Systems with centralized operation points and 
signals in place of old mechanical signalling have been provided at 6665 stations as on 
28.02.2026, out of which Electronic Interlocking have been provided at 3870 stations 
on Indian Railway. 
2.  Interlocking of Level Crossing Gates (LC) has been provided at 10153 Level 
Crossing Gates upto 28.02.2026 for enhancing safety at LC Gate. 
3.  Complete Track Circuiting of stations to enhance safety by verification of track 
occupancy by electrical means has been provided at 6,669 stations up to 28.02.2026.  
4.  Axle counters for automatic clearance of Block Section, BPAC (Block Proving 
Axle Counter) are provided to ensure complete arrival of train without manual 
intervention before granting line clear to receive next train and to reduce human 
element. These systems have been provided on 6149 Block Sections up to 28.02.2026. 
5.  Automatic Block Signalling (ABS) that enhances line capacity within existing 
track infrastructure has been provided at 6897 Route km upto 28.02.2026. 
6.  Indian Railways has gone for implementation of indigenously developed 
Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system, which required safety certification of highest 
order (SIL 4). Kavach has been adopted as a National ATP system in July 2020. 
After extensive and elaborate trials, Kavach Version 4.0 has been successfully 
commissioned on 1638 Route Kilometres, covering the high density Delhi - Mumbai 
and Delhi-Howrah routes as below: 
 
SN Section Progress (Route Km) 
(1) Delhi-Mumbai route: 
i. Junction cabin – Palwal – Mathura –Nagda section 667 
ii. Vadodara – Ahmedabad section 96 
iii. Vadodara – Virar section 336 
(2) Delhi – Howrah route: 
i Gaya Sarmatanr section 93 
ii Chota Ambana - Bardhaman – Howrah section 260 

72 
 
iii Subedarganj-Kanpur 186 
 
Track side Kavach implementation work has been taken up on 24,427 RKM 
covering all GQ, GD, HDN and identified sections of Indian Railways. 
Presently there are three Indian OEMs who are approved for Kavach. Efforts are 
being made to develop more vendors to enhance the capacity and scale up the 
implementation of Kavach. 
Specialized training programmes on Kavach are being conducted at centralized 
training institutes of Indian Railways to impart training to all concerned officials. By 
now more than 61,758 technicians, operators and engineers have been trained on 
Kavach technology. This includes about 52,317 Loco Pilots & Assistant Loco Pilots. 
Courses have been designed in collaboration with IRISET. 
Regarding Project Monitoring mechanism for financial as well physical 
progress, a dedicated team of Signalling officials under Gati Shakti Directorate in the 
Ministry of Railways has been established which closely monitors ongoing Signalling 
Projects for time bound completion. 
Punctuality: The Zone -wise punctuality of Mail / Express trains on Indian Railways 
for the last three years have been recorded as under:- 
  
Zones 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
CR 79.48 82.34 82.05 
ECOR 62.54 62.36 58.52 
ECR 80.29 79.31 75.26 
ER 77.99 83.80 78.97 
KRCL 64.26 67.66 71.13 
NCR* 52.96 72.35 79.13 
NER 75.11 78.08 76.26 
NFR 85.03 80.68 82.90 
NR* 61.66 64.37 66.45 
NWR 90.56 92.43 93.02 

73 
 
SCR* 72.43 79.52 85.60 
SECR* 45.49 55.38 59.34 
SER 72.08 61.97 56.26 
SR 90.13 91.23 91.29 
SWR 89.30 87.17 89.37 
WCR* 68.15 80.19 80.88 
WR 92.21 94.93 95.97 
IR 73.62 77.12 77.43 
  On account of Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) having been fully 
commissioned on the stretch falling in North Central Railway, freight traffic passes 
through DFCCIL, leaving the main line exclusively for operation of passenger train 
services.  It can be seen that punctuality of Mail/Express train has improved from  
52.96% in 2023-24 to 79.13% in 2025-26.    
  On Northern Railway, the Maximum Permissible Speed of Panipat -Jind section 
has increased from 65 Kmph to 100 Kmph.   Simultaneously, the conversion from ICF 
to LHB rakes has also been done for majority of rakes.   It may be seen that the 
punctuality of Mail / Express trains on NR has consistently been improving for the last 
3 years i.e. from 61.66% in 2023-24 to 66.45% in 2025-26. 
  On South Central Railway, due to various infrastructural works as well as 
conversion of ICF rakes into LHB rakes, the punctuality of Mail/Express trains have 
improved significantly from 72.43% in 2023-24 to 85.60% in 2025-26. 
  On South East Central Railway, after construction of Road over Rail Bridge on 
Raipur-Durg Auto section and construction of flyover from Bilaspur to Uslapur, 
punctuality of Mail / Express trains have gradually improved from 45.49% in 2023 -24 
to 59.34% in 2025-26. 
  On West Central Railway,  construction of new bypass line at New Katni has 
resulted in free goods traffic movement, facilitating through movement of passenger 
carrying trains.   Similarly, construction of UP & DN flyover between Powerkheda -
Jujharpur avoiding Itarsi have resulted in passing of through Mail / Express & goods 
trains.  As a result of these measures, punctuality of Mail / Express trains on WCR have 

74 
 
significantly improved by more than 12.5% i.e. from 68.15% in 2023 -24 to 80.88% in 
2025-26. 
  From the above, it can be concluded that as a result of various infrastructural 
improvement / measures taken, the punctuality of passenger carrying trains have 
consistently been improving on Indian Railways.  Moreover during the period 2023-24 
to 2025 -26, around 800 new train services have been introduced and increase in 
frequency of 84 trains have been done. 
Safety 
Safety is accorded the highest priority on Indian Railways. As a consequence of various 
safety measures taken over the years, there has been a steep decline in the number of 
accidents.  
Number of Consequential Train Accidents has reduced as shown in the table below:- 
Year Consequential Accidents 
2014-15 135 
2025-26  16 (88% lesser) 
Another important index showing improvement in safety in train operations is 
Consequential Accident Index, the details of which are as under:- 
Consequential Accident Index:- 
Year Accident Index 
2014-15 0.11 
2024-25 0.03 (73% lesser) 
2025-26 ( upto February 2026) 0.01 
 
This index measures number of consequential accidents as a ratio of total running 
kilometers of all trains. 
 
Accident Index   =               
 
 
 
 
     No. of consequential accidents  
 
     No. of trains X million kilometers run 

75 
 
 
 
The various safety measures taken to enhance safety in train operations are as under:- 
1. On Indian Railways, the expenditure on Safety related activities has increased 
over the years as under:- 
Year 
Expenditure/Budget on Safety related activities (Rs. in 
Cr.) 
2013-14 39,200 
2022-23 87,336 
2023-24 1,01,662 
2024-25 1,14,022 
2025-26 1,17,693 
2026-27 1,20,389 
 
2. Electrical/Electronic Interlocking Systems with centralized operation of points 
and signals have been provided at 6,665 stations up to 28.02.2026 to reduce accidents 
due to human failure. 
3. Interlocking of Level Crossing (LC) Gates has been provided at 10,153 Level 
Crossing Gates up to 28.02.2026 for enhancing safety at LC Gates. 
4. Complete Track Circuiting of stations to enhance safety by verification of track 
occupancy by electrical means has been provided at 6,669 stations up to 28.02.2026.  
234
165
135
55
31
16
2005-06 2009-10 2014-15 2019-20 2024-25 2025-26
No. of Consequential Train 
Accidents

76 
 
5. Indian Railways has gone for implementation of indigenously developed 
Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system, which required safety certification of highest 
order (SIL 4). Kavach has been adopted as a National ATP system in July 2020. Based 
on deployment of Kavach version 3.2 on 1,465 RKm on South Central Railway and 
experience gained, further improvements were made. Finally, Kavach specification 
version 4.0 was approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024. After extensive and elaborate trials, 
Kavach Version 4.0 has be en successfully commissioned on 1,638 Route Kilometres, 
covering the high density Delhi-Mumbai and Delhi-Howrah routes as below: 
S.No. Section Progress (Route Km) 
(1) Delhi–Mumbai route: 
i Junction cabin – Palwal – Mathura – Nagda 
section 
667  
ii Vadodara –Ahmedabad section  96 
iii Vadodara – Virar section 336 
(2) Delhi – Howrah route: 
i Gaya Sarmatanr section 93 
ii Chota Ambana–Bardhaman – Howrah 
section 
260 
iii. Subedarganj – Kanpur 186 
 
Further, track side Kavach implementation work has been taken up on 24,427 RKM 
covering all GQ, GD, HDN and identified sections of Indian Railways. 
6. Detailed instructions on issues related with safety of Signalling, e.g. mandatory 
correspondence check, alteration work protocol, preparation of completion drawing, 
etc. have been issued. 
7. System of disconnection and reconnection for S&T equipment as per protocol 
has been re-emphasized. 
8. All locomotives are equipped with Vigilance Control Devices (VCD) to improve 
alertness of Loco Pilots. 
9. Retro-reflective sigma boards are provided on the mast which is located two 
OHE masts prior to the signals in electrified territories to alert the crew about the signal 
ahead when visibility is low due to foggy weather. 

77 
 
10.  A GPS based Fog Safety Device (FSD) is provided to loco pilots in fog affected 
areas which enables loco pilots to know the distance of the approaching landmarks like 
signals, level crossing gates, etc. 
11.  Modern track structure consisting of 60kg, 90 Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) 
rails, Prestressed Concrete Sleeper (PSC) Normal/Wide base sleepers with elastic 
fastening, fan shaped layout turnout on PSC sleepers, Steel Channel/H -beam Sleepers 
on girder bridges is used while carrying out primary track renewals. 
12.  Mechanisation of track laying activity through use of track machines like PQRS, 
TRT, T-28 etc. to reduce human errors. 
13.  Maximizing supply of 130m/260m long rail panels for increasing progress of 
rail renewal and avoiding welding of joints, thereby improving safety. 
14.  Ultrasonic Flaw Detection (USFD) testing of rails to detect flaws and timely 
removal of defective rails. 
15.  Laying of longer rails, minimizing the use of Alumino  Thermic Welding and 
adoption of better welding technology for rails i.e., Flash Butt Welding. 
16.  Monitoring of track geometry by OMS (Oscillation Monitoring System) and 
TRC (Track Recording Cars). 
17.  Patrolling of railway tracks to look out for weld/rail fractures. 
18.  The use of Thick Web Switches and Weldable CMS Crossing in turnout renewal   
works. 
19.  Inspections at regular intervals are carried out to monitor and educate staff for 
observance of safe practices. 
20. Web based online monitoring system of track assets viz. Track database and 
decision support system has been adopted to decide rationalized maintenance 
requirement and optimize inputs.  
21. Detailed instructions on issues related with safety of Track, e.g. integrated block, 
corridor block, worksite safety, monsoon precautions, etc. have been issued. 
22. Preventive maintenance of railway assets (Coaches & Wagons) is undertaken to 
ensure safe train operations. 
23. Replacement of conventional ICF design coaches with LHB design coaches is 
being done. 

78 
 
24. All unmanned level crossings (UMLCs) on Broad Gauge (BG) route have been 
eliminated by January 2019. 
25. Safety of Railway Bridges is ensured through regular inspection of Bridges. The 
requirement of repair/rehabilitation of Bridges is taken up based upon the conditions 
assessed during these inspections. 
26. Indian Railways has displayed Statutory “Fire Notices” for widespread 
passenger information in all coaches. Fire posters are provided in every coach so as to 
educate and alert passengers regarding various Do’s and Don’ts to prevent fire. These 
include mess ages regarding not carrying any inflammable material, explosives, 
prohibition of smoking inside the coaches, penalties etc. 
27. Production Units are providing Fire detection and suppression system in newly 
manufactured Power Cars and Pantry Cars, Fire and Smoke detection system in newly 
manufactured coaches. Progressive fitment of the same in existing coaches is also 
underway by Zonal Railways in a phased manner. 
28. Regular counselling and training of staff is undertaken.  
29. Concept of Rolling Block introduced in Indian Railways (Open Lines) General 
Rules vide Gazette notification dated 30.11.2023, wherein work of integrated 
maintenance/ repair/replacement of assets is planned up to 52 weeks in advance on 
rolling basis and executed as per plan. 
The details of the Safety related works related to better maintenance practices, 
Technological improvements, better infrastructure and rolling stock etc. undertaken by 
Railways are tabulated below:- 
S.N. Item 2004-05 to 
2013-14 
2014-15 to 2024-
25 
2014-25 Vs. 
2004-14 
 Technological Improvements 
1. Use of high-quality rails 
(60 Kg) (Km) 
57,450 Km 1.43 Lakh Km More than 2 
times 
2. Longer Rail Panels 
(260m) (Km) 
9,917 Km 77,522 Km Nearly 8 
times 
3. Electronic Interlocking 
(Stations) 
837 Stations 3,691 Stations More than 4 
times 
4. Fog Pass Safety Devices 
(Nos.) 
As on 
31.03.14:  
90 Nos. 
As on 31.03.25: 
25,939 Nos. 
288 times 

79 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
The Committee note that Mumbai Ahmedabad High Speed Rail Line (MAHSR) 
(508 km) project was approved in 2015 at Rs. 97,636 crore. The Committee also note 
that the cost has increased mainly due to addition of taxes and cess (Rs. 29,330 crore), 
rolling stock and signalling (Rs. 16,500 crore), inflation (Rs. 19,084 crore) and higher 
land and resettlement and rehabilitation cost (Rs. 16,695 crore) and the revised estimate 
is under sanction. The Committee further note that the development of E10 series of 
Shinkansen is underway. Further the Committee appreciate the decision to start the 
operation using B28 (Bharat made Bullet Trainset) and efforts are underway to start 
operation using B28 (Bharat made Bullet, 280 kmph) for Surat to Vapi (97 km) in 
August, 2027. The Committee recommend that the Ministry adopt a robust execution 
framework to ensure effective inter -agency coordination, early id entification and 
resolution of bottlenecks, and expeditious completion of utility shifting works. Such 
5. Thick Web Switches 
(Nos.) 
Nil 28,301 Nos.  
 Better Maintenance Practices 
1. Primary Rail Renewal 
(Track Km) 
32,260 Km 49,941 Km 1.5 times 
2. USFD (Ultra Sonic Flaw 
detection) Testing of 
Welds (Nos.) 
79.43 Lakh 2 Crore More than 2 
times 
3. Weld failures (Nos.) In 2013-14: 
3699 Nos. 
In 2024-25:  
370 Nos. 
90 % 
reduction 
4. Rail fractures (Nos.) In 2013-14: 
2548 Nos. 
In 2024-25:  
289 Nos. 
More than 
88% 
reduction 
 Better Infrastructure and Rolling Stock 
1. New Track KM added 
(Track Km) 
14,985 Km 34,428 Km More than 2 
times 
2. Flyovers 
(RoBs)/Underpasses 
(RUBs) (Nos.) 
4,148 Nos. 13,808 Nos. More than 3 
times 
3. Unmanned Level 
crossings  
(Nos.) on BG 
As on 
31.03.14:  
8,948 
As on 31.03.24:Nil 
(All eliminated by 
31.01.19) 
Removed 
4. Manufacture of LHB 
Coaches (Nos.) 
2,337 Nos. 42,677 More than 
18 times 

80 
 
measures are essential to prevent time and cost overruns and to secure timely delivery 
of projects. The Committee also note the various steps taken by the Railways under 
Make in India Initiative in indigenising soft and hard skills amongst other innovations.   
The Committee recommend accelerated indigenisation of high speed rail components 
and institutionalised capacity -building efforts through expansion of training 
programmes at the High Speed Rail Training Institute, Vadodara, and by leveraging 
international expertise. While pursuing indigenisation of high -speed rail components 
and associated technologies, the Committee recommend that the Railways undertake a 
comprehensive study of successful high -speed rail networks in countries where such 
systems are oper ating efficiently. The Committee are of the view that drawing upon 
international best practices in planning, execution and operations would help in 
expediting project completion, minimise cost overruns and facilitate the development 
of a world-class high-speed rail network in the country. The Committee appreciate the 
forward-looking vision of Indian Railways in announcing new High -Speed Rail 
corridors in the Budget 2026 –27. For future corridors, the Committee emphasise that 
land acquisition and other statutory clearances should be completed  prior to the 
sanctioning of projects, so as to ensure time -bound implementation and safeguard 
financial viability.   
 
Reply of the Government 
Presently, the Mumbai -Ahmedabad High Speed Rail (MAHSR) Project (508 
km) is under execution. Entire land (1389.5 Ha.) for MAHSR project has been acquired. 
All Statutory Clearances have been obtained. All 1651 utilities have been shifted. The 
delay in land acquisition in the State of Maharashtra has impacted the project till 2021. 
The land acquisition picked up in 2022 in Maharashtra. The progress of the project is 
in full swing. 
Further, to strengthen national transport infrastructure, provide a fillip to regional 
connectivity, economic growth, tourism, investment and employment generation, and 
encourage modal shift from road and air transport to rail, the Government has 
announced the development of the following seven new High -Speed Rail (HSR) 
corridors in the Union Budget 2026-27: - 

81 
 
(i) Mumbai–Pune 
(ii) Pune–Hyderabad 
(iii) Hyderabad–Bengaluru 
(iv) Hyderabad–Chennai 
(v) Chennai–Bengaluru 
(vi) Delhi–Varanasi 
(vii) Varanasi–Siliguri 
Updation of cost, alignment etc. in DPRs for the four (04) corridors are underway 
and for remaining three (03) corridors, DPRs are under preparation. 
Being highly capital intensive, the decision to sanction any HSR 
Corridor/Project depends on many factors such as outcome of DPR, techno -economic 
feasibility studies and availability of resources such as financing options etc. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 22 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 
While observing the trend of budgetary estimates and actual expenditure on 
Railway Research in recent years, the Committee feel the need to enhance the pace of 
expenditure in research and development activities. Such efforts are essential to support 
rapid modern ization, indigenisation, safety enhancement and technological self -
reliance. The Committee desire that the Budget Estimate of Rs. 86.72 crore for 2026 –
27 should be effectively utilized to meaningfully advance these objectives and 
accelerate innovation-led transformation in the Railways. The Committee recommend 
that research initiatives be strategically aligned with emerging and future -oriented 
priorities, including advanced signalling and train control systems; energy efficiency 
and decarbonization; resilient construction and predictive maintenance of RUBs, ROBs, 
railway tunnels and bridges; next-generation rolling stock; high-speed rail technologies 
and digital transformation. The Committee further emphasize the need to establish 
clearly defined, outcome -oriented targets with timelines for each major R&D project, 
supported by a monitoring and evaluation framework to ensure accountability and 

82 
 
measurable impact. The Committee also desire that sustained collaboration be fostered 
with premier national and international institutions and industry partners working in 
these domains, so that research investments result in scalable outcomes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Committee regarding enhancing the pace of 
expenditure and strengthening of research and development activities in Indian 
Railways have been noted. 
It is further stated that the Budget Estimate of ₹86.72 crore for 2026 –27 for 
railway research will be optimally utilized on priority R&D projects by adopting 
following means- 
• Research initiatives are being aligned with emerging and future -oriented 
priorities including the areas as mentioned in the committee’s recommendation. 
• Each major R&D project is assigned clearly defined deliverables, milestone 
linked expenditure control and completion timelines. 
• Project tracking mechanism is in place to ensure measurable outcomes by 
assigning Project In-charges for each individual research project. 
• RDSO is regularly engaging with Eminent Research Institutions and their 
Startup Ecosystem (CRRs/ Joint Research). 
a) Centers for Railway Research, IISc, NID, Other IITs 
b) Chairs (BHU, PEC Chandigarh) 
c) International Collaborations with Research Bodies like MxV Rail, UIC etc. 
• After successful prototype/lab tests, developed product may be transferred to 
Industry or Railways for mass roll out and generating Economies of Scale 
besides developing Indigenous capacity for Production, Supply to IR and 
possible Export. 
The above measures are expected to strengthen the R&D ecosystem in Indian 
Railways and accelerate innovation-led transformation of the railway system. 
 
 
 
 

83 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
The Committee note the wide range of policy measures, infrastructure initiatives, 
technology adoptions and institutional mechanisms undertaken by Indian Railways to 
achieve the target of Net Zero Carbon Emissions by 2030, including near -complete 
electrification of the broad -gauge network, large -scale deployment of solar and wind 
energy, introduction of energy -efficient rolling stock and propulsion systems, 
promotion of green station redevelopment, solid waste management, bio -toilets, 
hydrogen train technolo gy and enhanced rail share in automobile and freight 
transportation. The Committee appreciate the setting up of Environment and 
Housekeeping Management (EnHM) Directorate in Railway Board in year 2015 and 
EnHM wings in all Zones to deal with the issues related to Environment as well as 
Housekeeping Management of Indian Railways. The Committee also note development 
and deployment of technologies by Indian Railways with organizations such as 
Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI), Council of Scientif ic & Industrial 
Research-Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (CSIR -CIMAP), 
International Centre for Automotive Technology (ICAT), Pune. While appreciating the 
energy efficiency and carbon reduction initiatives of Railways, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to establish defined targets, rational timelines, and measurable 
performance indicators. The Committee further recommend undertaking periodic 
impact assessments of these initiatives in collaboration with research organizations and 
technical institutions, so as to objectively evaluate actual reductions in energy 
consumption and carbon emissions. Such assessments would also help identify areas 
for improvement and enhance the overall effectiveness of the measures adopted.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways (IR) is an environment friendly means of bulk transportation 
system and it has set a target of making itself 'Net Zero Carbon Emitter' (NZCE) by 
2030. In this regard, the updated position regarding the targets and status of various 
initiatives being undertaken is as mentioned below:  
• Environment and Housekeeping Management (EnHM) wings have been set up 
in all Zones.  

84 
 
• Electrification:  
o Indian Railways has set target of 100 % electrification of BG routes. The 
completion of Electrification project(s) depends on various factors like 
forest clearances by officials of forest department, shifting of infringing 
utilities, statutory clearances f rom various authorities, geological and 
topographical conditions of area, law & order situation in the area of 
project(s) site, number of working months in a year for particular project 
site due to climatic condition etc. All these factors affect the compl etion 
time of the project(s).  
o Out of 70,140 BG RKM, 69,767 RKM (99.4%) has been electrified.  
o Further Roadmap : - 100 % electrification is to be achieved by Indian 
Railways. To expedite railway electrification work, various steps have 
been taken by Indian Railways including the close monitoring of 
execution through reviews meetings with executing ag encies being 
conducted regularly at Board level, chasing the matters with various 
executing agencies like RVNL, IRCON, PGCIL, RITES writing D.O 
letters to Chief Secretaries of states wherever the problem of ROW or 
execution of transmission line works arises with state power utilities with 
further letter to Railways for follow-up the matter.  
o Electrification of railway network on Indian Railways has been taken up 
in mission mode. So far  about 99.4% of the total broad - gauge network 
of Indian Railways has been electrified. The electrification in remaining 
network has been taken up. Electrificat ion carried out during 2014 -25 & 
before 2014 is as under: 
Period Route Kilometer 
Before 2014 (about 60 years) 21,801 
2014-25 46,900 
 
• Solar and Wind Energy: Indian Railways has planned to progressively meet its 
power requirement through renewable sources with combination of solar, wind 

85 
 
and other renewable sources based on strategic power procurement planning. 
The transition to renewable energy over Indian Railways is an ongoing 
process.  In this regard, as of April, 2026, the milestones achieved include: 
o Commissioning of approximately 1150 MW of solar power plants 
(comprising both rooftop and land based). 
o 103.40 MW of wind power plants. 
o 100 MW of renewable power under Round the Clock (RTC) mode, which 
has actively started flowing into the IR network. 
o As a definitive action plan and measurable indicator of future capacity 
augmentation, RE projects are being aggressively pursued. As a part of 
this, in addition to the existing tie-up of 1500 MW RE-RTC power, further 
1000 MW RE-RTC has also been tied up.  
• Redevelopment of Railway Stations:  In redevelopment process, all 
environmental norms are duly considered for achieving sustainable 
modernization of stations. 
• Solid Waste Management:  
o Waste collected inside trains is collected and disposed in garbage disposal 
bags at designated en-route stations, identified for waste disposal.  
o Based on local conditions, feasibility and requirement, tie -ups for waste 
disposal, have been made between local Railway authorities and 
municipal bodies.   
o Infrastructure like Sewage treatment plants (STPs), Effluent Treatment 
plants (ETPs) has been installed and commissioned, on need basis, at 
more than 200 stations over Indian Railways.   
o Materials Recovery Facilities (MRF), where non-compostable solid waste 
can be temporarily stored to facilitate segregation, sorting and recovery 
of recyclables from various components of waste, have been set up.  
o Zero discharge Bio -toilets have been fitted in all passenger coaches to 
prevent falling of fecal matter on railway tracks. The details of provision 
of bio toilets are as under: 

86 
 
 
 
• Hydrogen 
train: 
Indian Railways (IR) has taken up a state-of-the-art project for running of its first 
hydrogen train on pilot basis to demonstrate the use of hydrogen powered train 
technology in Railways. The project establishes the commitment of IR towards 
advancements in alternative energy -powered train travel thereby ensuring a 
cleaner and greener future for the country’s transportation sector in order to meet 
net-zero carbon emission targets of IR. 
This project involved designing from first stages, prototype manufacturing and 
first-time development of hydrogen traction technology in Indian Railways. 
Manufacturing of Hydrogen Train -set has been completed. Prominent features 
of Hydrogen Train-set are as below: 
o Designed and Developed in India demonstrating IR’s commitment to 
Atmanirbhar Bharat. 
o Presently, it is the world’s longest (10 coaches) and most powerful (2400 
kW) Hydrogen Train-set on Broad Gauge platform. 
o The train-set comprises of two Driving Power Cars (DPCs) of 1200 kW 
each, totalling 2400 kW along with eight passenger cars. 
o Zero CO2 emissions; only emission is water vapour. 
o Major step in development of next generation fuel technology in 
Railways. 
o Oscillation trial of Hydrogen trainset has been successfully completed. 
For providing hydrogen for use in this train -set, a dedicated Hydrogen 
Production Plant has been setup at Jind, where hydrogen is produced through 
electrolysis process, which is a key element of green hydrogen generation. 
This pilot project involved design, prototype manufacturing and first -time 
development of hydrogen traction technology in Indian Railways. The expansion 
Period Number of Bio-Toilet fitted 
2004-2014 9,587 
2014- Till February 2026 3,66,250 

87 
 
of hydrogen train operations beyond pilot project will depend on the success and 
feedback of this pilot project. 
 
 

88 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

89 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

90 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
       New Delhi; DR. C.M. RAMESH 
06 August, 2026________ Chairperson 
15 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
  

91 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2025-26) 
 
 
The Committee met on Thursday, the 6th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 
1530 hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. C.M. Ramesh – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Shri Ummeda Ram Beniwal 
5. Shri Chhotelal 
6. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
7. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
9. Shri Khagen Murmu 
10. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
11. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
12. Shri Sudama Prasad 
13. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
14. Dr. Bhola Singh 
15. Shri Bharatbhai Manubhai Sutariya 
16. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
17. Dr. Alka Gurjar 
18. Shri Rajendra Hiralal Jain 
19. Shri Mansoor Ali Khan 
20. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
21. Dr. K. Laxman 
22. Shri Khiru Mahto 
23. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
24. Smt. Sadhna Singh 

92 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam   -  Director  
3. Smt. Savdha Kalia  -  Deputy Secretary 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following 
draft Reports :-  
(i) *****   *****   *****   *****  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their 8th Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of Railways. 
 
The Committee adopted the above -mentioned Report s without any 
modifications.  
3.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the 
Reports to the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
    
-------- 
 
 