6 
STANDING  COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005)} 
 
 
 
   
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2005/Phalguna, 1925 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
   STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
 
(2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005) 
 
 
   {Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
       Observations contained in the Second Report of the 
            Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005)} 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   2.3.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3.3.2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2005/Phalguna, 1925 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
  
           
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
CHAPTER I   Report  
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have  
   been accepted by the Government  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observa tions in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited  
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
held on 25 January, 2005.      
 
II         Analysis of Action Taken by  the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Second  
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2004-2005) (14th Lok Sabha)  
     
        ANNEXURE 
 
I           Assessment of Harvest and Post-Harvest Losses of some   
Agricultural Commodities under NATP    

Composition of  the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri G.L. Bhargava 
5. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7. Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan 
8. Shri Lalchand Kol 
9. Shri Khagen Das 
10. Shri Dharmendra 
11. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
12. Shri Raghunath Jha 
13. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
14. Shri Prakash V. Patil 
15. Shri A. Ravichandran 
16. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
17. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
18. Shri Harihar Swain 
19. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
20. Shri Mahboob Zahedi 
21. # Smt. Anuradha Choudhary 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
23. Shri Harish Rawat 
24. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
25. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
26. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
27. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
28. Shri Datta Meghe 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
30. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
31. *Dr. M.S.Gill 
 
Chaudhary Munawwar Hassan  ceased to be the Member of this Committee owing to his 
nomination to  the Standing  Committee  on Labour  w.e.f.16.8.04 vide  L.S. Bt.Pt.-II 
dt.16.8.04 
# Smt. Anuradha Choudhary  has been nominated to this Committee  w.e.f. 30.8.2004 
vide  L.S. Bt.Pt-II, dt. 30.8.2004 
Shri Raashid Alvi ceased to be the Member of this Committee owing to his nomination  
to the Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice w.e.f  31.8.2004 vide  
R.S.  Bt Pt-II  dt. 31.8.2004 
*Dr. M.S. Gill has been nominated to this Committee w.e.f 31.8.2004 vide R. S. Bt  Pt-II  
dt. 31.8.2004 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Director 
3. Shri K.D. Muley  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Anil Kumar  - Senior Executive Asstt.  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-
2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, present this Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations/observations c ontained in the Second Report of 
the Standing Committee on Agricultu re (2004-2005) (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha), on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education). 
 
2. The Second Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2004-2005) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research & Education) was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 17.08.2004 and laid in Rajya Sabha on the 
same day.  The Ministry of Agricu lture (Department of Agricultural 
Research & Education) was requested to furnish action taken replies of the 
Government to recommendations contai ned in the Second  Report.  The 
replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the 
Report were received. 
 
3. The Committee considered these action taken replies furnished by 
the Government in its sitting held on 25 Janua ry, 2005, approved the draft 
comments and adopted the Sixth Report.  Minutes of the sitting are placed 
in Appendix I. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Second Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV  
25  February, 2005          Chairman, 
 5 Magha, 1926 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Agriculture. 
  

CHAPTER I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contai ned in the second Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agricu lture (2004-05) on Demands for Grants 
(2004-05) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education) which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 
17.8.2004. 
1.2 The Action Taken Replies have been receiv ed  from  the Mini stry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education)  in respect of all the 11 
recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II of the Report)  
 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 and 10 (Total-6) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s action take n reply (Chapter I II of the Report) - 
NIL 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which action taken replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV of the 
Report)  
 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 4, 8, 9 and 11 (Total-4) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Obser vations in respec t of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited.  (Chapter V)  
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 6 (Total-1) 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations. 

Recommendation No.2 
 
Insufficient Tenth Plan Public funding for DARE/ICAR 
 
1.4 The Committee had observe that the Department had proposed a minimum 
requirement of Rs. 16,000 crore for the Tent h Plan.  Against this requirement, the 
Planning Commission approved onl y Rs. 4,868 crore which was subsequently enhanced 
to Rs. 5,368 crore by providing Rs. 500 crore for establishing new KVKs. 
The Committee had strongly deplore th is tendency of the Planning Commission 
and the Ministry of Finance for imposing dras tic cuts as high as up to 55 per cent to 60 
per cent on the amount demanded by the Department as per their pressing needs. 
The Committee were of the strong opini on that although th e DARE/ICAR make 
high claims in matching the quality of their ag rarian and allied sectors in R&D activities 
with other advanced countries, the ground reality is entirely different, especially when  
compared with the kind of research a nd development activiti es and the actual 
achievements made by the agriculturally adva nced countries in the field of Hybrid 
Technology,  Biotechnology, Management of Biotic and Abiotic stresses, quality of Seed 
and Planting Material, quality of Energy and Farm machinery, post-harvest technologies, 
natural resource management, animal sciences  and fisheries sectors and speedy transfer 
of technology from Land to Lab. 
The Committee were of the considered view  that addressing of  all the important 
areas of agricultural research, developmen t and education practic ally requires huge and 
well planned funding.  Unfortunately, the Pl anning Commission and the Ministry of 
Finance have been ignoring the genuine an d pressing demands of the Ministry of 
Agriculture to provide higher amount of public funding than being provided at present for 

the R&D activities of the DARE/ICAR to prove their talent.   This will  give them 
encouragement to put in more dedicated effo rts in making new strides in the Agriculture 
sector and the benefits of which only reach to the common people of the country. 
The Committee, had, therefor e, strongly recommend that the Department should 
be provided with Rs. 16,000 crore by the Pl anning Commission and the Ministry of 
Finance for the Tenth Plan period as per their original proposal. 
1.5 The Government in its action taken repl y have stated that the Department has 
already completed the exercise of Xth Plan  SFCs / EFCs and the financial requirement 
has already been adjusted with the overall Xth Plan outlay of Rs.5368 crore allocated to 
the Department by the Planning Commission during the Xth Plan. 
Depending on the total resource avai lability, the Planning Commission had 
allocated Rs. 5368 crore to DARE / ICAR dur ing Xth Plan for on-going as well as new 
research initiatives to be undertaken by the Department.  As such, the Department had 
prioritized its requirements to adjust within the allocated amount of Rs.5368 crore.  Apart 
from the on-going plan schemes / projects including new activitie s already approved by 
the Xth Plan SFCs / EFCs of the Department, there are still a few new programmes, some 
of which have already been forwarded to the Planning Commission for its consideration 
and in-principle approval.  These programmes are : Seed  Production in Agricultural 
Crops and Fisheries (with outlay of Rs.247.54 crore); Productivity enhancement (Rs.2000 
crore); input use efficiency enhancement (R s.1000 crore); Moderniz ation of laboratories 
(Rs.950 crore); Centres of Excellence in S AUs (Rs.1050 crore) – all four components 
totaling Rs.5000 crore for Xth Plan period. Planning Commission has also been requested 
to provide Rs.550 crore during 2004 – 05) to address these issues. The National 
Agricultural Technology Project – Phase II (Rs.200 crore as Xth Plan component) – 

already agreed to in prin ciple by Planning Commission w ould be costing around Rs.900 
crore over the period of five years and other priority project namely Network Project on 
Microorganisms in relation to Agriculture is projected at Rs.200 crore approximately – 
which is at processing stage.  In the even t of approval of these priority projects, as 
explained above, the Department will need additional funds over and above to the 
allocated amount of Rs.5368 crore during Xth Plan period. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.6. The Committee view the reply of th e Planning Commission to continue the 
supportive for the R&D projects of DARE/ICAR in future as  rather paradoxical, given 
the fact that the DARE was allocated a meager amount of Rs.5,368 crore as against the 
demand of Rs.16,000 crore.  Since the Planning Commission has assured to be supportive 
in future, the Committee expect that the various projects and progr ammes forwarded by 
the Department to the Planning Comm ission would not languish for want of 
funds/approval. The Committee would also like  the Department to take appropriate 
caution and remedial action to absorb in time the allocations made to them.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.4 
 
Requirement of One-Time Catch Up Grant 
 
1.7 The Committee had note that the DARE has a number of institutions/laboratories, 
which are more than twenty years old.  In order to have excellent   academic standards of 
the State Agricultural Universities and to have globally competitive research working 
environment, the Eighth Plan and Ninth Pl an Working Groups had recommended Rs.300 
crore and Rs.500 crore, respectivel y one time catch up grant to meet the critical need for 

upgrading laboratory equipment, pilot plants, farm and laboratory f acilities, class rooms 
and audio visual facilities. 
The Committee had also note that dur ing the Eighth Plan  Period, Planning 
Commission did not provide any one time catch  up grant.  During the Ninth Plan, the 
Planning Commission had communicated a to tal outlay of Rs.3,376.95 crore including 
Externally Aided Projects (EAPs) out of which Rs.400 crore was indicated as one time 
catch-up grant but no separate allocations we re made for catch up grant, though  the 
Department had proposed an allocation of Rs.100 crore, Rs.200 crore,  Rs.250 crore and 
Rs.306.81 crore for  the year 1998-99, 1999-2000,   2000-2001 and 2001-02 respectively. 
Subsequently, Planning Commission had communicated that the amounts 
indicated for annual plans also included the amount for one time catch-up grant, i.e., the 
Department could meet its requirement of catch up grant out of their Annual Plan budgets 
only. Accordingly, the Department had taken a decision in the year 1999-2000 that the 
Institutes could spend up to a maximum of 20 per cent of their respective Plan B.E. 
(1999-2000); during 2000-2001 this percentage limit was raised to 30 per cent and for 
2001-02, it was decided that the Institutes could incur expenditure under one time catch 
up grant to the extent to which they coul d spare the money after meeting their other 
essential research requirements. For State Agricultural Universities, these per centages 
were 30 per cent for 1999-2000, 40 per cent  for 2000-01 and for 2001-02 it was allowed 
at par with institutes. 
The Department again proposed an am ount of Rs.1,000 crore during Tenth Five 
Year Plan but the Planning Commission ha s not yet made separate allocations 
specifically for catch up grant through Annual Plans 

The Committee had, therefore, unanimously opine that unless the Government is 
actually willing and come forward to support DARE/ICAR with this  directly needed 
One-Time Catch-Up grant to change the obs olete equipments, age old infrastructure 
including laboratories and other related research facilities, the Scientists and Researchers 
of ICAR and all their related institutes/SAUs will continue to suffer from want of latest 
state-of-the-art equipments and research infr astructure/laboratories as this change over 
from old to new technology requires additional funding.    
The Committee were also of the unanim ous opinion that the serious problem of 
brain-drain is practically linked with the situation in which the scientists of the country 
engaged in the entire spectrum of R&D activ ities of ICAR are forced to work under poor 
work/research environment and are left to struggle with obsolete equipments, research 
tools and laboratories which gradually gives birth to work dissatisfaction and ultimately 
forces the scientists to seek greener pastures where their creative urge and talent come to 
foreplay and they get higher pay and other facilities. 
The Committee had also feel that alt hough the Government and the people have 
great expectations from our agricultural scientists to achieve major breakthroughs in 
finding out solutions for problems faced by farmers and people engaged in agrarian and 
allied sectors apart from bringing total food and fodder security a nd overall prosperity 
and growth, yet the fulfillment of these great  expectations will not be possible unless the 
Government provide the much desired and direly needed funds and incentives to ICAR to 
make it a real apex organization and the hub of the most talented scientists of the nation.  
The Committee had once again strongly urge the Planning Commission and the 
Ministry of Finance to provide much needed one time catch up grant of Rs. 1000 crore in 

Tenth Plan in a phased manner to ICAR given its track record of service to the nation and 
being privy to agricultural revolution in the country.   
1.8 The Government in its action taken reply ha ve stated  that the  recommendation of 
PSCA was sent to the Planning Commission wh ich responded that “the catch up grant 
which was meant for upgrading and updating the research facilities of ICAR’s institutions 
had already been taken care of while approvi ng the proposals duri ng Tenth Five Year 
Plan”. 
The Xth Plan SFCs / EFCs agreed to a meagre amount, that too in some very 
specific cases, to meet the urgent need of  renovation of age old infrastructure.  The 
National Agricultural Research System comprising a large network of ICAR institutions 
and SAUs having dilapidated buildings, laboratories, clas s rooms and other farm and 
research related facilities as well as outdate d  / obsolete equipment needing large scale 
renovation / upgradation / modernization. The De partment still requires substantial funds 
on this count.  For this purpose Rs.1000 crore were proposed to the Planning Commission 
as part of the Department’s Xth Plan proposal s, but separate funds for this purpose were 
not allocated or provided during Xth Plan / Annual Plans, so far. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.9 The Committee once again reiterate that the Planning Commission must consider 
favourably the bonafide – long felt need of the Department for Rs. 1000 crore in addition 
to the Xth Plan funding as one-time catch up grant for renovation of age old 
infrastructure of National Agricultural Rese arch System (NARS).  Undoubtedly, such a 
one time catch-up grant will go a long way in creating a congenial working environment 
for our scientist engaged in ag ricultural research.  Taking not e of the stated liberal and 
supportive attitude of the Planning Commi ssion towards R&D projects, the Committee 

hope the Department of Agricultural Resear ch & Education would receive necessary 
budgetary support for creating state-of-the-art laboratory/research facilities for the greater 
benefit of the nation. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
Urgent Need to fill all the vacancies in ICAR 
 The Committee had noted that there is an  acute shortage of  manpower as  3,784 
posts are lying vacant in ICAR.   It is more so, especially in the scientific category, which 
has a shortfall of about 1,400 posts.  This pos ition has  aggravated since 2001.  As per 
orders of the Department of Personnel dated 16 May 2001, di rect recruitment is to be 
restricted to 1/3 rd of the vacancies arising in a particular year with a further stipulation 
that the vacancies filled in a year should not exceed one per cent of the total sanctioned 
strength.  In 1999, the Ministry of Fina nce had imposed a 10 per cent cut on the 
sanctioned posts of all categor ies.  Though the Department has taken up the matter of 
seeking exemption for the scientific category with the Ministry of Finance at various 
levels, yet the final decision is pending. 
 The Committee were of the considered view that the Department should give top 
priority to this matter and take up the matter immediately with top officers in the Ministry 
of Finance and the Department of Personnel for getting exemption from 10 per cent cut 
on the sanctioned posts and lift  restrictions imposed by De partment of Personnel on at 
least scientific and technical categories of posts. 
 The Committee had also urge the Depa rtment of Personnel and Ministry of 
Finance to consider the issue of granting exem ption from their respective orders in this 
regard, expeditiously for recruitment of the scientific and technical categories as the 
output and efficiency of the ICAR has been suffering owing to shortage of  

scientific/technical  manpower. Moreover, vaca ncies of scientists have been adversely 
affecting the scientific output in terms of basic, strategic, a pplied and anticipatory 
research.  Since all the R&D activities of the ICAR are meant fo r bringing overall 
progress and prosperity to the people engaged in agrarian and allied sectors, the nation as 
a whole can ill-afford to have such restrictions causing adverse effect on the working of a 
reputed scientific organization like ICAR. 
1.11 The Government in its action taken reply have stated that in  the post VII Plan 
period, the institutes of ICAR have been incr eased from 75 to 96.  However, not a single 
scientific post has been approved for cr eation commensurate with the expanding 
activities and the same are being managed by  internal redeploymen t of the available 
specialized manpower.  Now the organization has been stretched virtually to its limits and 
the demands on the research system are increas ing and options available from within the 
prevailing system have been tota lly exhausted.  In an effort to minimize the severity of 
the personnel crunch the ICAR has resorted to curtailing posts from all its other cadres in 
order to provide the bare minimum personnel required in the cadr e of scientists.  
Regarding the action taken so far by the Depart ment, it is clarified that the Secretary, 
DARE and DG, ICAR had made a presentation before the Cabinet Secretary on 27th June, 
2003 highlighting the following issues: 
a) The ICAR should be exempted from the application of 10% reduction in manpower, 
at least in the scientific category. 
b) Similarly, the restriction imposed by the DOPT O.M. dated 16.05.2001 on direct 
recruitment vacancies to 1/3 rd may not be made applicable  to ICAR in so far as 
scientific staff is concerned. 

c) The ICAR should be permitted to fill up a ll the posts contained in the approved SFCs/ 
EFCs of Tenth Plan.  
As desired by the Cabinet Secretary a detailed proposal was sent on 30.09.2003 
and was subsequently followed up at the level of then Hon’ble Agriculture Minister with 
the then Hon’ble Deputy Prime Mi nister on 06.01.2004. The response of MOS 
(Personnel) dated 11.02.2004 was again consid ered/processed and the matter was taken 
up by the Hon’ble AM with the Hon’ble Prim e Minister and Financ e Minister vide a 
demi-official letter dated 22.07.2004.   
In response the Hon’ble Finan ce Minister has clarified on 15 th September, 2004 
that so far no Ministry/Department has been exempted from the orders of 10% cut in 
manpower and filling up of only 1/3 rd of vacancies in a particular year.  However, it has 
been clarified that specific  proposals received from the Co uncil shall be considered on 
merits within the ambit of existing instruc tions. However, looking to the gravity of the 
situation all possible efforts would continue to be made to mitigate the situation. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.12 The Committee are seriously concerne d about the conti nuing shortage of 
scientific and technical staff in ICAR.  The Committee note that the Department has 
vigoursly pursued the matter with the Govern ment and have succeeded to elicit an 
assurance from the Ministry of  Finance that specific propos als from the ICAR would be 
considered on merit and that all possible effort s will be made to mitigate the situation.  
The Committee desire that the Department shoul d continue to make all out efforts at the 
highest level to resolve the issue and keep  the Committee apprised periodically after 
every three months till the matter is favourably resolved.  If necessary, the Committee 

would not hesitate to examine the representati ves of Ministry of Finance considering the 
continuing grim situation arising out of utter sh ortage of scientific and technical staff in 
ICAR. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.8 
Urgent Need for Minimising Huge  Post Harvest Losses of Agrarian and Allied 
Sectors Produces 
 
1.13 The Committee had note that the ICAR is  having a number of schemes meant for 
assessing and addressing the issues pertaining to post-harvest losses along with the 
mandate of R&D in Post-Harvest technology.   The two main schemes are (i)the Central 
Institute on  Post Harvest Engineering a nd Technology (CIPHET) Ludhiana, established 
in 1989, and (ii) All India Coordinated Re search Project (AICRP) on Post Harvest 
Technology (PHT) establishe d in 1972.   The Department has spent Rs.55.62 crore 
against the total allocation of  Rs.57.73 crore provided for th ese schemes during the last 
five years. 
 Despite this the value addition is only 79 per cent and agro processing  is  only 2 
per cent in case of perishable  produces.  There is a vast scope for value addition to the 
extent of 35 per cent and processing to the extent of 10 per cent in the next ten years.   As 
regards the data on quantum of post harvest lo sses and value in term of rupee of such 
wastage, the Committee are informed that at present, no authoritative estimates of post 
harvest losses in various agricultural livestock  and Fisheries sectors are available.  
However, on the basis of limited area general Post Harvest loss estimates available with 
ICAR, the minimum Post Harvest losses are about Rs.51,500 crore annually.  The 
Committee are surprised as to how ICAR be ing a national  apex organization for 
agricultural research and education has been performing its role to safeguard the scarce 

resources without any authoritative estimates of Post Harvest losses.   The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the ICAR should take immediate steps to collect, 
compile and analyse data at the earliest at national level in order to have better  Planning 
to stop wastages of  such a magnitude.   The Committee hope that this would also help 
the concerned Ministries/Department/Agencie s to develop appropria te technologies to 
prevent the avoidable waste.   Unless, this is done, and the desired post harvest 
technologies developed and implem ented to plug the big hole in the basket of agrarian 
produces, all the efforts made by the ICAR to increase production and productivity of 
agrarian and allied produces will continue to go down the drain. 
1.14 The Government in its action taken reply have stated that th e efforts have been 
made to assess the harvest and post harvest losses of agricultural commodities namely Oil 
Seeds, Wool, Meat, Eggs & Poultry Meat, Fisheries and Milk at Producer, Consumer and 
Market levels under the National Agricultura l Technology Project (NATP). The details 
are given in Annexe-1. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.15 The Committee note that the DARE/ICAR , being the Apex body, responsible for 
agricultural research and education has done precious little work in  collecting, assessing 
and analyzing the data of post harvest losses of  all the agrarian and allied sector produces 
and for developing and implementing technolo gies to prevent enor mous recurring post 
harvest losses.  The reply of the Department is  totally devoid as it does not indicate any 
institutionalized action plan to assess the pos t harvest losses that the country incurs year 
after year.  Considering the fa ct that the nation suffers an whopping estimated loss of Rs. 
50,000 crore per annum, the Committee, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
Department should take immediate steps to  collect, compile a nd analyse the data 

regarding post harvest losses of all the majo r agrarian produces and should develop and 
implement the appropriate post harvest technologies without further delay to arrest such a 
colossal national loss without further delay. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.9 
Need to check mal-functioning in Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
1.16 The Committee had noted that a total of  415 Krishi Vigyan Kendras have been 
sanctioned till date.  Out of these, 318 ar e functional and 50 which were sanctioned 
during the first two years of Tenth Plan, are partially functional.  While 39 Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras recently sanctioned are in the process of being made functional,  the remaining 8 
which were non-functional have been closed down.   The Committee are informed about  
some more  Krishi Vigyan Kendras in Biha r and Uttar Pradesh in which mal-functioning 
is going on without any check. 
 Considering the laudable objectives of Krishi Vigyan Kendras, the Committee 
recommend that all the remain ing 50 partially functional Kr ishi Vigyan Kendras should 
be made fully functional on top priority basi s within a stipulated period of six months 
from the date of presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
 The Committee are also concerned over th e reports of complaints of financial 
irregularities in 6 Krishi Vigyan Kendras.   The Committee note th at though the Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research claims  that they have a multi-tier monitoring 
mechanism for periodic and frequent evaluation of all the Krishi Vigyan Kendras, yet the 
closing down of these 6 Krishi Vigyan Kendras  has belied their claim.  Apparantely, the 
ICAR has failed to check financial irregular ities in time which allowed the unscrupulous 
elements to flourish unhindered upto a leve l that not only proved fatal to the very 
existence of those 6 Krishi Vigyan Kendras but  also  Such malpractices, if unchecked, 

would undermine public confidence in Kr ishi Vigyan Kendras.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Department s hould take appropriate steps to reform and 
strengthen their monitoring system, and bring transparency in the functioning of Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras so that Krishi  Vigyan Kendras continue to  perform their basic function 
of transfer of technology from  Lab to Land and continue to enjoy trust and confidence of 
the innocent farmers. 
1.17 The Government in its action taken repl y have stated that funds have been 
provided for creation of infrastructural faci lities for the Krishi Vigyan Kendras ( KVKs) 
sanctioned during the Xth Plan period. In orde r to check any financial irregularities, the 
funds for the current financial year are releas ed strictly after receiving the AUC of the 
previous year by the respective Zonal Coordinating Unit. The release of funds has also 
been decentralized at the level of the Zonal Coordinating Unit.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.18 The Committee are anguished to note that  the Department has not indicated as to 
what corrective or punitive action/has been in itiated in the complaints of financial 
irregularities in the 6 KVKs.  The Committee believe that  the concept of KVKs is 
laudable but the Department has abysmally faile d to translate the objectives by  making 
them fully functional.   The Committee reit erate the need for t horough probe into the 
complaints of financial irregu larities in the KVKs so that guilty are brought to book and 
the KVKs cleansed of corruption.  The Committee expect to be apprised of the remedial 
and penal action taken on the complaints within  three  months of presentation of this 
Report. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.11 
Need to Popularise R&D Support from ICAR to identify Synthetic Milk  

1.19 The Committee had noted that ICAR has sp ent about Rs.450 cror e  so far during 
the last few decades on the Research and Developmental aspects of Milk and  training 
personnel/people engaged in Dairy sector.   As a matter of fact ICAR has made 
significant contributions through their R&D support in ushe ring White Revolution in the 
country.  They also note that the per capita availability of milk has gone up to 226 gms 
per day against 127 gms per day during 1979-80.  Milk has been the life line of millions 
of people as it continues to be the most popular and potent source of nutrition and income 
generation for their survival and prosperity from  time immemorial.  The Committee were 
perturbed to note that unscrupul ous elements are  supplying s ynthetic or adulterated milk  
imperilling the life of consumers, particularly the young children. 
 The Committee were aware that though the prevention of supply of synthetic 
milk/adulterated milk is the responsibility of Ministry of Health , prevention of Food 
Adulteration Department, yet the ICAR equi pped with its well-equipped research can 
come forward by providing their R&D support in  detecting the supply of synthetic or 
adulterated milk. 
  Once the primary data are collected/compiled and analysed area-wise,  the ICAR 
will be in a better position to formulate strategies to promot e and popularize their 
research and development activites to enha nce the production and productivity of Pure 
Milk and milk products particularly in the areas bedevilled by  Synthetic/ adulterated 
milk.  
 The ICAR can also help other concerned Ministries/ Departments and law 
enforcement agencies engaged in promoti ng public health by providing them with  
valuable input for detecting synthetic milk. 
 The Committee had also felt that the IC AR can also produce self-help smaller and 
economy versions of the diagnostic kits they  have already produced for identifying 12 

common adulterants in milk and make all out efforts to  popularize their low priced 
smaller version of the Diagnostic Kits which can be gainfully used by the common man. 
1.20 The Government in its action taken reply have stated that the the NDRI, Karnal 
has developed the diagnostic kit to identify th e adulterated / synthetic milk which contain  
urea, starch, glucose, sugar, hydrogen peroxide, pond water, neutra lizers (like sodium 
hydroxide sodium carbonate sodium bicarbonate),   sodium chloride, vanaspati in ghee, 
formalin, malto-dextrin and ammonium compounds. The cost of this kit is Rs.8600/= and 
can be obtained from NDRI, Karnal.  
 The work on pesticide resi due in Indian milk is in progress. However, limited 
study done on residual level of DDT and BHC in milk in Northern India under NATP 
Project indicated an average DDT level of 0.028 ug/g fat which is below the permissible 
MRL (0.05 ug/g of fat). The average BHC level in 600 milk samples was 0.001 ug/g 
against the permissible MRL (0.01 ug/g of fat).  
 If need be, the logistic R&D support w ould be provided to Ministry of Health, 
which is the nodal agency, in analyzing the adulterated / synthetic milk samples.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.21  The Committee note with anguish that the Department has merely repeated the 
replies that was given earlier to the Committee.  Obviously, no action, worthwhile, seems 
to have been taken on their specific reco mmendation to promote and popularise their 
research in detecting synthetic/adulterated milk and to produce a diagnostic kit affordable 
by general milk consumers in the country.  The Committee would like to know as to how 
many pieces of the diagnostic kits developed by NDRI, Karnal have been sold so far and 
what logistic R&D support.  DARE has given to  Ministry of Health in this behalf and 
accepted the latter for mass dissemination or detecting adulterated milk.  

CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
 
Need for increasing DARE’s Allocation  to at least 1 per cent of AGDP 
 
2.1  The Committee note that the Planni ng Commission had constituted the Tenth 
Plan Working Group for the Department of  Agricultural Research and Education 
(DARE) and the Working Group had recomme nded that the DARE should be provided 
one per cent of the Gross Domestic Product of Agriculture and Allied Sector (AGDP) 
which amounted to approximately Rs. 25,000 crore at that time.  As a matter of fact, this 
recommendation of the Tenth Plan Working Group for DARE was in tune with the oft 
repeated recommendation of the Parliament ary Standing Committee on  Agriculture as 
well as the Ninth Plan Wo rking Group for DARE which had  recommended  that DARE 
should be provided at least one  per cent of AGDP in itially with a gradua l increase up to 
two per cent of AGDP in subsequent years.  Against the most needed minimum one per 
cent of AGDP outlay, the Department had proposed a minimum requirement of Rs. 
15,000 crore plus a one time catch up grant of Rs. 1,000 crore  for the Tenth Plan.  
However, the Planning Commission approved an amount of only Rs. 4,868 crore which 
was subsequently raised to Rs. 5,368 crore by providing Rs. 500 crore for setting up new 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). 
 The Committee note  that Sri Lanka  a nd some Latin American countries spend 
0.81 per cent and 0.98 per cent of AGDP on Ag ricultural Research, respectively.  
Astonishingly, in comparison to some of the leading industrialized countries whose 
spending on agricultural research ranges between 2.45 per cent a nd 4.02 per cent of 

AGDP,  India’s spending on agricultural R&D ranged between 0.17 and 0.32 per cent 
during the last one decade which was even less than the average of all the developing 
countries.  
The Committee are unable to comprehend the constraints of the Planning 
Commission why they could not earmark ade quate resources for DARE based on the 
recommendations of its own Working Group dur ing the  Ninth and Tenth Plans and the 
recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture to increase the 
Tenth Plan outlay to at least one per cent of AGDP  for  the DARE.   Considering the role 
of an applied research-based Department lik e DARE and its potential  to accelerate the 
growth of agriculture and allied sectors,  the Committee hope that  the Government will 
earmark higher outlays for the Department  in accordance with its declared commitment 
to accord priority to agriculture and the  allie d sectors so that India emerges a stronger, if 
not the strongest, global player in the field of  agricultural produces and exports.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNENT 
2.2 The recommendations of the Committee were sent to Planning Commission on 
which it responded that “the Planning Co mmission have allo cated Rs.5368 crore to 
DARE / ICAR during X Plan for on-going as we ll as new research initiatives to be 
undertaken by the Department.  The SFCs / EFCs clearances of these schemes have 
already been completed.  However, the department is yet to absorb the total allocated 
outlay for the Tenth Plan. Planning Commissi on has always been lib eral in supporting 
DARE / ICAR's R&D projects and would continue  to be so in the future.  Moreover, the 
predetermined earmarking of plan allocation has the potential of misallocation of scarce 
resources, which can and should be an avoidable situation”.   

Depending on the total resource avai lability, the Planning Commission had 
allocated Rs. 5368 crore to DARE / ICAR dur ing Xth Plan for on-going as well as new 
research initiatives to be undertaken by the Department.  As such, the Department had 
prioritized its requirements to adjust within the allocated amount of Rs.5368 crore.  Apart 
from the on-going plan schemes / projects including new activitie s already approved by 
the Xth Plan SFCs / EFCs of the Department, there are still a few new programmes, some 
of which have already been forwarded to the Planning Commission for its consideration 
and in-principle approval.  These programmes are : Seed  Production in Agricultural 
Crops and Fisheries (with outlay of Rs.247.54 crore); Productivity enhancement (Rs.2000 
crore); input use efficiency enhancement (R s.1000 crore); Moderniz ation of laboratories 
(Rs.950 crore); Centres of Excellence in S AUs (Rs.1050 crore) – all four components 
totaling Rs.5000 crore for Xth Plan period. Planning Commission has also been requested 
to provide Rs.550 crore during 2004 – 05) to address these issues. The National 
Agricultural Technology Project – Phase II (Rs.200 crore as Xth Plan component) – 
already agreed to in principle by Planni ng Commission would be costing about Rs.900 
crore over the period of five years and other priority project namely Network Project on 
Microorganisms in relation to Agriculture is projected at Rs.200 crore approximately – 
which is at processing stage.  In the even t of approval of these priority projects, as 
explained above, the Department will need additional funds over and above to the 
allocated amount of Rs.5368 crore during Xth Plan period. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.2 
Insufficient Tenth Plan Public funding for DARE/ICAR 

2.3  The Committee observe that the Department had proposed a minimum 
requirement of Rs. 16,000 crore for the Tent h Plan.  Against this requirement, the 
Planning Commission approved onl y Rs. 4,868 crore which was subsequently enhanced 
to Rs. 5,368 crore by providing Rs. 500 crore for establishing new KVKs. 
 The Committee strongly deplore this tendency of the Planning Commission and 
the Ministry of Finance for imposing drastic cuts as high as up to 55 per cent to 60 per 
cent on the amount demanded by the Department as per their pressing needs. 
 The Committee are of the strong opin ion that although the DARE/ICAR make 
high claims in matching the quality of their ag rarian and allied sectors in R&D activities 
with other advanced countries, the ground reality is entirely different, especially when  
compared with the kind of research a nd development activiti es and the actual 
achievements made by the agriculturally adva nced countries in the field of Hybrid 
Technology,  Biotechnology, Management of Biotic and Abiotic stresses, quality of Seed 
and Planting Material, quality of Energy and Farm machinery, post-harvest technologies, 
natural resource management, animal sciences  and fisheries sectors and speedy transfer 
of technology from Land to Lab. 
 The Committee are of the considered view   that addressing of all the important 
areas of agricultural research, developmen t and education practic ally requires huge and 
well planned funding.  Unfortunately, the Pl anning Commission and the Ministry of 
Finance have been ignoring the genuine an d pressing demands of the Ministry of 
Agriculture to provide higher amount of public funding than being provided at present for 
the R&D activities of the DARE/ICAR to prove  their talent.   This will  give them 
encouragement to put in more dedicated effo rts in making new strides in the Agriculture 
sector and the benefits of which only reach to the common people of the country. 

 The Committee, therefore, strongly r ecommend that the Department should be 
provided with Rs. 16,000 crore by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance 
for the Tenth Plan period as per their original proposal. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.4 The Department has already completed th e exercise of Xth Plan SFCs / EFCs and 
the financial requirement has already been adjusted with the overall Xth Plan outlay of 
Rs.5368 crore allocated to the Department by the Planning Commi ssion during the Xth 
Plan.  Depending on the total resource av ailability, the Pla nning Commission had 
allocated Rs. 5368 crore to DARE / ICAR dur ing Xth Plan for on-going as well as new 
research initiatives to be undertaken by the Department.  As such, the Department had 
prioritized its requirements to adjust within the allocated amount of Rs.5368 crore.  Apart 
from the on-going plan schemes / projects including new activitie s already approved by 
the Xth Plan SFCs / EFCs of the Department, there are still a few new programmes, some 
of which have already been forwarded to the Planning Commission for its consideration 
and in-principle approval.  These programmes are : Seed  Production in Agricultural 
Crops and Fisheries (with outlay of Rs.247.54 crore); Productivity enhancement (Rs.2000 
crore); input use efficiency enhancement (R s.1000 crore); Moderniz ation of laboratories 
(Rs.950 crore); Centres of Excellence in S AUs (Rs.1050 crore) – all four components 
totaling Rs.5000 crore for Xth Plan period. Planning Commission has also been requested 
to provide Rs.550 crore during 2004 – 05) to address these issues. The National 
Agricultural Technology Project – Phase II (Rs.200 crore as Xth Plan component) – 
already agreed to in prin ciple by Planning Commission w ould be costing around Rs.900 
crore over the period of five years and other priority project namely Network Project on 
Microorganisms in relation to Agriculture is projected at Rs.200 crore approximately – 

which is at processing stage.  In the even t of approval of these priority projects, as 
explained above, the Department will need additional funds over and above to the 
allocated amount of Rs.5368 crore during Xth Plan period. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
2.5 For Comments of the Committee please refe r to paragraph No.1.6 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
Inadequate allocation to DARE in 2004-2005 
2.6 The Committee observe that the Depa rtment proposed an outlay of Rs. 1,800 
crore for 2004-05 but has been  allocated onl y Rs. 1,000 crore.  Obviously, the reduced 
allocation by Rs. 800 crore will hamper the functioning of the Department, particularly in 
vital  research areas.  The Department has put up an additional demand of Rs. 5,000 crore 
for the Tenth Plan and Rs. 550 crore for the Annual Plan 2004-05 to address the research 
and developmental aspects related to enhan cement of productivity, input use, efficiency, 
modernization of infrastructure and centres of excellence in State Agricultural 
Universities (SAUs).  
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Planning Commission 
and the Ministry of Finance need to recons ider the genuine requirement of funds and 
provide them adequate funds during the remaining period of the Tenth Plan as an 
additionality over and above Rs . 5,368 crore already allocated for the Tenth Plan.  The 
Committee also recommend that for the ye ar 2004-05, Rs. 550 crore should also be 
provided at RE stage to the Department in addition to the Rs . 1,000 crore already 
provided as BE so that the re search and educational activitie s of the Department  get a 
real thrust and impetus in the emerging global agrarian scenario. 

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.7  The Department has approached the Planning Commission for additional funding 
of Rs.550 crore during the current financ ial year 2004-05 and Rs.5000 crore during Xth 
Plan period for implementing specific schemes of priority areas to be implemented under 
National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP).  The Department has also submitted 
to the Planning Commission Mid Term Apprai sal document of the Xt h Plan reflecting a 
separate Chapter highlighting priority areas  of agricultural rese arch & education and 
seeking additional resources mentioned above. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
 
Budgetary Process requires some Reformative Changes 
2.8  The Committee are aware that the Department  starts its preparation of Budgetary  
proposals by inviting proposals of  Revised Estimates (RE) of the current financial year 
and Budget Estimates (BE) of the next financia l year from various constituent units some 
time in the second week of Augus t.  Subject Matter Division s (SMDs) are also requested 
to scrutinize the proposals of RE/BE and send it to Budget section with their 
recommendations for finalisation.  The Plan proposals are required to be  sent to Assistant 
Director-General (ADG), Plan Implementa tion and Monitoring (PIM) as the Plan 
allocation is firmed up by ADG in consulta tion with the SMDs concerned.  In the 
meantime, the Budget Circular is also receive d from the Ministry of Finance (MOF) in 
the first and second week of September and as per their requireme nt, the statement of 
Budget Estimates (SBE) is sent to them sometim e in the month of October.   So far as 
Plan BE for the next year is concerne d, the Planning Comm ission intimates the 
Allocation  Ceilings.  After submission of the SBE, a discussion is arranged by the 
Ministry of Finance, sometime in the month of November  between the Financial Advisor 

of the concerned Ministry/Department and the Secretary (Expenditure) Ministry of 
Finance. 
 The RE/BE allocation is generally re ceived from the Ministry of Finance 
sometime in the first and second week of Janua ry.  The Plan allocation (BE) of the next 
financial year is received from the Pla nning Commission sometime in the first week of 
February.  Keeping in view the final allocat ions the SMD-wise/ Institute-wise allocation 
is decided and communicated to the Institut e/NRC/PD concerned by the end of January 
or first week of February.   The Committee obs erve that there is a greater need and scope 
of serious scrutiny of entire exercise of Budgetary Process begi nning from preparation 
Budgetary proposals in August by the concerne d Department till actually receiving the 
RE/BE allocation from Ministry of Finance in the second  week of January and then 
onward communication is made by the Department to the concerned Institutes by the first 
week of February, thus st retching the entire budgetary exercises  from August to 
February.  The Committee feel that this entire budgetary process and procedure, 
involving  about 8 months, has actually given birth to the evil of mi s-utilisation of funds 
in a hurried manner by the concerned institutes/schemes of the Department who find 
themselves under psychological pressure and there is apprehension of losing valuable but 
scarce financial resources made available to them by Ministry of Finance at the fag end 
of the Financial year. 
 The Committee, therefore, express thei r serious concern over this chronic malady 
of mis-utilisation and/ or  over-utlisation of scarce public money provided by the 
Government to the concerned Department in the form of grants which could have been 
better utilized, provided it was made available to the concerned Department sometime in 
the month of December or a little earlier. 

 The Committee, therefore, recommend and strongly urge the Department, the 
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for giving an active consideration 
through a rigorous and rational scrutiny, for reforming and rescheduling of their present 
Budgetary procedures and practices so that the final Plan and Non-Plan allocations are 
conveyed to the concerned Department and to the respective Institutes within the 
Department by the month of December every year  for  effective and fruitful utilization of 
scarce financial resources. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.9  The recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture is 
valuable. The above recommendation of the Committee was forwarded to Ministry of 
Finance and Planning Commission.  The Ministry of Finance has intimated that they have 
noted the recommendation and that  all efforts will be made by them to comply with the 
recommendation.  The Planning Commi ssion also communicat ed that the budget 
allocations for the ongoing schemes / projects  are being made on the basis of approved 
Annual Plan outlays, which allows a degree of certainty about the availability of funds to 
the Department and its lower formation. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
Plan Schemes suffer owing to time taken in SFC/EFC/CCEA Approval 
2.10 The Committee note that as a follow up of di rectives of the Government of India, 
the Department in consultation with  Planning Commission applied Zero Base Budgeting 
(ZBB) scrutiny to all Plan schemes for their continuation in Tenth Plan with the Primary 
objective of reducing the number of Plan Sc hemes for expeditious Clearance of Tenth 
Five Year Plan proposals.  In this ex ercise, original 235 Plan projects, viz. ICAR, 
Institutes, NRCs, PDs, AICRPs etc. have been brought together/inte grated into 72 main 

Plan projects.  Out of 72 major Plan Sc hemes, 25 Plan Schemes are approved by the 
Standing Finance Committee  (SFC) and 47 Plan Schemes are approved by the 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). 
 As per the instructions issued by the Department of  Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance, Plan Schemes/projects costing up to Rs.5 crore could be considered for approval 
by the Department itself, i.e.  without referring to SFC/EFC.  Schemes costing more than 
Rs.5 crore and less than Rs.25 crore pertain to SFC , Rs.25 crore and above but less than 
Rs.100 crore pertain to EFC, Rs.100 crore pe rtain to main EFC and those Rs.200 crore 
and above to Public Investment/ main EFC.   The respective jurisdic tion with respect  to 
SFC/EFC/CCEA is determined  on the basis of  total cost of the main project schemes 
including its sub-schemes for the entire five  year plan.  Any scheme costing Rs.100 crore 
and above requires approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). 
 The Committee also note  that till 9 A ugust 2004, the approval of CCEA was 
pending for four main schemes with sub-committees, namely, (i) Central Agricultural 
University, Imphal; (ii). Strengthe ning and Development of Agricu ltural Education; (iii).  
Project Directorate on Oilseed s Research, Hyderabad;  a nd (iv) Indian Agricultural 
Research Institute, New Delhi. 
 The Committee observe that the  primar y objective of reducing the number of 235 
plan schemes into 72 main schemes for expeditious clearance have been defeated to a 
large extent as the Department took about 14 months’ time, i.e. from April 2002 to May 
2003,  for preparation of their SFC/EFC/CCEA proposals.  In  another 10 months, i.e. 
from May 2003 to March 2004, SFC/EFC clearan ce was obtained, and even after 29 
months period of Tenth Five Year Plan have elapsed, the CCEA approval in 4 main 
schemes comprising about 27 sub-schemes are still pending. 

 The Committee, therefore, express their serious concer n over  such inordinate 
delays in which about 2 to 3 years’ precious  time out of total 5 ye ars period has been 
wasted in getting and providing clearance of the Tenth Five Year Plan which will come 
to an end on 31 March 2007 viz after another 32 months. 
 The Committee see no justification in such a situation wherein many 
schemes/plan projects of the Department have an outlay for a period of 5 years mentioned 
on paper only but actually cannot be utilised on their major work of planned activities for 
a period of 2 to 3 years out of a total 5 year Plan period, till the approval of 
SFC/EFC/CCEA remains pending.    The Committee urge the Department  as well as the 
concerned Appraisal Agencies to seriously introspect over the delays which are so 
detrimental for the progressive functioning of a Department like DARE 
 The Committee also desire  that serious and well cont emplated steps should be 
taken well in time by the Department/Planni ng Commission/ CCEA to avoid  any such 
recurrences in the forthcoming five year plan s and a limited stipulated time frame should 
be fixed for each step and stage involved in  the entire Budgetary exercise for the 
Department as well as for clearance from the Planni ng Commission and  
SFC/EFC/CCEA approval. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.11  The Department noted the recomme ndation of the Committee and will make 
efforts to comply with.  
RECOMMENDATION NO.10 
Vague,  Non-Specific and Inconclusive Replies  by the Department 

2.12 The main function of the Committee are to  scrutinize the Demands for Grants of 
the Department.   The task facilitated by obtaining written replies and examination of 
witnesses.    
 The Committee observe  that  the  Depart ment  has  provided  very     vague, non-
specific and inconclusive replies pertaining to about 100 main  Schemes/Sub-Schemes  of 
the Department.  The Department in its replie s has frequently used the terms, “most of 
the schemes” and “some of the schemes”, etc.    The Department was again categorically 
asked to furnish specific information on the said queries.  Further, the Department was 
again asked to provide the desired information in a  Tabular format in which reasons for 
under-utilisation/over-utilisation of funds during 2003-2004 and reasons for providing 
higher/lower allocations in 2004-2005 for each and every scheme  were to be furnished 
separately.   But the Department failed to  provide specific reasons for each and every 
scheme separately on every occasion as desired by the Committee.    
 When the issue was raised during oral  evidence,  the representative of the 
Department assured the Committee that they will furnish the desired reasons for under-
utilisation /over-utilisation etc. for each and every scheme separately. 
 The Committee deprecate such a tendency of avoiding specific answers.    
Obviously, they either did not  have specific replies as the said schemes were not 
monitored or an attempt was made to wit hhold information regarding non -performance 
or malfunctioning of these schemes.  
 The Committee hope that the Department would be more cautious in future and  
ensure that clear, specific, updated and conclusive replies are provided for the 
consideration of the Committee to dispel any mistrust about the functioning of the 
various programmes and schemes 

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.13 The recommendation of the Parliament ary Standing Committee on Agriculture to 
provide clear, specific, updated and conclu sive reply has been noted for future 
compliance. However, the information has been compiled and furnished in Annexe-2.  

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.4 
Requirement of One-Time Catch Up Grant 
4.1  The Committee note that the DARE has a number of institutions/laboratories, 
which are more than twenty years old.  In order to have excellent   academic standards of 
the State Agricultural Universities and to have globally competitive research working 
environment, the Eighth Plan and Ninth Pl an Working Groups had recommended Rs.300 
crore and Rs.500 crore, respectivel y one time catch up grant to meet the critical need for 
upgrading laboratory equipment, pilot plants, farm and laboratory f acilities, class rooms 
and audio visual facilities. 
The Committee also note that during the Eighth Plan Period, Planning 
Commission did not provide any  one time cat ch up grant.  During the Ninth Plan, the 
Planning Commission had communicated a to tal outlay of Rs.3,376.95 crore including 
Externally Aided Projects (EAPs) out of which Rs.400 crore was indicated as one time 
catch-up grant but no separate allocations we re made for catch up grant, though  the 
Department had proposed an allocation of Rs.100 crore, Rs.200 crore,  Rs.250 crore and 
Rs.306.81 crore for  the year 1998-99, 1999-2000,   2000-2001 and 2001-02 respectively. 
Subsequently, Planning Commission had communicated that the amounts 
indicated for annual plans also included the amount for one time catch-up grant, i.e., the 
Department could meet its requirement of catch up grant out of their Annual Plan budgets 
only. Accordingly, the Department had taken a decision in the year 1999-2000 that the 
Institutes could spend up to a maximum of 20 per cent of their respective Plan B.E. 

(1999-2000); during 2000-2001 this percentage limit was raised to 30 per cent and for 
2001-02, it was decided that the Institutes could incur expenditure under one time catch 
up grant to the extent to which they coul d spare the money after meeting their other 
essential research requirements. For State Agricultural Universities, these per centages 
were 30 per cent for 1999-2000, 40 per cent  for 2000-01 and for 2001-02 it was allowed 
at par with institutes. 
The Department again proposed an am ount of Rs.1,000 crore during Tenth Five 
Year Plan but the Planning Commission ha s not yet made separate allocations 
specifically for catch up grant through Annual Plans 
The Committee, therefore, unanimously opine that unless the Government is 
actually willing and come forward to support DARE/ICAR with this  directly needed 
One-Time Catch-Up grant to change the obs olete equipments, age old infrastructure 
including laboratories and other related research facilities, the Scientists and Researchers 
of ICAR and all their related institutes/SAUs will continue to suffer from want of latest 
state-of-the-art equipments and research infr astructure/laboratories as this change over 
from old to new technology requires additional funding.    
The Committee are also of the unanimous  opinion that the se rious problem of 
brain-drain is practically linked with the situation in which the scientists of the country 
engaged in the entire spectrum of R&D activ ities of ICAR are forced to work under poor 
work/research environment and are left to struggle with obsolete equipments, research 
tools and laboratories which gradually gives birth to work dissatisfaction and ultimately 
forces the scientists to seek greener pastures where their creative urge and talent come to 
foreplay and they get higher pay and other facilities. 

The Committee also feel that although the Government and the people have great 
expectations from our agricultural scientists  to achieve major br eakthroughs in finding 
out solutions for problems faced by farmers and people engaged in agrarian and allied 
sectors apart from bringing total food and fodder security and overall prosperity and 
growth, yet the fulfillment of these great expectations will not be possible unless the 
Government provide the much desired and direly needed funds and incentives to ICAR to 
make it a real apex organization and the hub of the most talented scientists of the nation.  
The Committee once again strongly ur ge the Planning Commission and the 
Ministry of Finance to provide much needed one time catch up grant of Rs. 1000 crore in 
Tenth Plan in a phased manner to ICAR given its track record of service to the nation and 
being privy to agricultural revolution in the country.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.2  The recommendation of PSCA was sent  to the Planning Commission which 
responded that “the catch up grant whic h was meant for upgrading and updating the 
research facilities of ICAR’s institutions had already been taken care of while approving 
the proposals during Tenth Five Year Plan”. 
The Xth Plan SFCs / EFCs agreed to a meagre amount, that too in some very 
specific cases, to meet the urgent need of  renovation of age old infrastructure.  The 
National Agricultural Research System comprising a large network of ICAR institutions 
and SAUs having dilapidated buildings, laboratories, clas s rooms and other farm and 
research related facilities as well as outdate d  / obsolete equipmen t needing large scale 
renovation / upgradation / modernization. The De partment still requires substantial funds 
on this count.  For this purpose Rs.1000 crore were proposed to the Planning Commission 

as part of the Department’s Xth Plan proposal s, but separate funds for this purpose were 
not allocated or provided during Xth Plan / Annual Plans, so far. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.3 For Comments of the Committee please refe r to paragraph No. 1.9 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.8 
Urgent Need for Minimising Huge Post Harvest Losses of Agrarian and Allied 
Sectors Produces 
  
4.4 The Committee note that the ICAR is  having a number of schemes meant for 
assessing and addressing the issues pertaining to post-harvest losses along with the 
mandate of R&D in Post-Harvest technology.   The two main schemes are (i)the Central 
Institute on  Post Harvest Engineering a nd Technology (CIPHET) Ludhiana, established 
in 1989, and (ii) All India Coordinated Re search Project (AICRP) on Post Harvest 
Technology (PHT) establishe d in 1972.   The Department has spent Rs.55.62 crore 
against the total allocation of  Rs.57.73 crore provided for th ese schemes during the last 
five years. 
 Despite this the value addition is only 79 per cent and agro processing  is  only 2 
per cent in case of perishable  produces.  There is a vast scope for value addition to the 
extent of 35 per cent and processing to the extent of 10 per cent in the next ten years.   As 
regards the data on quantum of post harvest lo sses and value in term of rupee of such 
wastage, the Committee are informed that at present, no authoritative estimates of post 
harvest losses in various agricultural livestock  and Fisheries sectors are available.  
However, on the basis of limited area general Post Harvest loss estimates available with 

ICAR, the minimum Post Harvest losses are about Rs.51,500 crore annually.  The 
Committee are surprised as to how ICAR be ing a national  apex organization for 
agricultural research and education has been performing its role to safeguard the scarce 
resources without any authoritative estimates of Post Harvest losses.   The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the ICAR should take immediate steps to collect, 
compile and analyse data at the earliest at national level in order to have better  Planning 
to stop wastages of  such a magnitude.   The Committee hope that this would also help 
the concerned Ministries/Department/Agencie s to develop appropria te technologies to 
prevent the avoidable waste.   Unless, this is done, and the desired post harvest 
technologies developed and implem ented to plug the big hole in the basket of agrarian 
produces, all the efforts made by the ICAR to increase production and productivity of 
agrarian and allied produces will continue to go down the drain. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.5 The efforts have been made to asse ss the harvest and post harvest losses of 
agricultural commodities namely Oil Seeds, Wool, Meat, Eggs & Poultry Meat, Fisheries 
and Milk at Producer, Consumer and Market  levels under the National Agricultural 
Technology Project (NATP). The details are given in Annexe-1. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.6 For Comments of the Committee please refer to paragraph No.1.15 of Chapter-I 
of the Report. 
s 

RECOMMENDATION NO.9 
Need to check mal-functioning in Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
4.7 The Committee note that a total of  415 Krishi Vigyan Kendras have been 
sanctioned till date.  Out of these, 318 ar e functional and 50 which were sanctioned 
during the first two years of Tenth Plan, are partially functional.  While 39 Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras recently sanctioned are in the process of being made functional,  the remaining 8 
which were non-functional have been closed down.   The Committee are informed about  
some more  Krishi Vigyan Kendras in Biha r and Uttar Pradesh in which mal-functioning 
is going on without any check. 
 Considering the laudable objectives of Krishi Vigyan Kendras, the Committee 
recommend that all the remain ing 50 partially functional Kr ishi Vigyan Kendras should 
be made fully functional on top priority basi s within a stipulated period of six months 
from the date of presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
 The Committee are also concerned over th e reports of complaints of financial 
irregularities in 6 Krishi Vigyan Kendras.   The Committee note th at though the Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research claims  that they have a multi-tier monitoring 
mechanism for periodic and frequent evaluation of all the Krishi Vigyan Kendras, yet the 
closing down of these 6 Krishi Vigyan Kendras  has belied their claim.  Apparantely, the 
ICAR has failed to check financial irregular ities in time which allowed the unscrupulous 
elements to flourish unhindered upto a leve l that not only proved fatal to the very 
existence of those 6 Krishi Vigyan Kendras but  also  Such malpractices, if unchecked, 
would undermine public confidence in Kr ishi Vigyan Kendras.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Department s hould take appropriate steps to reform and 
strengthen their monitoring system, and bring transparency in the functioning of Krishi 

Vigyan Kendras so that Krishi  Vigyan Kendras continue to  perform their basic function 
of transfer of technology from  Lab to Land and continue to enjoy trust and confidence of 
the innocent farmers. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.8  Funds have been provided for creation of infrastructural facil ities for the Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras ( KVKs) sanctioned during the Xth Plan peri od. In order to check any 
financial irregularities, the funds for the current  financial year are released strictly after 
receiving the AUC of the prev ious year by the respective Zonal Coordinating Unit. The 
release of funds has also been decentralized at the level of the Zonal Coordinating Unit.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.9 For Comments of the Committee please refer to paragraph No.1.18 of Chapter-I 
of the Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.11 
Need to Popularise R&D Support from ICAR to identify Synthetic Milk  
4.10 The Committee note that ICAR has sp ent about Rs.450 crore  so far during the 
last few decades on the Research and Developmental aspects of Milk and  training 
personnel/people engaged in Dairy sector.   As a matter of fact ICAR has made 
significant contributions through their R&D support in ushe ring White Revolution in the 
country.  They also note that the per capita availability of milk has gone up to 226 gms 
per day against 127 gms per day during 1979-80.  Milk has been the life line of millions 
of people as it continues to be the most popular and potent source of nutrition and income 
generation for their survival and prosperity from  time immemorial. The 

Committee are perturbed to note that unscrupul ous elements are  supplying synthetic or 
adulterated milk  imperilling the life of consumers, particularly the young children. 
 The Committee are aware that though the prevention of supply of synthetic 
milk/adulterated milk is the re sponsibility of  Ministry of Health, prevention of Food 
Adulteration Department,  yet the ICAR equi pped with its well-equipped research can 
come forward by providing  their R&D support in  detecting the supply of synthetic or 
adulterated milk. 
  Once the primary data are collected/compiled and analysed area-wise,  the ICAR 
will be in a better position to formulate strategies to promot e and popularize their 
research and development activites to enha nce the production and productivity of Pure 
Milk and milk products particularly in the areas bedevilled by  Synthetic/ adulterated 
milk.  
 The ICAR can also help other concerned Ministries/ Departments and law 
enforcement agencies engaged in promoti ng public health by providing them with  
valuable input for detecting synthetic milk. 
 The Committee also feel that the ICAR can also produce self-help smaller and 
economy versions of the diagnostic kits they  have already produced for identifying 12 
common adulterants in milk and make all out efforts to  popularize their low priced 
smaller version of the Diagnostic Kits which can be gainfully used by the common man. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The NDRI, Karnal has developed the diagnostic kit to identify the adulterated / synthetic milk which 
contain  urea, starch, glucose, sugar, hydrogen peroxide, pond water, neutralizers (like sodium hydroxide 
sodium carbonate sodium bicarbonate),  sodium chloride, vanaspati in ghee, formalin, malto-dextrin and 
ammonium compounds. The cost of this kit is Rs.8600/= and can be obtained from NDRI, Karnal.  
The work on pesticide residue in Indian milk  is in progress. However, limited study done 
on residual level of DDT and BHC in milk in Northern India under NATP Project 
indicated an average DDT level of 0.028 ug/g fat which is below the permissible MRL 

(0.05 ug/g of fat). The average BHC level in 600 milk samples was 0.001 ug/g against the 
permissible MRL (0.01 ug/g of fat).  
If need be, the logistic R&D support would be  provided to Ministry of Health, which is 
the nodal agency, in analyzing the adulterated / synthetic milk samples.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.12 For Comments of the Committee please refer to paragraph No.1.21 of Chapter-I 
of the Report. 
 

CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
Urgent Need to fill all the vacancies in ICAR 
5.1 The Committee note that th ere is an acute shortage of manpower as  3,784 posts 
are lying vacant in ICAR.   It is more so, especially in the scientific category, which has a 
shortfall of about 1,400 posts.  This position has  aggravated since 2001.  As per orders of 
the Department of Personnel dated 16 May 2001, direct recruitment is to be restricted to 
1/3rd  of the vacancies arising in a particular  year with a further stipulation that the 
vacancies filled in a year should not exceed one  per cent of the total sanctioned strength.  
In 1999, the Ministry of Finance had imposed a 10 per cent cut on the sanctioned posts of 
all categories.  Though the Department has taken up the matter of seeking exemption for 
the scientific category with the Ministry of  Finance at various levels, yet the final 
decision is pending. 
 The Committee are of the considered vi ew that the Department should give top 
priority to this matter and take up the matter immediately with top officers in the Ministry 
of Finance and the Department of Personnel for getting exemption from 10 per cent cut 
on the sanctioned posts and lift  restrictions imposed by De partment of Personnel on at 
least scientific and technical categories of posts. 
 The Committee also urge the Department of Personnel and Ministry of Finance to 
consider the issue of granting exemption from  their respective orders in this regard, 
expeditiously for recruitment of the scientif ic and technical categories as the output and 
efficiency of the ICAR has been suffering ow ing to shortage of  scientific/technical  
manpower. Moreover, vacancies of scientists ha ve been adversely affecting the scientific 

output in terms of basic, stra tegic, applied and anticipatory research.  Since all the R&D 
activities of the ICAR are meant for bringing overall progress and prosperity to the 
people engaged in agrarian and allied sectors, the nation as a whole can ill-afford to have 
such restrictions causing adverse effect on the working of a reputed scientific 
organization like ICAR. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
5.2  In the post VII Plan period, the institut es of ICAR have been increased from 75 
to 96.  However, not a single scientific  post has been approved for creation 
commensurate with the expanding activities a nd the same are being managed by internal 
redeployment of the available specialized manpower.  Now the organization has been 
stretched virtually to its limits and the demands on the research system are increasing and 
options available from within the prevailing system have been  totally exhausted.  In an 
effort to minimize the severity of the pe rsonnel crunch the ICAR  has resorted to 
curtailing posts from all its ot her cadres in order to provide  the bare minimum personnel 
required in the cadre of scientists.   Regard ing the action taken so far by the Department, 
it is clarified that the Secretary, DARE a nd DG, ICAR had made a presentation before 
the Cabinet Secretary on 27th June, 2003 highlighting the following issues: 
(a). The ICAR should be exempted from the application of 10% reduction in   manpower, 
at least in the scientific category. 
(b). Similarly, the restriction imposed by the DOPT O.M. dated 16.05.2001 on direct  
recruitment vacancies to 1/3rd may not be made applicable to ICAR in so far as scientific 
staff is concerned. 

(C) The ICAR should be permitted to fill up all the posts contained in the approved SFCs/ 
EFCs of Tenth Plan.  
As desired by the Cabinet Secretary a detailed proposal was sent on 30.09.2003 
and was subsequently followed up at the level of then Hon’ble Agriculture Minister with 
the then Hon’ble Deputy Prime Mi nister on 06.01.2004. The response of MOS 
(Personnel) dated 11.02.2004 was again consid ered/processed and the matter was taken 
up by the Hon’ble AM with the Hon’ble Prim e Minister and Financ e Minister vide a 
demi-official letter dated 22.07.2004.   
In response the Hon’ble Finan ce Minister has clarified on 15 th September, 2004 
that so far no Ministry/Department has been exempted from the orders of 10% cut in 
manpower and filling up of only 1/3 rd of vacancies in a particular year.  However, it has 
been clarified that specific  proposals received from the Co uncil shall be considered on 
merits within the ambit of existing instruc tions. However, looking to the gravity of the 
situation all possible efforts would continue to be made to mitigate the situation. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
5.3 For Comments of the Committee please re fer to paragraph No.1.12 of Chapter Iof 
the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI               PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
25 January, 2005             C h a i r m a n  
5 Magha, 1926 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
 
 

 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 25 TH JANUARY, 2005 AT 1100 HRS. IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW 
DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1240 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri G.L. Bhargava 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri Dharmendra 
7. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
8. Shri A. Ravichandran 
9. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
10. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
11. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
12. Shri Mahboob Zahedi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
14. Shri Harish Rawat 
15. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
16. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
17. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
18. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
19. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh   -  Director 
2.  Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
3. Smt. Ratna Bhagwani   -  Assistant Director  
 
     

 At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman , welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and requested them to take up me moranda Nos. 2, 3 & 4 containing draft 
Action Taken Reports on 2nd, 3rd and 4th Reports on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agri cultural Research and Education); Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husb andry & Dairying) and Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries, respectively for consideration and adoption. 
2. The Committee then considered and adopt ed the draft Action Taken Reports with 
certain additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter authorized the Chairman to present the above-
mentioned Report to the House on a date and time convenient to him. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 
 APPENDIX II 
(vide Para 4 of  Introduction of the Report)  
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE 2ND REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA) 
  
 
(i)  Total Number of Recommendations     11 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Obser vations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 & 10 
 
T o t a l           6  
 
Percentage        54.54 % 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
T o t a l          N i l  
 
P e r c e n t a g e          0  %  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the 
 Committee 
  
 Serial No. 4, 8, 9 & 11. 
  
 T o t a l          4  
 
 Percentage        36.36 % 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which  
 final replies of the Government are still awaited 
  
 Serial Nos. 6     
 
 T o t a l          1  
 
 Percentage        9.09 % 
 
 

          ANNEXURE -1 
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF HARVEST & POST-HARVEST LOSSES OF SOME 
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES UNDER NATP 
 
Commodity: Oilseeds 
Data collection was completed at five cente rs namely Bharatpur, Junagarh, Ferozepur, 
Akola and Raisen for Rapeseed & mustard, Groundnut, Cottonseed, sunflower and 
soybean respectively. The salient findings  are presented below: 
Losses at Farm Level: 
(A) Rapeseed & Mustard:  
(i) Losses during harvesting:  The percentage loss at harves t stage vary between 3.29 to 
3.63 by enquiry and 3.48 to 3.69 by observation. T hus, there is less variation within the 
category and there is insignificant difference between enquiry and observed data. Loss 
during harvesting is least in case of farmer s of medium category. The overall loss is 3.52 
% by enquiry and 3.51% by observation. 
(ii) Losses at transport from field to threshing floor : The loss during transportation is 
least in medium category farmer with 3.07% by enquiry and 3.32 % by observation, 
whereas, maximum in small category farmer s with a value of 3.53 % by enquiry and 
3.55% by observation. The difference in enqui ry and observation is insignificant. The 
variation in loss within categ ories is more in data coll ected by enquiry (3.07 to 3.53%) 
and less (3.32 to 3.55) in the loss estimat ed by observation. The overall loss is 3.30 % by 
enquiry and 3.49% by observation. 
(iii) Losses during threshing and cleaning : Loss during threshing takes place as some 
grains escaped from the stacks, some of th e grains are blown by aspirator, some seeds 
come out with the husk during cleaning. None of the selected  farmer used hand operated 
winnower for cleaning the seed. The seed is passed through the thresher for cleaning. The 
loss during threshing is less (2.94%) in large category farmers. The percent losses vary 
between 2.66% to 3.04%. The loss estimated by observation is slightly less than loss 
estimated by enquiry. Loss during thresh ing is 3.01% by enquiry and 2.79% by 
observation. 

(iv) Losses during storage at farm level : The overall loss is least (0.233%) in large 
category farmers, whereas, maximum (0.47%) fo r small farmers. Total loss is 0.29% for 
the whole year. No insect and rodent attack was reported by the farmers. No loss due to 
insect, mold etc. was observed. Foreign ma tter and mechanically damaged grains were 
observed in each sample. The losses reported by the farmers are mainly due to foreign 
matters. This indicates that the cleaning done by the thresher blower is not sufficient and 
proper cleaning of the seed is required prior to storage of the seed.  
(B) Soybean: 
(i) Losses during harvesting : Percentage loss by enquiry is 1.37% in small category 
farmers, whereas, 3.74% in large category farmers. Thus, ther e is a wide variation in 
losses between the categories. Estimated perc entage loss by observa tion varies between 
6.57 to 8.57 between categories. Hence, ther e is significant difference in the loss 
estimated by enquiry and observation. The overall loss by enquiry is 3.33 % and by 
observation it is 7.05%. 
(ii) Losses during transportation from field to threshing floor : Percent loss during 
transportation is less (0.39%) in small categor y farmers, whereas, more  (0.81%) in large 
category farmers as obtained by enquiry. Th e loss obtained by observations varies 
between 0.77 to 1.39%. So, the loss estimated by observation differ significantly from the 
loss estimated by enquiry. The overall lo sses by enquiry is 0.71%, whereas, by 
observation it is 1.27%. 
(iii) Loss during threshing and cleaning: Estimated loss by enquiry varies between 0.83 
to 1.01%, whereas, it varies between 1.08 to 1.14% as estimated by observation. There is 
significant difference within the category in  loss estimated by observation. Loss reported 
by small categories farmers is less than the observed value. Loss during cleaning takes 
place due to the fact that some grains escape with straw during cleaning. 57% farmers did 
the cleaning operation after threshing the grai n because threshers used by them was not 
attached with blower. Loss during cleaning varies between 0.06 to 0.17% as reported by 
farmers, whereas, it varies between 0.08 to  1.27% as estimated by observation. The loss 
in cleaning is very less (0.08%) in medium category farmers. 
It can be observed that overall  loss during harvesting is 3.33% followed by 1.01% during 
threshing as reported by farmers. Loss re ported by farmers is least (0.14%) during 

cleaning. Estimated loss during harves ting is 7.05% followed by loss during 
transportation (1.27%). It suggests that the pods  of the soybean crop may break easily, if, 
the crop is not harvested at proper time. It also indicates that pods are not strong enough 
to bound the seeds after maturity of the crop. 
(iv) Loss during storage at farm level:  Overall loss in this category is 0.023%. In 
medium category farmers, loss is observed in November and December and mainly due 
to foreign matter. Overall lo ss is 0.23%. In large category farmers, loss is reported in 
November, December, January and July months. Overall loss in the whole year is 0.11%. 
Attack of insects and weevilied grains were also observed. The percent loss due to 
weevilisation was 0.13%. Some grains were also damaged by molds and loss of 0.039% 
was observed. Overall loss was 0.17% in the whole year.  
(C) Groundnut: 
(i) Losses during Harvesting: The estimated loss by enquiry varies from 3.24 to 3.82% 
within  category. Maximum loss of 3.82% is estimated in large category farmers and least 
in small category farmers with a value of 3.24. but in case of observation, loss varies 
from 1.40 to 2.33% and least (1.40%) in larg e category farmers. Losses estimated by 
actual observation are lesser than that of enquiry and there is significant difference within 
the category. The overall loss by enquiry is 3.72%, whereas, in case of observation it is 
1.57%. 
(ii) Loss during transportation from field to threshing floor : Estimated loss by enquiry 
varies from 2.21% to 2.49%. But there is no loss during transportation as estimated by 
observation. This may be due to the reason that farmers have considered the pods left on 
soil during bundling and stacking as loss but these pods are collected by the farmers 
during picking. The overall loss by enquiry is 2.44%. 
(iii) Loss during threshing:  Percent loss estimated by enquiry varies from 2.04% to 
2.26% and minimum in large category, whereas, maximum (2.26%) in small farmers 
category. Loss estimated by observation varies  from 0.41 to 0.73% within the category. 
Loss estimated by observation is significantly lower than that of estimated enquiry. The 
overall loss estimated by enquiry is 2.08%, whereas, it is 0.47% in case of observation. 

 (iv) Losses during storage at farm level : The overall loss in the bag storage was 0.59% 
as compared to 0.43% loss in storage in bulk. T hus loss in bulk storag e is lesser than the 
loss in storage in bags. The main cause of loss in this case is attack by insects and mold. 
Attack of bruchids was obser ved in all months. Percent lo ss due to insect (bruchids) 
infestation was 0.46%. Losses due to mold growth were 0.67%. Overall loss of 1.08% 
was estimated in storage at farm level. 
(D) Cottonseed:  
(i) Loss during picking (harvesting) and transportation : Percent loss varies form 2.99% 
to 4.53% with in the category. But losses estim ated by observation ar e very high as it 
ranged from 7.39% to 9.54%. This may be due to the reason that some of the cotton bolls 
remain unplucked during the harvesting. Transportation loss in the cottonseed was 
estimated by enquiry only. Loss is least (0.1%) in large farmers and maximum (0.64%) in 
medium category. There is significant differen ce in estimated losses within the category. 
The overall loss during picking is 3.76% by enquiry and 9.30% by observation. Thus, 
there is significant difference in both th e methods of estimation. Transport losses are 
0.14% estimated by enquiry. 
Loss at Intermediary (Market) Level: 
Loss at intermediary level takes place mainly due to handling, pilferage, transportation as 
loss during storage. The loss was estimated by selecting two mandies in each district for 
each crop. Five traders in each mandi, handling the selected crop were taken randomly 
for data collection. Estimated losses at intermediary level is described crop wise. 
(i) Rapeseed & Mustard : The main causes of the losses are handling, dampness, and 
rodent, cleaning. Estimated loss due to ha ndling was 0.34%, whereas, loss due to 
dampness, cleaning and rodent were 0.07%, 0.05% and 0.001% respectively. Overall loss 
is 0.46% in the whole year. No loss due to weevilisation, insect, mold, etc. was observed 
in the analysis of samples.  
(ii) Soybean: Overall loss due to rodent was 0.026% and 0.12% due to handling (by 
enquiry). Overall loss was 0.15%. In the sa mples analysis, the insect damage was 
observed in the month of October and loss was 0.012%. Overall loss due to weevilisation 

was 0.04%. Mold infection was observed in samples and weight loss was 0.25% due to 
molds. Overall loss was 0.25% and it is more and differs significantly. 
(iii) Groundnut: The estimated loss due to handling was 0.83%, which involves 
weighing, bagging, cleaning, pilferage etc. Overall loss due to insect attack was also high 
and estimated as 0.61%. The traders did not repo rt the attack of bruchids in October and 
November months as fresh produce comes in the market at that time. The overall loss was 
estimated to be 1.86%. No insect damage was observed in the samples drawn in 
December. Overall loss due to insect (Bruchids) damage was 1.17% and it is higher than 
the estimated loss by enquiry. Loss due to mo ldy kernels was very high (1.72%) which is 
the main cause of quality deterioration. In  groundnut overall loss was estimated to be 
2.90%. 
(iv) Cottonseed: Weight loss mainly contributes to the loss of moisture and overall loss 
was 0.50%. Loss due to handling is 0.11%. Ov erall estimated loss was 0.61%. Loss due 
to mold infection was 0.32%. Loss due to inset damage was 0.035% and overall 
estimated loss was 0.35%. 
Losses at Oil Milling Unit Level: 
Losses at this stage are due to handling the s eed, pilferage, transportation, and losses in 
storage of the oil mills. The losses at this st age were estimated only before the seed was 
going for oil expelling. The losses were esti mated by enquiry as we ll as by laboratory 
analysis. The estimated losses in different crops are described below: 
(i) Rapeseed & Mustard : Losses during handling include s the loss during loading & 
unloading, pilferage, and loss due to foreign matter. The overall loss due to handling was 
0.64%. Weight loss was 0.28% and overall loss was estimated to be 0.92%. No loss due 
to insect or mold was observed. Foreign matter and mechanically damaged grains were 
observed in each sample. 
(ii) Soybean: Loss due to rodents was 0.05%. Losses due to handling and dampness were 
also very less i.e. 0.03% and 0.02% respectively. Overall loss was estimated to be 0.10%. 
Loss due to weevil damage was 0.013%. Moldy grains were also f ound and loss due to 
molds was 0.12%. The overall loss in quantity  due to weevizati on was 0.13%, which is 
higher than the estimated loss by enquiry. 

(iii) Groundnut: Losses due to insects were very high (1.44%) followed by damage by 
rodents (1.07%). The overall loss was 3.93%. This is mainly due  to the reason that attack 
of bruchids cause heavy loss  within very short period. Sa mples drawn from the store of 
the oil mills were analyzed. The loss due to insect damage was 1.04% and molds was 
1.33%. Overall loss due to thes e was 2.37%. This shows that the insect damage cause 
severe loss in the storage. 
(iv) Cottonseed: The main causes of losses as reported by the mill owners are weight loss 
due to moisture, pilferage and handling. Th e estimated loss by enquiry was 0.52% due to 
weight loss from moisture evaporation of th e seed. Losses due to pilferage and handling 
were very less and 0.015% and 0.04% respectively. Overall loss in th e whole year was 
0.58%.  
Loss in Ginning Mills:  
Estimated weight loss is 0.36% and loss due to handling was 0.34%. Overall loss in the 
whole year is estimated to be 0.74%. None of  the mill owners have reported any loss of 
seed going out with ginning mill waste. Al l ginning mill owners informed that the 
wastage is 2% of the total stock used for ginning. Samples were drawn from the waste of 
the ginning mills and analysed in the labo ratory. The overall loss 0.062% was estimated 
in the waste of the mill. There is wide variation in the losses in different months. 
Loss in Godown/CWC Godown/State Warehousing Corporation Godown  
In rapeseed & mustard, no loss is observed. But the manager of the godown informed that 
if normal conditions prevail then the overall  losses of 0.5% may take place in the whole 
year. In the soybean crop, loss of 0.4% was observed in October, 0.04% in November and 
0.02% in March, due to transportation from ma rket to warehouse. No loss due to other 
reasons was reported. In case of groundnut, no loss is reported in any month in the 
godown. In cottonseed, losses due to rodent a nd dampness were observed. Estimated loss 
was 0.13% due to rodents and 0.02% due to  dampness. Overall loss of 0.14% was 
estimated in the storage of cottonseed at godown. 

 
Commodity: Wool 
The losses of useful fibres at  three levels i.e. shepherd, trader and processor (Spinner) 
were assessed. 
Losses at Shepherd Level i.e. Production level 
The useful fibre loss at this level is main ly because of traditional hand shearing method 
among which the faulty practices viz. shea ring on dirty ground, use of blunt scissors, 
incomplete shearing or partial shearing, double cuts and admixture of foreign matters are 
found.  The parts of the fleece stained by anim al excretions are usually removed when 
fleece is skirted.  The total loss varies between 1 to 1.3% and the main loss is at the 
primary skirting level.  
Losses  at Trader Level i.e. Market level 
The total loss is below 1%.  
Losses at Processor Level i.e. Post Production level 
The wool losses were more at processor level in  comparison to shepherd and trader level.  
The useful wool fibre loss was maximum at carding stage. The total loss was around 4%. 
With respect to quality of wool fibres obt ained as useful fibre loss during processing, 
length more than 25 mm is reusable and therefore second card dr opping may be reused 
for production of woollen yarn.   
Commodity: Meat 
The pilot-study for estimation of  harvest (pre-slaughter and slaughter) and post-harvest 
(post-slaughter) losses in three sectors of meat – buffalo meat, sheep & goat meat and pig 
meat – revealed the following findings:- 
(i) Buffalo Meat Sector 
• She buffaloes were more prone to pre-sl aughter losses than he buffaloes. Losses 
mainly occurred due to injuries and deaths during transport by truck. 
• Overall percentage condemnation of meat at  the level of buffalo meat traders and 
buffalo meat stalls was 0.04 and 0.05 respectively. 

• Overall percentage post-slaughter losses in meat, regular offals and other offals were 
0.09, 1.41 and 3.74 respectively. 
• In general, losses were minimum during rabi season. 
(ii) Sheep and Goat Meat Sector 
• Pre-slaughter losses mainly occurred due to illnesses during holding period and due to 
deaths during transport by truck and holding period. 
• Overall slaughter losses due to carcass condemnation was 0.3%. 
• Overall percentage post-sla ughter losses due to unsold m eat and unsold offals were 
3.01 and 2.57 respectively. 
(iii) Pig Meat Sector 
• Overall percentage slaughter losses due to condemnation of meat at the level of pig 
meat traders and retail pork stall owners were 0.53 and 0.09 respectively. 
(iv) Meat Consumers Sector 
• Overall losses at the level of rural and urban meat consumers were 6.33% and 7.82%, 
respectively. 
• At the level of hotels and restaurants, losse s due to condemnation of fresh meat were 
highest in pork (0.23%), while losses due to  trimmings were highest in buffalo meat 
(2.46%). 
Commodity: Eggs & Poultry Meat 
• A pilot study for assessment of the quantit ative losses of  eggs and poultry meat at 
harvest (production) and post-harvest (post pr oduction) levels was carried out in and 
around Bareilly district  and at other sampling locations.  
 (i) Losses in Egg Sector 
• The magnitude of the total losses of table (inf ertile) eggs at layer farms, wholesalers, 
retailers, cold store, egg processing un it and household level was found to be 0.98%, 
1.39%, 3.26%, 2.11%, 1.24% and 3.24% respectively which together constituted an 
overall annual loss of 12.22% eggs between farm and kitchen in the survey area. 

• The overall loss of table eggs from poultr y farms(producers) to household consumers 
via wholesalers and retailers worked out to be 8.87% in the survey area. 
• Losses of table eggs were found to be mo re in small layer farms (1.94%) than in 
medium (1.11%) or large farms (0.95%). 
• The bulk of egg damage at farm level was in the form of straight crack (35.2%) 
followed by star crack (16.4%), smashed/leak ers (15.2%), soft –she ll (14.3%), holes 
(9.8%), shell-less eggs (8.9%) and spoiled (rotten) eggs (0.1%). 
• The losses were comparatively more in summer (1.31%) than in rainy(0.88%) or 
winter(0.75%) season during production of e ggs at the farms. Similar trend of 
seasonal variation in losses of table eggs was observed at market (wholesale/retail) 
and consumer (household) levels. 
• The bulk of egg damage occurred at pou ltry farms during collection stage i.e 
gathering of eggs, whereas, the same was maximum during packing and transport at 
market and household consumer level, a nd during mechanical washing operation at 
egg processing plants. 
• The total loss of combined layer and bro iler type hatching eggs was found to be 
1.79% and the seasonal trend in  losses of combined layer and broiler type hatching 
eggs was similar to that of table eggs. However, the loss was found to be much less in 
layer type hatching eggs (1.01%) than in broiler type hatching eggs (4.53%). The bulk 
of damage of hatching eggs was character ized by straight/star crack(43.8%) followed 
by shell-less(membranous)/soft-shell eggs(21.1%), leakers (13.1%), hole (8.0%), and 
defective eggs viz. extra small (7.8%) and extra large (6.2%)from hatchability 
viewpoint. About ¾th of the loss of hatching eggs o ccurred during collection stage at 
the poultry breeding farms (Table 6). 
• Possible causes of loss :  Poor quality pou ltry feed, summer stress and resultant poor 
egg shell quality, defective cage design, ro ugh handling, defec tive packaging and 
transport hazard attributed as the major causes of losses of eggs by the respondents. 

(ii) Losses in Poultry Meat Sector 
• The losses of poultry viz. chicken broilers at  marketable age (5-7 weeks) were found 
to be more at retail level (2.14%) than at  broiler farms (1.08%) or wholesale level 
(0.61%). This together consti tuted an overall 3.83% loss of broilers mainly due to 
mortality between farm and retail mark et. And about 0.44% loss was found at 
household level was on account of discard of less desirable skin/giblets by the 
consumers during pre-cooking stage. The lo ss of poultry meat at poultry processing 
unit in the form of condemned carcass or their parts due to bruishes/blisters was 
practically negligible (0.25%).  
• Loss of market-ready broilers between 5 and 7 weeks of age was higher in small 
(1.40%) than in medium (0.80%) or large size (0.64%) farms. 
• Seasonal analysis revealed that the loss of  broilers was more in summer (1.72%) than 
in rainy (0.85%) or winter (0.66%) season at the farms. Si milar trends in season-wise 
losses of broilers were also found at both wholesale and retail market levels.  
• The bulk of loss of market-ready broilers aged 5 to 7 weeks at farm level was 
accounted for by the mortality(77.8%) followed by illness(17.7%) and negligible due 
to physical injury (4.4%).  Mortality also appeared to be the ma jor cause of loss of 
broilers at wholesale (64.4%) or retail (54.06%) market (Table 7). 
• Possible causes of loss:  Diseases and heat stress were major causative factors for the 
loss of market-ready broilers at the farms whereas transport stress, high crate density 
and heat stress were mainly responsible for market level losses. 
 
Commodity: Marine Fisheries 
Harvest losses occur within the craft/gear a nd also after unloading from the craft/gear. 
Within the craft/gear the loss has been es timated for traditional, motorized and 
mechanized sector and it has been observed that loss for traditional sector is 4.13%, 
motorized sector 3.61%, mechanized sector  14.48% and 21.41% for larger trawlers. 
Large-scale discard of non-target low value fish and juveniles have been observed during 
harvest in the mechanized sector. 

I  Within craft/gear 
1.1 Traditional fisheries 
For traditional sector the loss was assessed as  4.13% with percentage standard error of 
9.52. The losses were 4.18% in pre-monsoon, 4.69% in post-monsoon and 3.65% in the 
monsoon season with percentage standard  errors of 14.14, 19.61 and 13.03 respectively. 
Loss with respect to the trawl ban was 4.70% in before, 3.90% during and 3.39% after the 
trawl ban seasons with percentage standard errors of 14.43, 26.55 and 9.10 respectively.  
The main reasons for loss in traditional fishi ng are the retention of catch in the craft and 
gear, handling losses during unloading, use of fi sh as bait in hook and line fishing, attack 
by larger species, discard of juveniles in heavy quantities especially during pelagic 
trawling and spoilage due to improper icing. With reference to seasons and ban period for 
trawling not much variation was observed in  the loss estimates. These losses could be 
reduced by implementing the responsible fishing methods.  
1.2 Motorized sector 
The percentage of loss for motorized sector was 3.61% with percentage standard error of 
9.98. The seasonal losses reported were 7.83%  for pre-monsoon, 2.25% for monsoon and 
2.15% for post-monsoon periods with percentage standard errors of 16.13, 9.10 and 21.22 
respectively. With reference to monsoon traw l ban the percentage of loss was 4.79% for 
pre-trawl ban period, 1.41% for trawl ban period and 2.96% for pos t-trawl ban period 
with percentage standard errors of 13.38, 19.53 and 16.21 respectively.   
The motorized sector reported higher loss during pre-monsoon period that coincided with 
pre trawl ban period. Heavy landi ngs of oil sardine were repo rted and large quantities of 
the species were dried for conversion into livestock feed. A major portion of this material 
after drying was transported out of the dist rict to other states including Karnataka, 
Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat. In the motorized sector the losses observed were due to 
similar causes as in the case of traditional fi shing. Porpoises that damage fishing nets 
were kept off bay by feeding them the fish  harvested. From March to August good catch 
has resulted in discard of low value species. Rough seas during the monsoon season also 
resulted in the physical loss of the harvest due to inability to bring to the shore.  

The fishermen reported loss of fishing da ys during the period under study due to 
inclement weather conditions and inter-sec toral conflicts. One of the important 
observations made in motorized fishing was the new innovation in pelagic trawling which 
lead to mortality of small pelagic fish.  Us e of banned nets such as huge small meshed 
ring seine and pelagic trawl also led to loss due to catch of juveniles.  
The main gear operated by the non-mechanized sect or were ring seine, drift net, gill nets, 
cast nets etc. and the major species landed in the sector were sardine, mackerel, prawns, 
anchovy, trevally (vattapara), glassy perchlet (nandan), pony fish (mullan), pomfret, tuna 
etc.  
1.3 Mechanized sector (small and medium) 
Loss at mechanized sector was estimated at 14.48% for the year under study with  
percentage standard errors of 5.21. The seasonal losses reported were 12.23%, 13.96% 
and 16.83% for pre-monsoon, monsoon and pos t-monsoon periods with percentage 
standard errors of 7.16, 8.10 and 9.74 respectiv ely.  With reference to monsoon trawl ban 
the percentage of losses were 14.26% for pre-trawl ban and 22.06% for post-trawl ban 
with percentage standard errors of 7.95 and 6.77 respectively.  Si nce the operation of 
mechanized crafts during the trawl ban period is banned, no loss was reported.   
In the mechanized fisheries sector, the types of crafts operated include gill netter, gill 
netter-cum-hook and line, purse seiners and trawlers.  Gill netters set out for fishing early 
in morning and returned in the evening while trawlers set out for fishing in the after noon 
and returned in the early morning.  Purs e seine operated only when a good catch was 
ensured.  
1.4 Large trawlers 
Vessels, which also operate at deep sea reported a loss of 21.41% for the period under 
study with percentage standard errors of 6.89. The losses for pre-monsoon, monsoon and 
post-monsoon periods were 19.91%, 20.95% and 23.12% with percentage standard errors 
of 10.10, 14.65 and 6.96 respectively.  Pre-traw l ban period reporte d a loss of 20.37% 
and post-trawl ban period 25.56% with percen tage standard erro rs of 6.39 and 10.82 
respectively.   

Multi-day fishing reported maximum loss due to capture of juveniles and their discard in 
the sea. A loss of about 1000 – 2000 kg due to discard of low value fish was reported 
during a fishing cruise of 3 – 5 days.  Low market price of the varieties caught and the 
limitation in the fish hold capacity onboard were  the main reasons for discard of such 
fish.  Shrimp, cuttle fish and squid were the most valuable species.  Trawlers carrying out 
multi-day fishing carried with them about 15 types of nets on board for catching different 
species. The mesh size of cod end was less than 30 mm. Gill net boats operated for a 
period of 15 – 20 days continuously.  These boa ts also used hook and line for capture of 
shark, ray, sail fish, tuna etc.   Small fish was used as bait in the hook and line, which is 
also reported to be a reason for loss.  It was also observed that physical damage occurred 
in the gill net boats due to limited storage capacity and over filling of fish holds. Major 
catch landed by purse seiners were mackerel, pomfret and oil sardine.  During the period 
of study huge loss of oil sardin e was reported from purse se ine boats due to low price. 
Losses were also observed due to fish entanglin g in the net.  Loss of fishing nets in the 
fishing grounds was also an important reason for fish loss in the marine sector. 
II  Losses after unloading from craft/gear 
2.1 Traditional sector 
Losses in the traditional sector was 4.30% fo r the year with a standard error of 5.73. 
During pre-monsoon the percentage of loss was 4.29, monsoon 4.53 and post-monsoon 
4.02 with percentage standard errors of 13.86, 9.39 and 6.38 respectively.   With regard to 
trawl ban the estimate of loss was 4.10% during pre-trawl ban, 3.42% during trawl ban 
and 5.04% during post trawl ban period with percentage standard errors of 8.30, 16.72 
and 9.02 respectively.  The higher values for pre-trawl ban and post-trawl ban can be 
explained as there increase in the total fish cat ch as all types of fish ing crafts operate in 
the sea during this period.  
Loss at traditional sector was mainly due to la nding of low value fish and juveniles of oil 
sardine which was  used for li vestock feed. Major portion of  these catches moved out of 
the district to other states including Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat.  
2.2 Motorized sector 

The percentage of loss for motorized sector was 5.16 with percentage  standard error of 
7.09. The  seasonal losses were 6.03%, 2.60% and 7.71% for pre-monsoon, monsoon and 
post-monsoon periods with percentage standard errors of 9.44, 16.53 and 11.12 
respectively. The percentage  of loss with respect to ban on trawling was 7.33, 2.24 and 
3.36 for pre-trawl ban, trawl ban and post-traw l ban period with percentage standard 
errors of 8.23, 13.46 and 17.93 respectively.  
Losses occurred mainly due to discard of juve niles in heavy quantities especially during 
pelagic trawling and spoilage due to improper icing in the traditional sector. From March 
to August good catch has resulted in discard of low value species. Heavy landings of oil 
sardine were reported and larg e quantities of the species we re dried for conversion into 
livestock feed. Higher losses occurred in ring seine and choodavala while unloading. The 
major species landed in the sector were sa rdine, mackerel, prawns, anchovy, vattapara, 
nandan, mullan, pomfret, tuna, akvli, thalayan etc.  
2.3 Mechanized sector (small and medium) 
Based on the data collected from small and medium sector the mechanized sector loss 
reported for the year under study was 0.41% w ith percentage standard error of 7.97. The 
seasonal losses were 0.69% for pre-m onsoon, 0.14% for monsoon and 0.54% for post-
monsoon periods with percentage standard errors of 15.58, 12.5 a nd 12.5 respectively. 
The loss with respect to trawl ban was 0.68%  and 0.23 % respectively for pre and post-
trawl ban with percentage standard errors of 10.16 and 14.10 respectively. 
The major reasons for loss in the mechan ized sector are physical damage during 
fishing, loss and damage of fishing nets, handling loss and throwback of low value 
species and juveniles, loss due to spoilage  as a result of improper icing, taken away 
by birds.  
2.4 Larger vessels  
Larger vessels, which also operate in the deep sea reported a loss of 0.18% during the 
period under study with percentage standard error of 22.41. The season losses reported 
were 0.32% for pre-monsoon, 0.12% for m onsoon and 0.14% for post-monsoon periods. 
Loss at pre-trawl ban period was 0.22% and post-trawl ban period was 0.13%.  
 

The reasons for loss are similar to the ones observed for the mechanized sector. Losses 
occurred due to lack of infra-structural facilities and poor handling of the fish landed. The 
fish landed are usually of high value which has a ready market. 
The major species landed were threadfin bream ( Kilimeen), lizard fish, prawns, whip tail 
sting ray ( thirandi), anchovy, trevally ( vattapara), glassy perchlet ( nandan), crab, 
(manthal), squid, octopus, cuttlefish, pony fish ( mullan), pomfret, tuna, russel’s scad 
(thiriyan), spotted butter fish (nachara), blank king fish (kadalvaral), seer fish etc.  
III  Pre-Processing sector  
Losses in the pre-processing sector have b een observed for fresh and frozen fish. The 
overall loss percentage was 0.26% for fresh fish and 0.14% for frozen fish. 
3.1 Loss at pre-processing sector (fresh fish) 
An overall loss of 0.26% with  percentage standard erro r of 26.34 was reported at pre-
processing stage. The losses were 0.45% at pre-monsoon, 0.26% at monsoon and 0.12% 
at post-monsoon periods.  Pre-trawl ban period reported a loss of 0.25%, trawl ban period 
0.37% and post-trawl ban period 0.21%.   
3.2 Loss at pre-processing sector (frozen fish) 
For frozen fish the overall loss percentage was 0.14 with percentage standard error of 
11.68. The seasonal loss was 0.21%, 0.12% and 0.10% respectively for pre-monsoon, 
monsoon and post-monsoon periods.  With respect  to the trawl ban there was not much 
variation in the extent of losses, the percentages being 0.15, 0.15 and 0.11 before, during 
and after the ban period respectively.   
In the pre-processing centres loss occurred due to faulty handling and discard of small 
size fish.  Both fresh and iced shrimp, squid and cuttlefish were the main species 
processed in these centres.  Loss also occu rs in the shrimp meat while grading and 
packing.  Loss of meat while washing is also observed. The pr e-processing centres 
handled shrimp from different places outside the state and in such stock black spot and 
discoloured ones are frequently observed, th e spoilage occurring due to improper icing 
and exposure to ambient temperatures while transportation in flower tail prawns 
(poovalan), brown shrimp ( kazhanthan) and deep sea prawns.  In karrikkadi (kiddi 
prawn), discolouration and white patches were  observed.  Small size fish found in these 

consignments are thrown out along with the sh rimp shell.  This is observed in the raw 
material received from the non-mechanized fishing sector. Tiny deep sea lobsters that are 
supplied along with deep sea shrimp are also discar ded. Losses occurred during 
unloading, re-icing, weighing and speedy and hasty operation by the workers.   
IV  Processing sector 
Like in the pre-processing sector losses in the processing sector were also studied for 
both fresh fish processing and frozen fish pr ocessing. Losses were very small in this 
sector with processing of fresh fish recording a loss of 0.15% and frozen fish 0.03%. 
4.1 Loss at processing sector (fresh fish) 
The processing recorded a loss of 0.15 % with percentage standard error of 23.32. The  
seasonal losses were of 0.31%, 0.08% and 0.10% respectively for pre-monsoon, monsoon 
and post-monsoon seasons. With respect to ban on monsoon trawling the loss percentage 
recorded were 0.22% for pre-trawl ban, 0.14% for trawl ban and 0.04% for post-trawl ban 
periods.  
4.2 Loss at processing sector (frozen fish) 
In the case of frozen fish loss recorded we re of very low order of less than 0.5%. The 
percentage loss was 0.03 for the year unde r study with seasonal variation of 0.05%, 
0.02% and 0.02% respectively for pre-m onsoon, monsoon and post monsoon seasons. 
With respect to ban on m onsoon trawling the loss percenta ge recorded were 0.04% for 
pre-trawl ban, 0.02% for trawl ban and 0.02% for post trawl ban periods. 
In the processing sector losses occurred due to discolouration, black spot, broken 
tentacles and wings.  During glazing also loss occurred in the meat portion.  Clean shrimp 
meat while moving through conveyor in the processing plants is subjected to loss due to 
spillage. Damage to certain species like cu ttle fish and octopus while removing the raw 
material from the freezer takes place when  tentacles break. There was no significant 
seasonal impact on the losses in the processing sector. The sector is export oriented and 
the production system is tuned towards minimizing of the losses. In the export sector 
rejection of consignment due to food safety problem was reported in which case the 
importing country rejected and destroyed the entire consignment in the receiving point. 
This channel was not subjected to detailed study. 

V   Loss in fish drying 
Survey was conducted in two districts namely  Alappuzha and Calicut for estimation of 
percentage loss at drying un its. At Alappuzha a loss of 58.07% was reported for the 
period of study with seasonal loss of  38.16%, 80.86%, and 44.52% during pre-monsoon, 
monsoon and post-monsoon respectively. With respect to ban on monsoon trawling the 
loss percentage reported were 33.65%, 61.37%  and 93.05% for pre-trawl ban, trawl ban 
and post trawl ban respectively. At Calicut  the loss was 19.36% with season loss of 
16.67%, 19.17% and 21.61% during pre- monsoon, monsoon and post monsoon 
respectively. With respect to ban on monsoon trawling the loss was 15.02%, 4.95% and 
33.08% for pre-trawl ban, trawl ban and post trawl ban respectively. 
Drying units were of two types namely dryi ng for human consumption and for livestock 
feed. Huge quantities of oil sardine were found to be dried along the entire coast line 
from Chellanam in Ernakulam District to Punnapra in Alappuzha which was meant for 
livestock feed and extraction of fish oil duri ng October to January. Insect infestation and 
attack by bids and animals also result in loss. 
VI  Losses in markets 
The markets studied were wholesale markets, major and minor retail markets and 
roadside markets. Besides another major marketing channel of the vendors was also 
studied. Details of the losses in this area are presented below. 
6.1 Wholesale market (fresh fish) 
The losses reported for the year for fresh fi sh in the wholesale market was 2.17% with 
percentage standard error of 25.23.  The seasonal loss ie. pre-monsoon, monsoon and 
post monsoon was 2.69%, 1.74% and 2.31% resp ectively. Loss at wholesale market for 
pre-trawl ban, trawl ban and post-trawl ban periods were 2.76%, 1.03% and 2.69% 
respectively.   
The major reasons for loss in wholesale markets are handling losses and losses due to 
spoilage. Improper icing and exposure to ambi ent temperatures were the main causes for 
spoilage. Handling losses are also observed during loading and unloading.  
6.2  Wholesale market (dry fish) 

Loss percentage of dry fish in the wholesal e market was 8.28 for the year with seasonal 
loss of 10.37, 7.02 and 8.30 respectively fo r pre-monsoon, monsoon and post-monsoon 
periods.  With reference to the ban on m onsoon trawling pre-trawl ban period accounted 
for 9.27%, ban period 7.56% and post-trawl period 7.17  
The major reasons for loss were the same as in fresh fish market. Besides increase in 
humidity leading to spoilage  and insect infestation as far as dry fish  products are 
concerned.  
6.3 Major retail market (fresh fish) 
Major retail market reported loss of fresh fish as 0.16% with percentage standard error of 
35.03. Seasonal variations reported were  0.14% for pre-monsoon, 0.14% for monsoon 
and 0.19% for post-monsoon periods. During pr e-trawl ban a loss of 0.15%, trawl ban 
period 0.14% and post-trawl ban period 0.17% was reported.  
6.4 Major retail market (dry fish) 
A loss of 2.40% was reported over the year for dry fish in the major retail market. Pre-
monsoon period reported a loss of 1.72% , monsoon 3.09% and post-monsoon 2.05%.  
With reference to trawl ban the loss wa s 2.03% during pre-traw l ban 6.85% during ban 
and 0.72% during post-trawl ban period.  
6.5  Minor retail market (fresh fish) 
Minor retail market reported fresh fish loss of 1.89% with percenta ge standard error of 
13.77. Seasonal variation of 2.78% during pre-monsoon, 1.77% during monsoon and 
1.36% during post-monsoon was reported. The lo ss with reference to trawl ban was 
2.11% for pre-trawl ban, 1.64% for trawl ban and 1.69% for post-trawl ban periods. 
6.6 Minor retail market (dry fish) 
Minor retail market reported a loss of 6.43% for the year while pre-monsoon, monsoon 
and post-monsoon losses were reported at 8.54%, 6.89% and 4.27% respectively.  During 
pre-trawl ban period the percentage of loss of 5.97, durin g trawl ban 7.85 and during 
post-trawl ban 6.41.  
Physical damage due to improper handling, discard of fish due to lack of demand and low 
prices are the major reasons for loss at the retail level. The problems for dry fish are 

similar to that in other channels and are a result of spoilage du ring periods of high 
humidity and due to infestation of spoilage organisms and insects. 
Besides in minor retail markets there is la ck of proper storage facilities and improper 
icing leading to spoilage and discard of fish. Animals in the markets are also fed some of 
the fish. 
6.7  Roadside market (fresh fish) 
Roadside market reported a loss of 2.348% in fresh fish with percenta ge standard error of 
15.63.  The seasonal losses were 2.70% fo r pre-monsoon, 3.0% for monsoon and 1.27% 
for post-monsoon periods. A loss of 2.0% was reported during pre-trawl ban, 2.06% 
during trawl ban and 3.02% for post-trawl ban periods.   
6.8 Roadside market (dry fish) 
A loss percentage of 5.86 was reported for dry fish in roadside mark et with percentage 
standard error of 28.89. The seasonal losses were 5.19 for pre-monsoon, 6.38 for 
monsoon and 5.73 for post-monsoon period. The pre-trawl ban loss was 5.28%, trawl ban 
loss 6.73% and post-trawl ban loss 6.30%.  
The volume of fish traded in roadside markets is rather small and as such the losses are 
also minimal. If fish is left unsold it is usually dried. Loss occurs in case of damaged and 
spoiled fish. Feeding of animals is observed in  these markets also. In the roadside market 
losses were observed in oil sardine due to belly bursting and physical damage.   
6.9  Loss at vendor level 
In door to door vending of fresh fish a loss of 9.73% was reported with percentage 
standard error of 21.76. Seasonal variation of 16.85% during pre-monsoon, 6.05% during 
monsoon and 8.98% in monsoon was reported.  The loss in pre-trawl ban period was 
13.07%, trawl ban period 5.43% and post-trawl ban period 6.86% . 
Loss at the level of vendors occurs due to di scard of damaged and discoloured fish. Lack 
of demand for smaller varieties in some months also  results in loss. The fish unsold and 
that cannot be used is also thrown away. 
VII  Loss at household consumer level 

Urban and rural households were observed to  study the losses at the consumers level. 
Households in general are care ful in the use of food items, including fish and as such 
losses are less. Major reasons being spoilage due to lack of refrigeration facilities and 
feeding of pet animals. The details are presented below.  
7.1 Urban household 
The consumer loss at households was 1.93% with percentage standard error of 15.58. 
Seasonal loss of 1.99% for pre-mons oon, 1.33% for monsoon and 2.65% for post-
monsoon period was recorded.  With reference to trawl ban the losses were 2.50%, 1.14% 
and 1.49% for pre-trawl ban, trawl ban and post-trawl ban respectively.  
7.2 Rural household 
Consumer level loss for rural households was 4.95% with percentage standard error of 
3.60. Seasonal loss was 5.23%, 4.45% and 5.37% respectively for pre-monsoon, 
monsoon and post-monsoon seasons. Loss repor ted during pre-trawl ban period was 
5.32% during trawl ban 3.34% and during post trawl ban 5.20%.   
Fish loss in urban households was higher for pre-trawl ban and post monsoon seasons, 
whereas, in rural households the loss was hi gh in all the seasons ranging from 3.2 to 5.3 
percentage. A household bought small quantities of  less priced fish such as oil sardine, 
mackerel etc. up to 1 kg daily depending upon the number of family members.  It is 
assumed that easy availability of low value fish in the coastal villages and lack of storage 
facility at household level led to such losses. 
 
Commodity: Inland Fisheries 
I  Losses at harvest level 
1.1  Losses at freshwater aquaculture ponds 
Percentage losses at fresh water aquaculture pon ds in different seasons vary from 0.76 to 
6.23 %. The overall loss is estimated as 2.40%. At harvesting or packing or loading stage, 
the losses are physical losses due to faulty  handling practices and discarding of 
uneconomical sized, spoiled or bruised species . Here sometimes, spoilage occurs due to 
delay in timing from harvest to packing/ loading.                                                 

1.2  Losses at brackish water aquaculture ponds 
The percentage losses ove r the seasons vary from 0.13 to 2.79. The overall loss 
percentage is 1.86. The two stage random sampling design was followed to collect the 
data from sampling units. BW aquaculture is a seasonal activity with  a duration of four 
months a crop. Hence there was no activity / no crop in  the already selected sample units 
for rest of the year. The causes of loss are same  as in the case of fresh water aquaculture 
ponds. 
1.3  Losses at landing centres in reservoirs 
 The causes of loss at harvest level in re servoir fisheries are, spoilage due to 
adverse weather conditions, inordinate dela y in harvesting timing and insufficient icing 
and physical losses or bruises due to faulty handling practices and t ypes of fishing gears 
used. The percentage of loss during harvesting of fish in the Hirakud Reservoir is found 
to be high when the long line hook nets/ gill nets are used.  
The percentage losses at Yerrakalva, a sma ll reservoir in West Godavari District in 
Andhra Pradesh, vary from 7.72 to 10.30. The overall loss estimated to be 8.89% with the 
percentage standard error of 21.11.  
At Wyra, medium reservoir in  Khammam District in Andhr a Pradesh, the percentage 
losses are 1.90, 4.15 and 0.47 during pre-m onsoon, monsoon and post-monsoon seasons 
respectively.  
At Hirakud reservoir, the major reservoir sel ected for this study, the percentage losses 
vary from 5.08 to 8.85 over the seasons with the overall loss of 6.52 with the percentage 
standard error of 25.79. 
1.4  Losses at landing centres in lake 
The proportion of loss varies from 0.38 % to 4.48 % over the seasons. The overall loss 
could not be calculated as the data for one of the three landing centres selected 
(Penchilimaru) were not available due to no landing activity dur ing the months of 
December 2002 to February 2003. For those thr ee months, data could be collected only 
from the remaining two landing centres viz., Vaddalagadithippa and Akiveedu. 

The major causes of loss are, spoilage due  to adverse weather conditions, delay in 
harvesting timing and insufficient icing and physical losses or bruises due to faulty 
handling practices and eaten/ bi tten by ‘Kolleti cat’, a species  prevalent in Kolleru lake 
area. 
1.5  Losses at landing centres  in riverine fisheries 
The loss is high during monsoon season  at both the landin g centres (12.12% and 
14.66% at Kovvur and Dowleswaram landing cent res). The overall loss percentage was 
8.56 at Kovvur and 13.94 at Dowleswaram with  the percentage standard errors of 6.14 
and 6.20 respectively. The volume of catch handled at Dowleswaram landing centre is 
high since the catches from other land ing centres too are brought here for 
redistribution. 
The causes of loss are, spoilage due to a dverse weather conditions, delay in harvesting 
timing and insufficient icing and physical losses or bruises due to faulty handling 
practices and types of fishing gears used. 
1.6  Losses at landing centres  in estuarine fisheries 
It is almost equal (around 6%) over the seasons. The overall loss is estimated to be 6.32% 
with the percentage st andard error of 11.74. The major cause  of loss is s poilage due to 
adverse weather conditions, delay in harves ting timing and insufficient icing. The other 
types are, physical losses or bruises due to faulty handling practices and discarding due to 
uneconomical sizes or lack of demand. 
II Losses at post harvest level 
2.1  Losses at packaging centres 
Season does not play a major role as the loss percentage is almost same over the three 
seasons and the overall loss percentage is very  minimum as 0.29 with the percentage 
standard error of 10.77. 
The causes of losses are physical losses due to  faulty handling practices at loading/ 
unloading/packing stage, spoilage due to delay in transportation at raw material receiving 
stage and spoilage due to insufficient icing at storage stage. 
 

2.2  Losses at pre-processing units 
The loss percentage at the units  in West Godavari District  is negligible (0.19) with 
percentage standard error of 11.27. In East Godavari it varies fr om 0.84 to 2.17 over the 
seasons and the overall loss percentage is 1.57  with the percentage  standard error of 
15.03.  
The causes of losses are spoilage due to delay in transportation/ insufficient icing at raw 
material receiving stage and di scarding of little edible por tions due to faulty handling 
practices at peeling stage. 
2.3  Losses at processing units 
The percentage loss at the units  in West Godavari district is 0.15 with the percentage 
standard error of 16.92 and in East Godavari  District it is 0.54 with 18.13 as percentage 
standard error. The percentage loss does not vary significantly over the seasons in both 
the Districts. Spoilage due to delay in transp ortation/ insufficient icing at raw material 
receiving stage is the only cause of loss identified. 
2.4  Losses at wholesale markets 
The overall loss percentage is minimum (1.42) at Eluru, followed by 3.10 in Akiveedu, 
4.88 in Kakinada and high (10.98) at Rajahmundr y with percentage standard errors of 
9.22, 11.89, 7.03 and 3.82 respectively. 
At Akiveedu, it varies from 2.00 to 3.71 over the seasons, 1.05 to 1.76 in Eluru, 3.26 to 
5.85 in Kakinada and 6.45 to 13.40 in Rajahmundry. It is because of the poor 
infrastructure facilities, a nd huge volume of arrivals from  far away landing centres of 
Godavari River, the percentage loss is high at Rajahmundry Wholesale market. 
Four major causes of loss have  been identified as, firstl y, spoilage due to improper 
packing/ inefficient containers, delay in tr ansportation and unrelia ble transportation at 
transportation stage. Secondly, it is spoilage due to lack of storage facilities, insufficient 
icing and adverse weather conditions during st orage. Thirdly, it is physical loss/ bruises 
due to faulty handling practices at loadin g/unloading/packaging stage. Lastly, it is 
discarding due to un-economical sizes or lack of demand at marketing stage. 
2.5  Losses at retail markets 

The percentage loss at retail market is  as less as 0.26 and 0.11 during pre-monsoon and 
post-monsoon seasons. It is high (5.73) duri ng monsoon seasons. The overall loss is 2.96 
with the percentage standard error of 16.58.  The causes of loss are spoilage due to 
improper packing/ insufficient icing, delay in  transportation and unreliable transportation 
at transportation stage, spoilage due to lack of storage facilities, insufficient icing and 
adverse weather conditions durin g storage stage, physical lo ss/ bruises due to faulty 
handling practices at loading/ unloading / pack aging stage and lastly, it is discarding due 
to uneconomical sizes or lack of demand and spoilage due to adverse weather conditions 
at marketing stage. 
2.6  Losses at the level of small-scale vendors 
In East Godavari District, the percenta ge loss is 3.29 during pre-monsoon, 5.53 during 
post-monsoon and maximum of 6.63 during monsoon season. The overall loss is 5.52 
with the percentage standa rd error of 29.92. In West Godavari, it is 3.12, 4.33 and 4.47 
during pre-monsoon, post-monsoon and monsoon s easons. The overall percentage loss is 
4.10 with the percentage standard error of 27.36. 
Since the inland fishes have to come from far away places (West Godavari and Kolleru 
lake area) and the distance traveled is more, the loss percentage is comparatively more at 
East Godavari than West Godavari. 
The causes of loss are, discarding/ spoilage  due to lack of demand, adverse weather 
conditions, in-efficient containers used/ in sufficient icing and delay in selling at 
marketing stage, and spoilage  due to lack of storage facilities, adverse weather 
conditions, in-efficient containers used/ insufficient icing at storage stage.  
2.7  Losses at live fish transportation centres 
The proportion of loss is 2.22, 1.71 and 3.23 during pre-monsoon, monsoon and post-
monsoon seasons. The overall loss percentage is 2.22 with the percentage standard error 
of 19.76. The loss at destination, which would have been very high, was not studied since 
the destinations are, East and West Be ngal, which are far away. The causes are, 
discarding due to small size at unloading stage,  mortality due to faulty handling practices 
at unloading/ packaging stage and mortality  due to lack of proper storage facility/ 
inefficient containers at storage stage. 

III Losses at consumer level 
3.1  Losses at household level in urban locations 
Proportion of loss of fish (i n percentage) at consumer l evel, households in urban 
locations is almost equal at both the locations viz., Eluru (4.41) and Rajahmundry 
(4.52) with percentage standard errors of 13.64 and 15.37 respectively.  
The major cause of the loss is discarding of spo iled/ bruised/ some part of edible portions 
at cleaning stage. 
3.2  Losses at household level in rural areas 
Proportion of loss of fish (in percent age) is 1.28, 5.41 and 3.68 during pre-monsoon, 
monsoon and post-monsoon stages. The o verall loss is 3.94 with the percentage 
standard error of 26.53. The major cause of the loss is discarding of spoiled/ bruised/ 
some part of edible portions at cleaning stage. Spoiled fish ar e difficult to be identified 
at the time of purchase. At cleaning stage, so me spoiled portions as well as little edible 
portions are discarded. In rural areas, th e percentage of disc arding is less when 
compared to urban areas, since they get fresh fish in rural areas. 
 
Commodity: Milk 
 Milk Losses at Milk Producers Level 
(i)    Milk Producers 
¾ Milk production 8.75 litr es; total loss of 4.31% , during production  2.56%, 
storage 0.62%, kitchen  0.61% and consumption 0.61%.   
¾ Losses- winter (3.19%), rainy (4.16%) summer (4.16%) . 
¾ Losses of 6.04, 3.55 and 3.66%. for small, medium and large category. 
(ii)  Rural Dairies  
¾  herd size 16-17 milch animals.  

¾  Milk production 103.50 litres, loss 1.87%;  seasonal loss  3.76%  winter, 1.27%  
summer, 1.24%  rainy.  
¾  causes of losses - calf suckling, teat infection, kicking.   
¾  small, medium and large category losses - 2.06, 1.56 and 2.53%, respectively.  
¾  Curdling losses highest (1.33%) on large farm.  
(iii) Urban Dairies  
¾ herd size of 14 to 15 animals, production 85 litres, 3.05% loss due to mastitis 
(1.59%), calf suckling (0.61%) and animal kicking (0.21%) and sale (0.25%).  
¾  Small, medium and large categories losses - 2.53, 0.38 and 3.74% respectively.   
¾ losses - teat infection (2.74 %) for large, calf suckling ( 0.79%), teat infection (0.71%) 
for small farms.  
Milk Losses at Market Levels 
(i)  Milk Procurment 
 Milk Collection Centre  
¾ Milk collection 296 litres, losses 0.28% during testing (0.12%), collection (0.09%), 
dispatch 0.05%.   
¾ Losses - winter 0.31% , summer 0.28% and rainy 0.14% respectively .   
¾ Losses for small, medium and large categories, 0.59, 0.42 and 0.16% respectively.   
(ii)  Milk Producers Co-operative Societies  
¾ The co-operative societies collected 110 litres per day with 0.35% loss.   
¾ This loss was mainly during testing and milk collection.   
¾ Losses in rainy season were 0.24, in summer 0.27 and in winter 0.44% respectively.   

¾ Scale had inverse effect on losses.  
(iii)  Raw Milk Can Transportation  
¾ total loss of 1.18% from supply points to chilling centres.  
¾ In summer, losses during transportation were highest 0.65 out of total loss (1.49%).   
¾ small category, medium and large ones losses 1.55, 0.56 and 1.15% respectively.  
 (iv) Bulk Milk Transportation  
¾ Total loss 0.33%.  
¾ Rail tankers’ losses were 0.56% by transporting 43724 litres per trip. 
¾ Losses were 1.46% for small category.  
(v)  Chilling Centres  
¾ losses 0.59%   for 4734 litres milk handling.  
¾ Losses during reception were highest (0.18%).  
¾ This reception dock loss was 0.48% .  
¾ In winter,  milk loss  0.95% for 4000 litres milk handled. 
(vi)  Milk Vendors   
¾ They handled 84 litres milk per day with 1.32% loss.   
¾ Losses during tumbling (0.50%), measurement (0.47%), milk handling (0.10%).   
¾ high losses, transportation (0.59%), milk collection (0.33%) and distribution (0.25%).   
¾ Losses in summer (1.83%) mainly during tr ansportation (0.86%), tumbling (0.84%) 
with quantities picked up from 60 to 216 litres, losses decreased - 1.66% to 076%.    
Milk Processing 

(i)   Creameries  
¾ Their losses were 0.59% mainly during retail sale (0.29%), cream separation (0.22%), 
curdling 0.06(%) by handling 592 litres/day.  
¾ Losses in summer were hi ghest (1.10%) caused mainly  during separation (0.52%), 
retail sale (0.35%) and due to curdling (0.18%).  
¾ Small vendors using 221 litres milk incurred losses mostly due to high losses during   
milk separation (0.65%), retail sale (0.5%) and curdling (0.24%).   
(ii)  Halwaies 
¾ Halwaies’ losses were 1.20% by utilising 50 litres milk/day.  
¾ Sourage/ curdling caused 0.50% loss in su mmer, it went down to 0.35% in rainy and 
zero in winter with their respective total loss percentage of 1.35, 1.45 and 0.78% 
respectively.   
¾ Small vendor’s losses were 1.57% for 32 litres milk, medium’s 0.82% with 78 litres 
and the large lost 0.70% by handling 189 litres.  
(iii)   Milk Plants  
¾ When data was collected for previous day once in a month their losses were 0.99% by 
handling 3.35 lakh litres milk/day/plant.   
¾ Then 0.99% losses were caused during milk reception (0.12%), quality control 
(0.03%), milk processing (0.58%) with processes, packaging, pasteurising and storage 
dispatch (0.08%) and utilization of returned milk (0.16%).  
Market Milk Transportation.  
(i)  Pouche Milk Transportation In Insulated Vans  

¾ Vans transported 2561 litres per day with loss of 0.11%  
¾ Losses in summer were highest (0.14%).  These losses were mainly due to 
transportation, unloading and loading.   
¾ Losses incurred by thei r large category were 0.12% bei ng the highest of that of all 
other groups.  
(ii) Market Bulk Milk Tankers  
¾ They carried daily 8716 litres/trip with 0.35% loss.   
¾ Their major losses were in transportation (0.13%), flushing (0.10%), distribution 
(0.07%) and loading (0.06%).   
¾ Their losses in all seasons and also for categories were around 0.35%.   
Milk Sales and Distribution 
(i)   Milk Booths/Departmental Stores  
¾ Their losses were 0.12% by selling 513 litres per day/booth or departmental store.   
¾ Milk pouches leakage was the major reason for loss during all seasons and for all 
categories.   
¾ Losses for small category were highest (0.32%) as compared to other groups.  
¾  Losses in winter season were also highest (0.16%). 
(ii)  Pouches Home Delivery Vendors  
¾ They sold 104 litres/day with loss of 0.31%.   
¾ Losses were mainly during transportation (0.19%) and distribution (0.12%).   
¾ These total losses were highest (0.49%) in summer and also for retailers small  
      category (0.56%). 

(iii) Automatic Milk Vending Machines  
¾  Their milk losses were 0.02% by sale of 935 litres/day.  
¾  The losses percentage remained the same throughout season.  
¾  In small, medium and large category, these were 0.03, 0.31 and 0.01% respectively.   
¾  All losses were due to flushing. Milk dr ipping/overflow losses while vending milk in 
customers’ container belonged to the customers and not to the milk vending booths.   
(iv)  Mobile Vending Machines 
¾ They sold 190.14 ± 7.34 litres milk per day with loss of 0.41%.   
¾ Losses in all seasons were around 0.40%.   
¾ These were mainly during transportation (0.18%), distribution (0.12%) and collection 
      (0.08%).  
¾  Loss percentage for small category was highest (0.56%) and least for large (0.33%).  
Milk Losses at Consumer Level  
(i)     Milk consumers in rural area  
¾ Average consumption 1.28 litres per day with loss of 6.26%.  
¾ These were highest during storage (2.71%), boiling overflow (0.80%), stickage/ 
vessel transfer loss (about 1%).    
¾ Overall losses were around 5.50%. Average cons umption of milk in  case of small, 
medium and large categories was 1.118, 3.597 and 10.00 litres per day with 
respective losses of 6.62, 3.78 and 0.70%.   
¾ Overall sourage/curdling losses were 1.27%.  
(ii)  Milk Consumers in Karnal  

¾ Average consumption per day was 2.09 litres with 3.58% loss.   
¾ Cats and dogs caused milk loss (1.07%). Undruck/leftover losses were 1.08%.   
¾ Losses in kitchen were 1.45%. Losses in summer were 4.43% being higher as 
compared to other seasons i.e. winter 3.30% and rainy 3.02%. On an average, 
curdling/souring losses were 0.55%.  
¾ Average consumption in case of small and medium categories was 1.47 and 2.8 
litres/day with respective loss as 4.87 and 2.75%.  
¾  No large category existed in sample size that consumed more than 5 litres milk per 
day.   
(iii)   Milk Consumers in Nissing  
¾ Milk consumers in Nissing consumed 1.52 litres with loss of 5.79% per day.  
¾ Souring/curdling losses were 2.00%.  Boiling overflow caused 0.63%.  
¾ Consumption losses by family members we re 1.31%. Sourage/curdling losses were 
highest in rainy 3.5% and 3.0% in summer.   
¾ Small and medium categories used 1.36 and 3.66 litres/day with loss of 6.20 and 
3.68%.  
(iv)  Consumers In Delhi  
¾ Average consumption per day was about 2.8 litres with losses of 2.94% per day.   
(v)   Producers As Consumers  
¾ Their consumption was about 4.77 litres/day with overall loss of 3.12%.   
(vi)  Extra Large Producers As Consumers  
¾ They consumed 18.39 litres milk per day with overall losses 1.089% .   

¾ Average no. of family members were 10.   
¾ Market purchases were nil.   
 
 
 
 