 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2007-2008) 
                 
         
34
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-08) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007)} 
 
         
        
THIRTY FOURTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) 

 
THIRTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 
AND EDUCATION) 
         
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008) 
  
         
[Action Taken by the Government on the  
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report  
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.11.2007 
 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.11.2007  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
 
 
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 
 

 
COA No.199  
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
            © 2007 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of  
Business in Lok Sabha  (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 

 
<CONTENTS> 
                   P AGE 
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………    
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………   
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
held on  27 November, 2007.      
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by  the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth  
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2006-2007) (14th Lok Sabha)      
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2007-2008) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Ranen Barman 
3.  Shri Anil Basu 
4.  Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
5.  Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava  
6.  Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
7.  Shri Khagen Das 
8.  Shri Dharmendra 
9.  Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar 
10.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
11.  Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
12.  Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire 
13.  Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
14.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
15.  Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
16.  Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Nilangekar Patil 
17.  Shri K.J.S.P.Reddy 
18.  Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy 
19.  Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
20.  Shri M.P.Veerendrakumar 
21.  Shri Baleshwar Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22.  Shri Harish Rawa 
23.  Dr. M.S.Gill 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Vikram Verma 
26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28.  Shri Datta Meghe 
29.  Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
30.  Shri M.Rajasekara Murthy 
31.  Prof. M.S.Swaminathan 
 
 
 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K.Sharma   -  Additional Secretary 
2.         Shri A.K.Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Raj Kumar   -  Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri N.S.Hooda   -  Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Anil Kumar   -  Senior Executive Assistant 
     
 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
         
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture, [2007-2008] having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty Fourth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the Twenty Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007) (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) for the year 2007-2008. 
 
2. The Twenty Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007) on 
Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha on 27.04.2007 and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on the same day.  The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education) was requested to furnish action taken replies of the Government to the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report.  The replies of the Government to all 
the recommendations contained in the Report were received. 
 
3. The Committee considered the action taken replies furnished by the Government at their 
sitting held on 27.11.2007, approved the draft comments and adopted the Thirty Fourth Report.  
Minutes of the sitting are placed at Appendix I.  
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
      
                     
                                                           
                                               
NEW DELHI;                        PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
27_November, 2007                                               Chairman, 
6 Agrahayana, 1929(Saka)                          Standing Committee on Agriculture. 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007) on Demands for Grants (2007-
2008) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research & Education) which 
was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 27.04.2007. 
 
1.2  The Action taken replies have been received from the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education) in respect of all the 11 
recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorised as under: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II of the Report)  
 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 2, 7, 8, 9 and 10 (Total-5) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s action taken reply (Chapter III of the Report) - NIL 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which action taken replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV of the 
Report)  
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 11 (Total-1) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited.  (Chapter V)  
 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 (Total-5) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of recommendations for 
which only interim replies have been given by  the Government, should be furnished to 
the Committee expeditiously. 
 
 
 
 

 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
Decline in DARE/ICAR proposed/demanded allocation for XIth Plan 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
1.5 Regarding decline in DARE/ICAR allocation for X ith Plan, the Committee have 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that Ninth Plan Working Group constituted by the 
Planning Commission for DARE/ICAR had recommended that DARE should be provided 
at least one per cent of Agricultural Gross Domestic Product (AGDP) initially, with a 
gradual increase upto two per cent of AGDP in subsequent years.  Similarly, X th Plan 
Working Group for DARE had also recommended at least one per cent of AGDP share 
which amounted to about Rs.25,000 crore at that time. The X Ith Plan Working Group on 
Agricultural Research and Education has also recommended that at least a sum of 
Rs.31,672 crore should be provided for various sectors and State Agriculture 
Universities (SAUs), in addition to the funding of the Externally Aided 
Projects(EAPs)/World Bank Aided Projects as per their approved programmes.   
To the sheer astonishment of the Committee, DARE has proposed/demanded an 
allocation of Rs.12176.40 crore for the X Ith Plan which happens to be Rs.3823.60 crore 
less than the outlay proposed/demanded by them for X th Plan which was Rs.16000.00 
crore (including Rs.1000.00 crore as one-time catch up Grant for replacing/renovating 
the age-old/obsolete infrastructure/equipments, etc.)  
The Committee have always been very strongly recommending year after year to 
the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for providing at least one per cent of 
AGDP to DARE/ICAR for fulfilling their mandate, but have failed to understand the 
attitude of the Department that has belittled the Department’s own pleadings before the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture for seeking enhanced funding every 
year. 
The Committee would like to be informed of the reasons as to why the DARE has 
failed to propose more outlay for X Ith Plan which was expected to be greater than the 
Xth Plan Projections of Rs.16000.00 crore, which was repeatedly endorsed by the  
Committee through their various recommendations.”. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
1.6 The Government, in their Action Taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“The Department was constrained to project the XI Plan Outlay at Rs. 12176 
crore in the background of the instructions received from Planning Commission in 
November 2006 while inviting the Department’s Plan proposals for the XI Plan period 
and Annual Plan 2007–08 wherein the Department was asked to submit with a 
maximum limit of an increase of 15% p.a. (at current prices).  Going by this criterion as 
suggested by Planning Commission, the X I Plan outlay works out to Rs. 10467 crore 
whereas the Department had projected a higher figure of Rs. 12176 crore.  However, the 
XI Plan Working Group on Agricultural Research & Education had recommended Rs. 
31672 crore – against which a communication is yet to be received from Planning 
Commission.  Further, in pursuance of the decisions taken by the NDC sub-committee 
on Agriculture and related issues a sub-group on Adoption and Generation of Relevant 
Technologies and their Dissemination to the Farmers was set up under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, DARE & DG, ICAR, which has recommended to the 
Planning Commission Rs. 36,000 crore during the XI Plan.”. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.7 The Committee note that the XIth Plan Working Group on Agriculture Research & 
Education had recommended Rs.31672 crore against w hich a communication is yet to be 
received from Planning Commission.  The Committee also note that in pursuance of the 
decisions taken by  the National Development Council (NDC) Sub-Committee on 
Agriculture and related issues a sub-group on Adoption and Generation of Relevant 
Technologies and their Dissemination to the Farmers was set up under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary DARE & DG, ICAR, w hich has recommended to the Planning Commission 
Rs.36,000 crore during the XIth Plan. 
 The Committee w ould like to be apprised of the fate of these tw o 
recommendations mentioned above. 
 
 
 

 
 
 One Time Catch up Grant should be provided separately 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 1.8 Regarding One Time Catch up Grant, the Committee have recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that the DARE/ICAR has a number of 
institutions/laboratories, which are more than twenty years old.  It was felt necessary that 
a one time catch-up grant may be sought from the Planning Commission, so that the 
requirement of renovation of old infrastructure and up-gradation/replacement of obsolete 
equipment could be met.  The Ninth Plan Working Group recorded that one time catch-
up grant was the critical need for upgrading laboratory equipment, pilot plants, farm and 
laboratory facilities, class rooms and audio visual facilities.  In order to have excellent   
academic standards in State Agricultural Un iversities and to have globally competitive 
research working environment, the Eighth Plan, Ninth Plan & Tenth Plan Working 
Groups had recommended Rs.300 crore, Rs.500 crore & Rs.1000 crore respectively as 
one time catch-up grant.   
The Committee have been strongly recommending and urging the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance year after year to provide the much needed one 
time catch up grant over and above the annual allocations in a phased manner to ICAR, 
given its track record of service to the nation and being privy to agricultural revolution in 
the country. 
The Committee also note that in this regard, the Department had written a 
number of times to the Planning Commission but the Planning Commission had always 
taken a rigid stand that the very purpose for which this grant was sought and felt 
necessary, viz., critical repair/renovation/upgradation of research and education 
facilities, etc., had already been taken care of in the total Plan Budgetary Support.  
Maintaining their earlier stand again, the Planning Commission in their guidelines for 
formulation of XI Five Year Plan has indicated that in the Plan budget critical repair and 
maintenance upto 15% of the Plan budgetary support can be included. 
The Committee are dismayed with the routine response of ignoring and rejecting 
the recommendation of the Committee by the Planning Commission and pessimistic 
attitude of the Department in giving up the efforts to procure the essentially required one 
time catch up grant.  The Committee strongly deplore the attitude of the Planning 
Commission to give false promises since IXth Plan onwards. 
 
 
 

 
 Further, the plea of the Planning Commission that the requirement of one time catch up 
grant has been taken care of in the X th Plan allocations and hence no separate funding 
was required, is baseless as the Annual Plan allocations are always much  below the 
budget proposals of the Department and  hardly enough to maintain the on-going 
schemes of the Department.  The meagre f unding provided to the Department  has 
always been inadequate and has proved insufficient for changing/renovating the 
obsolete infrastructure/equipment as is evident  from the nil response from all the ICAR 
Institutes and SAUs who were given instructions during the IX th Plan that 20 to 40% of 
their total Annual Plan grant every year was meant for the purpose of one time catch up 
grant, but not even a single Institute/SAU could do that and the conditions with regard to 
obsolete equipment, age old infrastructure including laboratories and other related 
research facilities remain the same which is  why the Department had again proposed 
an amount of Rs.1,000 crore during the Tenth Five Year Plan but the Planning 
Commission had never made separate allocations specifically for catch up grant through 
Annual Plans. 
So far as the latest guidelines/instructions of the Planning Commission for 
formulation of X Ith Five Year Plan which indicated that in the Plan budget critical repair 
and maintenance upto 15% of the Plan budgetary support can be included, is 
concerned, it is more than evident from the financial budgetary figures of the Department 
for the year 2006-07 and 2007-08 that although there seems to be some increase in BE 
(2007-08) i.e., Rs.1620.00 crore [Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) which includes DBS + 
EAPs] from the RE(2006-07) of Rs.1430.00 crore yet practically the actual Domestic 
Budgetary Support  viz., Rs. 1620.00 crore(GBS) – Rs. 290.00 crore (EAP) = 
Rs.1330.00 crore  is Rs.83.50 crore less than the DBS of RE (2006-07) which is 
Rs.1413.50 crore. 
The Committee, after keeping in view the potential of agriculture in changing 
socio-economic condition of millions of Indians, urge the Planning Commission and the 
Government to seriously consider agricultural research & education as one of the central 
elements of the planning efforts in the X Ith Five Year Plan.  The Committee as well as 
the Government have widely accepted that concomitant with high growth rate in our 
economy, agriculture must grow at 4%, as t he improvement in productivity is the most 
important option to raise production which can’t be done without developing new 
varieties of seeds which needs a lot of investment. 
 
 
 

 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance 
to have interactive sessions with the Department to understand, assess and negotiate 
the requirement of one time catch up grant in the favour of the Department as per the 
latest requirement to be assessed by physical verification of the ICAR Institutes and 
SAUs rather than imposing their terms and conditions to do the major 
renovation/upgradation of infrastructure/l aboratories from the meagre annual domestic 
budgetary support.”.   
 
1.9 The Government in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“The above recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to Planning 
Commission / Ministry of Finance.   According to guidelines of Planning Commission the 
Department may also include upto 15% of Plan budget for critical repairs and 
maintenance.  However, the Planning Commission has intimated that the proposals / 
initiatives in the form of SFC / EFC / CCEA would be considered favourably to provide 
need based allocation.”.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.10 The Committee note that the Department has forwarded the Recommendation 
No.5 of the 28 th Report of the Committee (2006-07) to the Planning Commission/Ministry 
of Finance for getting it implemented. How ever, the Planning Commission has intimated 
that the proposals/initiatives in the form of Standing Finance 
Committee(SFC)/Expenditure Finance Committee(EFC)/Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs(CCEA) would be considered favourably to provide need based allocation. 
The Committee would like to be apprised as to how  the Department makes the 
best use of this positive assurance given by  the Planning Commission and prove the 
need for one-time catch up grant to do the major renovation/upgradation of 
infrastructure/laboratories and put up the proposal in the form of SFC/EFC/CCEA for the 
same as has been desired by the Planning Commission. 
 
 
 
 

 
Slow Budgetary Process needs revamping for optimal utilization of public money 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
1.11 Regarding the Slow Budgetary Process, the Committee have recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that in spite of the positive assurance from the Planning 
Commission, the Ministry of Finance and also by the Department during the examination 
of the last three DFGs of the DARE/ICAR regarding the implementation of the 
recommendations of the Committee that RE/BE grants/funds should be made available 
to the Department and various Institutes under its jurisdiction sometime in the month of 
December or a little earlier, practically nothing positive has been done so far, as is 
evident from the factual information made available to the Committee by the 
Department. 
The Committee observe that Ministry of Finance conveyed RE(2006-07) to the 
Department officially on 4.1.2007 and the Department also intimated sectoral allocations 
to the Division(s) located in the Headquarters of the Department, on 18.1.2007.  From 
the first written reply of the Department, it is clear that the exact date on which the 
Subject Matter Divisions(SMDs) actually communicated the RE(2006-07) to the 
concerned Institute/NRC/PD was : (i) Crop Science on 25.1.2007; (ii) NRM on 
19.1.2007; (iii) Fisheries on 22.1.2007; (iv)Agricultural Extension on 31.1.2007; (v) 
Agricultural Engineering on 9.2.2007; (vi) Horticulture on 5.2.2007; (vii) Animal Science 
on 29.12.2006; and (viii) Education on 17.12.2006.  When enquired further on a  
supplementary point as to how the Animal Science and Education SMDs were able to 
convey RE(2006-07) on 29.12.06 and 17.12.06 respectively, to various 
Institutes/NRCs/PDs under them, even when Ministry of Finance conveyed RE(2006-07) 
on 4.1.2007, the Committee were further informed that  ‘Animal Science and Education 
Divisions also took an advance action by communicating the  tentative RE to its 
Institutes so as to keep them  in  a state of preparedness, although final RE 2006-07 
was conveyed on 18.1.2007 and 5.2.2007 respectively.’  The Department has stated that 
‘In the meeting held on 27.11.2006   Secretary(Expenditure), Ministry of Finance, while 
deciding the RE 2006-07 for DARE/ICAR through discussion with Financial Adviser, 
indicated the Plan RE as Rs 1430 crore. Initiating an advance action, the Department  
communicated tentative RE 2006-07 to all SMDs on 12.12.06 itself. The final RE 2006-
07 of Rs 1430 crore was officially conv eyed by MoF on 4.1.2007 and the Department  
also intimated sectoral allocations to Division on 18.1.07.’   
 
 
 

 
The Committee feel that if Animal Science and Education Divisions could take an 
advance action by communicating the tentative RE to its Institutes on 29.12.2006 and 
17.12.2006; respectively, then why the other six SMDs failed to take the same advance 
action in the month of December itself.  Astonishingly, the Department has given belated 
action taken dates for their first six SMDs and advance action taken dates for the last 
two SMDs in the same reply.  Moreover, the Department is admitting in their reply that 
the formal and actual RE(2006-07) was conveyed to the concerned Institutes etc. by 
their respective SMDs, as late as, for Horticulture & Education on 5.2.2007 and 
Agricultural Engineering  on 9.2.2007 whereas Animal Science SMD is said to have 
conveyed on 18.1.2007 to its institutes, why Horticulture, Education and Agricultural 
Engineering. took 18 to 21 days more time to do the same.  
The Committee strongly deplore the tendency of the Department to give 
confusing and misleading information/statements and later on cover up/polish their 
delays in action while replying to the points raised by the Committee and advise the 
Department to concentrate on improving thei r financial and administrative skills, as the 
Department took about 15 days time to forma lly convey the RE 2006-07 to its various 
SMDs located within the same building and SMDs in turn took about 18 to 21 more days 
to convey the same to their respective Institutes/NRCs/PDs, etc.   
The Committee unanimously urge the Planning Commission, the Ministry of 
Finance and the Department to seriously look into their procedural working in order to 
improve the entire tardy budgetary process to ensure that the RE/BE etc. are conveyed 
to the end-users, i.e., actual Institutes etc. of the Department, in the month of December 
itself or a little earlier for optimal utilization of scarce public money.”. 
 
1.12 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“The above observations and recommendation have been forwarded to Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance.  All the Subject Matter Divisions of the Department 
have been acquainted with these constructive observations of the Committee for 
expeditious compliance.  The Department would be utmost careful in future in adhering 
to the concerns of the Committee.”.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.13 The Committee note that the Department has forwarded the Recommendation       
No. 6 of the 28 th Report of the Committee (2006-07) for revamping the slow Budgetary 
 
 
 

 
Process to the Planning Commission and Ministry  of Finance.  But the reply does not 
indicate the response(s) of both of these parties involved in the budgetary process, 
namely, Planning Commission and Ministry  of Finance.  The Committee also note that all 
the Subject Matter Divisions of the Department have been acquainted with these 
constructive observations of the Committee for expeditious compliance and the 
Department w ould be utmost careful in future in adhering to the concerns of the 
Committee. 
 The Committee are dismayed to point out that in spite of such assurances given 
by the Department through their action taken replies since 2004-05, practically, no care 
has been taken/reflected in their actual and factual deeds in this regard. However, the 
Committee are sanguinely  aw aiting the positive outcome in the revamping of the tardy 
budgetary process this year onwards and w ould like to be apprised of the actual reform 
taken in this regard. 
 
Concern over Hormone-injected Milk Production and its effect on Human and Animal Health 
(Recommendation No.11) 
 
1.14 Regarding Hormone-injected milk production and its effect on human and animal health, 
the Committee have recommended as under:- 
“The Committee are aware that the practice of injecting hormone for enhancing 
milk production is prevalent among livestock farmers of almost all regions of the country, 
especially in Punjab, Haryana, U.P., Bihar, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, 
etc.  The material used for the purpose is a crude preparation of Oxytocin, a peptide 
hormone that has the basic function of facilitating secretion of milk from the udder and 
expulsion of fetus/placenta during parturition. The farmers use the preparation of this 
hormone for salvaging complete milk retained in the udder.  However, repeated use of 
the hormone on the animal can have a bad effect on the health of the animal especially 
on udder health. 
The Committee express their concern over the issue and are astonished as to 
why the ICAR has not initiated any work on this issue even when they (ICAR) are very 
well aware of the fact that repeated use of the hormone on the animal can have some 
bad effect on the health of the animal.  The Committee are not satisfied with the 
reasoning of the Department for not initiating any work on the whole issue as according 
 
 
 

 
to them, no hormone is secreted in the milk as it does not stimulate milk synthesis as such and 
hence no risk for the consumers. 
In the opinion of the Committee, this is a serious matter which directly involves 
animal’s health and field experiences tell that it reduces animal’s lactation years and also 
affects human health. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to initiate 
research on this issue afresh on both the aspects, viz., animal as well as human health 
from every angle and make the livestock farmers and consumers aware about their 
research findings on the bad/ill effects of injecting hormone repeatedly in the animal out 
of greed to gain more milk and money, through their network of KVKs, scientists-farmers 
interactive session and through media advertisements.”. 
 
1.15 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“At NDRI, Karnal work has been conducted on oxytocin administration on cows 
and buffaloes and gist of various studies carried out is given below: 
 
• Administration of oxytocin in the doses of 10 IU(International Unit) for a period of 
10 days did not affect milk production of crossbred cows. The production of fat 
and protein in cows of control group as well as the experimental group was 
similar. It was concluded that administration of synthetic oxytocin for milk let 
down does not adversely affect the production of milk fats and proteins.  
• The effect of different doses (1 IU to 10 IU) of oxytocin on milking behaviour and 
composition of milk in 20 Murrah buffaloes in mid lactation and yielding an 
average of 9.1 kg milk per day was studied. One IU of oxytocin injected intra-
muscular was very effective in milk let down without affecting the composition of 
milk.  
• 2.5 IU and 5 IU of oxytocin when injected intra-muscular influenced milking time.  
• Administration of oxytocin @2.5 IU indicated that its administration results in 
significant changes in milk yield. There is no effect of oxytocin on milk 
composition, pH, Erythrocyte Count and Non Essential Fatty Acids concentration. 
• Study conducted on 18 lactating Murrah buffaloes to find out the effect of 
exogenous oxytocin on cisternal, alveolar and total milk yield, milk composition of 
cisternal, alveolar and total milk and permeability of mammary tight junctions 
showed no significant change. No effect on reproductive parameters was 
observed. The incidence of estrous symptom was similar and normal in control 
 
 
 

 
and experimental groups of buffaloes and the ovarian status was normal.  In 
view of this outcome of the study, it is evident that experimental studies 
undertaken at the institute did not reveal any adverse effect on milk composition 
or otherwise.  
 
The Department had also sought the views / necessary action from the 
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries, which  responded as under: 
 
‘Oxytocin is used in veterinary practice as a drug to induce rhythmic 
contractions during dystokia – difficult parturition, removal of retained placenta 
and in some cases letting down of milk in case of withdrawal symptoms after 
delivery. 
It is a schedule ‘H’ Drug that can be sold only on prescription.  Recently, 
after seizure of such illegal injections of Oxytocin from Uttar Pradesh during 
2004, letters were again issued to all the Secretaries of Animal Husbandry 
Department and copy to all Directors of States / Union Territories regarding 
initiating the campaign in collaboration with the State Drug Controller to check 
the menace of indiscriminate use of Oxytocin in animals in the States and an 
awareness campaign amongst the farmers and the dairy owners to be taken up’.” 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.16 The Committee are not satisfied w ith the reply of the Department.  The reply does 
not mention anything or any action taken/proposed to be taken on the fresh research to 
be conducted by the Department on the issue of Hormone-injected milk and its effect on 
human beings.  Moreover, the Committee feel that the study conducted by NDRI, Karnal 
on Animal Health is only for a limited period, say , 10 days or so, (as has been mentioned 
in the reply ); but out of greed, the ow ner of animals uses this Hormone injection on 
regular basis, and the reply is silent about the same as no research seems to have been 
conducted on the effects of prolonged use of Hormone (Oxy tocin) on Animal health,  
lactation years and composition of milk.  The Committee desire that an elaborate study  
should also be conducted to know  the effects of prolonged use of this injection.   
Further, the Committee w ould like to be apprised of the facts with regard to paradoxical 
contradiction in the reply  of the Department as on the one hand the Department is 
 
 
 

 
claiming to have found that there is no ill-effect/side-effect on milk as well as on animal 
health ow ing to using Oxy tocin Hormone-injection, on the other hand, Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries whose views/plan of action on the issue were sought by 
the DARE, are calling it a menace and has re-issued the letters to all the Secretaries of 
Animal Husbandry Department regarding initiating the campaign in collaboration with the 
State Drug-Controller to check the menace of indiscriminate use of Oxy tocin in animals 
in the States. 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 Decline in DARE/ICAR proposed/demanded allocation for XIth Plan 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
2.1 Regarding decline in DARE/ICAR allocation for X ith Plan, the Committee have 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that Ninth Plan Working Group constituted by the 
Planning Commission for DARE/ICAR had recommended that DARE should be provided 
at least one per cent of Agricultural Gross Domestic Product (AGDP) initially, with a 
gradual increase upto two per cent of AGDP in subsequent years.  Similarly, X th Plan 
Working Group for DARE had also recommended at least one per cent of AGDP share 
which amounted to about Rs.25,000 crore at that time. The X Ith Plan Working Group on 
Agricultural Research and Education has also recommended that at least a sum of 
Rs.31,672 crore should be provided for various sectors and State Agriculture 
Universities (SAUs), in addition to the funding of the Externally Aided 
Projects(EAPs)/World Bank Aided Projects as per their approved programmes.   
To the sheer astonishment of the Committee, DARE has proposed/demanded an 
allocation of Rs.12176.40 crore for the X Ith Plan which happens to be Rs.3823.60 crore 
less than the outlay proposed/demanded by them for X th Plan which was Rs.16000.00 
crore (including Rs.1000.00 crore as one-time catch up Grant for replacing/renovating 
the age-old/obsolete infrastructure/equipments, etc.)  
The Committee have always been very strongly recommending year after year to 
the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for providing at least one per cent of 
AGDP to DARE/ICAR for fulfilling their mandate, but have failed to understand the 
attitude of the Department that has belittled the Department’s own pleadings before the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture for seeking enhanced funding every 
year. 
The Committee would like to be informed of the reasons as to why the DARE has 
failed to propose more outlay for X Ith Plan which was expected to be greater than the 
Xth Plan Projections of Rs.16000.00 crore, which was repeatedly endorsed by the  
Committee through their various recommendations.”. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2.2 The Government, in their Action Taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“The Department was constrained to project the XI Plan Outlay at Rs. 12176 
crore in the background of the instructions received from Planning Commission in 
November 2006 while inviting the Department’s Plan proposals for the XI Plan period 
and Annual Plan 2007–08 wherein the Department was asked to submit with a 
maximum limit of an increase of 15% p.a. (at current prices).  Going by this criterion as 
suggested by Planning Commission, the X I Plan outlay works out to Rs. 10467 crore 
whereas the Department had projected a higher figure of Rs. 12176 crore.  However, the 
XI Plan Working Group on Agricultural Research & Education had recommended Rs. 
31672 crore – against which a communication is yet to be received from Planning 
Commission.  Further, in pursuance of the decisions taken by the NDC sub-committee 
on Agriculture and related issues a sub-group on Adoption and Generation of Relevant 
Technologies and their Dissemination to the Farmers was set up under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, DARE & DG, ICAR, which has recommended to the 
Planning Commission Rs. 36,000 crore during the XI Plan.”. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
2.3 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No.1.7 of Chapter-I of the 
Report. 
 
Need to develop m ore High Yielding Varieties (HYVs) and im proved management practices for 
existing HYVs of Wheat & Rice 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
2.4 Regarding Need to develop more High Yielding Varieties (HYVs) and improved 
management practices for existing HYVs of Wheat & Rice, the Committee have recommended 
as under:- 
“The Committee note that it has been generally experienced that there is 
exhaustion of yield potential of new high yielding varieties (HYVs) of wheat and rice.  
Though the Department claims that in fact, there still exist a high yield potential which is 
yet to be harnessed with improvement in management practices and it may not be 
appropriate to say that yield potential of HYVs of  wheat and paddy is exhausted, yet the 
Committee feel that the ICAR has done precious little in this direction and it must 
increase its research and monitoring activities to find out the truth in what majority of the 
 
 
 

 
farmers and stakeholders are experiencing that there is exhaustion of yield potential of new 
HYVs of wheat and paddy as this fact has also been reported in Government’s own 
Economic Surveys. 
The Committee, therefore, expect the ICAR to put in more vigorous research 
efforts to develop more HYVs and improved management practices to remove all the 
barriers coming in the way to harness the untapped high yield potential of new HYVs 
and popularise those improved management pr actices and HYVs among the farmers 
through their extension and education network”. 
 
2.5 The Government, in their Action Taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“ICAR has developed large number of high yielding varieties in wheat and rice for 
different agro climatic conditions. New varieties and hybrids are introduced in the 
production system on continuous basis with built in resistance to biotic and abiotic 
stresses.  Development and adoption of improved varieties of wheat and rice possessing 
high yield, resistance to important diseases and pests and other desirable traits have 
played a major role in enhancing wheat and rice production and productivity. 
In rice 768 high yielding varieties have been developed for different ecologies 
since 1966.  Twenty nine rice hybrids have also been released since 1994.  Yield 
advantage of 1 to 1.5 t / ha has been obtained with the cultivation of rice hybrids over the 
varieties. Integrated nutrient management technology using organic and inorganic 
nutrients, nitrogen and water saving methods have been developed and popularized. 
New effective and environmentally safe chemicals for control of weeds, insect pests and 
diseases have been identified and recommended.  Integrated pest management tools 
have been developed and popularized.   
In wheat, 334 high yielding varieties have been developed for different ecologies 
since 1966. Short term and long term strategies have also been devised to boost the 
wheat production. Under short term strategy more emphasis is being given for effective 
transfer of available technology to the farmers. The long term strategies address the 
issue of breaking yield barriers through developing wheat hybrids, superior wheat as well 
as broadening of genetic base of varieties; sustaining rice-wheat system through 
resource conservation technologies, diversification/intensification, water and nutrient use 
efficiency, residue management; improving soil health by increasing carbon content, 
correction of micro-nutrient deficiencies/ toxicity, balanced use of fertilizers; integrated 
pest management; combating rusts through durable resistance; wheat quality 
 
 
 

 
improvement by developing product specific varieties, increasing protein content, 
sedimentation value and grain hardness to match international standards, improving 
beta carotene and protein content and semolina recovery in durums and biofortification. 
   
Steps being taken for breaking yield barriers 
– Exploitation of heterosis for developing hybrids based on cytoplasmic male sterile 
system 
– Broadening of genetic base of varieties 
– Biotechnological interventions such as gene pyramiding, marker aided selection 
for biotic, abiotic and quality traits and Structural and functional genomics 
Apart from high yielding varieties, the Department has developed a number of 
technologies on site specific integrated nutrient management; amelioration of acid, 
saline and sodic soils; cid, participatory water management including water harvesting; 
micro irrigation/ fertigation, diversified farming, composting/ vermi-composting, 
biofertilizers production, resource conserving technologies further to make them 
location-specific and cost-effective. The technologies have potential to increase yields by 
40-100 percent.  
The Frontline Demonstrations data indicate that yield can be enhanced up to 1.5 
ton/ha.  In order to streamline this practice at the level of stakeholders, the specific 
recommendation of the Committee in this regard has been forwarded to the Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation for disseminating the wheat production technologies to 
the farmers of different states”. 
 
Need to augment dedicated Research, Educational and Extension Activities of ICAR for 
accelerating Agricultural Growth Rate 
 
(Recommendation No.8) 
2.6 Regarding Need to augment dedicated Research, Educational and Extension Activities 
of ICAR for accelerating Agricultural Growth Rate, the Committee have recommended as 
under:- 
“The Committee note that imbalanced use of fertilizer, low seeds replacement 
rate, low post harvest value addition, etc., are among the reasons manifested in the 
lackluster agricultural growth which stands at a moderate annual average growth of 
three per cent in the first six years of the new millennium starting 2001-02. 
 
 
 

 
The Committee are of the considered view that DARE/ICAR, being the apex body for 
agrarian research & education, is directly responsible as per their mandate which 
includes (i) finding out cost effective technologies for preparing various health and 
organic composts; (ii) developing new effective biofertiliser strains tolerant to different 
biotic and abiotic stresses; and (iii) scientific management of proposed 1000 advanced 
soil testing laboratories and helping in maintenance of soil health cards containing 
appropriately recommended fertilizer to be used by the farmers.  Similarly, one of the 
main reasons for low seed replacement rate is said to be “lack of awareness about yield 
advantages of use of quality seed”, also demands ICAR’s attention. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the DARE/ICAR to look into these issues 
seriously and find out practical solutions/remedies to all these problems coming in the 
way of achieving high growth rate of agriculture, through their dedicated research, 
educational and extension activities in a time bound manner”. 
 
2.7 The Government, in their Action Taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“There is no denying the fact that the imbalanced fertilizer use, as evidenced by 
wider nutrient consumption ratios in some of the agriculturally important states is causing 
decline in soil health and stagnation in crop productivity. The Department has devised 
integrated nutrient management packages for important soils and cropping systems of 
the country to correct soil nutrients disorders and realize sustained crop yields. The 
packages envisage conjunctive use of chemical fertilizer, organic manure/ 
compost/vermi-compost/ bio-fertilizers and green manures. The eco-friendly and cost-
effective technology for production of com post/vermi-composts out of rural and urban 
waste has been developed. The work is continuing on finding effective composting bio-
cultures, improved compost plant designs and more efficient ways of handling and 
processing of bio-degradable waste in collaboration with other departments to reduce 
production cost of city composts. To have new bio-fertillizers strains suited to hot-arid/ 
saline/ alkaline/ acidic soil environments and novel strains/ PGPRs (Plant growth 
promoting Rhizobacteria), the Department has initiated a Network Project on Bio 
Fertilizer with 12 cooperating centres in the country established in the year 2002. The 
proposed advance soil testing laboratories will be managed scientifically to provide 
analyses and recommendations in terms of secondary and micro-nutrients besides 
primary nutrients. The laboratories would help maintain soil health by making entries 
regularly for nutrients status and fertilizer prescriptions in the soil health cards.  
 
 
 

 
In order to cope with the problem of existing low seed replacement rate, during X Plan 
the Department  has initiated a project entitled “Seed Production in Agricultural Crops 
and Fisheries” involving ICAR institutes, SAUs and conventional universities to have 
adequate production of quality seed of crops and fisheries as well as planting material.   
The project has started paying dividends in the shape of enhanced quantity of quality 
seed. 
The above recommendation of the Committee has also been forwarded to the 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation for initiating necessary steps in order to 
address the concerns raised by the Committee”. 
 
Need to find real and practical rem edies for abiotic and biotic stresses by ICAR causing 
heavy damages to the crops every year  
 
(Recommendation No.9) 
 
2.8 Regarding Need to find real and practical remedies for abiotic and biotic stresses by 
ICAR causing heavy damages to the crops every year, the Committee have recommended as 
under:- 
“The Committee note that the production of nine oilseeds at 23.6 milllion tonnes 
in 2006-07 (2nd Advance Estimates) is estimated to decline by 15.7 per cent compared to 
their production in 2005-06.  The reasons for decline in production of oilseed crops 
during 2006-07 are reported to be (i) largely due to late and deficit rainfall causing loss to 
groundnut crop in Andhra Pradesh; (ii) continuous and heavy rains in Gujarat resulted in 
decline of productivity; (iii) necrosis disease in sunflower also added to total decline of 
production, etc. 
The Committee observe that basically abiotic and biotic stresses are the main 
reasons for decline in productivity and production of oilseeds as well as for other major 
foodcrops almost every year and these are in the knowledge of ICAR which in spite of 
high claims in doing the needful to fight the challenges of abiotic and biotic stresses for 
more than five decades, has failed to provide practical solutions to these perennial 
problems Indian Agriculture System is facing continuously. 
As crores of rupees of the public money have been spent to find 
solutions/remedies to these stresses during the last more than fifty years, the 
Committee, therefore, recommend that ICAR should provide real and practical 
solutions/remedies in a time bound manner to fight with abiotic and biotic stress faced by 
 
 
 

 
the Indian farmers and the Committee should also be informed of the reasons of failure to 
provide viable solutions for such a long time and the action taken or proposed to be 
taken in this regard”.  
 
2.9 The Government, in their Action Taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“Oil seed production is mainly taken up in rainfed areas. The aberrations in 
rainfall pattern do affect the crop productivity. The Department has developed a number 
of varieties in groundnut that escape terminal drought. With particular reference to 
Groundnut, in Andhra Pradesh due to aberrations in rainfall, the crop varieties that were 
sown suffered due to lack of adequate moisture and the yield was affected. The 
unpredictability of local rainfall pattern caused this predicament.  At the time of Kharif 
2006 meeting, the ICAR suggested that the concerned States should take up risk 
averting measures so as to minimize  damage to crop and consequent loss to farmers. 
Flash floods due to cloud-burst inducing heavy rains were recurrent in Gujarat and 
adjoining States causing severe crop loss including that to groundnut.  
Due to intense research efforts, some biotic stress-tolerant groundnut varieties 
are released for cultivation in the country, which are: (1.) GG-16- Tolerant to bud 
necrosis, root rot diseases and thrips; (2.) TCF-38 Highly tolerant to stem rot; (3.) GPBD-
4 resistant to LLS and rust; and (4.) Short duration Groundnut varieties are JL-24 & GG-
2. 
Sunflower necrosis disease is managed by seed treatment with systemic 
insecticides that could reduce the insect vector population and prevent the disease 
transmission. Sunflower seeds are generally m ade available to growers by private seed 
industry and have all their stocks treated with recommended insecticides and fungicides 
to reduce crop loss due to seed-born pathogens as well as reduce early season insects 
such as thrips.   
Biotic stress-tolerant sunflower varieties are: 
 
TAG-24 tolerant to leaf spots, Bud Necrosis Disease 
LS-II tolerant to downy mildew 
Dstt-1 Resistant to downy mildew  
PAC –36 – tolerant to downy mildew  
DRSH-1- tolerant to downy mildew hybrid  
 
 
 
 

 
Amongst biotic stress-tolerant Mustard varieties are: 
YRN-6  suitable for late sown condition  
Maya- resistant to white rust  
CS614-4-1-4 (CS(54) suitable for salt affected soil 
JM –1 and 2, NDR –1 & Geeta are White rust tolerant 
RGN –13, Urvasi & Pusa Agrani are high temperature tolerant 
 
Amongst biotic stress-tolerant Soybean varieties are:  
Pant Soybean 1241- Resistant to Yellow Mosaic Virus disease, fungal complex & 
tolerant to rhizochnia  
CO 3- Resistant to Yellow Mosaic Virus disease 
SL 525 – Resistant to YMV, tolerant to stem blight & root knot nematode  
Indira Soya –9 resistant to rust and stem fly 
Short duration Sesame varieties are: RT-46 & RT-125  
Amongst Pulse crops, the wilt tolerant Chickpea varieties, viz., Pusa Kabuli, BGD 
72, JG–11, SAKI 9516, Phule G 95311, JGK -1 are widely cultivated.  
 
The Pigeonpea Varieties that have multiple resistance to Sterility Mosaic 
Disease, tolerant to wilt & phytophthora blight are: Narendra Arhar 1 – MAL –13, GAUT 
OO1E, GTH – 1 (Hybrid) and NDA 99-6.  
Mungbean variety, TARM 18 is resistant to Downey Midlew, Pant Mung - 4, HUM - 1 and 
Pusa Bold –1 are resistant to Yellow Mosaic Virus disease. Short duration varieties of 
Mungbean are K-851 & RMG-62)  
Urdbean varieties resistant to Yellow Mosaic Virus disease are KU –300, NDU 99-2and 
KU 96-3 while KBSH 44- is tolerant to moisture stress and resistant to major insect 
pests. Short duration varieties Urdbean varieties are T-9 & RBU-38. 
 
Food crops: 
The major effort to breed varieties tolerant to abiotic and biotic stresses 
culminated in the release of the following crop varieties. 
 
Wheat:  
Abiotic Stresses: Sodic Soils: KRL 19 & Raj 3077, Heat Stress: Raj 3765 & 
Halna, NW 104 
 
 
 

 
Biotic stresses: Karnal Bunt: PDW 215, PD 233, WH 896 ( Triticum. durum) & PBW 502 
(T. aestivum) 
 
Rice: 
Abiotic Stresses: Upland varieties, viz., Tulsi, Aditya, Rani, Prasanna, Vandana; 
Saline Sodic: CSR-10, Narendra Ussar 2, Lunishree & Usar Dhan 2 
Biotic stresses: Blast: VL Dhan 62,VL Dhan 8, Rice Tungro Virus endemic areas: 
Vikramarya & Nidhi, Gall Midge: Suraksha & Vikramarya. 
Short duration Rice varieties like Vandana, Anjali, GR-8, Utpala, DRRH-2, RH-204, 
Vivek dhan 82 and Pant Dhan –16   are recommended. 
 
In addition, the following recommended short duration varieties of food crops are: 
Pearl millet:  
Short duration Pearl millet hybrids and varieties are:  
Maharashtra: Hybrid: ICMH 356, Nandi 35, Saburi, PAC 903; Variety: PPC 6, HC 20, 
JBV 2, ICTP 8203;  
Tamil Nadu: Hybrid: GHB 558, CoHCu 8, X7; Variety: CO 7, ICMV 221, ICMV 155;  
Andhra Pradesh: Hybrid: PB 106, GHB 558; Variety: AIMP 92901, APS-1;  
Rajasthan: Hybrid: HHB 67, RHB 121, GHB 538, PB 180; Variety: CZP 9802, Raj 171;  
Gujarat: Hybrid: GHB 577, GHB 526, PB 172, PB 112; Variety: JBV 2, HC 20;  
Karnataka: Hybrid: PB 106, GHB 558; Variety: ICMV 221, ICMV 155  
Sorghum:  
Varieties recommended to manage scanty rain situation are: Maharashtra: Hybrids: CSH 
9, CSH 13, CSH 14(Light soil areas) CSH 16, CSH 18, CSH 21 (Medium to heavy soils) 
Varieties: CSV 13, CSV 15, CSV 17, PVK 400, SPV 699 (Medium to heavy soils);  
Madhya Pradesh: Hybrids: CSH 9, CSH 10, CSH 13, CSH 16, CSH 17, CSH 18, CSH 
23 varieties: CSV 10, CSV 11, CSV 13, CSV 15, SPV 235, JJ 741, JJ 938, JJ 1041;  
South Gujarat: Hybrids: CSH 9, CSH 11, CSH 16, CSH 17, CSH 18, CSH 23; Varieties: 
CSV 10, CSV 13, CSV 15, CSV 17, GJ 35, GJ 36, GJ 38, GJ 40;  
North Gujarat & Saurashtra: Hybrids: CSH 17, CSH 13, CSH 16, CSH 18; Varieties: 
CSV 10,CSV 15, GJ 37, GJ 38, GJ 39, GJ 40, GJ 41 ;  
Rajasthan: Hybrids: CSV 10, CSV 13, CSV 15, SPV 96 , CSV 17; Varieties:(Medium to 
heavy soils )CSH 14,CSH 23 (Semi arid & transitional zones) CSH 9, CSH 10, CSH 11, 
CSH 13, CSH 16, CSH 18. 
 
 
 

 
Maize:  
Suitable varieties of Maize are:  
Gujarat: Guj Makki1, Guj Makki 2, Prakash, Pusa Hyb 1, Pusa Hyb 2, Gaurav, Shakti, 
Guj.Makki-3, Guj Makki 4, Guj Makki 6;  
Andhra Pradesh: Harsha, Deccan 103, Deccan 109, Deccan 107, MMH 133, Prakash, 
Pro 311, Bio 9681.Deccan 115.  
Southern parts of Rajasthan short duration varieties: Mahi Kanchan, PEHM-2 & Navjot 
Sorghum: CSH-14, CSH-9 & CSV-15 
Millets:  
Foxtail Millet is one of the choice for the regions having scanty rainfall (Maharashtra, 
A.P., Karnataka). In Western Rajasthan Foxtail millet (knagni) is a well-known drought 
hardy crop and can give reasonable harvest in areas where annual rainfall is less than 
400 mm. Varieties of fox-tails millets, viz. SR 11 (Gauri) and SR 16 (Meera) are suitable 
for delayed planting and mature in 80 days. SR 16 has stay green character and gives 
higher fodder yield also. Application of 10-20 kg N/ha as basal dose is beneficial in 
withstanding drought and giving higher yield.  
The ICAR has been devising appropriate in-situ moisture conservation practices 
increasing more infiltration of water into soil and less run off water harvesting measures 
to ensure life saving/ supplemental irrigations, micro-irrigation for conserving scarce 
water by applying in the root zone and use of amendments like gypsum and lime in sodic 
and acid soils, respectively for managing abiotic stresses to crops arising from drought 
and soil nutrients deficiencies and toxicities. The efforts are underway to refine these 
technologies further to make them location specific and cost effective. The ICAR has 
proposed full fledged Institutes of abiotic and biotic stress management during XI Plan 
for comprehensive treatment to problems of stress management of crops.  
For horticulture crops also the Department has reoriented the research 
programmes with major emphasis for management of biotic and abiotic stresses through 
developing resistant cultivars/ varieties/ root stocks, integrated insect pest and disease 
management, use of bio-control agents like Trichoderma, pseudom onas, Verticillium  
(Pollionia) species, botanicals, predators, parasites, pheromone technology and 
improving soil health using soil amendments,  organic manures including Vermicompost 
etc.  
 
 
 

 
Salinity and drought tolerant grape root stocks like Dogridge has been used on 
commercial scale. Aonla and ber can be successfully  cultivated on commercial scale in 
salt affected areas.  
Vegetable varieties resistant to diseases in tomato (bacterial wilt, nematodes), 
brinjal (bacterial wilt), pea(powdery mildew), okra (yellow vein mosaic virus) were 
developed. In spices resistant varieties in black pepper (Phytophthora foot rot, 
nematodes) cardamom (rhizome rot, katee) were developed and are being commercially 
cultivated. 
 
Need to improve the functional status/shortage of staff in KVKs 
 
(Recommendation No.10) 
 
2.10 Regarding Need to improve the functional status/shortage of staff in KVKs, the 
Committee have recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the ICAR has sanctioned 546 KVKs in the 
country out of w hich 3 are non-functional due to financial and administrative 
problems.  Out of the remaining 543 KVKs, 223 w ere sanctioned during 2004-05 to 
2006-07.  These KVKs are said to be in various stages of development.  The ICAR 
claims that the remaining 320 are developed KVKs. 
The Committee also note that the explanation extended by  the ICAR for 
prevailing shortage of staff in KVKs that ‘Overall 64% post are filled. However, it is 
worth mentioning that 261 KVKs w ere sanctioned during last 28 y ears, as against 
101 during the last tw o y ear. The codal formalities for filling up the posts take 
time. The matter w as also discussed in the VCs’ Conference held on 21-22 
February, 2007 for filling of the posts on priority ’.  How ever, the Committee 
observe that the explanation given by the Government speaks volumes of the lack 
of organisational and management skills and lackadaisical approach of the 
DARE/ICAR in filling up the 36 per cent overall pending posts in KVKs. The 
Committee are dismayed at finding the ground reality  different from the rosy  
picture the Department gives about the fully  functional status of 320 KVKs.  The 
Committee are aware that many of the KVKs w hich ICAR claims to be fully  and 
satisfactorily functional are only  semi or partially  functional in spite of the fact 
that these were sanctioned more than 5, 8 or even 10 years ago.   
 
 
 

 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to look into the problems/barriers 
which are coming into the w ay of making all the KVKs fully  rather optimally  
functional and remove the shortage of all categories of staff in KVKs during 2007-
08 itself. 
The Committee further recommend that the Department should develop a 
regular mechanism w ith immediate effect through w hich the Department should 
not only always inform and apprise the local Members of Parliament about the 
major events/activities of KVKs of their areas but also invite them to actively 
involve/participate in the activities of the KVKs”. 
 
2.11 The Government, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows: 
“The issue of shortage of staff in the KVKs w as discussed in the Vice 
Chancellors’ Conference held during 21-22 February , 2007 for filling up the posts 
on priority . The Hon’ble Union Minister of Agriculture in his letters dated 10-14 
May, 2007 requested the Chief Ministers of all the concerned States to issue 
necessary instructions for filling up the positions w hich are essentially needed in 
order to achieve desired science-led grow th particularly important in the present 
context of Indian Agriculture. As a follow -up, the Deputy Director General 
(Agricultural Extension) has requested the Vice-Chancellors of the State 
Agricultural Universities (SAUs) enclosing the letter of Hon’ble Union Minister of 
Agriculture addressed to Hon’ble Chief Ministers and has requested for filling-up 
the vacant posts in the KVKs immediately.  
For developing a mechanism through w hich the Department should not 
only always inform and apprise the local Members of Parliament about the major 
events/ activities of KVKs of their areas but also invite them to actively  involve/ 
participate in the activities of the KVKs; there is a provision of a Scientific 
Advisory Committee (SAC) for each KVK including the representatives from the 
SAU, ICAR Institute, Line Departments, Lead Bank, and Farmers’ Representatives 
where the action plan for the KVK is discussed. In the backdrop of Government of 
India decision to assign overseeing responsibilities to the Directors of Extension 
Education of SAU/ Central Agricultural University (CAU) in their jurisdiction and in 
consonance w ith the recommendation of the Committee, the ICAR is sending 
advice to the SAUs/ CAU for inviting the local Hon’ble Members of Parliament in 
important functions of the KVK”.  
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Concern over Hormone -injected Milk Production and its effect on Human and Animal Health 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
4.1 Regarding Hormone-injected milk production and its effect on human and animal health, 
the Committee have recommended as under:- 
“The Committee are aware that the practice of injecting hormone for enhancing 
milk production is prevalent among livestock farmers of almost all regions of the country, 
especially in Punjab, Haryana, U.P., Bihar, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, 
etc.  The material used for the purpose is a crude preparation of Oxytocin, a peptide 
hormone that has the basic function of facilitating secretion of milk from the udder and 
expulsion of fetus/placenta during parturition. The farmers use the preparation of this 
hormone for salvaging complete milk retained in the udder.  However, repeated use of 
the hormone on the animal can have a bad effect on the health of the animal especially 
on udder health. 
The Committee express their concern over the issue and are astonished as to 
why the ICAR has not initiated any work on this issue even when they (ICAR) are very 
well aware of the fact that repeated use of the hormone on the animal can have some 
bad effect on the health of the animal.  The Committee are not satisfied with the 
reasoning of the Department for not initiating any work on the whole issue as according 
to them, no hormone is secreted in the milk as it does not stimulate milk synthesis as 
such and hence no risk for the consumers. 
In the opinion of the Committee, this is a serious matter which directly involves 
animal’s health and field experiences tell that it reduces animal’s lactation years and also 
affects human health. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to initiate 
research on this issue afresh on both the aspects, viz., animal as well as human health 
from every angle and make the livestock farmers and consumers aware about their 
research findings on the bad/ill effects of injecting hormone repeatedly in the animal out 
of greed to gain more milk and money, through their network of KVKs, scientists-farmers 
interactive session and through media advertisements.”. 
 
 
 
 

 
4.2 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“At NDRI, Karnal work has been conducted on oxytocin administration on cows 
and buffaloes and gist of various studies carried out is given below: 
 
• Administration of oxytocin in the doses of 10 IU(International Unit) for a period of 
10 days did not affect milk production of crossbred cows. The production of fat 
and protein in cows of control group as well as the experimental group was 
similar. It was concluded that administration of synthetic oxytocin for milk let 
down does not adversely affect the production of milk fats and proteins.  
• The effect of different doses (1 IU to 10 IU) of oxytocin on milking behaviour and 
composition of milk in 20 Murrah buffaloes in mid lactation and yielding an 
average of 9.1 kg milk per day was studied. One IU of oxytocin injected intra-
muscular was very effective in milk let down without affecting the composition of 
milk.  
• 2.5 IU and 5 IU of oxytocin when injected intra-muscular influenced milking time.  
• Administration of oxytocin @2.5 IU indicated that its administration results in 
significant changes in milk yield. There is no effect of oxytocin on milk 
composition, pH, Erythrocyte Count and Non Essential Fatty Acids concentration. 
• Study conducted on 18 lactating Murrah buffaloes to find out the effect of 
exogenous oxytocin on cisternal, alveolar and total milk yield, milk composition of 
cisternal, alveolar and total milk and permeability of mammary tight junctions 
showed no significant change. No effect on reproductive parameters was 
observed. The incidence of estrous symptom was similar and normal in control 
and experimental groups of buffaloes and the ovarian status was normal.  In view 
of this outcome of the study, it is evident that experimental studies undertaken at 
the institute did not reveal any adverse effect on milk composition or otherwise.  
 
The Department had also sought the views / necessary action from the 
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries, which  responded as under: 
 
‘Oxytocin is used in veterinary practice as a drug to induce rhythmic 
contractions during dystokia – difficult parturition, removal of retained placenta 
and in some cases letting down of milk in case of withdrawal symptoms after 
delivery. 
 
 
 

 
It is a schedule ‘H’ Drug that can be sold only on prescription.  Recently, after seizure of 
such illegal injections of Oxytocin from Uttar Pradesh during 2004, letters were 
again issued to all the Secretaries of Animal Husbandry Department and copy to 
all Directors of States / Union Territories regarding initiating the campaign in 
collaboration with the State Drug Controller to check the menace of 
indiscriminate use of Oxytocin in animals in the States and an awareness 
campaign amongst the farmers and the dairy owners to be taken up’.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.3  For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No.1.16 of Chapter-I of the 
Report. 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Need for allocating DARE/ICAR outlay to a m inimum of one per cent of AGDP for the 
XIth Plan 
 (Recommendation No. 1) 
5.1 Regarding need for allocating DARE/ICAR outlay to a minimum of one per cent of 
AGDP for the XIth Plan, the Committee have recommended as under:- 
“The Committee has noted that the Department of Agricultural Research & 
Education has proposed an outlay of Rs.12176.40 crore for carrying out all their sectoral 
activities including funding to State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), Externally Aided 
Projects (EAPs) like, National Agricultural Innovative Project (NAIP) and Indo-US 
Knowledge Initiative and also include the requirement of critical repairs and maintenance 
during the XIth Plan as per the recent instructions of the appraisal agencies.    
The Committee note that Brazil spends about 1.81 per cent of AGDP on 
Agricultural Research while countries like Japan and USA spend about 3.62% and 
2.65% of their AGDP on agrarian research.  Astonishingly, in comparison to the average 
of all leading industrialized countries whose spending on agrarian research is about 
2.36% of their respective AGDP, India’s spending on agricultural research ranged 
between 0.31% to 0.35% during 2002 to 2007 which is even less than all the developing 
countries average of 0.53% for the year 2000. 
The Committee are dismayed and unable to comprehend the constraints of the 
Planning Commission as to why they should not earmark adequate funds for 
DARE/ICAR, even after the elected representatives of the people, i.e. members of 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture, unanimously and strongly 
recommending in favour of at least 1% of AGDP share to DARE/ICAR as well as 
Planning Commission’s own Working Group on DARE recommending the same 
percentage for DARE during the IX th, X th Plan and X Ith Plan periods. In the instant 
case, the X Ith Plan Working Group has recommended Rs.31,672.00 crore for agrarian 
research and education. 
In view of the above, the Committee strongly urge the Planning Commission and 
the Ministry of Finance to have a positive and broad-minded  approach towards the 
greater national need of the hour to enhance public funding for agrarian research and 
 
 
 

 
education upto the desired level of 1% to 2% of AGDP for the X Ith Plan so that the ever 
growing population of the nation can have food and fodder security”. 
 
5.2 The Government, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows: 
“The above recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to Planning 
Commission / Ministry of Finance.  The X I Plan outlay in respect of DARE / ICAR is yet 
to be communicated by Planning Commission.  However, the Planning Commission has 
intimated that the X I Plan outlay of the Department will be decided also keeping in view 
the large number of competing demands from other sectors / ministries / departments 
and that it would support the DARE / ICAR’s priority projects and may provide adequate 
funds for the same”.   
 
Inadequate allocation to DARE/ICAR in the first year of the XIth Plan (2007-08) 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
5.3  Regarding Inadequate allocation to DARE/ICAR in the first year of the XIth Plan 
(2007-08), the Committee have recommended as under:- 
  
“The Committee observe that the DARE proposed an Annual Plan (2007-08) 
Outlay of Rs.1945.50 crore. Against their proposed requirement, they were allocated 
Rs.1620.00 crore. That means, the Department got Rs.325.50 crore less than the 
projected outlay which will obviously hamper the desired/targeted growth functioning of 
the DARE/ICAR, especially, in their vital research & development and educational 
activities. 
The Committee further observe that this BEs (2007-08) of Rs.1620.00 crore 
which includes Rs.290.00 crore exclusively meant for Externally Aided Project (EAPs), 
namely, (NAIP-Rs.285.00 crore and Indo-US Knowledge Initiative-Rs.5.00 crore-i.e., 
Rs.1620.00 crore minus Rs.290.00 crore = Rs.1330.00 crore as Domestic Budgetary 
Support (DBS).  Moreover, this Annual Plan Outlay also includes critical repairs and 
maintenance component upto 15% of the total Annual Plan.  If the above figures are 
compared with the RE(2006-07) which was Rs.1430.00 crore and the EAPs component 
was Rs.16.50 crore at RE stage,  it is evident that the net Domestic Budgetary Support 
for the year 2007-08 is Rs.1330.00 crore which happens to be Rs.83.50 crore less than 
 
 
 

 
the DBS of Rs.1413.50 crore for 2006-07 at RE stage.  Therefore, it is more than evident that 
virtually for all practical purposes, the DARE/ICAR has got less DBS for 2007-08 than 
what they got in  2006-07(RE) to carry out all their planned research and educational 
activities.   
The Committee, therefore, strongly deplore the tendency of the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance/Government wherein they practically give less 
money to the Department but theoretically propagate that they have taken good care of 
the agrarian research and education which is the foundation for providing not only food 
security to the entire population of the nation at present and in future but also has the 
power to decide the course of agriculture of India on which 70% of the population is 
dependent for their livelihood. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Planning Commission and 
Ministry of Finance should adequately increase the funding of DARE/ICAR, at least upto 
their proposed outlay of Rs.1945.50 crore during 2007-08, so that they can do the 
needful more enthusiastically to usher the Second Green Revolution into India”.  
 
5.4  The Government, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows: 
“The above recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to Planning 
Commission / Ministry of Finance; however, no further increase in Plan budget 2007 – 
08 has yet been communicated to the Department.  However, the Planning Commission 
has intimated that it was aware of the fact and if, necessity arises; it would be supported 
at RE stage.  Accordingly, this Department will pursue with the Ministry of Finance for 
additionality of the fund at the RE 2007 – 08”. 
 
Need to provide additional funding for Externally Aided Projects (EAPs) and World Bank 
(WB) Aided Projects over and above the Budget Estimates of DARE/ICAR 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
5.5 Regarding Need to provide additional funding for Externally Aided Projects (EAPs) and 
World Bank (WB) Aided Projects over and above the Budget Estimates of DARE/ICAR , the 
Committee have recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the X Ith Plan Working Group on Agricultural Research 
and Education has recommended that at least a sum of Rs.31,672 crore should be 
provided for the various sectors and SAUs, and in addition, the Externally Aided Project 
 
 
 

 
(EAPs)/ World Bank Aided Projects (WBPs) also need to be funded as per their approved 
programmes.   
 The Committee observe that external aid is for certain purposes and objectives 
that are different from the regular on-going schemes of the DARE/ICAR and EAPs are 
strictly time bound programmes involving the Collaborating and Donor Agency for the 
very specific cause/purpose and as such at times, may not have a direct link with the on-
going schemes/projects of the Department, being run with the Domestic Budgetary 
Support (DBS) provided to the Department.   
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Planning Commission and the 
Ministry of Finance should do the needful in tune with the Committee’s view towards 
excluding the EAPs/WBPs component from the Plan BEs of the DARE/ICAR by 
providing EAPs allocation separately over and above the BEs meant for the Department 
from 2007-08 itself and the Department should be provided Rs.290.00 crore for 
EAPs/WBPs over and above the BEs of Rs.1620.00 crore for 2007-08.   Unless this is 
done and DARE gets Rs.290.00 crore additional funding for EAPs over and above 
Rs.1620.00 crore  BEs(2007-08), all the claims/declaration of the Government to give 
priority enhanced funding to DARE/ICAR during 2007-08 will only be an eye-wash as is 
evident from the facts and figures that if Rs.290.00 crore are subtracted from the 
BE(2007-08) of Rs.1620.00 crore, Rs.1330.00 crore are left for on-going 71 main Plan 
Schemes with 108 sub-schemes of DARE/ICAR as DBS, which is even Rs.83.50 crore 
less than Rs.1413.50 crore DBS  of RE 2006-07”.  
 
5.6 The Government, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows: 
 
“The above recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to Planning 
Commission / Ministry of Finance, but no further increase in Plan budget 2007 – 08 has 
been communicated to the Department.  However, the Planning Commission has 
intimated that it was aware of the recommendations of the Working Group and that the 
final assessment of outlays for X I Plan is yet to be firmed-up.  Besides this, it is also 
intimated that the Externally Aided Projects in critical support areas are favoured and 
funds provided accordingly”. 
 
 
 

 
One Time Catch up Grant should be provided separately 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 5.7 Regarding One Time Catch up Grant, the Committee have recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that the DARE/ICAR has a number of 
institutions/laboratories, which are more than twenty years old.  It was felt necessary that 
a one time catch-up grant may be sought from the Planning Commission, so that the 
requirement of renovation of old infrastructure and up-gradation/replacement of obsolete 
equipment could be met.  The Ninth Plan Working Group recorded that one time catch-
up grant was the critical need for upgrading laboratory equipment, pilot plants, farm and 
laboratory facilities, class rooms and audio visual facilities.  In order to have excellent   
academic standards in State Agricultural Un iversities and to have globally competitive 
research working environment, the Eighth Plan, Ninth Plan & Tenth Plan Working 
Groups had recommended Rs.300 crore, Rs.500 crore & Rs.1000 crore respectively as 
one time catch-up grant.   
The Committee have been strongly recommending and urging the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance year after year to provide the much needed one 
time catch up grant over and above the annual allocations in a phased manner to ICAR, 
given its track record of service to the nation and being privy to agricultural revolution in 
the country. 
The Committee also note that in this regard, the Department had written a 
number of times to the Planning Commission but the Planning Commission had always 
taken a rigid stand that the very purpose for which this grant was sought and felt 
necessary, viz., critical repair/renovation/upgradation of research and education 
facilities, etc., had already been taken care of in the total Plan Budgetary Support.  
Maintaining their earlier stand again, the Planning Commission in their guidelines for 
formulation of XI Five Year Plan has indicated that in the Plan budget critical repair and 
maintenance upto 15% of the Plan budgetary support can be included. 
The Committee are dismayed with the routine response of ignoring and rejecting 
the recommendation of the Committee by the Planning Commission and pessimistic 
attitude of the Department in giving up the efforts to procure the essentially required one 
time catch up grant.  The Committee strongly deplore the attitude of the Planning 
Commission to give false promises since IXth Plan onwards. 
 
 
 

 
 Further, the plea of the Planning Commission that the requirement of one time catch up 
grant has been taken care of in the X th Plan allocations and hence no separate funding 
was required, is baseless as the Annual Plan allocations are always much  below the 
budget proposals of the Department and  hardly enough to maintain the on-going 
schemes of the Department.  The meagre f unding provided to the Department  has 
always been inadequate and has proved insufficient for changing/renovating the 
obsolete infrastructure/equipment as is evident  from the nil response from all the ICAR 
Institutes and SAUs who were given instructions during the IX th Plan that 20 to 40% of 
their total Annual Plan grant every year was meant for the purpose of one time catch up 
grant, but not even a single Institute/SAU could do that and the conditions with regard to 
obsolete equipment, age old infrastructure including laboratories and other related 
research facilities remain the same which is  why the Department had again proposed 
an amount of Rs.1,000 crore during the Tenth Five Year Plan but the Planning 
Commission had never made separate allocations specifically for catch up grant through 
Annual Plans. 
So far as the latest guidelines/instructions of the Planning Commission for 
formulation of X Ith Five Year Plan which indicated that in the Plan budget critical repair 
and maintenance upto 15% of the Plan budgetary support can be included, is 
concerned, it is more than evident from the financial budgetary figures of the Department 
for the year 2006-07 and 2007-08 that although there seems to be some increase in BE 
(2007-08) i.e., Rs.1620.00 crore [Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) which includes DBS + 
EAPs] from the RE(2006-07) of Rs.1430.00 crore yet practically the actual Domestic 
Budgetary Support  viz., Rs. 1620.00 crore(GBS) – Rs. 290.00 crore (EAP) = 
Rs.1330.00 crore  is Rs.83.50 crore less than the DBS of RE (2006-07) which is 
Rs.1413.50 crore. 
The Committee, after keeping in view the potential of agriculture in changing 
socio-economic condition of millions of Indians, urge the Planning Commission and the 
Government to seriously consider agricultural research & education as one of the central 
elements of the planning efforts in the X Ith Five Year Plan.  The Committee as well as 
the Government have widely accepted that concomitant with high growth rate in our 
economy, agriculture must grow at 4%, as t he improvement in productivity is the most 
important option to raise production that can’t be done without developing new varieties 
of seeds which needs a lot of investment. 
 
 
 

 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance 
to have interactive sessions with the Department to understand, assess and negotiate 
the requirement of one time catch up grant in the favour of the Department as per the 
latest requirement to be assessed by physical verification of the ICAR Institutes and 
SAUs rather than imposing their terms and conditions to do the major 
renovation/upgradation of infrastructure/l aboratories from the meagre annual domestic 
budgetary support.”.   
 
5.8 The Government in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“The above recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to Planning 
Commission / Ministry of Finance.   According to guidelines of Planning Commission the 
Department may also include upto 15% of Plan budget for critical repairs and 
maintenance.  However, the Planning Commission has intimated that the proposals / 
initiatives in the form of SFC / EFC / CCEA would be considered favourably to provide 
need based allocation.”.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
5.9 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No.1.13 of Chapter-I of the 
Report. 
 
Slow Budgetary Process needs revamping for optimal utilization of public money 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
5.10 Regarding the Slow Budgetary Process, the Committee have recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that in spite of the positive assurance from the Planning 
Commission, the Ministry of Finance and also by the Department during the examination 
of the last three DFGs of the DARE/ICAR regarding the implementation of the 
recommendations of the Committee that RE/BE grants/funds should be made available 
to the Department and various Institutes under its jurisdiction sometime in the month of 
December or a little earlier, practically nothing positive has been done so far, as is 
evident from the factual information made available to the Committee by the 
Department. 
The Committee observe that Ministry of Finance conveyed RE(2006-07) to the 
Department officially on 4.1.2007 and the Department also intimated sectoral 
 
 
 

 
 allocations to the Division(s) located in the Headquarters of the Department, on 
18.1.2007.  From the first written reply of the Department, it is clear that the exact date 
on which the Subject Matter Divisions (SMDs) actually communicated the RE(2006-07) 
to the concerned Institute/NRC/PD was : (i) Crop Science on 25.1.2007; (ii) NRM on 
19.1.2007; (iii) Fisheries on 22.1.2007; (iv)Agricultural Extension on 31.1.2007; (v) 
Agricultural Engineering on 9.2.2007; (vi) Horticulture on 5.2.2007; (vii) Animal Science 
on 29.12.2006; and (viii) Education on 17.12.2006.  When enquired further on a  
supplementary point as to how the Animal Science and Education SMDs were able to 
convey RE(2006-07) on 29.12.06 and 17.12.06 respectively, to various 
Institutes/NRCs/PDs under them, even when Ministry of Finance conveyed RE(2006-07) 
on 4.1.2007, the Committee were further informed that  ‘Animal Science and Education 
Divisions also took an advance action by communicating the  tentative RE to its 
Institutes so as to keep them  in  a state of preparedness, although final RE 2006-07 
was conveyed on 18.1.2007 and 5.2.2007 respectively.’  The Department has stated that 
‘In the meeting held on 27.11.2006   Secretary(Expenditure), Ministry of Finance, while 
deciding the RE 2006-07 for DARE/ICAR through discussion with Financial Adviser, 
indicated the Plan RE as Rs 1430 crore. Initiating an advance action, the Department  
communicated tentative RE 2006-07 to all SMDs on 12.12.06 itself. The final RE 2006-
07 of Rs 1430 crore was officially conv eyed by MoF on 4.1.2007 and the Department  
also intimated sectoral allocations to Division on 18.1.07.’   
The Committee feel that if Animal Science and Education Divisions could take an 
advance action by communicating the tentative RE to its Institutes on 29.12.2006 and 
17.12.2006; respectively, then why the other six SMDs failed to take the same advance 
action in the month of December itself.  Astonishingly, the Department has given belated 
action taken dates for their first six SMDs and advance action taken dates for the last 
two SMDs in the same reply.  Moreover, the Department is admitting in their reply that 
the formal and actual RE(2006-07) was conveyed to the concerned Institutes etc. by 
their respective SMDs, as late as, for Horticulture & Education on 5.2.2007 and 
Agricultural Engineering  on 9.2.2007 whereas Animal Science SMD is said to have 
conveyed on 18.1.2007 to its institutes, why Horticulture, Education and Agricultural 
Engineering. took 18 to 21 days more time to do the same.  
The Committee strongly deplore the tendency of the Department to give 
confusing and misleading information/statements and later on cover up/polish their 
delays in action while replying to the points raised by the Committee and advise the 
 
 
 

 
 Department to concentrate on improving their financial and administrative skills, as the 
Department took about 15 days time to forma lly convey the RE 2006-07 to its various 
SMDs located within the same building and SMDs in turn took about 18 to 21 more days 
to convey the same to their respective Institutes/NRCs/PDs, etc.   
The Committee unanimously urge the Planning Commission, the Ministry of 
Finance and the Department to seriously look into their procedural working in order to 
improve the entire tardy budgetary process to ensure that the RE/BE etc. are conveyed 
to the end-users, i.e., actual Institutes etc. of the Department, in the month of December 
itself or a little earlier for optimal utilization of scarce public money.”. 
 
5.11 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“The above observations and recommendation have been forwarded to Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance.  All the Subject Matter Divisions of the Department 
have been acquainted with these constructive observations of the Committee for 
expeditious compliance.  The Department would be utmost careful in future in adhering 
to the concerns of the Committee.”  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
5.12 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No.1.13 of Chapter-I of the 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
NEW DELHI;                                       PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
27  November, 2007                                                         Chairman, 
6 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Agriculture  
 
 
 

 
APPENDIX- I 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 27 TH NOVEMBER, 2007 AT 1500 HRS. IN  COMMITTEE ROOM, 
‘B’, GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1620 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Anil Basu 
 
 
3.  Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
4.  Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
 
5.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 
 
6.  Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
 
7.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
 
 
8.  Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
 
9.  Shri M.P.Veerendra Kumar 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
10.  Shri Harish Rawat 
 
11.  Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
12.  Prof. M.S.Swaminathan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Raj Kumar   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri N.S.Hooda   -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Walia   -  Under Secretary 
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and requested them to take up the following Memoranda on draft Action Taken 
Reports on Demands for Grants(2006-07) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries for consideration and adoption:- 
 
(1) Memorandum No. 2 regarding draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations 
contained in the 27 th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) in respect of Ministry 
of Agriculture (Deptt. of Agriculture and Co-operation) 
 
(2) Memorandum No. 3 regarding draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations 
contained in the 28 th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) in respect of Ministry 
of Agriculture (Deptt. of Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
(3) Memorandum No. 4 regarding draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations 
contained in the 29 th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) in respect of Ministry 
of Agriculture (Deptt. of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries); and  
 
(4) Memorandum No. 5 regarding draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations 
contained in the 30 th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) in respect of Ministry 
of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the draft action Taken Reports with minor 
modifications. 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize and present the above-
mentioned Reports to both Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA) 
  
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     11 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Serial Nos. 2, 7, 8, 9 and 10 
 
T o t a l          5  
 
Percentage        45. 5%   
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Serial No. NIL 
 
T o t a l          N I L    
     
Percentage         0% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
Serial No.  11 
 
T o t a l          1    
 
Percentage        9% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Serial Nos.  1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 
 
T o t a l          5    
 
Percentage        45.5%  
 
 
 
 