 
32 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION) 
 
 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 
 
 
THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
  
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2007/SRAVANA, 1929 (SAKA) 

THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2007-08) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION) 
 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on __________________________ 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on _____________________________ 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2007/SRAVANA, 1929 (SAKA) 
 ii

 
 
COA No.  197 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
                 
            
 
           
 
 
         
© 2007 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  
( Tenth Edition) and Printed by 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 iii

<CONTENTS> 
 
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-07)………………………     (v) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08)………………………    (vi) 
 
INTRODUCTION                  (vii) 
 
REPORT  PART I  An Overview        1  
   PART II           Clause-Wise Analysis       11 
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX  I Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee(2006-07) 
   h eld on 2nd November, 2006 
 
 APPENDIX  II Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting  of the Committee (2006-07) 
   held on  15th June, 2007 
 
APPENDIX  III Minutes of Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee (2006-07) held  
on 28th June, 2007 
 
APPENDIX IV Minutes of Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee (2006-07) held   
   on 18th July, 2007 
 
APPENDIX V Minutes of Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee (2006-07) held   
   o n 26th July, 2007 
 
APPENDIX VI Minutes of Seventeenth Sitting of the Committee (2006-07) held   
   on 3rd August, 2007 
 
APPENDIX VII Minutes of First Sitting of the Committee (2007-08) held   
   on 16th August, 2007 
 
ANNEXURE  The Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Bill,  
   2006  
 
 iv

COMPOSITION  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
FOR THE YEAR – 2006-07 
                                                 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
          MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Ranen Barman 
3. Shri Anil Basu  
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
6. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
7. Shri Khagen Das 
8. Shri Dharmendra 
9. Shri GadakhTukaram Gangadhar 
10. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
11. Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
12. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
13. Shri Prabodh Panda 
14. Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Patil Nilangekar 
15. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
16. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
17. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
18. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
19. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
20. Shri Baleshwar Yadav    
21. Smt. Kalpana  Ramesh Narhire 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Harish Rawat 
23. Dr. M.S.Gill 
24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25. Shri Vikram Verma 
26. Shri  Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28. Shri Datta Meghe 
29. Shri Debobrata Biswas * 
30. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
31. Sh. M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.   Sh. S.K. Sharma   -    Addl. Secretary 
2.  Sh. A.K. Singh   -               Joint Secretary 
3. Sh. Hardev Singh  -    Director 
4.  Sh. Raj Kumar   -    Deputy Secretary 
5.  Sh. N.S. Hooda   -    Deputy Secretary 
6.  Ms. Amita Walia  -    Under Secretary 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
* Shri Debobrata Biswas ceased to be member of this Committee owing to his nomination to Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 3.5.2007 
 
 
 v
 

COMPOSITION  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
FOR THE YEAR – 2007-08 
                                                 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
            MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Ranen Barman 
3. Shri Anil Basu  
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
6. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
7. Shri Khagen Das 
8. Shri Dharmendra 
9. Shri GadakhTukaram Gangadhar 
10. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
11. Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
12. Smt. Kalpana  Ramesh Narhire 
13. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
14. Shri Prabodh Panda 
15. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
16. Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Patil Nilangekar 
17. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
18. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
19. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
20. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
21.      Shri Baleshwar Yadav    
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.         Shri Harish Rawat 
23.        Dr. M.S.Gill 
24.      Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.      Shri Vikram Verma 
26.      Shri  Vinay Katiyar 
27.      Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28.      Shri Datta Meghe 
29.      Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
30.      Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
31.      Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.   Sh. S.K. Sharma   -    Addl. Secretary 
2.  Sh. A.K. Singh  -               Joint Secretary 
3.  Sh. Raj Kumar   -    Deputy Secretary 
4.  Sh. N.S. Hooda  -    Deputy Secretary 
5.  Ms. Amita Walia  -    Under Secretary
 vi

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing  Committee o n Agriculture having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the report on th eir behalf, present this Thirty-Second 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘The Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth 
Amendment) Bill 2006’ perta ining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Departm ent of 
Agriculture and Co-operation). 
 
2. One of the  functions of the Standi ng Committee on Agriculture as laid down 
in Rule 331 E (1) (b) of ‘The Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Busi ness in Lok 
Sabha’ is to exam ine such Bills pertaining  to the concerned Ministries/Departments 
as are referred to the  Committee by the Ch airman, Rajya Sabha or the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha, as the cas e may be, a nd make Report thereon.  In pursuance of this Rule, 
‘The Constitution (O ne Hundred and Sixt h Amendment) Bill 2006’, introduced in 
Lok Sabha on 22 nd May 2006, was referred by t he Honourable Speaker to this 
Committee on 25 th May 2006 for examination and Report.  The Committee then 
decided to know the views of t he State Governments/Union Territories and also the 
experts in the field to enable the Mem bers to have an in-depth knowledge about 
various clauses of the Bill. Thirteen St ates and three Union Territories, namely; 
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam , Bihar, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Maharas htra, Tamil Nadu, Tr ipura, Uttrakhand, Uttar Pradesh, West 
Bengal, Chandigarh, Delhi a nd Puducherry have forwarde d their views/suggesti ons 
to the Committee. The Co mmittee also heard the views of State Go vernments of 
Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra in Luckno w and Mum bai respectively, during t heir 
study visit in November, 2006 and that of West Bengal and Tam il Nadu in Kolkata  
and Chennai respectively, in July, 2007.  
 
3. The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of Government of 
India High Powered Comm ittee on Co-operatives on 15 th June 2007 and Shri Ram 
Niwas Mi rdha, former Union Minister and Dr.U.S.Awast hi, Managing Director, 
IFFCO on 18 th June 2007 a nd had detailed disc ussions with them on vari ous 
provisions of the Bill. 
 
4. The Comm ittee had a briefing from  the representatives of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Dep artment of Agricultu re and Co -operation) on the Bill on 2 nd 
November 2006 and took thei r oral evidence on 18 th July 2007. In between, the  
Committee heard the views of the expe rts and State Governments as mentioned 
above. 
 
 vii

 viii
5. The Committee at their internal sitting held on 26 th July 2007 discussed in 
detail various clauses of the Bill. 
 
6. The Committee express their thanks to  the State Governments and the experts 
who gave their valuable suggestions/views to enable the Committee to arrive at 
consensual decision on various clauses of the Bill. The Committee also express their 
thanks to the officials of the Ministry of  Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and 
Co-operation) for placing before them th e material and info rmation desired from 
time to time in connection with examination of the Bill.  
 
7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee in connection with examinati on of the Bill and drafting of the Report 
thereon. 
 
8. The Committee (2006-07) co nsidered and adopted the Report at their sitting 
held on 3rd August 2007 and the Committee (2007-08 ) reconsidered and adopted the 
Report on 16th August 2007. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
16 August, 2007                      Chairman, 
25 Sravana, 1929 (Saka)       St anding Committee on Agriculture 

REPORT 
 
PART-I 
 
An Overview 
 
 
 The emergence of the co-operative societies in India has largely been 
facilitated by legis lative and ad ministrative measures taken over the last 10 0 
years.  In pre-Independence er a, the policy of the Gove rnment by and large was 
of laissez f aire towards the co-operatives  and the Government did not play an 
active role for their promotion and development. These institutions were originally 
conceived as a means for ameliorating  the economic conditions of farmers,  
particularly, with a view to solving t he problem of rural indebtedness. The 
approach of the Government in framing the cooper ative law was that certain 
broad principles mus t be laid down and certain precautions must be insisted 
upon; but within thos e princ iples and subj ect to thos e precautions, the people 
must in the main be left to work out t heir own salvation on their own lines, the 
functions of government being confi ned to hearty sympathy, assistance and 
advice. 
2. In 1901, the imperial Govern ment appointed a Law Commission to 
formulate a blue print for the Co-operat ive Law.  The Co- operative Credit 
Societies Act, 1904 was enacted to faci litate formation of Prim ary Cooper ative 
Credit Societies.  Subsequently, visualiz ing the need for the formation of other  
types of Societies includi ng Federal Societies, the Co-operative Societies Act, 
1912 was enacted. The Cooper ative Societ ies Act of 1912 removed many of 
these shortcomings and served as a model for subsequent Acts passed by  
various State Governments when ‘Cooper ative Societies’ becam e a transferred 
subject under the constitutional reforms of 1919. 
3. The Government of India Act, 1919 transferred the subject “ Co-operative 
Societies” to Provincial Governments, and subsequently, Provincial Governments 
enacted their own Co-operative Soc ieties Acts.  The status of “Co-operative 
 1 
 
 

Societies” as a Provincial subject was maintained in the Government of India Act, 
1935.  However, the Act of 1912 largely remained the basis for Provincial Acts as 
well the Co-operative Societies Acts enacted by the States after independence. 
4. To facilitate the organisation and functioning of the c o-operative societies 
having jurisdiction in more than one Prov ince, the Government of India enacted 
the Multi-Unit Co-operative Societie s Act , 1942.  The Act of 1942 was an 
enabling instrument dealing with the incorporation and winding up of co-operative 
societies having juris diction in more than one Province.  With the emergence of  
National Federations of Co -operative Societies, which were being governed by  
different laws (Co-operative Societies Acts of the respec tive States in which the 
principal place of business of such society was loc ated), the need was felt f or a 
comprehensive central legislation to c onsolidate the law governing co-operative 
societies having jurisdiction in m ore than one State.  Parliament therefore, under 
Entry 44 of the Union List  of the Cons titution, en acted the Multi-State Co-
operative Societies Act, 1984 which has s ince been r eplaced by the Multi- State 
Co-operative Societies Act, 2002. 
5.  After independenc e, the adv ent of planned ec onomic development 
ushered in a new era for t he co-operatives.  Co-operation was  regarded as a 
preferred instrument of  planned economic  developm ent and emerged as  a 
distinct sector of the national economy.  The grow th of Co-operatives was  
promoted on a large-scale in the Five Y ear Plans,  as part of the effort for 
securing s ocial and economic justice and equitable distribution of the frui ts of 
development.  As a result, the concept of  State Assistance to Co-operatives and 
Governmental participation in their equi ty came into being.   Co-operative 
development in the c ountry has  thus been,  by and large, t he result of State 
Sponsorship and assistance. 
6. Co-operative Movement in India has grown significantly and has become 
the most extens ive in the Wor ld.  Agri cultural Co-operativ e Institutions now 
provide pr oduction, investment credit, agric ultural inputs, marketing support for 
agricultural produce and also fund arr angements for transportation, storage,  
processing and sale of end products.  Co ntribution of co-oper ative venture in 
areas like food processing, horticulture,  agro-export, stabiliz ation of domestic  
 2 
 
 

market, urban credit through urban co-o perative banks has  had its positive 
impact.  Co-operatives are the chief institutional agency under the Public 
Distribution System (PDS).  Co-operativ e ventures have also had a significant 
impact in  sectors such as dairying, sugar, cotton, oilse eds and F ertilizer 
production. 
7. The Rural Credit Survey Commi ttee, 1954 recommended that promotion 
of cooperatives be accepted as a part of  State policy in the development of  
various economic activities, particularly in those providing support to agriculture.  
The policy led to state partnership in the share capital of cooperatives and in their 
management.   Committee on Cooperativ e law (1955) appoi nted by  the 
Government of India suggested a number of modifications in t he cooperativ e 
legislation for giving effect to the concept of the state partnership and accordingly 
various State Cooperative Soc ieties’ Ac ts were amended whic h in effect als o 
strengthened the government control on the cooperative institutions. 
8. In 1958, the National Development Council adopted a Cooperativ e Policy 
Resolution, which inter-alia, also examined the cooperative legislative framework.  
The Council had observed; “many of the existing procedures impede the 
development of cooperation as a popular movement in  which s mall groups and 
communities can func tion freely  and organi se their work and activities along 
cooperative lines without ex cessive official interference and red tap.  The 
restrictive features of existing c ooperative legislation should be removed and 
both the pr esent cooperativ e laws and model legis lation and rules which ha ve 
been under consideration of the states should be modified in accordance with the 
approach outlined in this Resolution”. 
9. The Committee on Cooperative Administra tion while examining the role of 
Registrar Cooperative Societies felt that in order to make cooperative movement  
peoples’ movement in real sense of the term and to foster popular initiative within 
the cooperative movement, it is necessary that the role of Regist rar should be 
confined to that of a “friend, philosopher and guide” to the cooperative movement 
and many of the powers whic h have been concentrated in  his hands should be 
transferred to the federal cooperative organizations.  A Com mittee observed,  
“each sec tor of the movement shoul d ultimately have its own federal 
 3 
 
 

arrangements for supervision”.  It further  added, “the work of supervising non-
credit type of societies  may be transferr ed from cooperative departments to the 
federations at the district level and above”.  Noting that  in many of the states the 
federal cooperative organizations ar e not strong enough, the Com mittee 
recommended that the government by givi ng catalytic help to t he cooper ative 
movement should promote these federal organizations top which ultimately some 
of the statutory powers of the Registrar Cooperat ive Societies should  be 
transferred. 
10. The Conference of Chief Minister s and State Ministers of Cooperative 
which met at madras in 1968 cons idered certain important aspects of 
management of cooperatives with a view to stemmi ng the growth of vested 
interest in cooperatives and to ensur e that economic benefits conferred by 
cooperative flow in a larger  measure to the weak er sections of t he community.  
This conference suggested certain legisl ative measures to be introduced relating 
to: 
 
(a) Exclusion of money lenders, etc. from becoming members of 
cooperatives; 
(b) Reservation of seats on the Board of Management  of cooperatives for 
weaker sections; 
(c) Restriction on holding office for more than the prescribed term; 
(d) Restriction on holding office simultaneously in a number of institutions; 
(e) Regulation of loans to office-bearers; 
(f) Regular election by an independent authority. 
11. In view of the increasing demand from  co-operatives that they be allowed 
to function as truly autonomous bodies without undue governmental intervention, 
the Planning Commission in 1990 a ppointed a Commit tee under  the 
Chairmanship of Ch. Brahm Per kash.  The Committee examined the provisions  
of the existing Co-operative Societies Acts and with a view to promoting 
independent and autonomous  functioning of the co-oper ative societies  
recommended, inter alia, a ‘Model Co-opera tives Act’ with the aim of giving a 
genuine c o-operative character to co-oper ative societies wit h the delection of 
 4 
 
 

restrictive provisions  and to  facilitate the building of  an integrat ed co-oper ative 
structure.   
12. In spite of felt need for amendments in the State Acts, the pace of reforms 
in Co-operative Legislation by the States is not encouraging.  Some of the States 
such as  Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Prades h, Bihar, Orissa, Jammu & Kas hmir, 
Karnataka, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand and U ttaranchal, have enacted parallel s elf-
reliant co-operatives Acts which are excl usively for the co-operatives without any 
share holding or financial assistance fo rm the Government.  Other States are 
also considering enacting similar legislat ions.  Howe ver, substantive number of 
co-operatives, particularly those beari ng s ignificance on agriculture and allied 
sectors and implementation of public  policies, like; agricultural cr edit, agricultural 
marketing and supply of inputs, agro- processing, handloom and handicrafts,  
labour, consumers etc. are still governed under the provisions  of Co-operative 
Societies Acts. Therefore, one view  has  emerged for amendment in the 
constitution to provide protection to co -operatives and to insulate them from  
unnecessary political and bureaucratic interf erence. It is the stated policy  of the 
Government of India to regulate the Co-operative law regime with adequate 
checks to safeguard the interests of members and public at large and also 
assistance to co-operatives in needy and deserving case. 
13. It has been experienced that, in spite of considerable numerical expansion 
of Co-operatives in different sectors of  the rural economy, their performance in 
qualitative terms has not been up to the desired level. Democratisation and 
professionalism have not taken roots and there has been excessive depend ence 
on financial support from the Government.  Government assistance has led to 
intervention and, on occasion,  to interf erence. Elec tions are often postponed 
indefinitely and nominated offi ce-bearers/administrators take over reducing the 
accountability of the management to the me mbers.  P owerful individuals/groups 
have monopolized offices in co-operatives  creating their vested interests.  
Unprofessional management has led to poor service and lace of  productivity and 
competitiveness with like enterprises and amongst the Co-operatives.  It is felt  
that the present state of a ffairs of co-operatives is a result of lack of appropriate 
legislative and policy  framework conduciv e to the growth of co-operatives 
 5 
 
 

coupled with excessive Government control and unnecessary political 
interference. 
14. “Co-operative Societies” is a State subject (under Entry 32 of the Secon d 
List of the 7 th Schedule of the C onstitution of I ndia).  Under this entry the S tate 
Governments have enacted their respective  State Cooperative Societies Acts.  
However, the functioning of Cooperative Societies with objectives not confined to 
one State and serving the interests of me mbers in m ore than one State, c omes 
under the purview of  entry 44 of  the Union List of the 7 th Schedule of the 
Constitution of India.  The Parliam ent, therefore, enact ed the Multi-State 
Cooperative Societies Act, 1984, (No. 51 of 1984), which has since been 
replaced by the Multi -State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002 (No. 39 of 2002),  
based on the recommendations of Choudhary Brahm Perkash Committee widely  
acknowledge by the States. 
15. Accordingly, vide ‘The Consti tution (One Hundred and Sixth Am endment) 
Bill 2006’ as introduced in Lok Sabha on 22-5-2006,  it is proposed to add 
Chapter IX B in Article 243 of the Constitution. 
16. The amendment to the Constitution, fo r the purpos e, is limited to ensur e 
the democ ratic, autonomous and professional functioning of the co-operatives.   
The co-operatives, however, shall remain  a State Subject under List-II of the 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.  The issues addressed are: 
(a) Inclusion of co-operative principles; 
(b) Fundamental right to form co-operative societies; 
(c) Timely conduct of elections; 
(d) Maximum time limit for supersession of a managing 
committee; 
(e) Independent and professional audit; 
(f) Uniform tenure of managing committee; 
(g) Regular and timely conduct of general body meetings; 
(h) Right of a member for access to information; 
(i) Compulsory system of filing returns; and 
(j) Provisions for offences and penalties. 
 
 6 
 
 

17. To address these issues, provisi ons have been inc orporated in the draft 
Bill.  It is proposed to add Co-operative Principles in article 243 ZI of the draft Bill.  
It is also proposed t hat the election shou ld be entirely the responsibility of 
general body of a co-operative society.  This has been propos ed in orde r to 
protect the autonomy of co -operatives and to ensure member control of co-
operatives.  Similarly in order to prot ect the autonomy and member control of co-
operatives, the power of State to s upersede the elected management have been 
clearly defined.  The State should provide b road parameters for conduct of audit 
and basically the co-operative societies should be free to cause their accounts to 
be audited by the auditors, appointed by the general body, and who fulfil the 
requirements laid down by the State legisl ature.  It is also proposed to include 
provisions for convening ann ual general m eting in time, right of member to get 
information, returns to be filed by every co-operative society in respect of annual 
reports, statement of audi ted accounts etc and provis ions for offences and 
penalties.  These provisions ar e proposed  to make the management of a co-
operative society accountable to members, to prevent misuse of powers by  the 
management and transparency in the functioning of co-operative societies. 
18. “Cooperative Societies” is a State subject under En try 32 of the List II – 
State List of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.  The draft Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill, after having been pass ed by both the houses of Parliament 
and befor e the ass ent of the President , would r equire ratification by  the 
Legislatures of not less than one-half of the St ates by resolutions to this effect.  
The issue of amendments in the Constitution has been discussed with the States 
in the Conference of State Cooperative Ministers held on 7-12-2004.  The States 
have agreed for the proposed amendments, in  the Constitution.  The resolution 
adopted in the conference is as follows: 
Resolution: “The conference noted the need for amendment to 
the constitution to ensure t he democratic, autonomous and 
professional functioning of co-oper atives after taking note of the 
suggestions made on some issues by the States.  The Centr al 
Government clarified that any assistance or financial package 
would henceforth be linked to the States undertaking suc h 
reform.  The amendment to the constitution, for the purpose,  
may address the k ey issue of  empowerment of the co-
operatives through their vol untary formation, autonomous 
 7 
 
 

functioning, democratic control and professional management.  
The said empowerment of co- operatives s hall be ensured by  
regular and timely conduct of elections of the Board of Directors, 
general body meetings and profe ssional audit.  The question of  
professional audit is  to be decided bas ed on the activities, 
undertaken by a co-operative society, its level of functioning and 
quantum of the transaction.  The conferred affirmed that 
“Cooperative societies” shall cont inue to remain a State subject  
under the Constitution and that the concern and views of the 
States would be fully kept in vi ew while fin alising the proposal 
for amendments to the constitution”. 
 
19. The Comm ittee before going int o det ailed examination of  the Bill invited 
views of the all the State Governments and Union T erritories on the Bill. Out of 
the total, only 13 Stat e Governments and  three Union Territories  responded in 
writing.  T he views of the various St ate Governments/Union Territories have 
immensely helped the Committee in understanding the issues involved in various 
clauses of the Bill and in arriving at right conclusions. 
20. The Committee have gone through the Bill threadbare and c lause-wise 
comments have been given in Part-II of  this Report. Some of the important 
recommendations of the Committee, which may have f ar-reaching effects on th e 
implementation of the Bill, have been summarised hereunder: 
 
21. Article 19(1)(c) of th e Constitution sa ys that ‘a ll c itizens shall have 
the right to form associations or unions’.  The Committee have been 
informed that the Department of Legal Affairs of the Ministr y of Law  and 
Justice, Government of India is of th e opinion that the word ‘associations’ 
in Article  19(1)(c) of the Constitu tion includes the w ords ‘co-operative 
societies’ also. A view  has been expressed in th e Committee that the w ord 
‘associations’ does not include ‘co-ope ratives’. The Com mittee, therefore, 
recommend that the  Government should examine w hether the w ords ‘co-
operative societies’ can be in serted a fter the w ord ‘associations’ in the 
aforesaid Article. 
 
22. The Com mittee further recomme nd that a new  Article 43 B on  
 8 
 
 

Empowerment of Co-operatives may be added in Part-IV of the Constitution 
that contains Directive Principles of State Policy, which may read as under: 
“43 B Empowerment of Co-operatives:  The St ate shall endeavour to 
promote voluntar y formation,  autonomous functioning, 
democratic control and profe ssional management of the co-
operatives”. 
 
23. Co-operative Societies is a Sta te subject under Entr y 32 of the State 
List of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. The Committee are of the firm 
view that the Central Government shoul d not interfere in the day -to-day 
affairs of the co-operative societies. 
 
24. The Committee are of the un animous opinion that a compr ehensive 
amendment to the Constitution on  co-operatives is not necessar y. T hey, 
therefore, recommend that ‘The Co nstitution (One Hundred and Sixth 
Amendment) Bill 20 06’ should be conver ted into a comprehensive centra l 
model la w for voluntar y formation, autonomous functioning, democratic 
control and professi onal man agement of the co-operatives w ith certain  
incentives and disincentives to the States that implement or not implement  
the model law .   The States can en act their own law s on the subj ect, 
however, State Laws should be compatible with the Central Model Law. 
 
25. The Com mittee rec ommend that no person should be allow ed to 
become the office bearer of the co-operative societ y for more than tw o 
consecutive terms. How ever, he w ill ag ain be eligible to contest the 
elections after a gap of full one term. 
 
26. The Com mittee fee l that though the co-operative societies are not  
part of local gover nance like panchy ati raj institutions and municipalities  
and should be allowed to conduct their own elections, however, they are of 
the opinion that major ill of co-opera tive sector is their election process.  
They, therefore, recommend that the ma tter should be further examined so 
as to have free, fair, impart ial and timely elections to the co-oper ative 
 9 
 
 

societies conducted by  the State Election Commission or any  other 
appropriate independent body. 
 
27. The Committee not e that in  the Bill it  is stated t hat ‘the b oard of co-
operative societies shall not be supe rseded where there is no govern ment 
shareholding or loan or financial assistance or an y guarantee b y th e 
Government’.  The Committee note that the shareholding b y the 
Government has not been qualified and even if the Government have one 
rupee as shareholding, it will have the right to supersede the board of th e 
co-operative society.  These unfettered powers to Government as proposed 
in the Bill w ill affect the autonom y of the Co-operatives adversely.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that the board of co-operative societ y should 
not be su perseded w here government shareholding is less than 51 per  
cent.  
 
28. The Committee are of the opinion that there is a need to set up ‘Co-
operative Members Grievances Redressal Forum’ to decide all t ypes of  
disputes arising in respect of consti tution, business, management, or an y 
other activity of the co-operative society.  This may deliver cheap and quick 
justice to the members of the co-operatives. 
 
29. The Committee are of the opinion that there is a need to set up a ‘Co-
operative Regulator y Commission’ to reduce the interference of  the 
Government as w ell as the Registrar and to inspect/enquire about the 
conduct of the Management Committee/ Board of Directors of the co-
operatives in each State to ensure transparen cy, neutr ality in quick 
disposal of the cases w hich w ill also regulate th e statutor y aspect of  
functioning of co-operatives. 
 
30. The Committee observe that the sp irit of an independent audit may  
be diluted if the co-operative societ y being aud ited has a hand in the 
choice and appointment of its audito rs.  There may  be chances that  
 10 
 
 

although officially the general body will appoint the auditors, it is the Board 
of Directors of the concerne d co- operative societ y, w hose choice w ill 
actually p revail to the detriment of auditing ethics, given the reality that 
most of the members of the co-ope rative societ y are n either deepl y 
involved nor have the time and information required to make the best  
choice. The independent audit can be ensured only if audit is carried out by 
the auditor from the  government approved panel of auditors/audit firms or 
through a separate government organisation say for example Directorate of 
Audit. The Committe e are of the opinion that the Director of Co-operative 
Audit should be made answerable to the State Legislature.  
 
31. The Com mittee have considered each clause of the Bill th oroughly 
and are of the opinion that the clauses,  other than those discussed in Part-
II of the  Report, should be ma de consistent with the provisions on which 
amendments/suggestions have been made in the Report. 
 11 
 
 

PART-II 
 
CLAUSE -WISE ANALYSIS 
 
 
PART IX B 
THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
 
Clause 243 ZJ (1) 
 The Clause read as under: 
“The board shall consist of such num ber of directors as  may be provided 
by the Legislature of a State, by law: 
 
Provided that the m aximum number of dir ectors of a co-operative society 
shall not exceed twenty-one,  except in the case of a State level co-
operative society”. 
 
The Com mittee note that this Cl ause specifies that the maximum 
number of Directors shall not exceed twenty-one except in the case of a 
State level co-operative so ciety. It has been obser ved that in man y cases 
there are ver y large boards and it is ve ry difficult to arrive at reason able 
decision. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the maximum number 
of directors including functional direct ors should be restricted to tw enty-
one for all co-operatives irrespective of  their sizes.  Hence, the w ords 
‘except in case of a State Level co-ope rative societ y’ sh ould be deleted 
from the proviso to Clause 243 ZJ (1). 
 
Clause 243 ZJ (3) 
 The Clause read as under: 
“The Legislature of a State shall, by law, make prov isions for co-option of  
persons to be m embers of  the board having experie nce in the field of  
banking, management, finance or specialisation in any  other field relating 
to the objects and activities underta ken by the co-operative society as 
members of the board of such society: 
 
Provided that the number of such co-opted members shall not exceed two 
in addition to twenty-one directors specified in the proviso to clause (1). 
 12 
 
 
Provided further that such co-opted members shall not have the right to 
vote in any  election of  the co-operati ve society in their capacity as such 

member or to be eligible to be elected as Vice- Chairman or Vice-
President, Chairman or President of the board.” 
 
The Committee recommend that in the second proviso to the Clause 
243 ZJ (3) for the w ords ‘Vice-Chairma n or Vice-Presiden t, Chairman o r 
President of the board’, the w ords ‘o ffice bearer  of the board’ may be 
substituted. 
 
Clause 243 ZL (1) 
 The Clause read as under: 
“Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, 
no board shall be superseded or k ept under suspension for a period 
exceeding six months: 
XX    X X     X X 
Provided further that t he board of any suc h co-operative society shall not  
be superseded wher e there is no Gove rnment shareholding of  loan or  
financial assistance or any guarantee by the Government: 
XX    X X     X X 
 
The Committee note that in this clause it is s tated that ‘the  board of 
co-operative societies shall not be  superseded w here there is no 
government shareholding or loan or financial assistance or an y guarantee 
by the Government’.  How ever, th e Committe e further note that the 
shareholding by  the Government has not been qualified a nd even if the 
Government have o ne rupee as shareh olding, it w ill have the right to  
supersede the board of the co-operative societ y.  Giving these unfettered  
powers to Government as proposed in th e Bill, will affect the autonomy of 
the Co-operatives.  The Com mittee are of the opinion that the board of co-
operative societ y should not be superseded w here gover nment 
shareholding is less than 51 per cent. 
 
New Delhi;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
16 August, 2007                      Chairman, 
25 Sravana, 1929 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
 
 13 
 
 

 
APPENDIX - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SI TTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRI CULTURE HE LD ON THURSDAY, THE 2 
NOVEMBER, 2006 AT 1430 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, GROUND 
FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1430 hrs to 1610 hrs 
                                                                                   
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri  Anil Basu 
3. Shri Khagen Das 
4. Shri GadakhTukaram Gangadhar 
5. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Baleshwar Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
8. Shri Harish Rawat 
9. Dr.M.S.Gill 
10. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
11. Shri Vikram Verma 
12. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
13. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed  
14. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
15. Shri  M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri N.S.Hooda   -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 14 
 
 

WITNESSES 
 
 
1. Smt. Radha Singh  - Secretary (A&C) 
2. Shri Karnail Singh  - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Satish Chander  - Joint Secretary 
4. Shri S.D.Indoria  - Chief Director (Cooperation) 
5. Shri P. Sampath  - Director (Cooperation) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 
 
 

At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Co- operation), and read out contents  
of Direction 55 (1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.’ 
2.       After the introductions, the Secretary (Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) briefed the Com mittee ab out the his tory of cooperatives  and  
legislation thereon in India and the need and importance of ‘The Constitution (One 
Hundred and Sixth Ame ndment) Bill, 2006’.  The repr esentatives of the Ministry  
also replied to the various  points raised by t he members of the C ommittee during 
evidence. 
3. In view of the impor tance of the Bill and its impact on all the State 
Governments and t heir existing legisl ations on C o-operative Sector, the 
Committee decided to seek the views of all the State Governments in this regard. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceeding of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 16 
 
 

APPENDIX - II 
 
MINUTES OF THE THI RTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDI NG 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON FRI DAY, THE 15  
JUNE, 2007 AT 1500 HRS. IN COMM ITTEE ROOM ‘D’, GROUND 
FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1650 hrs 
                                                                                   
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
4. Shri Prabodh Panda 
5. Smt. Rupatai D.Patil Nilangekar 
6. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
7. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
8. Shri Baleshwar Yadav 
9. Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Harish Rawat 
11. Dr.M.S.Gill 
12. Shri Vikram Verma 
13. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
14. Shri Sk.Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
15. Shri Datta Meghe 
11. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K. Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajkumar   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri N.S. Hooda  -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary 
 17 
 
 

 
WITNESSES 
 
S.NO.  Name    Designation 
 
1.  Shri S.G. Patil - President, High Power Committee on  
      C ooperatives 
2.  Shri H.K. Patil  - Director, National Federation of Urban  
      C ooperative 
3.  Dr. R.C. Dwivedi - Special invitee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 
 
 

At the outset, the Chairman, St anding Committee on Agriculture, 
welcomed the Mem bers of the Committee and the representatives of the 
Government of India, High Power Co mmittee on Cooperatives and read out the 
contents of Direction 55 (1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.’ 
2. Thereafter, the witnesses were urged to give their suggestions/expert views  
on various clauses of ‘The Constitution (106 th) Amendment Bill, 2006’.  Then the 
witnesses explained their point of view.  The members raised certain clarificatory 
queries to which the witnesses replied and also pr omised to send any ot her 
information desired by the Committee relating to the Bill.  
3. A verbatim record of the proceeding of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19 
 
 

APPENDIX - III 
 
MINUTES OF TH E FOURTEENTH  SITTING O F THE S TANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 2 8 
JUNE, 2007 AT 1500 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘139’, Ist 
FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1750 hrs 
                                                                                   
PRESENT 
 
Shri Harish Rawat – In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ranen Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
7. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda 
9. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
10. Shri Baleshwar Yadav 
11. Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Dr.M.S.Gill 
13. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
14. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
15. Shri Sk.Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
16. Shri Datta Meghe 
17. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K. Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajkumar   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri N.S. Hooda  -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary 
 20 
 
 

 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
S.No.  Name     Designation 
 
1.  Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha  - Former Union Minister 
2.  Dr. U.S. Awasthi  - Managing Director, Indian   
       Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative  
       L td. (IFFCO) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 21 
 
 

 
 
In the absence of Chairman, Shri Ha rish Rawat chaired the sitting of the 
Committee.  He then welcomes the me mbers of the Comm ittee and Shri Ram 
Niwas Mirdha, former Union Minister.  Shri Mirdha briefed the Committee about 
the views on various clauses of ‘The Constitution (106 th) Amendment Bill, 2006’  
and also re plied to t he queries raised by the memb ers o f th e Commit tee.  S hri 
Mirdha told the Committee th at a comprehensive Act sh ould be enacted by the 
Central G overnment with cer tain incentives and disinc entives to the States who 
follow or don’t follow the Act. 
2. The Chairperson thanked him for briefing the Committee. 
(Shri Mirdha then withdrew)  
(tea break) 
3. After the tea break, Dr. U.S. Awa sthi, Managing Director, IFFCO was 
called in and was apprised of the contents of Direction 55 (1) of the ‘Directions by 
the Speaker, Lok Sabha.’  Dr. Awasthi br iefed the Committee about his vie ws on 
various clauses of ‘The Constitution (106 th) Amendment Bill, 2006’.  He gave 
certain written suggestions on some of th e clauses of the Bill and also replied to 
the queries raised by the Members. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceeding of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 22 
 
 

APPENDIX - IV 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF TH E STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON AGRI CULTURE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 
18 JULY, 2007 AT 1500 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, 
GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1645 hrs 
                                                                                   
PRESENT 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ranen Barman 
3. Shri Anil Basu 
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
6. Shri Khagen Das  
7. Shri GadakhTukaram Gangadhar 
8. Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
9. Shri Probodh Panda 
10. Smt. Rupatai D.Patil Nilangekar 
11. Shri K.J.S.P.Reddy 
12. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
13. Shri M.P.Veerendra Kumar 
14. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
15. Shri Baleshwar Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Harish Rawat 
17. Dr.M.S.Gill 
18. Shri Vikram Verma 
19. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
20. Shri Sk.Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
21. Shri Datta Meghe 
22. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
23. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajkumar  -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri N.S. Hooda  -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary 
 23 
 
 

WITNESSES 
 
S.NO.  Name     Designation  
 
1. Dr. P.K. Mishra  - Secretary (A&C) 
2. Shri Karnail Singh  - Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Satish Chander  - Joint Secretary 
4. Shri S.D.Indoria  - Chief Director (Cooperation) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 24 
 
 

 
 
At the outset, the Chairman, St anding Committee on Agriculture, 
welcomed the Members of the Committee an d the representatives of the Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Co-operation) to the sitting of the 
Committee and read out the content of Dire ction 55 (1) of the ‘Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha.’ 
2. The representatives of the Minist ry briefed t he C ommittee on various 
clauses of ‘The Constitution (106th) Amendment Bill, 2006’.  Then the Committee 
took oral evidence of th e representatives.  The Members raised certain 
clarificatory queries, some of them we re replied and those w hich could not be 
replied, they proposed to send the written replies to the Committee at their earliest. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceeding of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 25 
 
 

    APPENDIX - V 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 2 6 
JULY, 2007 AT 1100 HRS. IN COMM ITTEE ROOM ‘C’, GROUND 
FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1230 hrs 
                                                                                   
PRESENT 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Ranen Barman 
2. Shri Anil Basu 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri GadakhTukaram Gangadhar 
6. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
9. Shri M.P.Veerendra Kumar 
10. Shri Baleshwar Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Harish Rawat 
12. Dr.M.S.Gill 
13. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
14. Shri Vikram Verma 
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
16. Shri Sk.Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
17. Shri Datta Meghe 
18. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
19. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.      Shri A.K. Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajkumar   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri N.S. Hooda  -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary 
 
 26 
 
 

 
 
 The Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  The 
Members were asked to explain their point  of view on various clauses of ‘The  
Constitution (106th Amendment) Bill, 2006’ and also to express their view whether 
the Bill should be treated as Constitution Amendment Bill or a comprehensive law 
including the various  clause s of the Bill should be en acted by Parliament with 
certain incentives and disincentives to the States. 
2. Thereafter, the Members had a detailed discussion on various clauses of the 
aforesaid Bill.  The Committee decided to meet again on 3rd August, 2007. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceeding of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 27 
 
 

APPENDIX - VI 
 
MINUTES OF TH E SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRI CULTURE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 3  
AUGUST, 2007 AT 1500 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, 
GROUND FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1620 hrs 
                                                                                   
PRESENT 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Ranen Barman 
2. Shri Anil Basu 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar 
6. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Smt. Rupatai D.Patil Nilangekar 
9. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Harish Rawat 
11. Dr.M.S.Gill 
12. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
13. Shri Vikram Verma 
14. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
15. Shri Sk.Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
16. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
17. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K. Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajkumar   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri N.S. Hooda  -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 28 
 
 

At the outset, the Chairman, St anding Committee on Agriculture, 
welcomed the Members of the Committee and requested them to consider the 
Draft Report and gi ve their s uggestions if any on various clauses of ‘The  
Constitution (106th Amendment) Bill, 2006’.   
2. After a detailed discussion t he Dr aft Report was adopted wit h certain 
modifications.  The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalize the report and 
present the same to the Parliament in the ensuing Session.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 29 
 
 

APPENDIX - VII 
 
MINUTES OF TH E FI RST SITTI NG OF TH E STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 1 6 
AUGUST, 2007 AT 1500 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’, 
GROUND FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1620 hrs 
                                                                                   
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2 Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
4. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
5. Shri Prabodh Panda 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
6. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
7. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed  
8. Shri Datta Meghe 
9. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
10. Shri  M. Rajasekara Murthy 
11. Prof. M.S.Swaminathan 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajkumar    -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri N.S. Hooda   -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Walia   -  Under Secretary 
 
 30 
 
 

At the outset, the Chairm an, Standing Committee on Agr iculture, welcomed the 
Members of the recons tituted Comm ittee to its  first sitting .  There after, the  Chair man 
requested the Mem bers to re consider the dr aft Report on ‘The Constitu tion (106 th 
Amendment) Bill, 2006’ which was adopted by the previous Committee (2006-07) on 3rd 
August, 2007 and could not be presented as the tenure of the Comm ittee expired on 4 th 
August, 2007.  The Comm ittee then adopted  the report unanim ously without any  
change/modification. 
2. The Comm ittee authoris ed the Chairm an to f inalize the re port and pr esent th e 
same to the Parliament.  
X     X    X    X    X     X     X     X     X     X       X       X     X     X     X 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 31 
 
 

 32 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
 
The Draft Report on ‘The Consti tution (One Hundred and Sixth 
Amendment) Bill, 2006 is put up for approval please.  
 
 
 