      
  25 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2006-07) 
                         
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                   
         
                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY DAIRYING AND 
FISHERIES) 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007) 
         
         
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Twentieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006)} 
         
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
  
                                                      
  
         
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
MARCH, 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (Saka) 
  
 1

TWENTY  FIFTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2006-07) 
          
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY DAIRYING AND 
FISHERIES) 
 
 
              
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations  contained in the Twentieth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006] 
         
Presented to Lok Sabha on____________ 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  ______________ 
  
                                                     
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
           MARCH, 2007/, PHALGUNA 1928 (Saka) 
 2

 
COA No  190 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price:  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
        © 2007 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha  (Eleventh Edition).  
 
 
 
 3

<CONTENTS> 
                   P AGE 
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………   
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
held on 08.03.2007 .      
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2005-2006) on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of  
Department of Animal Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries   
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 4

Composition of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Ranen Barman 
3. Shri Anil Basu  
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
6. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
7. Shri Khagen Das 
8. Shri Dharmendra 
9. Shri GadakhTukaram Gangadhar 
10. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
11. Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
12. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
13. Shri Prabodh Panda 
14. Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Patil Nilangekar 
15. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
16. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
17. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
18. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
19.    Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
20.    Shri Baleshwar Yadav    
21.    Smt. Kalpana  Ramesh Narhire 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
22.    Shri Harish Rawat 
23.   Dr. M.S.Gill 
24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25. Shri Vikram Verma 
26. Shri  Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28. Shri Datta Meghe 
29. Shri  Debabrata Biswas 
30. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
31.        Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K.Singh   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Hardev Singh   - Director 
4. Shri N.S.Hooda   - Deputy Secretary   
  
 5

 
INTRODUCTION 
         
         
I, the Chairm an, Standing Comm ittee on Agriculture, having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their be half, present this Twenty Fifth Report on 
Action Taken by the Governm ent on the Reco mmendations/ Observations contained in 
the Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006) (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) on De mands for Grants of the Mi nistry of  Agriculture (Department of 
Animal Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries) for the year 2006-2007. 
 
2. The Twentieth Report of the Standi ng Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006) on 
Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Minist ry of Agriculture (Departm ent of Anim al 
Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries) was pr esented to Lok S abha on 19.05.2006 and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on the sam e day.  The Minist ry of Agriculture (Department of Animal 
Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries) was request ed to furnish action taken replies of the 
Government to the  recommendations containe d in the Twentie th Report.  The replie s of 
the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report have been received. 
 
3. The Committee considered the a ction taken replies furnished by the Governm ent 
at their sitting held on 08.3.2007, approved the draft comments and adopted the T wenty 
Third Report.  Minutes of the sitting are placed at Appendix I.  
 
4. An analysis of the Action Take n by the Governm ent on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Twentieth Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
        
            
                                          
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
08  March, 2007                                 Chairman, 
17 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on Agriculture1 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 6

  
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
  This Report of  the Comm ittee on Agricu lture deals with th e action tak en by the 
Government on the recomm endations containe d in the   T wentieth Report (Fou rteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Comm ittee on Agriculture (2005-06) on Demands for Grants 
(2006-07) of the Ministry of Agriculture (D epartment of Ani mal Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisher ies) which was presen ted to the Lok  Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 
19.5.2006. 
1.2 The Action Taken Replies in connection with the 20 th Report of  the Comm ittee 
relating to De mands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) have been examined and classified as under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations th at have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II of the Report) Recommendation Sl.Nos. 8,9,11 & 
13 (Total –4) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the  Comm ittee do n ot des ire to  
pursue in view of the Governm ent’s action taken reply (Chapter III of the 
Report)  (Total –Nil) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which action taken replies of  
the Government have not been acce pted by the Committee (Chapter IV of 
the Report) Sl.Nos. 3,5,6 and 12   (Total-4) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are s till awaited.  (Chapter V) Recomm endation 
Sl.Nos.1,2,4,7 and 10  (Total –5) 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Governm ent on some 
of their recommendations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 7

Recommendation No. 1 
Tenth Plan allocation and expenditure fo r Department of Animal Husbandry,  
Dairying and Fisheries 
 
1.4 The Department have informed that the total expenditure during the Tenth Plan is 
expected to be around Rs. 2450.00 crore which is  almost 98% of the total allocation of 
Rs. 2,500 crore for the entire Tenth Plan pe riod. However, it is observed that the 
expenditure during the first four years of the T enth Plan com es to Rs. 1514.52 crore 
which constitutes barely 60.58% of the total outlay of Rs. 2, 500 crore with only one year 
to go.  The Departm ent in their reply had a ssured that with the implementation of new 
schemes such as Livesto ck Insurance, Nati onal Fisheries Developm ent Board which are 
expected to take off during 2006-07, the Depart ment would m ake all possible efforts to 
fully utilize the allocated funds and would try to get additiona l allocation in the course of 
the years, so as to reach the full Tenth Plan outlay of Rs. 2,500 crore. 
Having regard to the pace of expenditure  during the preceding four years, the 
Committee are surprised as to how  the Depa rtment would utilize such a huge unspent 
balance of about Rs. 985.50 crore d uring the las t year of the Tenth Plan.  The utilization 
of around Rs. 985 crore which is almost 40% of  the total allocation, during the fifth and 
final year as against the re ported expenditure of only Rs. 1514 crore during the first four  
years, appears to be a form idable task given the past perform ance of the Departm ent.  
The Committee feel that the Departm ent also made a poor perform ance by not utilizing 
the allo cated funds.  The Comm ittee would, ther efore, lik e to be apprised of the new 
measures/strategies specifically prop osed by th e Department to ensur e full and ef fective 
utilization of allocations in th e final year of the Tenth Plan.   The Committee would also  
like the Dep artment to k eep a strict watc h over the pace of im plementation of schem es 
 8

and expenditure incu rred thereon, s o as to fu lly utilize the allocated funds and also to  
enable completion of various schemes within the stipulated time schedule. 
Reply of the Government 
1.5 The Government in their Action Taken reply have stated that  the department is 
making concerted efforts to fully utilize the Tenth Plan allocation.  Out of the total outlay 
of Rs.2500 crore for the Tent h Plan, about Rs.1671.00 crore has been spent in the first 
four years of the Tenth Plan.  Due to vario us measures taken by the Departm ent by wa y 
of close monitoring of schemes, follow up of  the State Governm ents through field visits 
by Officers, etc., the utilisation of the Plan Allocation has improved considerably over the 
years.  During 2005-06, the Departm ent was able to utilize around Rs.594.00 crore, 
which is over 99% of the RE for that year.    The current year’s outlay of Rs. 777.00 crore 
is also exp ected to b e alm ost fully ut ilized.  W ith the im plementation of new 
schemes/component schemes viz. Livestock Insurance, National Fisheries Developm ent 
Board and expected  ap proval to  th e Nation al Project for Im provement of Poultry and 
Small Animals, the pa ce of  expenditur e is lik ely to im prove f urther.   In f act, the 
Department may require additional allocation of funds in the course of the year, so as to 
reach the full Tenth Plan Outlay of Rs.2500.00 crore.   
Comments of the Committee 
1.6 The Committee are no t convinced  w ith the reply given by the Departmen t 
that w ith the impleme ntation of new  sc hemes/component schemes viz ., Livestock 
Insurance, National Fisheries Developm ent B oard and expected approval of the 
National Project for Improvement of Poultry and Sm all  Animals, the pace of 
expenditure is likely to improve, when th e Department could utilize only 60% of the 
funds in th e first four years of the Tenth Plan.  The Committee, th erefore,   d esire 
 9

that the Department should so plan the expenditure on its schemes that the funds  
allocated are spent regularly and evenly over the Plan period and there is no rush of 
expenditure in the last year of the Plan.  The Committee may also be apprised about 
the utilization of the funds, especially during the last year of the Tenth Plan.    
 
Recommendation No. 2 
National Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding 
 
1.7 The Comm ittee hav e been inf ormed that the National Pr oject f or Cattle an d 
Buffalo Breeding is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme and was  launched in Oct. 2000 for a  
period of 10 years, with an allocation of Rs. 402 crore for phase-I.  The scheme envisages 
genetic upgradation on priority basis and aim s at re-organisation and re-orientation of the 
Cattle and Buffalo Breeding Opera tion in th e country.  It h as been also noted that s ince 
May, 2000 States jo ined this scheme very late so Planning Comm ission has permitted to 
extend the P hase I by two years i.e. upto March, 2007. The Comm ittee are perturbed to 
note tha t out of  the 27 participa ting States /UTs, Phase-I will be prac tically com pleted 
only in 13 States/Uts by 2006-07.  
The Committee recommend that this  being a very i mportant scheme to help the  
farmers as well as th e States to breed the better kind of cattle and buffaloes, the Murra-
buffaloes and Shaliwal and Tharparkar and ot her such breed of cows of Punjab, Haryana 
and Rajasth an should be given special atten tion so that the num ber of cattles of these 
breeds could be increas ed on a m ass scale so th at the farm ers and dairy  owners can buy  
these cattles at a reason able price to augment their m ilk production and can be exported 
to other countries in case of demand. 
 10

 
Reply of the Government 
1.8 The Government in their Action Taken reply have stated that  the National Project 
for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding (N PCBB) focuses on developm ent and conservation of 
indigenous breeds. Funds have been released  to the participating States to take up 
programmes for developm ent of indigenous br eeds in their breeding tracts so as to 
improve the genetic makeup and availability.    More funds have been proposed in Phase-
II of NPCBB to take up syste matic bul l production programm e, which will further 
contribute towards efforts to increase th e population of im proved genetic breeds. The  
Expenditure Finance Comm ittee (EFC ) has in its m eeting held on 19.05.2006 
recommended continuation of the project dur ing the curren t financial y ear. The CCEA 
note with a total project cost of Rs 779.87 cr ore has been circulat ed to the appraisal 
agencies. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.9 The Committee are surprised  at the lackadaisical  approach of the 
Department tow ards this ve ry important scheme o f the Dairyin g Sector.   The 
Committee note w ith serious co ncern th at Phase I of the Sch eme w hich w as 
launched in October, 2000, is yet to be fu lly implemented.  For Phase II of the 
National Project for Cattle and Buffalo  Breeding (NPCBB), the CCEA note has 
been circulated to the Appraisal Agencies.  However, it is not clea r from the reply 
whether the scheme has been approved and th e funds placed at the disposal of the 
implementing agencies.  The Com mittee desire that the Departmen t should initiate 
immediate steps for full impleme ntation of  Phase I of the Project and expeditiou s 
 11

approval of Phase II of the Project so that adequate funds are made available for 
the scheme for the benefit of the cattle and buffalo breeders. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme (FMD-CP) 
1.10 The Foot and Mouth Disease Control Pr ogramme was e arlier a component of 
‘Assistance to States for Control of Livestoc k Disease’.  It is now a new com ponent of 
the Centrally sponsored m acro-management schem e with 100% funding including the  
cost of vaccine and supporting expenses.  The State Governm ent provides m anpower, 
infrastructure and logistical suppo rt.  Th e Comm ittee has noted that th e programme is 
being implemented selectively and covered only in 54 districts throughout the country of 
which cattle/buffalo population are susceptible and easily affected. 
 The Committee are surprised to note that  the schemes has not covered almost the 
entire eastern parts of the country in cluding all the North Eastern States.  The Committee 
was informed that ano ther sch eme called “Ass istance to  States  for Control of Anim al 
Disease (ASCAD)” has been taken up in districts which are not covered under FMD –CP.  
The Committee note the importance of FMD-CP as its objective is to protect the cattle by 
vaccination against Foot and Mouth Disease.  The Committee would like  to be apprise d 
of all the States /Districts, excluding the 54 id entified districts, that are free of Foot and 
Mouth Disease or the reasons therein for not including the sam e under FMD-CP.  The 
Committee would also like the Department to apprise the measures being initiated for the 
identification of such susceptible areas. 
 The Committee have also been  infor med that rinderp est disease h as been 
eliminated but it would take about 10 to 15 years to overcom e the Foot and Mouth 
 12

Disease, as it requires regular vaccination for five years, to make an animal free from this 
disease. The Departm ent inform ed that th e population of cattle being large, it wa s 
becoming difficult to produce the v accination on such a large scale.  T he Committee are 
of the opinion that in case of shortage the private sector can be encouraged to produce 
this vaccine on a mass-scale and the vaccine can be made available in abundance and it is 
not difficult as the hum an population is so larg e and no person is allowed to die for want 
of a medicine or a vaccine. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should come out with 
a definite and clear cut plan so that FMD could be elim inated from the country at the  
earliest. Since 10-15 years are too long a period. W e should plan m ass scale production 
of vaccine and also regu lar vaccination of the anim als, first in the areas affected by this  
disease and later on in other areas where th ere are chances of its spread.  A publ icity 
campaign should be launched to m ake the farm ers aware of the vacc ination for saving 
their animals from Foot and Mouth Disease.   The State Governm ents through the village  
panchayats should be involved in  this inform ation campaign against this disease as also 
the local print and electronic media. 
Reply of the Government 
1.11 The Government in their Action Taken repl y have stated that there are at present 
only three vaccine manufacturers in the coun try, one in public secto r (Indian Veterinary 
Research I nstitute, Ba ngalore) an d two in  corpora te o r priv ate s ectors (Ind ian 
Immunologicals, Hyderabad and Intervet India,  Pune). Keeping in view the requirement 
of FMD va ccine in the country, these m anufacturers are upgrading/expanding their 
facilities to enhance the production. Moreover,  two more manufacturers are also in the 
process of developing facilities for the production of vaccine.  
 13

In order to explore the possibility of expansion of the programme to other areas, it 
has been identified as one of the terms of reference for the Sub - Group on Animal Health 
Services of the W orking Group on An imal Husbandry and Dairying for 11 th Five Year 
Plan. Publicity cam paign invol ving village P anchayats is  part of the FMD control 
programme to m ake the farm ers aware of th e vaccination for sav ing their animals from 
Foot and Mouth Disease.  The State Governm ents have already started  inform ation 
campaign against this disease by publishing  pam phlets/booklets in local/vernacular 
language and by organising public meetings at state, district, block and village levels.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.12  The Department in th eir rep ly h ave in formed that there is a shortage of 
vaccines fo r the Foo t and Mouth Diseas e due to w hich all animals cannot be  
regularly vaccinated.  The Depa rtment is silent about  the measures init iated by 
them for identificatio n of the susceptibl e areas which are prone to the Foot and 
Mouth disease.  The Committee reiterate their recommendation that the 
Department should launch production of va ccines on a w ar footing so that all the  
animals in the country could be vaccinated an d there is no loss of animal life due to 
Foot and Mouth disease and the disease could be eliminated in the near future. 
Recommendation No. 4 
Livestock Insurance 
 
1.13 It has tim e and again  been reco mmended by the Comm ittee tha t live stock  
insurance should be introduced  imm ediately so that the farmers can freely breed the 
milch cattles without fear of their losses due  to disease o r death.  The Comm ittee have 
been informed that livestock insu rance ha s been approved and the funds have been 
 14

released. However, the f irst policies are yet to  be issued.  The Governm ent have decided 
that the in surance scheme will at firs t run onl y in 100 selected districts where there is a 
substantial population of highly productive cattle.  
The Commi ttee, recomm end that the lives tock insurance schem e should not be 
further delayed and also should not be confin ed to 100 districts only, rather it should 
cover the whole of the country in p hases within a period of two years.  The Committee 
feel that the schem e should not be confine to two anim als per beneficiary, and should be 
extended to cover 4-5 anim als per household in due course. The prem ium of 50% is too 
high for a poor farm er to pay. It should be in the ratio of 75:25 for governm ent and the 
farmers respectively.  
The Committee also recomm end that the period of insurance coverage should be 
at lease five years (and not three years as at present) as the milch animals give milk for at 
least 8-10 years. 
Reply of the Government 
1.14 The Governm ent in their Action T aken Re ply have stated that the Livestock 
Insurance Scheme has been approved for i mplementation on pilot basis in 100 districts 
during 2005-06 and 2006-07.  Soon after approval of the Sc heme by the Governm ent of 
India in February, 2006, an a mount of Rs.2421.14 lakh was released in March, 2006 for  
its implementation.  An additional amount of Rs.24.00 crore has al ready been approved  
for release. 
 On the bas is of the rev iew of the pe rformance of the Schem e during the pilot 
stage, the sc heme will be extended  during 11 th Five Year P lan.  The im plementation of 
the Scheme in the pilot stage will h elp in standardizing the norms of insurance premi um 
rates, selection of Insurance Com panies, and bringing further improvement in the system 
 15

based on experience.  T he Livestock Insurance Scheme is expected to grow big in short  
time.  Various recomm endations of the Hon’ble Comm ittee viz., i mplementing the 
scheme in the entire country, covering 4-5 animals per household, increasing subsidy on 
premium to the tune of 75%, increasing the period of insura nce coverage, etc. will be 
kept in view at the time of extending the scheme in the 11th Plan. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.15 The Committee note that the  Livest ock Insurance Scheme is being 
implemented on a pilot basis in 100 dist ricts since 2005-06.  The Committee w ould 
like to know the results of the implementation of the Pilot Scheme. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Conservation of Threatened Livestock Breeds 
 
1.16 The Committee have been inform ed that during the Tenth Plan  the `conservation 
of Threatened Livestock Breeds’ of sm all ruminants, pack anim als, pigs and equine was 
introduced as a Centrally Sponsored Schem e which aims at conservating and protecting 
threatened or near extinct breeds of lives tock, whose population is less than 10,000.  
Several species of goats, sheeps, yaks etc. are threatened breeds.  But the Comm ittee are 
dismayed to note that even after 4 year s of the schem e being in operation, the 
Government has not been able to make an authentic data-base of the threatened livestock 
breed and is satisfied by being a signatory to  the UN, FAO sponsored `State of the World 
Animal Genetic Resou rces’ programme.  As th e UN will also take the help of  the local 
governments, NGOs, experts groups etc. for th is purpose, the Govern ment of India can 
also take th eir he lp a longwith the `Nationa l Bureau of  Anim al Genetic Resou rces’ a  
 16

research center of ICAR and State Governments to survey the threatened breeds in a time 
bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
1.17 The Government in their Action Taken Re ply have stated that  the cataloguing of 
all threatened breeds of  livestock in a Country of continental si ze is a m ammoth task.  
The Department has sourced inform ation about the threatened breed s of livestock from  
the National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources (NBAGR), Karnal, the species specific 
institutions/research cen ter of the ICAR, a nd State Governm ents.  Preparation of an 
exhaustive list of threatened breeds woul d involve extensive breed survey, which not 
only will go beyond the scope of the scheme but will overlap with other programmes. 
 It is proposed to approach the ICAR  for conducting a breed survey through the 
NBAGR wi th a view to com piling a foolproof  identification of threatened breeds  and  
their status. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.18 The Committee note w ith concern that even after four years of th e scheme 
being in operation, the Department has not been able to prepare a n authentic data  
base of the threatened livestock breed.  Th e last livestock census held in 2003 also 
did not yield the required results.   The Committee reiterate their recommendation 
that the D epartment should see k the  help of the State Governments and  the 
National Bureau of Animal Genetic Reso urces (NBAGR) for preparing a database 
of the threatened breeds.  The data so compiled could be further refined on the basis 
of results of the next livestock census to be held in 2008. 
 17

 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
Bird Flu  
1.19 The Comm ittee have noted with great c oncern that Avian Influenza (popularly 
know as `Bird Flu’) has come to India, though till now in a localized way.  The poultry is 
a m ajor source of incom e for the landle ss labourers and sm all farm ers whose sole 
livelihood depends on poultry.  Lakhs of birds have been  culled out in Nawapore and 
Jalgaon areas of Maharashtra.  The Comm ittee feel that it is the lack of strin gent 
measures for im port of poultry products  and non-compliance on surveillance and 
sampling of m igratory birds that  le d to th e spr ead of  bird flu which resulted in a very 
damaging e ffect on the entire poultry indu stry in the country causing trem endous 
sufferings and losses to the poultry producers. 
 The Comm ittee recomm end that string ent m easures should be taken towards 
formulating processes and policies for the im port of poultry and its products. The poultry 
Venture Capital Scheme should be started in a large scale, instead of a sm all scale as at 
present, to cover large poultry farmers as well as poor backyard poultry producers in rural 
areas. 
Reply of the Government 
1.20 The Governm ent in the ir Action Taken Reply have stated that the import of 
poultry and poultry products are regulated through Livestock and Livestock Products 
Importation Act, 1898 (9 of 1898) as am ended in 2001 (No.28 of 2001).  The im port is 
allowed on the basis of the sanitary im port perm it issued by the Dep artment and  the  
consignment is checked at the port of entry by the Quarantine Officers.    Under 
 18

Dairy/Poultry Venture Capital Fund,  a total of 49 poultry units involving a financing of 
Rs. 2.17 crore have already been approved in 2005-06. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.21 The Committee note that despite the existence of the Livestock and Livestock 
Products Importation Act, 1898 (as ame nded in 2001), bird fl u could enter India 
which led to heavy loss of poultry and con sequent financial loss to the poultry 
owners.  Had the concerned authorities be  vigilan t enough, the tremendous loss 
could have been prevented.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation that stringent measures should be t aken for s urveillance of  
migratory birds / imp ort of poultry birds and early det ection and treatment o f the 
infected birds so that this deadly disease does not enter India again. 
Recommendation No. 7 
Dairying 
1.22 The Committee have noted that t hough dairying sector not only provides 
employment and income generating opportuni ties but has also becom e an i mportant 
secondary s ource of incom e for m illions of ru ral fam ilies, yet the total outlay for this  
sector for the whole of 10th Plan was Rs. 361 crore out of which only Rs. 175 crore could 
be utilized during first four years of th is Plan, which shows poor planning and low 
priority given to dairy industry.  Th e Committee depricate this kind of approach of the 
Government.  Even a single m anufacturing industry in other sector is given loan m ore 
than this 10th Plan outlay for dairy sector.  The Committee failed to und erstand how the 
Assistance to Co-operatives, Intensive Dair y Development Programme, Strengthening of 
Infrastructure for Quality and Clean Milk  Production, Dairy/Poul try Venture Capital  
Funds etc. could be run by this amount and still 52% of the total plan outlay rem ain 
 19

undisbursed even after a lapse of four years of 10 th Plan.  Funds allotted for `Assistance 
to Co-operatives’ was Rs. 130 crore and even  out of this only Rs. 34.65 crore i.e. 27% 
could be disbursed during the first four years of  10th Plan period, which shows the poor  
state of priority given to this sector.  It shows poor planning and low priority towards this 
sector on the part of the governm ent whic h needs to be addressed seriously.  The 
Committee strongly recomm end that  the dairy sector should be developed in a holistic 
manner enhancing in outlay and giving priority  to the dairy developm ent schemes in a  
planned and given tim e frame, so that our farmers could also produce quality m ilk and 
other milk products comparable to Western co untries and get remunerative price for their 
products.  Governm ent should strengthen th e Intensive dairy developm ent programme  
and give more assistance to cooperatives to bring about white revolution in our country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
1.23 The Government in their action taken reply have stated  as under : 
 Intensive Dairy Development Pr ogramme (IDDP): With the releas e of funds 
directly to the im plementing agen cies in the States and  coverage of more area for 
assistance under the scheme (districts with nil and investm ent less than 50 lakh during 
Operation Flood are now eligible f or assistance under the schem e). In the revised IDDP 
scheme, the utilization of funds has improve d significantly.  During the year 2005-06, an 
amount of Rs.39.91 crore was utilized against BE provision of Rs .50.00 crore and RE of 
Rs 42.70 crore. 
Assistance to Cooperatives:  The 10 th Plan o utlay for th e Schem e “Assistan ce to  
Cooperatives” is Rs.130.00 crore. The Departme nt could utilize Rs.34.65 crore i.e. 27% 
during first four years of the 10 th Plan.  The schem e is purely dem and driven and, on an 
 20

average, an am ount of Rs.5-6 crore is actual ly required annually to m eet the comm itted 
liabilities of some of the proposals already approved and new proposals. 
 The Departm ent entrusted the ev aluation study of the schem e to the National 
Institute of Agricultural Extension m anagement (MANAGE), Hyderabad an autonomous 
organisation under the Departm ent of Agri culture & Cooperation.  The MANAGE has  
stressed the need to review the shar ing m echanism between  Central and  State 
Government from 50:50 basis to 90:10 or at  least 75:25 for m ore effective (pro -active) 
participation of the State Governments.  The Department  is also of the opinion that if the 
present sh aring m echanism between Centre and  State is ch anged from 50:50 basis to 
90:10 or at least 75:25 , it will lead to bette r utilisation of funds  under the Schem e 
“Assistance to Cooperatives”, as the State G overnments are not in position to provide 
their 50% matching share in time. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.24 The Committe e note w ith concern that under the scheme ‘Assistance to  
Cooperatives’,  the Department could util ize only Rs. 34.65 crore (i.e. 27% ) of the 
total 10th Plan outlay of Rs. 130 crore, durin g the first four years of the 10 th Plan.  
The Committee also note  that under the revised IDDP scheme also, the Department 
could not utiliz e the full a mount allocat ed.   The Co mmittee de sire  that  the  
Implementing Agencies in the Sta tes should be impress ed upon to fully ut ilize the 
assistance available u nder the I DDP for proper and holistic dev elopment o f the 
dairy sector.       
 
 
 
 21

Recommendation No. 10 
Welfare of Fishermen 
1.25 The Committee note that the National Schem e for W elfare of Fisherm an which 
consists of three com ponents, viz.  developm ent of m odel fisherm en villag es, g roup 
accident insurance and saving-cum -relief for active fisherm an, has been im plemented in 
various States/Union Territories.  The Department, on a query with regard to the numbers 
of fisherman villages that have been developed during the past three years in the Tsunami 
affected areas and also if the targets set were met, has not given clear and specific replies 
but in a general response has cited that “the package approved for Tsunami Rehabilitation 
Programmes covers housing, fisheries, ports and jetties, roads and bridges, social 
infrastructure, environ mental and coasta l protection m easures.  T he Rehabilitation 
Programme has provision of Rs. 3096.88 crore for construction of houses in the Tsunami-
affected areas, which will cover fishermen as well.” 
 It has been  m ore than a year sin ce the devastating Tsunam i waves caused 
unimaginable havoc and losses to the people.  The Committee in their R eport on DFG of 
the Department (2005-06) had recommended that the approved package for rehabilitation 
of fishermen affected by Tsuna mi, should be  implemented scrupulously and speedily to 
provide the much needed succour to  the affected fishermen. However, the Committee are 
disheartened to note that in m any i nstances the rehabilitation packages  m eant for th e 
affected people are yet to be taken up in  full swing which gives an unm istakable 
impression that these rehabilitation programmes are not being accorded the required and 
focused attention by the Departm ent. The Co mmittee, th erefore, recomm end that the 
Department should implem ent the rehabilita tion packages on war footings to provide 
much needed succour to  the affected people.  The Committee desire to be apprised o f all 
 22

the developmental and rehabilitation progra mmes including long-term  plans and results 
thereof  that have already been completed 
Reply of the Government 
1.26 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that the Department deals 
with cases o f fishermen affected by Tsunam i and the financial assistance to be given to 
them under Tsunam i Rehabilitation Programm e.  About 80% of the boats fully or 
partially dam aged have  been repaired/replaced  in the Tsunam i affected States of the 
country.  There is a provision for up gradation of fisheries infrastructure which includes i) 
Rehabilitation of the dam aged fishing harbour s/fish landing centres  ii)Construction of 
twenty new fish landin g centres an d iii)Conducting techno-economic feasibility studies 
through  reputed agencies for setting up of mode rn fishing harbours.  In Kerala, two fish 
landing centres have already been restored into functional position and such works for  
other four harbours are at a dvanced stage of co nstruction.  The construction of two new 
fishing harbours in Kerala, one at Art hungal and another at Chellanam , are under 
consideration and necessary activities are ta king place.  Governm ent of Andhra Pradesh 
has proposed to construct three fish landi ng centres, one at Antarvedit, another at  
Vodalarevu and the third one at Lakshipuram Pallipalem.  The necessary activities in this 
regard are at advanced stage.  In T amilnadu, repair and renovation of all the affected 
fishing harbours/landing centes are at various stages of completion and it is expected that 
it will be done shortly.  Governm ent of Tamilnadu has also identified sites  for 
construction of 10 new fish landing centres.  In Pondicherry also, repair and renovation of 
fishing harbour/landing centres are at various s tages of co mpletion and the Governm ent 
has also decided to construct a new fish landing centre at Yanam. 
 
 23

Comments of the Committee 
1.27 The Committee are concerned to learn that a number of fish ing 
harbours/fish landing centers in Kera la, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and 
Puducherry are still at various stages of repair/renovation despite lapse of a period 
of more than tw o years since the Tsunami , affecting the livelihood of the poor 
fishermen.  The Committee des ire that the rehabilitation progra mmes for the 
fishermen affected by Tsunami should be taken up on a w ar footing and all fishing 
harbours/fish landing centers should be repaired and new ones constructed urgently 
and the Committee be apprised of the progress in the matter. 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Development of Animal Husband ry, Dairyi ng and Fish eries in the North Eas tern 
States 
 
1.28 The Committee have been informed that the Department is earmarking 10% of its 
Plan allocation to the North Eastern States  and is im plementing a num ber of Plan 
schemes in the North Eastern and Sikkim  to assist the respective State Governm ents for 
development of Ani mal Husbandry Dairying an d Fisheries sector.  The Departm ent has 
also informed that as most of the Cent ral Sector Schem es and Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes relating to Marine and Coastal Fisheries are not implementable in North Eastern 
Region, it has not always been possible to fully utilize the 10 % allocation.   
 In order to develop inland fisheries and aquaculture ac ross the country including 
North Eastern States, m acro schem e na med `Developm ent of Inlan d Fisheries  and 
Aquaculture’ has been launched in the Tenth Plan. The scheme includes development of 
fresh water  aquacultu re, cold water f isheries and aquacultu re in  hilly regions, 
 24

waterlogged areas into aquacu lture estates, construction of new and renovation of ol d 
ponds and tanks, running water fish culture, fish feed mills, etc. The Committee have also 
been apprised that the Centrally sponsor ed schem es on `welfare of fisherm en’, 
`marketing and strengthening of database a nd infrastructure’, Networking for fisheries 
sector are also in operation in the North Eastern States. 
 The Committee  ar e su rprised to  f ind tha t th e schem e “Assistan ce to States  for 
Piggery Development” is yet to get approva l though four years of the Tenth Plan have 
already expired. The schem e is expected to be approved duri ng 2006-07 which m eans 
that it can be im plemented only during th e next Five Y ear Plan, w hich shows the 
lackadaisical attitude of  the Govern ment towards this schem e.  The Committee stro ngly 
recommend that all the schem es includi ng the ‘Piggery Developm ent’, should be  
formulated, approved and i mplemented in a given time frame and should not be allowed 
to linger on for a long tim e. Piggery develo pment especially has a big role in the 
economic upliftment of the people in the North Eastern States. 
Reply of the Government 
1.29 The scheme on Assistance to States for Piggery Development was discontinued 
after Ninth Plan as a consequence of an ex ercise undertaken in the Planning Commission 
to weed out ineffective Centrally Sponsored Schemes. Attempts to revive the Schem e 
could not s ucceed because of insistence on th e part of Planning Commission for an  
evaluation of the Ninth Plan Schem e. Evaluation of the Schem e by NABARD was 
completed by third quarter of 2004-05. Thereafte r fresh attempts to revive the Schem e 
could not succeed because Planning Commission advised during last qu arter of 2004-05, 
merger of a number of small schemes into a National Project for Improvement of Poultry 
and Sm all Ani mals, which was to subsum e t he schem e on piggery developm ent as a 
 25

component of the new  project to be im plemented in m acro-management m ode. The 
National Project for Poultry and S mall Animals was for mulated which had a com ponent 
on piggery development and the scheme was circulated to appraisal agencies during third 
quarter of 2005-06. However, a meeting of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) to 
consider the proposal could not be organi zed because Planning Comm ission has not yet 
appraised the proposal. The m atter is being pursued with Planning Commission with the 
hope of getting the scheme initiated during 2006-07.  
Comments of the Committee 
1.30 The Committee  note  that the scheme  “A ssistance to States for Piggery 
Development” was discontinued after the Ninth Plan and subsumed as a component 
of the new scheme “National Project for improvement of Poultry and Small 
Animals”.  The new scheme was circulated to the Appraisal Agency during the third 
quarter of 2005-06.  How ever, the Planning  Commission has yet to appraise the 
proposal.  The Committee note w ith con cern that a fter discon tinuation of the 
scheme on Piggery Development after the Ni nth Plan, no assistance has been made 
available to the people of North -Eastern States and Sikkim for development of 
piggery affecting their livelihood.  It is cl ear that the Dep artment has not been able 
to convince the Planning Commission about the utility and usefulness of the scheme 
which is so important for the people of the North-East.  The Committee recommend 
that the D epartment should pursue th e matter w ith the Planning Commission 
immediately, convince them about the util ity and usefulness of the scheme and  get 
their approval urgently for the benefit of  the people o f the North-Eastern Region, 
and other areas also. 
 26

CHAPTER –II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE  GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Milk Productivity 
2.1 The Committee have been told that Indi a has the highest ca ttle population in the 
world.  About 16% of the cattle and 57% of the buffaloes of the total world population 
are in India.  However, while the world av erage of m ilk production is about 2050 litres 
per lactatio n, ours is still around a thousand litre.  In Is rael it is 9000 litres.  The  
Committee are of the considered v iew that we  need to m ake determined and concerted 
efforts towards the genetic upgrad ation and dise ase contro l of the cattle as also fodder 
development, to im prove the m ilk productiv ity of the m ilch anim als.  The National 
Programme for the Cattle and Buffalo Breedin g of which the phase-I is in operation, 
whereas the phase-II is still at form ation stage, should be vigourously im plemented. 
Immediate steps should be taken to im prove upon our own indigenous breeds, such as 
Murra-buffalo for which there is a big dem and from some foreign countries. This breed 
can be exported, if breeded in large numbers, thereby earning valuable foreign exchange. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 Efforts are being m ade through Centrally  Sponsored m acro management scheme 
‘Livestock Health & Disease Control’ for controlling the diseases of the cattle.  
 As regards Fodder developm ent, the Department is im plementing two fodder  
development schemes. 
1. Central Sector Scheme : There are Seven Regional Stations for Forage 
Production & Dem onstration located in different agro-clim atic zones of the country and 
one Central Fodder Seed Production Farm , Hessarghatta, for production and propagation 
 27

of certified seeds of high yielding varietie s of fodder crops and pastures/legum es.  
Besides, there is one Central Minikit Te sting Programme on Fodder crops under which 
high yielding varieties of fodder crops ar e provided to the Department of Ani mal 
Husbandry in the States for free distribution to  the farmers.  This increases overall fodder 
production in the country. 
2. Centrally Sponsored Fodder Development Scheme :  The acute shortage of 
nutritious green/dry fodder is  a m ajor constraint in th e livestock production.  For  
augmentation of fodder production, a new Ce ntrally Sponsored Fodder Developm ent 
Scheme is being im plemented by the Depa rtment from  2005-06 w ith the following 
components. 
    
S.No. 
Component Funding Pattern 
1. Assistance to Fodder Block Making 
Units. 
25:75 
Central:State/implementing 
agency share basis. 
2. Grassland Dev. Including grass reserves 100 Central share basis 
3. Fodder Seed Distribution 75:25 
Central:State/implementing 
agency share basis. 
4. Biotechnology research projects. 100% Central share basis. 
 
 The main objectives of the scheme are (i) Establishment of Fodder Block Making 
Units, which will u tilize the crop residues for commercial pr oduction of balanced  feed 
fodder blocks for easy transportation, storag e and supply of requisite nutrients for 
increasing productivity of cows and buffaloes in fodder scarci ty areas, (ii) creation of 
grass reserves in common property resources for growing perennial grasses for regular 
supply of greens to the cows and buffaloes, (iii) enhancement of production of fodder 
seeds of high yielding varieties of  croppe d fodder/grasses and (iv) taking up specific 
 28

research programmes using biotechnology for increasing nutritive value of fodder and its 
better utilization. 
 In order to develop buf falo populati on, Murrah bull production programme is 
proposed to be taken up during Phase-II of  the National Project for Cattle and Buffalo 
Breeding (NPCBB) at a total cost of Rs 128.28 crores. For developing indigenous cattle 
breeds, an extensive cattle bull production programme has also been proposed in Phase-II 
involving a total cost of Rs 84.00 crores. 
Recommendation No. 9 
DMS 
2.3 The Committee are happy to note that Delhi Milk Scheme which was o nce a loss 
making entity of  Government of India, has im proved a lot and the p resent sale of milk 
has reach ed 2.75 lakh litres per day and the lo sses which were Rs. 20.70 crore du ring 
2003-04 have com e down to about Rs. 1.93 cr ore during 2005-06.  The Departm ent has 
informed that the DM S is likely  to ge t an  ISO and HACCP Certif icate f or its 
procurement, manufacturing, storage and marketing facilities shortly. 
The DMS was earlier to be tran sferred to the Delhi Governm ent. However, the  
Govt. of NCT, Delhi was not in favour of  taking over DMS unless the Govt. of India 
accepts all the liabilities of DMS and grant adequate funds for modernization of the plant 
machinery.  
The Committee recomm end that if the assistance to dairy cooperatives is 
increased and intensive dairy developm ent scheme is vigorously promoted in and around 
Delhi, then DMS could be run profitably a nd the Delhi Governm ent or Mother Dairy 
would not feel reluctant to take over it s activity. The successful running of the DMS 
 29

would be a boon both to the m ilk producers in and around Delhi as also to the consum ers 
who can get quality milk at fair prices.  
Reply of the Government 
2.4 Delhi Milk Scheme has been recently aw arded the ISO Certificate from  M/s SGS 
United Kingdom  Li mited (System and Servi ces Certification) for raw m aterial 
procurement, processing, packing, storage a nd distribution of m ilk and m ilk products. 
The HACCP certificate has been o btained fro m M/s HACCP Codex Alim entations for  
systematic working in manufacture and marketing of quality product. 
 The sale of DMS m ilk is increasing regularly during 2006-07 and was 2.67 lakhs 
litres per day (LLPD) during June, 2006 as against 2.52 LLPD during June, 2005. 
 Lot of financial assistance is being give n to the States around Delhi under various 
schemes for  Dairy Developm ent including ‘Intensive Dairy Developm ent Programme  
(IDDP)’. Continuous efforts are being m ade to improve the operationa l efficiency of the 
plant and increasing the sale of milk and milk products by DMS. 
Recommendation No. 11 
National Fisheries Development Board 
2.5 The Fisheries sector is a powerful em ployment generator and cheap source of  
nutrious food and also a foreign exchange s ource. However, the Comm ittee have noted 
that in this sector there is a huge underu tilization of funds and out of Rs. 740 crore 
sanctioned for the Tenth Plan only Rs. 429.43 crore, i.e. 58%, have been utilized during 
the first four years of the Tenth Plan  period which shows poor planning and 
implementation of  the schem es in this sec tor.  The m ain challenges facing fishery 
development are developm ent of sustainable t echnologies for fin and shell fish culture, 
yield optimization, infrastructure for harves t and post harvest operations and landing and 
 30

berthing facilities for fishing vessels. The fisheries s ector, in partic ular the inland 
fisheries, has tremendous potential which needs to be tapped on priority basis. 
The Comm ittee d esire that s ince th e approval of Planning Comm ission and 
Expenditure Finance Comm ittee have alre ady been accorded,  National Fisherie s 
Development Board should be set up without any further delay so that all activities 
relating to fisheries and acquaculture could be co-ordinated in a professional and focused 
way and the potential fo r increasing the fish production and its m arketing could be fully 
tapped leading to generation of more employment opportunities. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The National Fisheries Developm ent Board has been set up with the approval of  
Cabinet in its m eeting held on 16 th June, 2006 and was regist ered under Andhra Pradesh 
Societies Registration Act, 2001 on 10th July, 2006. 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Women in Animal Husbandry and Fisheries Sector 
2.7 The Comm ittee hav e noted with g reat concern that the Departm ent does not 
prescribe separate targets for women benefi ciaries i n animal  hus bandry and fisheries 
sector, though woman work in large numbers in this sector.  Various schemes concerning 
fisheries, implem ented by the Departm ent ar e beneficial to the wom en directly or 
indirectly but no separate allocation is made for them nor any targets are fixed for women 
beneficiaries in the field of training. 
 The Committee strongly recommend that women should be given special training 
in handling the anim al husbandry and fisheries work, especially in selling the m ilk and 
milk products and fisheries in the market near  their places of residence so that th ey can 
contribute towards the household incom e alongwith the other m embers of their fam ily.  
 31

Women should be encouraged for form ing Self Help Groups and they should be trained 
for marketing of dairying and fishing products. 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The Department of Anim al Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries does not have any 
specific schem e designated as one for empowerment of wom en. As the schem es 
implemented by this Departm ent are not gender specific, it h as not been feasible for the 
Department to m ake separate allocation of funds for Wom en. However, the Departm ent 
has always em phasized for providing benefits to weaker sections of th e society. In  the 
poultry sector, especially in the schem e fo r prom otion of rural poultry, it has been 
emphasized that as rural poultry is an incom e supplem enting schem e and mostly 
implemented by wom en, hence emphasis, especi ally in training should be given to 
women. However, there is no se gregation in the scheme for women as such. Similarly, in 
the schem e for conservation of breeds, the conservation of sheep, goat and sm all 
ruminants are especially directed towards s ectors in which women are being identified to 
take up such schemes. 
 
 The women have been at the forefront of dairy cooperative movement, which was 
initially spear-headed through Operation Fl ood Program me and later also under the 
Integrated Dairy Development Programme implemented by the Government. Taking note 
of wom en participation in dairy move ment, the National Dairy Developm ent Board 
(NDDB) is im plementing a W oman Dairy Co operative Leadership Programm e in 50 
district unions across the count ry. This has resulted in incr easing the part icipation of 
women dairy farm ers in Dairy Cooperative s. The Departm ent of Wom en & Child 
Development, Ministry of Hum an Resources Development is implementing “Support for 
 32

Training & Em ployment Programme (STEP)” under which they also consider W omen 
Dairy Projects (WDP) received from various States. 
 A centrally sponsored schem e on fisheries training and extension is im plemented 
by the Departm ent under which fishers irresp ective of male or fem ale are im parted 
training for their skill u p gradation.  In add ition, Integrated Fisheries Project, an Institute 
under the administrative control of this Department, imparts training to persons including 
women on processing of fish products. 
   
 33

CHAPTER III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 34

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme (FMD-CP) 
4.1 The Foot and Mouth Disease Control Pr ogramme was e arlier a component of 
‘Assistance to States for Control of Livestoc k Disease’.  It is now a new com ponent of 
the Centrally sponsored m acro-management schem e with 100% funding including the  
cost of vaccine and supporting expenses.  The State Governm ent provides m anpower, 
infrastructure and logistical suppo rt.  Th e Comm ittee has noted that th e programme is 
being implemented selectively and covered only in 54 districts throughout the country of 
which cattle/buffalo population are susceptible and easily affected. 
 The Committee are surprised to note that  the schemes has not covered almost the 
entire eastern parts of the country in cluding all the North Eastern States.  The Committee 
was informed that ano ther sch eme called “Ass istance to States for Control of Anim al 
Disease (ASCAD)” has been taken up in districts which are not covered under FMD –CP.  
The Committee note the importance of FMD-CP as its objective is to protect the cattle by 
vaccination against Foot and Mouth Disease.  The Committee would like  to be apprise d 
of all the States /Districts, excluding the 54 id entified districts, that are free of Foot and 
Mouth Disease or the reasons therein for not including the sam e under FMD-CP.  The 
Committee would also like the Department to apprise the measures being initiated for the 
identification of such susceptible areas. 
 The Committee have also been  infor med that rinderp est disease h as been 
eliminated but it would take about 10 to 15 years to overcom e the Foot and Mouth 
 35

Disease, as it requires regular vaccination for five years, to make an animal free from this 
disease. The Departm ent inform ed that th e population of cattle being large, it wa s 
becoming difficult to produce the v accination on such a large scale.  T he Committee are 
of the opinion that in case of shortage the private sector can be encouraged to produce 
this vaccine on a mass-scale and the vaccine can be made available in abundance and it is 
not difficult as the hum an population is so larg e and no person is allowed to die for want 
of a medicine or a vaccine. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should come out with 
a definite and clear cut plan so that FMD could be elim inated from the country at the  
earliest. Since 10-15 years are too long a period. W e should plan m ass scale production 
of vaccine and also regu lar vaccination of the anim als, first in the areas affected by this  
disease and later on in other areas where th ere are chances of its spread.  A publ icity 
campaign should be launched to m ake the farm ers aware of the vacc ination for saving 
their animals from Foot and Mouth Disease.   The State Governm ents through the village  
panchayats should be involved in  this inform ation campaign against this disease as also 
the local print and electronic media. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 There are at present only three vaccine manufacturers in the country, one in public 
sector (Indian Veterinary Research I nstitute, Bangalore) and two in corporate or pr ivate 
sectors (Indian Imm unologicals, Hyderabad and Intervet India, Pune ). Keeping in view 
the requ irement of FMD vaccine in th e country,  these m anufacturers are 
upgrading/expanding their facilities to en hance the production. Moreover, two m ore 
manufacturers are also in th e process of developing facil ities for the production of 
vaccine.  
 36

In order to explore the possibility of expansion of the programme to other areas, it 
has been identified as one of the terms of reference for the Sub - Group on Animal Health 
Services of the W orking Group on An imal Husbandry and Dairying for 11 th Five Year 
Plan. Publicity cam paign invol ving village P anchayats is  part of the FMD control 
programme to m ake the farm ers aware of th e vaccination for sav ing their animals from 
Foot and Mouth Disease.  The State Governm ents have already started  inform ation 
campaign against this disease by publishing  pam phlets/booklets in local/vernacular 
language and by organising public meetings at state, district, block and village levels.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.3 For Comm ents of the Comm ittee Please re fer to Para 1.2  of Chapter-I of this  
Report. 
Recommendation No. 5 
Conservation of Threatened Livestock Breeds 
 
4.4 The Committee have been inform ed that during the Tenth Plan  the `conservation 
of Threatened Livestock Breeds’ of sm all ruminants, pack anim als, pigs and equine was 
introduced as a Centrally Sponsored Schem e which aims at conservating and protecting 
threatened or near extinct breeds of lives tock, whose population is less than 10,000.  
Several species of goats, sheeps, yaks etc. are threatened breeds.  But the Comm ittee are 
dismayed to note that even after 4 year s of the schem e being in operation, the 
Government has not been able to make an authentic data-base of the threatened livestock 
breed and is satisfied by being a signatory to  the UN, FAO sponsored `State of the World 
Animal Genetic Resou rces’ programme.  As th e UN will also take the help of  the local 
governments, NGOs, experts groups etc. for th is purpose, the Govern ment of India can 
 37

also take th eir he lp a longwith the `Nationa l Bureau of  Anim al Genetic Resou rces’ a  
research center of ICAR and State Governments to survey the threatened breeds in a time 
bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
4.5   The cataloguing of all th reatened breeds of livestock in a Country of continental 
size is a m ammoth task.  The Departm ent has sourced inform ation about the threatene d 
breeds of livestock from the National Bureau  of Ani mal Genetic Resources (NBAGR), 
Karnal, the species s pecific institutions/r esearch center of the ICAR, and State 
Governments.  Preparation of an exhaustiv e list of threatened breeds would involve 
extensive breed survey, which not only will  go beyond the scope of the scheme but will 
overlap with other programmes. 
 It is proposed to approach the ICAR  for conducting a breed survey through the 
NBAGR wi th a view to com piling a foolproof  identification of threatened breeds  and  
their status. 
Comments of the Committee 
4.6 For Comm ents of the Comm ittee Please refe r to Para 1.18 of Chapter-I of this 
Report. 
Recommendation No. 6 
Bird Flu  
4.7 The Comm ittee have noted with great c oncern that Avian Influenza (popularly 
know as `Bird Flu’) has come to India, though till now in a localized way.  The poultry is 
a m ajor source of incom e for the landle ss labourers and sm all farm ers whose sole 
livelihood depends on poultry.  Lakhs of birds have been  culled out in Nawapore and 
Jalgaon areas of Maharashtra.  The Comm ittee feel that it is the lack of strin gent 
 38

measures for im port of poultry products  and non-compliance on surveillance and 
sampling of m igratory birds that  le d to th e spr ead of  bird flu which resulted in a very 
damaging e ffect on the entire poultry indu stry in the country causing trem endous 
sufferings and losses to the poultry producers. 
 The Comm ittee recomm end that string ent m easures should be taken towards 
formulating processes and policies for the im port of poultry and its products. The poultry 
Venture Capital Scheme should be started in a large scale, instead of a sm all scale as at 
present, to cover large poultry farmers as well as poor backyard poultry producers in rural 
areas. 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 The import of poultry and poultry products  are regulated th rough Livestock and 
Livestock P roducts Im portation Act, 1898 (9  of 1898) as am ended in 2001 (No.28 of 
2001).  The im port is allowed on the basis of  the sanitary im port permit issued by the 
Department and the consignm ent is checked at the port of entry by the Quarantine 
Officers.   Under Dairy/Poultry Ventur e Capital Fund, a total of 49 poultry units 
involving a financing of Rs. 2.17 crore have already been approved in 2005-06. 
Comments of the Committee 
4.9 For Comm ents of the Comm ittee Please refe r to Para 1.21 of Chapter-I of this 
Report. 
Recommendation No. 12 
Development of Animal Husband ry, Dairyi ng and Fish eries in the North Eas tern 
States 
 
4.10 The Committee have been informed that the Department is earmarking 10% of its 
Plan allocation to the North Eastern States  and is im plementing a num ber of Plan 
 39

schemes in the North Eastern and Sikkim  to assist the respective State Governm ents for 
development of Ani mal Husbandry Dairying an d Fisheries sector.  The Departm ent has 
also informed that as most of the Cent ral Sector Schem es and Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes relating to Marine and Coastal Fisheries are not implementable in North Eastern 
Region, it has not always been possible to fully utilize the 10 % allocation.   
 In order to develop inland fisheries and aquaculture ac ross the country including 
North Eastern States, m acro schem e na med `Developm ent of Inlan d Fisheries  and 
Aquaculture’ has been launched in the Tenth Plan. The scheme includes development of 
fresh water  aquacultu re, cold water f isheries and aquacultu re in  hilly regions, 
waterlogged areas into aquacu lture estates, construction of new and renovation of ol d 
ponds and tanks, running water fish culture, fish feed mills, etc. The Committee have also 
been apprised that the Centrally sponsor ed schem es on `welfare of fisherm en’, 
`marketing and strengthening of database a nd infrastructure’, Networking for fisheries 
sector are also in operation in the North Eastern States. 
 The Committee  ar e su rprised to  f ind tha t th e schem e “Assistan ce to States  for 
Piggery Development” is yet to get approva l though four years of the Tenth Plan have 
already expired. The schem e is expected to be approved duri ng 2006-07 which m eans 
that it can be im plemented only during th e next Five Y ear Plan, w hich shows the 
lackadaisical attitude of  the Govern ment towards this schem e.  The Committee stro ngly 
recommend that all the schem es includi ng the ‘Piggery Developm ent’, should be  
formulated, approved and i mplemented in a given time frame and should not be allowed 
to linger on for a long tim e. Piggery develo pment especially has a big role in the 
economic upliftment of the people in the North Eastern States. 
 40

Reply of the Government 
4.11 The scheme on Assistance to States for Piggery Development was discontinued 
after Ninth Plan as a consequence of an ex ercise undertaken in the Planning Commission 
to weed out ineffective Centrally Sponsored Schemes. Attempts to revive the Schem e 
could not s ucceed because of insistence on th e part of Planning Commission for an  
evaluation of the Ninth Plan Schem e. Evaluation of the Schem e by NABARD was 
completed by third quarter of 2004-05. Thereafte r fresh attempts to revive the Schem e 
could not succeed because Planning Commission advised during last qu arter of 2004-05, 
merger of a number of small schemes into a National Project for Improvement of Poultry 
and Sm all Ani mals, which was to subsum e t he schem e on piggery developm ent as a 
component of the new  project to be im plemented in m acro-management m ode. The 
National Project for Poultry and S mall Animals was for mulated which had a com ponent 
on piggery development and the scheme was circulated to appraisal agencies during third 
quarter of 2005-06. However, a meeting of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) to 
consider the proposal could not be organi zed because Planning Comm ission has not yet 
appraised the proposal. The m atter is being pursued with Planning Commission with the 
hope of getting the scheme initiated during 2006-07.  
Comments of the Committee 
4.12 For Comm ents of the Comm ittee Please refe r to Para 1.32 of Chapter-I of this 
Report. 
 41

CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED. 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Tenth Plan allocation and expenditure fo r Department of Animal Husbandry,  
Dairying and Fisheries 
 
5.1 The Department have informed that the total expenditure during the Tenth Plan is 
expected to be around Rs. 2450.00 crore which is  almost 98% of the total allocation of 
Rs. 2,500 crore for the entire Tenth Plan pe riod. However, it is observed that the 
expenditure during the first four years of the T enth Plan com es to Rs. 1514.52 crore 
which constitutes barely 60.58% of the total outlay of Rs. 2, 500 crore with only one year 
to go.  The Departm ent in their reply had a ssured that with the implementation of new 
schemes such as Livesto ck Insurance, Nati onal Fisheries Developm ent Board which are 
expected to take off during 2006-07, the Depart ment would m ake all possible efforts to 
fully utilize the allocated funds and would try to get additiona l allocation in the course of 
the years, so as to reach the full Tenth Plan outlay of Rs. 2,500 crore. 
Having regard to the pace of expenditure  during the preceding four years, the 
Committee are surprised as to how  the Depa rtment would utilize such a huge unspent 
balance of about Rs. 985.50 crore d uring the las t year of the Tenth Plan.  The utilization 
of around Rs. 985 crore which is almost 40% of  the total allocation, during the fifth and 
final year as against the re ported expenditure of only Rs. 1514 crore during the first four  
years, appears to be a form idable task given the past perform ance of the Departm ent.  
The Committee feel that the Departm ent also made a poor perform ance by not utilizing 
the allo cated funds.  The Comm ittee would, ther efore, lik e to be apprised of the new 
measures/strategies specifically prop osed by th e Department to ensur e full and ef fective 
 42

utilization of allocations in th e final year of the Tenth Plan.   The Committee would also  
like the Dep artment to k eep a strict watc h over the pace of im plementation of schem es 
and expenditure incu rred thereon, s o as to fu lly utilize the allocated funds and also to  
enable completion of various schemes within the stipulated time schedule. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2  The departm ent is m aking concerted e fforts to f ully u tilize the Ten th Plan 
allocation.  Out of the total outlay of Rs.2500 crore for the Tent h Plan, about Rs.1671.00 
crore has been spent in the fi rst four years of the Tenth Pl an.  Due to various m easures 
taken by the Departm ent by way of close m onitoring of schem es, follow up of the State 
Governments through field visits by Officers, etc., the utilisation of  the Plan Allocation 
has improved considerably over the years.  During 2005-06, the Departm ent was able to 
utilize around Rs.594.00 crore, whic h is over 99% of the RE  for that year.    The current 
year’s outlay of Rs. 777.00 crore is also expect ed to be almost fully utilized.  W ith the 
implementation of new schem es/component schemes viz. Livestock Insurance, N ational 
Fisheries Developm ent Board and expected approval to the National Project for  
Improvement of Poultry and Sm all Animals, the pace of expenditure is likely to im prove 
further.   In fact, the Departm ent may require additional allocation of funds in the course 
of the year, so as to reach the full Tenth Plan Outlay of Rs.2500.00 crore.   
Comments of the Committee 
5.3 For Comm ents of the Comm ittee Please re fer to Para 1.6  of Chapter-I of this  
Report. 
 43

 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
National Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding 
 
5.4 The Comm ittee hav e been inform ed that  the National Pr oject f or Cattle an d 
Buffalo Breeding is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme and was  launched in Oct. 2000 for a  
period of 10 years, with an allocation of Rs. 402 crore for phase-I.  The scheme envisages 
genetic upgradation on priority basis and aim s at re-organisation and re-orientation of the 
Cattle and Buffalo Breeding Opera tion in th e country.  It h as been also noted that s ince 
May, 2000 States jo ined this scheme very late so Planning Comm ission has permitted to 
extend the P hase I by two years i.e. upto March, 2007. The Comm ittee are perturbed to 
note tha t out of  the 27 participa ting States /UTs, Phase-I will be prac tically com pleted 
only in 13 States/Uts by 2006-07.  
The Committee recommend that this  being a very i mportant scheme to help the  
farmers as well as th e States to breed the better kind of cattle and buffaloes, the Murra-
buffaloes and Shaliwal and Tharparkar and ot her such breed of cows of Punjab, Haryana 
and Rajasth an should be given special atten tion so that the num ber of cattles of these 
breeds could be increas ed on a m ass scale so th at the farm ers and dairy  owners can buy  
these cattles at a reason able price to augment their m ilk production and can be exported 
to other countries in case of demand. 
Reply of the Government 
5.5 The National Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding (NPCBB) focuses on 
development and conservation of indigenous br eeds. Funds have been  released to the 
 44

participating States to take up programmes for development of indigenous breeds in their 
breeding tracts so as to impr ove the genetic m akeup and availability.    More funds have 
been proposed in Phase-II of NPCBB to take  up system atic bull production programm e, 
which will further contribute towards effort s to increase the population of i mproved 
genetic breeds. The Expenditure Finance Co mmittee (EFC) has in its meeting he ld on 
19.05.2006 recomm ended continuation of the proj ect during the current financial year. 
The CCEA note with a total proj ect cost of Rs 779.87 crore ha s been circulated to the 
appraisal agencies. 
Comments of the Committee 
5.6 For Comm ents of the Comm ittee Please re fer to Para 1.9  of Chapter-I of this  
Report. 
Recommendation No. 4 
Livestock Insurance 
 
5.7 It has tim e and again  been reco mmended by the Comm ittee tha t live stock  
insurance should be introduced  imm ediately so that the farmers can freely breed the 
milch cattles without fear of their losses due  to disease o r death.  The Comm ittee have 
been informed that livestock insu rance ha s been approved and the funds have been 
released. However, the f irst policies are yet to  be issued.  The Governm ent have decided 
that the in surance scheme will at firs t run onl y in 100 selected districts where there is a 
substantial population of highly productive cattle.  
The Commi ttee, recomm end that the lives tock insurance schem e should not be 
further delayed and also should not be confin ed to 100 districts only, rather it should 
cover the whole of the country in p hases within a period of two years.  The Committee 
 45

feel that the schem e should not be confine to two anim als per beneficiary, and should be 
extended to cover 4-5 anim als per household in due course. The prem ium of 50% is too 
high for a poor farm er to pay. It should be in the ratio of 75:25 for governm ent and the 
farmers respectively.  
The Committee also recomm end that the period of insurance coverage should be 
at lease five years (and not three years as at present) as the milch animals give milk for at 
least 8-10 years. 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 The Livestock Insurance Schem e has b een approved for implem entation on pilot 
basis in 100 districts during 2005-06 and 2006-07.  Soon after approval of the Scheme by 
the Government of India in February, 2006, an am ount of Rs.2421.14 lakh was released 
in March, 2 006 for its im plementation.  An addition al am ount of Rs.24.00 crore has  
already been approved for release. 
 On the bas is of the rev iew of the pe rformance of the Schem e during the pilot 
stage, the sc heme will be extended  during 11 th Five Year P lan.  The im plementation of 
the Scheme in the pilot stage will h elp in standardizing the norms of insurance premi um 
rates, selection of Insurance Com panies, and bringing further improvement in the system 
based on experience.  T he Livestock Insurance Scheme is expected to grow big in short  
time.  Various recomm endations of the Hon’ble Comm ittee viz., i mplementing the 
scheme in the entire country, covering 4-5 animals per household, increasing subsidy on 
premium to the tune of 75%, increasing the period of insura nce coverage, etc. will be 
kept in view at the time of extending the scheme in the 11th Plan. 
 
 
 46

Comments of the Committee 
5.9 For Comm ents of the Comm ittee Please re fer to Para 1.15 of Chapter-I of this 
Report. 
Recommendation No. 7 
Dairying 
5.10 The Committee have noted that t hough dairying sector not only provides 
employment and income generating opportuni ties but has also becom e an i mportant 
secondary s ource of incom e for m illions of ru ral fam ilies, yet the total outlay for this  
sector for the whole of 10th Plan was Rs. 361 crore out of which only Rs. 175 crore could 
be utilized during first four years of th is Plan, which shows poor planning and low 
priority given to dairy industry.  Th e Committee depricate this kind of approach of the 
Government.  Even a single m anufacturing industry in other sector is given loan m ore 
than this 10th Plan outlay for dairy sector.  The Committee failed to und erstand how the 
Assistance to Co-operatives, Intensive Dair y Development Programme, Strengthening of 
Infrastructure for Quality and Clean Milk  Production, Dairy/Poul try Venture Capital  
Funds etc. could be run by this amount and still 52% of the total plan outlay rem ain 
undisbursed even after a lapse of four years of 10 th Plan.  Funds allotted for `Assistance 
to Co-operatives’ was Rs. 130 crore and even  out of this only Rs. 34.65 crore i.e. 27% 
could be disbursed during the first four years of  10th Plan period, which shows the poor  
state of priority given to this sector.  It shows poor planning and low priority towards this 
sector on the part of the governm ent whic h needs to be addressed seriously.  The 
Committee strongly recomm end that  the dairy sector should be developed in a holistic 
manner enhancing in outlay and giving priority  to the dairy developm ent schemes in a  
planned and given tim e frame, so that our farmers could also produce quality m ilk and 
 47

other milk products comparable to Western co untries and get remunerative price for their 
products.  Governm ent should strengthen th e Intensive dairy developm ent programme  
and give more assistance to cooperatives to bring about white revolution in our country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 5.11 Intensive D airy Develo pment Pro gramme (I DDP): W ith the release of funds 
directly to the im plementing agen cies in the States and  coverage of more area for 
assistance under the scheme (districts with nil and investm ent less than 50 lakh during 
Operation Flood are now eligible f or assistance under the schem e). In the revised IDDP 
scheme, the utilization of funds has improve d significantly.  During the year 2005-06, an 
amount of Rs.39.91 crore was utilized against BE provision of Rs .50.00 crore and RE of 
Rs 42.70 crore. 
Assistance to Cooperatives:  The 10 th Plan o utlay for th e Schem e “Assistan ce to  
Cooperatives” is Rs.130.00 crore. The Depart ment could utilize Rs.34.65 crore i.e. 27% 
during first four years of the 10 th Plan.  The schem e is purely dem and driven and, on an 
average, an am ount of Rs.5-6 crore is actual ly required annually to m eet the comm itted 
liabilities of some of the proposals already approved and new proposals. 
 The Departm ent entrusted the ev aluation study of the schem e to the National 
Institute of Agricultural Extension m anagement (MANAGE), Hyderabad an autonomous 
organisation under the Departm ent of Agri culture & Cooperation.  The MANAGE has  
stressed the need to review the shar ing m echanism between  Central and  State 
Government from 50:50 basis to 90:10 or at  least 75:25 for m ore effective (pro -active) 
participation of the State Governments.  The Department  is also of the opinion that if the 
present sh aring m echanism between Centre and  State is ch anged from 50:50 basis to 
 48

90:10 or at least 75:25 , it will lead to bette r utilisation of funds  under the Schem e 
“Assistance to Cooperatives”, as the State G overnments are not in position to provide 
their 50% matching share in time. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
5.12 For Comm ents of the Comm ittee Please re fer to Para 1.24 of Chapter-I of this 
Report. 
Recommendation No. 10 
Welfare of Fishermen 
5.13 The Committee note that the National Schem e for W elfare of Fisherm an which 
consists of three com ponents, viz.  developm ent of m odel fisherm en villag es, g roup 
accident insurance and saving-cum -relief for active fisherm an, has been im plemented in 
various States/Union Territories.  The Department, on a query with regard to the numbers 
of fisherman villages that have been developed during the past three years in the Tsunami 
affected areas and also if the targets set were met, has not given clear and specific replies 
but in a general response has cited that “the package approved for Tsunami Rehabilitation 
Programmes covers housing, fisheries, ports and jetties, roads and bridges, social 
infrastructure, environ mental and coasta l protection m easures.  T he Rehabilitation 
Programme has provision of Rs. 3096.88 crore for construction of houses in the Tsunami-
affected areas, which will cover fishermen as well.” 
 It has been  m ore than a year sin ce the devastating Tsunam i waves caused 
unimaginable havoc and losses to the people.  The Committee in their R eport on DFG of 
the Department (2005-06) had recommended that the approved package for rehabilitation 
of fishermen affected by Tsuna mi, should be  implemented scrupulously and speedily to 
 49

provide the much needed succour to  the affected fishermen. However, the Committee are 
disheartened to note that in m any i nstances the rehabilitation packages  m eant for th e 
affected people are yet to be taken up in  full swing which gives an unm istakable 
impression that these rehabilitation programmes are not being accorded the required and 
focused attention by the Departm ent. The Co mmittee, th erefore, recomm end that the 
Department should implem ent the rehabilita tion packages on war footings to provide 
much needed succour to  the affected people.  The Committee desire to be apprised o f all 
the developmental and rehabilitation progra mmes including long-term  plans and results 
thereof  that have already been completed 
Reply of the Government 
5.14 The Departm ent deals with cases of fisher men affected by Tsuna mi and the  
financial assistance to be given to them unde r Tsunam i Rehabilitation Programm e.  
About 80% of the boats fully or p artially da maged have b een rep aired/replaced in  the 
Tsunami affected States of the country.  Ther e is a provision for up gradation of fisheries 
infrastructure which includes i) Rehabilitation of the da maged fishing harbours/fish 
landing centres ii)Construction of twenty ne w fish landing centres  and iii)Conducting 
techno-economic feasibility studies through  re puted agencies for setting up of modern 
fishing harbours.  In Kerala, two fish landi ng centres have already been restored into 
functional position and such works for other four harbours are at advanced stage of 
construction.  The construction of two new fishing harbours in Kerala, one at Arthungal 
and another at Chellanam , are under consider ation and necessary ac tivities are taking 
place.  Gov ernment of Andhra Pradesh has proposed to construct three fish land ing 
centres, one at Antarvedit, another at V odalarevu and the third one at Lakshipura m 
Pallipalem.  The necess ary activities in this reg ard are at ad vanced stage.  In Tam ilnadu, 
 50

repair and renovation of all the affected fi shing harbours/landing cen tes are at various 
stages of  co mpletion an d it is  expe cted th at it will b e don e shor tly.  Governm ent of 
Tamilnadu has also ide ntified sites for construction of 10 new fish landing centres.  In 
Pondicherry also, repair and renovation of fi shing harbour/landing centres are at various  
stages of com pletion and the Governm ent ha s also decided to construct a new  fish 
landing centre at Yanam. 
Comments of the Committee 
5.15 For Comm ents of the Comm ittee Please re fer to Para 1.29 of Chapter-I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
08  March, 2007                                 Chairman, 
17 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on Agriculture2 
 
                                                 
 
 51

APPENDIX -I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 8TH MARCH, 2007 AT 1500 HRS. 
IN COMMITTEE  ROOM ‘B’, GRO UND FLOOR,  PARLI AMENT HOUSE 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1500 HRS TO 1630 HRS 
                                                                                   
 
PRESENT 
 
       Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Shri  Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri   Khagen Das 
4. Shri  Deepender Singh Hooda 
5. Shri  Hari Rama Jogaiah 
6. Shri  M.P.Veerendra Kumar 
7. Shri  Baleshwar Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Harish Rawat 
9. Shri Vikram Verma 
10. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed  
11. Shri Datta Meghe 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Director 
3. Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Deputy  Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita  Walia   -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 52

At the outset, the Hon’b le Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting of  the 
Committee and reques ted them  to take up the following Mem oranda on draft Action 
Taken Reports on  Dem ands for Grants (2006- 07) of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries for consideration and adoption: 
(1) Memorandum No. 2 regarding 23 rd  Action Taken Report on reco mmendations 
contained in the 18th Report on Demands for Grants (2006- 07) in respect of Ministry 
of Agriculture (Deptt. of Agriculture and Co-operation) 
 
(2) Memorandum No. 3 regarding 24 th Action Taken Report on reco mmendations 
contained in the 19h Report on Demands for Grants (2006- 07) in respect of Ministry 
of Agriculture (Deptt. of Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
(3) Memorandum No. 4 regarding 25 th Action Taken Report on reco mmendations 
contained in the 20th Report on Demands for Grants (2006- 07) in respect of Ministry 
of Agriculture (Deptt. of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) 
 
(4) Memorandum No. 5 regarding 2 6th Action Taken Report on reco mmendations 
contained in the 21st  Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) in respect of Ministry 
of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2 The Committee then considered and adopt ed the draft Action Taken Reports with 
minor additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, authorized the Chairman to present the above-
mentioned Reports to the House on a date and time convenient to him. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 53

 54
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE TWENTIETH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations                                                           13   
(ii) Recommendations/Obser vations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Serial Nos. 8,9,11 and 13  
T o t a l           4  
P e r c e n t a g e          3 1 %   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Serial No.  Nil 
T o t a l           N i l   
P e r c e n t a g e           N i l  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies 
Of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Serial Nos.3,5,6 and 12          
T o t a l           3   
P e r c e n t a g e          3 1 %  
(v) Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which  
           Final replies of the Government are still awaited  
 
Serial No. 1,2,4,7, and 10 
T o t a l           5   
P e r c e n t a g e          3 8 %    