 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2005-2006) 
                 
15
         
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND FISHERIES) 
              
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Eleventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005)} 
 
         
        
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2006/Magha, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 

FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2005-2006) 
          
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, 
DAIRYING AND FISHERIES) 
         
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006) 
  
         
[Action Taken by the Government on the  
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eleventh Report  
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.02.2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.02.2006  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
February, 2006/Magha, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 

COA No.180  
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
            © 2006 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  
(Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
<CONTENTS> 
                   P A G E  
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………    
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations /Observations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………   
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendati ons/Observations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations /Observations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Obs ervations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
held on 18 January, 2006 .      
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by  the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh  
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2004-2005) (14th Lok Sabha)      
 
 
 

Composition of  the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
6. Smt. Anuradha Choudhary 
7. Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan 
8. Shri Khagen Das 
9. Shri Dharmendra 
10. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
11. Shri Raghunath Jha 
12. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan  
13. Smt. Rupatai D iliprao Patil Nilangekar 
14. Shri Sippiparai Ravichandran  
15. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
16. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
17. Shri Harihar Swain 
18. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
19. Shri Mahboob Zahedi 
      20   *    Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
      21   #   Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
      22. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
      23.   Shri Harish Rawat 
      24.   Dr. M.S.Gill 
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
26. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
27. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
29. Shri Datta Meghe 
30. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
31. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
___________________________________________________________________ 
 
* Shri Prakash V.Patil ceased to be the member of this Committee owing to his demise on 
21 October, 2005 and the vacancy thus created was filled by nomination of Shri 
Deepender Singh Hooda, to this Committee vide L.S. Bulletin Part-II, Para No.1905, 
dated 9th December, 2005 
# Shri Lal Chandra Kol ceased to be the member of this Committee due to 
his expulsion from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 23 December, 2005. 

 6
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   -  Secretary 
2.          Shri  A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri  Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri K. D.Muley   -  Under Secretary 
5. Shri N.K. Touthang   -  Executive Assistant  
     

 7
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
         
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture, (2005-2006) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Re port on their behalf, pr esent this Fifteenth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government  on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005) 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) for the year 2005-2006. 
 
2. The Eleventh Report of the Standi ng Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005) on 
Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Minist ry of Agriculture (Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.4.2005 and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on the same day.  The Ministry  of Agriculture (Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) was request ed to furnish action taken replies of the 
Government to the recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report.  The replies of 
the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received. 
 
3. The Committee considered the action ta ken replies furnished by the Government 
at their sitting held on 18.1.2006, approved the dr aft comments and adopted the Fifteenth 
Report.  Minutes of the sitting are placed at Appendix I.  
 
4. An analysis of the Action Take n by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Eleventh Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
      
                    
                                          
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
18, January, 2006                                        Chairman, 
28 Pausa, 1927 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Agriculture  
    

 8
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (Thirteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agricu lture (2004-2005) on Demands for Grants 
(2005-2006) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying 
and fisheries) which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
20.04.2005. 
 
1.2 Action taken replies have been received fr om the Government in respect of all the 
18 recommendations contained in the Report.   These have been categorized as 
follows:- 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendations Sl. Nos.  1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15 and 16. 
(Total- 11) 
 
  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III of the Report) 
 
Recommendations Sl. No. (Total – Nil) 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV of the 
Report to be commented upon in Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation  Sl. No. 3 (Total-1) 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 7, 8, 11, 12, 17 and 18  (Total - 6) 
 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendations. 
 
 

 9
Recommendation No. 2 
Implementation of new schemes during 10th Plan 
1.4 The Committee note that the Departme nt proposes to implement 23 schemes 
during 2005-06 including the new Centrally Spon sored Scheme of Livestock Insurance. 
Three other new schemes proposed to be implemented are Rural Backyard Poultry 
Development, Integrated Development of Small Ruminants and Setting up of National 
Fisheries Development Board.  The Ce ntrally Sponsored Component Scheme, 
“Assistance to States for Pi ggery Development” under the macro-management scheme, 
“Livestock and Poultry improvement Programme” is also yet to be revived. 
 The Department has informed in respect  of certain major schemes introduced as 
new schemes in the 10th Plan that significant expenditure could not be effected in the first 
two years since certain preliminary steps were  required to be completed.  The Committee 
are dismayed to note that even after three years of commencement of the 10 th Plan, these 
new schemes are yet to be modified/finalized or get the cleara nce of the appraisal 
agencies.  The Committee are perturbed to not e that out of the allocation of Rs. 2,500 
crore for implementation of various schemes during 10 th Plan, the Department could 
utilize only Rs. 968.86 crore leaving Rs. 1,531.14 crore to be utilised during the 
remaining two years of 10 th Plan. The Committee note that these schemes announced in 
one financial year and launched in subsequent financial year with fanfare are yet to take 
off.  The Committee find little relevance of the schemes which are yet to get the 
clearance of appraisal agencies and need fu rther modification even after three years of 
their introduction.  Obviously, there is lack of seriousness and direction in the conception 
and formulation of the schemes.   The entire procedure, therefore, needs to be thoroughly 
reviewed and streamlined so that implementation of the Sc hemes is not delayed by the 
appraisal agencies. 

 10
Reply of the Government 
1.5 The Government in their action taken repl y has stated that the Department, while 
sharing the concern of the Committee regard ing the implementation of new schemes is 
making concerted efforts to utilize the outlay approved for these schemes by the terminal 
year of the 10th Plan.  In the Dairy s ector, under the new centrally sponsored scheme viz. 
Strengthening Infrastructure for Quality & Clean Milk Production launched during 2003-
2004 (October 2003) and having a budget outlay of Rs. 30.00 crore for the Tenth Plan, an 
amount of Rs. 24.64 crore has already been released to various States during 2004-05. 
 The EFC memos for the new schemes Ru ral Backyard Poultry Development, 
Integrated Development of Small Ruminant s and Assistance to States for Piggery 
Development are under progress. 
 As regards setting up of a National Fi sheries Development Board (which was 
conceived only during 2004-2005) action has already been initiated by the Department. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.6 The Committee desire that the Department should not only make concerted 
efforts to fully utilize the balance total ou tlay of Rs. 1531.14 crore but should also 
initiate sincere steps to accelerate the pr ocess of implementation of the various 
schemes in such a way that implementation  of schemes are not further delayed on 
any pretext.  The process of getting clearances of apprised agencies should have 
been completed before their announcement.  
Recommendation No. 3 
Infrastructural development in Central Cattle Breeding Farm 
1.7 Seven Cattle Breeding Farms located in di fferent agro climatic regions of the 
country maintain herds of some important in digenous and exotic cattle breeds as well as 

 11
buffaloes for distribution to the States for use in the Cattle and Buffalo Development 
Programme.  The Plan allocation during 2004- 05 had been increased to Rs. 8.60 crore 
against BE of Rs. 6.00 crore in 2003-04 towards infrastructural development necessary 
for production of high quality bulls in Central Cattle Breeding Farm.  The Department in 
its Action Taken Reply to the recommendation made by the Committee in their 3
rd Report 
on Demands for Grants 2004-2005 informed th at all the developmental work in the 
Central Cattle Breeding Farms will be comple ted within the financial year 2004-2005 as 
desired by the Committee.  The Committee, while examining the Demands for Grants 
2005-2006, asked about the progress of developmental works which are being carried out 
in the farms and also the expenditure incurr ed, thereon, the Department could not furnish 
the desired information.  The Committee furthe r note that allocations scaled down at RE 
stage of 2004-2005 were again raised to Rs . 11.16 crore at BE stage of 2005-2006.  The 
reasons put forth by the Department for enhancement of funds during 2005-2006 were 
some developmental works suggested by Cent ral Management Committee in the farms 
like Construction of Quarantine Sheds at each farm, purchase of agricultural equipments 
and machinery, etc.  The Committee are surpri sed to note that over the years while the 
funds are being used for enhancing developmental works in the farms, the Department 
was unable to give details of the works being carried out and also the actual expenditure 
incurred on it so far.  Obviously, the Departme nt has not been able to utilize the funds 
allocated. Apparently, the Management Committee and the Advisory Committee 
constituted by the Department have been f unctioning in a lackadaisical manner.  The 
Committee would like the Department to assess the performance of the farms and initiate 
sincere efforts for their improvement.  They al so desire that the money allocated for the 
purpose should be fully utilized and definite  time frame may be fixed for completion of 
the developmental works in the farms so that poor animals in the farms do not suffer. The 

 12
Committee would also like to be apprised of the efforts made to make available good 
breeds of indigenous cows and buf faloes during the last thre e years State-wise and year-
wise. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.8 The Government in their action taken re ply has stated that the funds for civil 
works were released to CPWD and most of  the work taken up during 2004-05 have been 
completed / are in the final stage of completion.  
The expenditure incurred during last 3 years under various Sub-Heads and Budget 
provision made for 2005-06 is as under:                                                                              
        (Rs. in thousand) 
Actual Expenditure Incurred Items of 
Expenditure 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 Total
Budget Provision 
made for 2005-06 
Major works 421 1581 4699 6701 27039 
Minor works 46 60 43 149 6500 
Machinery & 
Equipments 
2350 587 1933 4870 7725 
Total 2817 2228 6675 11720 41264 
 
Higher outlay provided at BE level for the year 2005-06 is essentially required for 
undertaking urgent major & minor works in th e farms and purchase of critical machinery 
& equipment as recommended by the Farm Management Committee. The Management 
Committee discussed in detail the proposal of all the seven farms as suggested by Farm 
Technical Advisory Committees (FTACs) for bringing about essential improvement in 
the farms.  

 13
  In order to accomplish the desired works to be undertaken by the farms the 
proposals are being processed and it is anti cipated that the funds earmarked for the 
scheme will be utilized fully.   
  The mandate of the Central Cattle Breeding farms is to supply cattle and buffalo 
breeding bulls to various States for breed  improvement programmes i.e artificial 
insemination and natural service. The bulls /bull calves supplied by CCBFs to different 
States during the last 3 years is given at Annexure-I and the cows/heifers supplied to 
States and Royal Govt. of Bhutan is given at Annexure-II. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.9 The Committee  are surprised to note that inspite of the enhancement of 
funds during 2005-06 the Depa rtment is conspicuously silent about the detail 
developmental work being carried out in the CCBFs fuelling app rehension that the 
Management Committee and the Advisory Committee constituted by the 
Department have not been functioning as they ought to.   It appears that this 
Committees are not taking their mandate seriously.   The Committee is not at all 
satisfied with the state of affairs at these farms.   Even after utilizing Rs.11,720 lakhs 
for their development since the year 2002- 03, the performance of these Farms  is 
still very poor and pitiable.   For exam ple, in the Central Cattle Breeding Farm 
Andesh Nagar, (U.P.) only 27 Bulls/ Bull calves had been produced/ provided since 
2002-03. 
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate its demand to assess the performance of 
these farms on priority, especially the CCB F Andesh Nagar (UP) and take effective 
steps for their improvement.  
 

 14
Recommendation No. 5 
Feed and Fodder Development 
1.10 The Centrally-Sponsored scheme, “Assist ance to States for Feed and Fodder 
Development” was initiated during the 7 th Five Year Plan and discontinued during the 
10th Plan.  However, two components of this  scheme, establishment of fodder bank and 
enrichment of straw/cellulosic waste were  revived upto March 2005 to facilitate the 
States to combat the current drought situation in the country.  The Committee also note 
that a new revised scheme on Fodder Deve lopment has been proposed with the aim to 
increase qualitative green and dry fodder, f odder seeds, conservation of fodder, fodder 
block making and popularizi ng high yielding varieties of  fodder crops, ultimately 
increasing the fodder production. 
 The Committee note that due to competin g pressures on land, the green revolution 
and diversified use of agriculture residues,  the gap between the demand and supply of 
fodder is increasing. Besides, due to freque nt drought in several States, the need to 
develop fodder with drought proofing as an objective is in sharp focus.  Even under 
normal conditions, tremendous shortage of fodde r is felt in many parts of the country.  
The deficit aggravates further during natura l calamities such as drought, floods, etc.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongl y feel that for augmenting the fodder seed and fodder 
production in the drought prone areas, a Regi onal or Sub-Regional Station be set up 
specially for these specific areas to facilitate production and easy availability of fodder in 
consultation with the ICAR. 
 The Committee further note that the two components of the Scheme which were 
revived to facilitate the Stat es to combat the current drough t situation in the country has 
come to an end in March 2005 and as of now  the new scheme has only been proposed to 
the Planning Commission. The Committee observe  that with the gap arising between the 

 15
conclusion of the existing Scheme and the implementation of the new proposed Scheme, 
the shortage of fodder will aggravate furtherm ore.  The Committee, therefore, desire and 
recommend that the new revised scheme  on `Fodder Development’ should be 
implemented at the earliest  not only to combat chronic `Fodder Shortage’ in certain parts 
of the country but also to tackle the pr oblem of plenty elsewhere by setting up of 
adequate number of Fodder Banks.  The Depa rtment also needs to evolve a mechanism 
for timely and suitable transportation of fodder from areas of plenty to areas of scarcity in 
consultation with the Railways.  
 
Reply of the Government 
1.11         The Government in their action taken repl y has stated that the Department is 
operating 7 Regional Stations  for Forage Production & De monstration at Hissar, 
Haryana/Suratgarh Rajasthan/Gandhinagar, Gujarat/Kalyani, West Bengal/Hyderabad, 
Andhra Pradesh/Chennai, Tamil Nadu/Srin agar, Jammu and Kashmir and 1 Central 
Fodder Seed Production Farm at Hessarghatta, Bangalore.  Each Fodder Station covers 
three to four States in its region for th eir fodder development programme.  These Fodder 
Stations undertake following fodder development activities. 
(a) Multiplication of high yielding varieties of fodder crops 
(b) Training programmes for farmers as well as State Gove rnment officials 
engaged in fodder development programme 
(c) Field demonstrations of newly e volved high yielding varieties of fodder 
species at the farmers’ field 
(d) Farmers’ fairs/field days for extension and awareness. 
During 2005-06, the Planning Commission ha s not allocated funds from Plan 
head for these Stations and has also advised the Department to stop fodder seed 

 16
production in these stations.  The Department  has however, taken up the matter with the 
Planning Commission as well as the Minist ry of Finance for providing funds from 
suitable budget head for these Stations. 
The new revised scheme on Fodder Devel opment has been approved with total 
outlay of Rs. 24.50 crore for implementation during remaining period of 10 th Plan.  
Guidelines for submission of proposals for a ssistance under the scheme have been issued 
to the States in May, 2005.  In order to prevent wastage of crop residues/straw etc. left in 
the farmers’ fields after harvesting of cr ops, a component on `Assistance to fodder block 
making units’ under which gainful utilization of crop residues by their conversion into 
`Fodder blocks’ has been included.  Further, the Department also recommends to the 
Ministry of Railways from time to time on sp ecific requests from the States to permit 
transportation of fodder from are of surplus to those of defi cit on priority particularly 
during drought situations.  
  
Comments of the Committee 
1.12 The Committee is happy to note that a new component `Assistance to Fodder 
Block making Units’ under the revised scheme on Fodder Development has been 
approved to strengthen the prevention of wa stage of crop residues/straw etc. left in 
the fields after harvesting of crops. The Committee hope that the new revised 
scheme on fodder development will be effectively implemented at the earliest. 
 The availability of Fodder in all situatio n whether it is drought, famine, or 
any other natural calamity – is a questio n of life and death for the poor helpless 
animals which can neither speak not protes t unlike human beings.  Therefore it is 
our sacred duty to feed the animals in every circumstances, wherever they are. 

 17
Recommendation No. 6 
Sheep Breeding Farm, Hissar 
1.13 The Sheep Breeding Farm at Hissar, Ha ryana had been esta blished with the 
objective to produce around 1,000 exotic and crossbred rams annually for supply to 
various State Governments/Organisations for implementing Sheep Development 
Programme launched in the resp ective States.  The Commi ttee are constrained to note 
that out of the Tenth Plan allocation of Rs . 25.00 crore, the Department could merely 
spend Rs. 3.05 crore during the first three years which is a meagre 12.2%. Also out of the 
Tenth Plan target of production and suppl y of 5,000 rams to various States, the 
Department could supply only 1,533 rams in the first two years, i.e. 2002-2003 and 2003-
2004.  However, the achievement during 2004-2005 was nil and also no target has been 
fixed for 2005-06 reportedly due to paucity of land in the farm.  The Committee also note 
that the issue of finalizing lease agreement and lease rent with the Haryana Government 
is yet to be resolved.  The Department in reply to a question informed the Committee that 
the matter will once again be taken up with the State Government.  
 The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to take up the matter 
expeditiously with the State of Haryana de novo in order to accelerate the implementation 
of the National Sheep Development Programme .  The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the response of the Government of Haryana.   
 
Reply of the Government 
1.14 The Government in their action taken reply has stated that it is not correct that in 
respect of supply of rams to various states there was no achievement during 2004-05 and 
no target has been fixed for 2005-06.  As a matter of fact, 1370 rams were supplied 

 18
during 2004-05 and target of 1050 has been fixed for 2005-06 (the target is lower because 
of the need to cull some animals). 
 Regarding the issue of lease agreement, the Government of Haryana has agreed to 
extend the lease agreement from 1998 to 2018 at the rate of Rs . 1100 per hectare per 
annum.  Necessary formalities are being completed for this. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.15 The Committee is happy to note that th e long pending issue of extending the 
lease agreement with the Government of Haryana has since been resolved.  The 
Committee now hope that the Department wo uld make all out efforts with sincerity 
and take all possible steps for full utilizat ion of the Plan funds during the remaining 
years of the 10 th Plan.  This would go a long way not only in accelerating the 
implementation of the National Sheep Development Programme but also in uplifting 
the rural economy by producing high quality crossbred rams.    
Recommendation No. 7 
Assistance to Co-operatives 
1.16 The scheme `Assistance to Co-operati ves’ is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
which was approved in January 2000 for providing assistance in the form of grants for 
rehabilitation of loss-making dairy co-operativ es/district level unions, as well as to the 
State Level Federations which are set up in  different parts of the country under the 
Operation Flood Programme.  The Scheme envisages rehabilitation assistance on 50:50 
sharing basis between the Government of India and the concerned State Governments. 
 The Committee are distressed to note th at a number of these unions/federations 
have accumulated losses for a variety of reas ons, causing severe hardships to the milk 
producers and their daily economy, resultin g in, among other things, delayed and 

 19
irregular payments to the poor farmer member s of these co-operatives. In response to a 
query, the Committee were informed that excessive and low ma npower productivity, 
lower scale of operation of some milk union s with high per litre cost on procurement, 
transport, processing and dist ribution with lower sales realization and other factors as 
some of the reasons for the unsatisfactory performance of these unions/federations.   
The 10 th Plan outlay for this Scheme was Rs. 130.00 crore.  Surprisingly, the 
Committee observe that the Department could utilize only Rs. 25.29 crore during the first 
three years of the 10 th Plan leaving a huge unspent ba lance of Rs. 104.71 crore.  The 
Department had stated that the pace of e xpenditure will increas e once the progress of 
implementation of many unions is revived follo wing issue of appropria te instructions to 
them.  The Department further pointed out that  in case of any shortfall in the utilization 
of the outlay earmarked, the same can be divert ed to other schemes and the effort of the 
Department will be to fully utilize the total outlay for the 10 th Plan.  The Committee 
strongly desire that the Depart ment should make all out and integrated efforts to fully 
utilize the entire outlay earmarked for the 10th Plan.  
The Committee also recommend that the funding pattern of the Scheme from the 
present sharing and rehabilitation of assistance on 50:50 sharing basis may be changed to 
75:25 to ensure better participation of the States.  The Committee hope that such a change 
in funding pattern will help  mitigate the plight of the milk producers/their 
unions/cooperatives across the country particul arly when in some parts of the country 
milk is being sold at rates much cheaper than the mineral water.  
Reply of the Government 
 
1.17 The outlay for the 10 th Plan for the Central Sector Plan Scheme ‘ Assistance to 
Cooperatives’ is Rs 130.00 crore and the Department has utilized Rs 29.18 crore during 

 20
the first three years of the 10 th Plan. The scheme is purely demand driven and on an 
average, an amount of Rs 10-12 crore is re quired annually to meet the committed 
liabilities of some of the proposals already approved and new proposals.  
 The Department has entrusted the eval uation study of the scheme to National 
Institute of Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE), Hyderabad, an autonomous 
organization under the Departme nt of Agriculture & Coopera tion. Therefore, revision in 
the scheme in respect of funding pattern and other aspect will be considered after the 
findings of the evaluation study become available. 
Comments  of the Committee 
1.18 The Committee, while appreciating the pr actical difficulties the Department 
might be experiencing in the implementa tion of the Scheme , desire that the 
MANAGE, Hyderabad should be asked to co mplete the study expeditiously.   The 
Government may revise the funding patte rn and other aspects of the scheme 
suitably within the shortest possible time period. 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Delhi Milk Scheme 
1.19 The Department in its reply to the r ecommendation made by the Committee in 3 rd 
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) stat ed that the Management Committee of 
DMS has taken measures to contain the losses of DMS.  The DMS is able to process and 
pack 3.50 lakh litre of variety of milk per day.  The Depart ment is making efforts to 
increase the processing capacity of different type of milk up to 6.00 lakh litre per day by 
undertaking modifications and upgradations of  the plant and machinery. It has been 
stated by the Department that the entire cost  for upgradation and modification of the plan 

 21
to bring it to a semi-automatic level w ill be Rs. 23.00 crore out of which Rs. 5.00 crore 
have already been earmarked for DMS in the current financial year.  The Committee also 
note that National Capital Territory (NCT) was also requested to take over DMS and to 
run it.  However, the Government of NCT wa s not in favour of the proposal of taking 
over DMS unless the Government of India decides to accept al l up-to-date liabilities of 
DMS and grant adequate funds for mode rnization of plant machinery. In the 
circumstances, the Committee feel that the remaining amount of Rs. 18.00 crore required 
for the upgradation of plant shoul d be released in the next tw o years so that the fate of 
DMS is fully equipped with upgraded and mo dern plant and machinery to meet the 
growing milk requirement of the Capital. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.20 The Government in their action taken repl y has stated that during the current year, 
no budget provision has been provided for the Delhi Milk Scheme.  However, the 
Department has requested the Planning Comm ission to allocate Rs. 18.00 crore to DMS 
during 10th Plan. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.21 The Committee would like to be appris ed of all the new developments and 
progress made in this regard.  The Government must extend all the help to the DMS 
since after the white revolution India rank s number one in milk production.  When 
other milk companies like Amul, milkfed and other private players in this field can 
tap this market to their benefits, why DM S should be lagging behind in providing 
safe and hygienic milk and milk products to the common men.  DMS has the 
credibility and support of the Government wh ich is not available to other players in 
the field. 

 22
 

 23
Recommendation No. 11 
Export of Marine Fisheries 
1.22 The Committee note the importance of the fisheries sector which occupies a very 
important place in the socio-economic development of the country by providing 
employment to over 11 million people mostly  belonging to backward/weaker sections, 
engaged partially or in subsidiary activities associated with the fisheries and aquaculture 
sector.   
The Committee are pleased to note that there has been steady growth in the export 
of fish and fish products and that efforts are being made  to boost the e xport potential 
through diversification of products for exports . The Department in reply to a question 
raised by the Committee stated that the main re asons for the fall in export of frozen fish 
are stringent SPS conditions imposed by EU, anti-dumping duty imposed by the US and 
problems of muddy and moldy smell of shrimps in  certain parts of the eastern coast.  The 
Committee, therefore, hardly need to underline the need fo r launching new and sustained 
measures so as to maintain at least the st eady growth in the e xport of fish and fish 
products.  The Committee also desire the Depa rtment to ensure e ffective utilization of 
funds allocated during the terminal years of the Tenth Plan so that the intended objectives 
are achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
1.23 The Government in their action taken re ply has stated that the Marine Products 
Export Development Authority (MPEDA) in cons ultation with this Ministry has initiated 
a number of measures to tackle the issue of antibiotics residues in the marine products 
exported from India, especially shrimp a nd also the anti-dumpi ng duty imposed by USA 
as well as on the other problems related to exports. 

 24
During the visit of the European Union Mission to India in October, 2003 to 
evaluate the level of residue on banned antib iotics and environmental contaminants, an 
assurance was given by the Ministry of Co mmerce that for violating the conditions the 
license of a firm can be cancelled and further operations stopped on th e basis of the test 
results in respect of samples drawn from the firms testing positive for the banned drugs. 
A Core   Group comprising representatives fr om Aquaculture Authority, Central Institute 
of Fisheries Technology, Ce ntral Institute of Brackis hwater Aquaculture, Export 
Inspection Council, MPEDA, Governments of  Andhra Pradesh and Sea Food Exporters’ 
Association, was constituted to prepare the guidelines for this purpose, which shall be 
adopted to prevent the use of antibiotics in shrimp farming in tune with the sanitary 
requirements (SPS) of European Union (EU). 
An Indian Delegation led by the Minister of State for Commerce visited USA 
during the first week of April 2005 to negot iate the issue of an ti-dumping duty in the 
background of Tsunami incident. The US Administration had decided to have a review of 
the anti-dumping duty imposed on our exports.   
The Coastal Aquaculture Authority Bill  (2005) passed by both Houses of 
Parliament has received President’s assent. This will definitely help in increasing the area 
under brackish water aquaculture and thereby increasing employment and exports.  
Suitable measures are being taken to ensure effective utilization of funds allocated 
for the various fisheries development schemes by the terminal year of the Tenth Plan and 
thereby to achieve their desired objectives. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.24 The Committee desire to know the details of the guidelines prepared by the 
Core Group comprising the representatives from Aquaculture Authority, etc. and 
whether there has been any improvement in exports as a result of such guidelines. 

 25
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Safety of Fishermen at Sea 
1.25 Having regard to the hazardous nature of sea fishing which often results in loss of 
life, fishing boats and implements, injury and permanent impairment of fishermen and 
even in their capture as prisoners by foreign countries for unwittingly straying in their 
Exclusive Economic zone, the Committee enquired as to what measures were taken by 
the Government for the safety of fisherma n. The Committee also noted the result of the 
recent studies which have pointed out that calamities occur due to ill equipped vessels 
and non-availability of an early warning system on board.  The scheme, “Safety of 
Fisherman at Sea” is being taken up to address this issue by equipping the small 
mechanized craft by providing a package of position finding and communication 
equipment.  This component envisages inst alling one Global Positioning System (GPS) 
and a wireless set on the small-mechanised fishing vessels.  The unit cost of these 
equipments together works out to about Rs. 1.50 lakh, 20% of whic h (but not exceeding 
Rs. 30,000) is provided as backended subsidy through the National Co-operative 
Development Corporation (NCDC) to benefit 1,666 boats in the 10
th Plan.  In response to 
a query, the representative of the Departme nt confessed that the Government has not 
achieved the target of vessel monitoring system  but assured of definite progress in the 
matter.  
The Committee strongly urge th e Department to give utmost priority to the safety 
of fishermen specially in the deep-sea fishing by taking necessary measures at the earliest 
by providing them with advance mechani zed boats, updated modern communication 
systems and fishing gears and other necessa ry modern equipments.  The Committee, 

 26
further desire the Department to ensure that  the overall outlay a pproved for the scheme 
during the Tenth Plan is fully utilized by the terminal years of the plan.   
Reply of the Government 
1.26 The Government in their action taken re ply has stated that the macro scheme on 
`Development of Marine Fisheries, Infrastruc ture and Post Harvest Operations’ launched 
in the 10 th Plan has safety of fishermen at sea as one of its component.  It envisages to 
equip the fishing vessels with Global Po sitioning System (GPS), wireless set, vessel 
Monitoring System (VMS) in a phased manner.  The Central assistance is extended to the 
implementing agencies as per need basis on receipt of proposals.  The progress in 
utilization of funds earmarked under various schemes implemented by the Department is 
reviewed regularly and it is expected that outlay approved for the fishing sector for the 
10th Plan will be utilized fully by the terminal year of the Plan.  The implementation of 
the component relating to safety of fishermen will be taken up during the current year. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.27 Since the safety of the fishermen at se a is of utmost concern and importance, 
the Committee desire that the Department should give top priority to the 
installation of GPS, Wirele ss sets and Vessel Monitori ng System in the fishing 
Vessels. 
The Committee desire to know what ty pe of standing search and rescue 
mechanisms are in position or planned to meet any eventuality and offer medical aid 
or Insurance cover to the trapped fishermen away from the shore.   
The Committee further desire that a comprehensive Study regarding welfare 
measures to be taken or proposed to be taken, may be conducted and the Committee 
may be apprised at the earliest.  

 27
  
Recommendation No. 13 
Strengthening of Database and Information Networking for Fisheries Sector 
1.28 The Committee are surprised to note that  due to delay in creation of posts under 
the scheme, “Strengthening of Data base and Information Networking for fisheries 
sector”, it is not possible to submit economically  viable and technically feasible proposal 
seeking financial assistance for IT and other components. The Department, in reply to a 
question by the Committee, stated that all the States/Union Territories have not been able 
to create the posts as the matter is stated  to be pending in concerned state Finance 
Departments.  The Committee feel that the Department should take up the matter with the 
responsible State Departments at the highest level so that the database and information 
system for fisheries sector is put in pl ace either by enjoining additional duties/re-
deployment of existing staff or by creating additional posts. 
Reply of the Government 
1.29 The Government in their action taken repl y has stated that the Department took up 
the matter with the Fishery Departments of all the State Governments to create the posts 
sanctioned under the scheme on `Strengthening of Database and Information 
Networking’ for the fisheries sector.  The requ isite posts have been created in the last 
quarter of 2004-05 in 17 States and the same are likely to be filled shortly by 
redeployment of existing staff in the States or otherwise. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.30 The Committee desire that the Depar tment should pursue the matter of 
creation of posts with the remaining States so  that shortage of staff does not become 

 28
a hindrance for positive development in strengthening of database and information 
of Data base and Information Networking for fisheries sector. 
 The Committee also desire that the pr ogress made in this regard may be 
monitored regularly and the Committee may be apprised of the same. 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
Setting up of Fisheries Development Board 
1.31 It hardly needs reiteration that the Fisher ies Sector is such a vital sector of our 
economy which has enormous potential of ge nerating income and improve the economic 
status of the people by providing gain ful employment to over 11.00 million people 
engaged fully, partially or in subsidiary activities pertaining to the Sector, with an equally 
impressive segment of the population engaged in ancillary activitie s associated with 
fisheries and aquaculture.  The Committee also note that Fisheries were brought under the 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying in the hope that such an important sector 
of activity would receive due attention commensurate with its vast potential. 
 The Committee are happy to note that India is now the 3 rd largest producer of fish 
in the world and second largest producer of fresh water fish in the world.  The fish 
production during 2003-2004 is estimated to be 63.99 lakh tonnes.  The country exported 
5.21 lakh tonnes of marine products valued  at Rs. 6,793.05 crore in 2002-2003 compared 
to 4.58 lakh tonnes of marine products , valued at Rs. 5,815 crore in 2001-2002.  
However, the Committee are also aware of th e decline in fish and fish products for 2003-
04 mainly due to the decline in  the export of frozen fish as  compared to the previous 
years. 
 Undoubtedly, the Fisheries sector deserves much greater investment for its further 
growth and expansion.  Most importantly, fisheries sector bein g one of the most 

 29
important source of livelihood for a very large section of the economically backward 
population of the country, great er and concerted efforts ar e required for augmenting 
production and productivity.  The Committee are we ll aware of the fact that India has not 
been able to develop modern fishing technol ogy to utilize its huge  potential of fishery 
resources.  The harvesting of such highly po tential resource is being done mostly by non-
motorised traditional crafts due to shortage/non-availability of mechanized boats, modern 
communication system and fishing gears, nuts and other necessary modern equipments, 
with the result that hardly one-third of this  potential is being exploited.  The Committee 
also feel that allocation with regard to fisher ies sector may be enhanced so that shortage 
of funds does not become a hindrance in the proper f unctioning and updating of all 
infrastructural facilities and for maintenance and upkeep of the same.  
 The Committee get an unmistakable impre ssions that a vast sector like fisheries, 
having great potential for further growth is not being accorded the focused and undivided 
attention that it ought to get.   The Comm ittee, therefore, recommends strongly that 
Government must set up expeditiously an apex board to exclusively look after the various 
problems and aspects associated with the fisheries sector for its accelerated growth.   
Reply of the Government 
1.32 The Government in their ac tion taken reply has stated that during the Tenth Plan, 
two macro schemes namely Development of Ma rine Fisheries, Infrastructure and post 
Harvest Operations and Development of Inland Fisheries and aquaculture covering gamut 
of activities have been put in place to enhance production an d productivity in the fishery 
sector and thereby to improve the socio-economic condition of the people employed win 
the sector.  The scheme for the marine sector has motorisation of traditional crafts as one 
of its component.  During 2004-05, Centra l assistance of Rs . 410.00 lakh has been 
released to States/Uts to motorise 4100 traditional crafts. 

 30
 Action has already been initiated to establish a National Fisheries Development 
Board with the Broad objective to bring all activities relating to Fisheries and 
Aquaculture under a single umbrella with a view to improve the production, processing 
and marketing of the fishing products.  Th e Planning Commission when approached in 
this regard have suggested to have a deta iled feasibility report before the proposal is 
considered by them for `in principle’ appr oval.  A feasibility study has since been 
awarded in the first week of May 2005 for su bmission of the report in 3 month’s time.  
Simultaneously the other details for setting up the proposed Board are being worked out 
in consultation with the concerned organizations.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.33 The Committee are happy to note that the Department has initiated a 
feasibility study for the establishment of  a National Fisheries Development Board 
(NFDB).  The Committee desires to know what further action has been taken on the 
findings of the study and the progress towards the establishment of the NFDB .  
Other details, like composition of the NF DB, its functions and powers, date by 
which the Board is likely to be established,  etc. may be sent for information of the 
Committee.  It need hardly be emphasized that the Board should become functional 
at the earliest for improving the producti on, processing and marketing of fishing 
products to give a boost to all activities relating to fisheries and aquaculture. 
 

 31
Recommendation No. 17 
Rehabilitation of Tsunami-affected farmers/fishermen 
 
1.34 The Committee note that the Tsunami waves played havoc in the Southern 
Coastal Areas and in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  The devastating waves rendered 
several agricultural land incultivable and wi ped out the lives of so  many people and their 
place of settlement besides the loss of a great number of livestock severely affecting the 
poor farmers in particular.  The Committee also take note of the loss of  56,000 boats and 
the damage of around 20,000 boats in the Tsunami  tragedy which has affected around 37 
fishing harbours in the country.   
 In response to a query, the Committee were  informed in the course of evidence 
that Rs. 11.00 crore are kept for rehabilitati on which would be limited for the purpose of 
providing boats to fishermen for restoration of their means of livelihood.  The Committee 
also note the programme of the Government w ith regard to housing which would be of a 
short and also a long-term housing policy.  The Committee are ha ppy to note that the 
Government of India has set up a separate cell in the Planning Commission to monitor 
the proper implementation of this schemes and also to ensure the availability of funds.  
The Secretary assured the Committee that in the Andamans, where th e housing is getting 
delayed, temporary houses wi ll be constructed well befo re the Monsoon season, `though 
the permanent housing is going to be a long affair’. 
 The Committee hope that the package appr oved for the rehabilitation of fishermen 
which is 100% assistance for replacement/repair of traditional crafts/nets and also both 
subsidy and loans from the banks in th e case of motorized/mechanized boats is 
implemented scrupulously and speedily so as  to provide much needed succour to the 
affected fishermen.  The Committee also take no te of the oral reply from the Department 

 32
that housing will not be a problem for the Ts unami-affected people but that the problem 
would be the location and acquisition of la nd.  The Committee strongly desire that the 
Department should make concerted efforts to popularize the availability of 100% 
assistance for replacement/repair of traditi onal crafts and also the loans and subsidy 
available from the banks so that the affected people take advantage of the opportunity and 
restart their normal activity at the earliest. The Committee would also like to be apprised 
of the long term action plan drawn and put in  place for construction of permanent houses 
for fishermen state-wise. 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.35 The Government in their action taken reply has stated that under the Rajiv Gandhi 
Rehabilitation Package for Tsunami affected areas, assistance (as 100% subsidy) for 
replacement of catamaran boats plus nets  up to the unit cost of Rs. 32000 has been 
provided.  The affected fishermen who want to  replace boats and motors are entitled to 
get part of the cost as subsidy and the balan ce as bank loan at 7% rate of interest with 
repayment period of 7 years afte r one and a half year moratorium.  Further subsidy of 2 
% will be paid in case of prompt repayment. A Sub- Group on Fisheries has been set in 
the Department to review the progress of re habilitation programme of Tsunami affected 
fishers and its meeting are convened periodical ly. The Core Group set up in the Planning 
Commission is in the process of finalizing Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme including 
construction of permanent houses  and details would be ava ilable once the proposal is 
approved by the competent authority. 
 
 
 
 

 33
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.36 The Committee desire that immediate assistance be given to the fishermen 
affected by the recent tsunami for their rehabilitation.  The progress of the 
rehabilitation programme may be reviewed by the Sub Group on Fisheries 
constituted by the Department  on a regular basis so that  the means of livelihood of 
the affected persons are resto red immediately.  The Comm ittee may be apprised of 
the action taken. 
 

 34
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
 ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Plan allocation for the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
2.1 The Committee note that the Depart ment has been allocated Rs. 669.08 crore 
(Plan) for the year 2005-06.  The Plan budgeta ry allocation for the year 2004-05 was Rs. 
500.00 crore at BE stage which was enhanced to Rs. 575 crore at RE stage of 2004-05.  
The expenditure during 2004-2005, as reported up to Febr uary 2005 was Rs. 458.2 crore 
which has certainly increased in comp arison to previous years of the 10 th Plan.  
Surprisingly, the total expenditure during the first three years of the 10 th Plan was Rs. 
968.86 crore constituting barely 38.75% of the total 10 th Plan outlay of Rs. 2,500.00 
crore.  The representative of the Department stated that the expenditure in the first three 
years of 10th Plan is expected to be over Rs. 1,068.00 crore leaving a balance amount of 
Rs. 1,440.00 crore, but assured its utilisation in the rema ining two years of the 10 th Plan.  
Having regard to the pace of expenditure during the preceding three years, the Committee 
are surprised as to how the Department would utilize such a huge amount of Rs. 1440.00 
crore in the remaining two years. The Committ ee are fully aware of the significant role 
and potential of a sector like Animal Husb andry, Dairying and Fisheries in generating 
gainful employment in the rural sector, particularly among the landless, small and 
marginal farmers and the other disadvantag ed social groups. The Committee feel that 
despite this, it is not only the Government which accorded low priority in allocation of 
funds, the Department also made a poor performance by under-utilisation of the allocated 
funds.  The utilization of Rs. 1,440 crore during the remainder two years of the 10 th Plan 
as against the reported expend iture of Rs. 1,068 cror e during the first 3 years appears to 

 35
be a formidable task given the past perf ormance of the Department.  The Committee, 
would, therefore, like to be apprised of the new measures/strategies proposed by the 
Department to ensure full and effective uti lization of allocations in the remainder two 
years of the Tenth Plan. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 The Government in their action taken re ply has stated that the Department is 
taking all possible steps for full utilization of the Tenth Plan allocation.  Out of the total 
outlay of Rs. 2500.00 crore for the Tenth Plan, about Rs. 1076.00 crore has been spent in 
the first three years of the Tenth Plan.  Due to various measures taken by the Department 
in terms of constant monitoring of schemes, evaluation studies, interaction with States, 
field visits by Officers, utilization of the plan allocation has impr oved considerably over 
the years.  During 2004-2005, the Department has been able to utilize around Rs. 566.00 
crore, which is over 98% of RE 2004-05.  Current year’s outlay of Rs. 669.08 crore is 
also expected to be almost fully utilized.  Th e Department is fully confident of utilizing 
the balance amount of Rs. 754 crore in the concluding year of the Tenth Plan.  In fact, the 
Department hopes of get and u tilize additional allocation over and above the Tenth Plan 
outlay of Rs. 2500 crore. 
Recommendation No. 2 
Implementation of new schemes during 10th Plan 
2.3 The Committee note that the Departme nt proposes to implement 23 schemes 
during 2005-06 including the new Centrally Spon sored Scheme of Livestock Insurance. 
Three other new schemes proposed to be implemented are Rural Backyard Poultry 
Development, Integrated Development of Small Ruminants and Setting up of National 
Fisheries Development Board.  The Ce ntrally Sponsored Component Scheme, 

 36
“Assistance to States for Pi ggery Development” under the macro-management scheme, 
“Livestock and Poultry improvement Programme” is also yet to be revived. 
 The Department has informed in respect  of certain major schemes introduced as 
new schemes in the 10th Plan that significant expenditure could not be effected in the first 
two years since certain preliminary steps were  required to be completed.  The Committee 
are dismayed to note that even after three years of commencement of the 10 th Plan, these 
new schemes are yet to be modified/finalized or get the cleara nce of the appraisal 
agencies.  The Committee are perturbed to not e that out of the allocation of Rs. 2,500 
crore for implementation of various schemes during 10 th Plan, the Department could 
utilize only Rs. 968.86 crore leaving Rs. 1,531.14 crore to be utilised during the 
remaining two years of 10 th Plan. The Committee note that these schemes announced in 
one financial year and launched in subsequent financial year with fanfare are yet to take 
off.  The Committee find little relevance of the schemes which are yet to get the 
clearance of appraisal agencies and need fu rther modification even after three years of 
their introduction.  Obviously, there is lack of seriousness and direction in the conception 
and formulation of the schemes.   The entire procedure, therefore, needs to be thoroughly 
reviewed and streamlined so that implementation of the Sc hemes is not delayed by the 
appraisal agencies. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The Government in their action taken repl y has stated that the Department, while 
sharing the concern of the Committee regard ing the implementation of new schemes is 
making concerted efforts to utilize the outlay approved for these schemes by the terminal 
year of the 10th Plan.  In the Dairy s ector, under the new centrally sponsored scheme viz. 
Strengthening Infrastructure for Quality & Clean Milk Production launched during 2003-

 37
2004 (October 2003) and having a budget outlay of Rs. 30.00 crore for the Tenth Plan, an 
amount of Rs. 24.64 crore has already been released to various States during 2004-05. 
 The EFC memos for the new schemes Ru ral Backyard Poultry Development, 
Integrated Development of Small Ruminant s and Assistance to States for Piggery 
Development are under progress. 
 As regards setting up of a National Fi sheries Development Board (which was 
conceived only during 2004-2005) action has already been initiated by the Department. 
Comments of the Committee 
2.5 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No.1.6 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
National Veterinary Biological Products Quality Control 
2.6 The Indian Veterinary Research Instit ute has been assisting in the task of 
maintaining the quality of v accines and biologicals.  But fo r effective monitoring of the 
quality, it is essentia l to establish a separate Institu te.  The Committee are happy to note 
that a Centre is being constructed in Chaudhary Charan Singh Institute of Veterinary 
Health at Baghpat and the works on various activities are being carried out by the 
Department. The approved 10
th Plan outlay for this project is Rs. 21.10 crore of which an 
amount of Rs. 10.70 crore has been incurred so far. The allocation for the year 2005-06 is 
Rs. 11.00 crore.  The Committee would like the Department to keep a strict watch over 
the pace of expenditure so as to adhere to its self-stipulated time schedule for completion 
of the Centre by the end of the financial year 2005-2006. 

 38
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.7 The Government in their action taken re ply has stated that the Department is 
taking all steps to keep to the time schedul e for completion of the activities by way of 
monitoring the progress of work at different  levels. Secretary (ADF) also reviews the 
progress on a regular basis.  
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Feed and Fodder Development 
2.8 The Centrally-Sponsored scheme, “Assist ance to States for Feed and Fodder 
Development” was initiated during the 7 th Five Year Plan and discontinued during the 
10th Plan.  However, two components of this  scheme, establishment of fodder bank and 
enrichment of straw/cellulosic waste were  revived upto March 2005 to facilitate the 
States to combat the current drought situation in the country.  The Committee also note 
that a new revised scheme on Fodder Deve lopment has been proposed with the aim to 
increase qualitative green and dry fodder, f odder seeds, conservation of fodder, fodder 
block making and popularizi ng high yielding varieties of  fodder crops, ultimately 
increasing the fodder production. 
 The Committee note that due to competin g pressures on land, the green revolution 
and diversified use of agriculture residues,  the gap between the demand and supply of 
fodder is increasing. Besides, due to freque nt drought in several States, the need to 
develop fodder with drought proofing as an objective is in sharp focus.  Even under 
normal conditions, tremendous shortage of fodde r is felt in many parts of the country.  
The deficit aggravates further during natura l calamities such as drought, floods, etc.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongl y feel that for augmenting the fodder seed and fodder 
production in the drought prone areas, a Regi onal or Sub-Regional Station be set up 

 39
specially for these specific areas to facilitate production and easy availability of fodder in 
consultation with the ICAR. 
 The Committee further note that the two components of the Scheme which were 
revived to facilitate the Stat es to combat the current drough t situation in the country has 
come to an end in March 2005 and as of now  the new scheme has only been proposed to 
the Planning Commission. The Committee observe  that with the gap arising between the 
conclusion of the existing Scheme and the implementation of the new proposed Scheme, 
the shortage of fodder will aggravate furtherm ore.  The Committee, therefore, desire and 
recommend that the new revised scheme  on `Fodder Development’ should be 
implemented at the earliest  not only to combat chronic `Fodder Shortage’ in certain parts 
of the country but also to tackle the pr oblem of plenty elsewhere by setting up of 
adequate number of Fodder Banks.  The Depa rtment also needs to evolve a mechanism 
for timely and suitable transportation of fodder from areas of plenty to areas of scarcity in 
consultation with the Railways.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.9 The Government in their action taken repl y has stated that the Department is 
operating 7 Regional Stations  for Forage Production & De monstration at Hissar, 
Haryana/Suratgarh Rajasthan/Gandhinagar, Gujarat/Kalyani, West Bengal/Hyderabad, 
Andhra Pradesh/Chennai, Tamil Nadu/Srin agar, Jammu and Kashmir and 1 Central 
Fodder Seed Production Farm at Hessarghatta, Bangalore.  Each Fodder Station covers 
three to four States in its region for th eir fodder development programme.  These Fodder 
Stations undertake following fodder development activities. 
(e) Multiplication of high yielding varieties of fodder crops 

 40
(f) Training programmes for farmers as well as State Gove rnment officials 
engaged in fodder development programme 
(g) Field demonstrations of newly e volved high yielding varieties of fodder 
species at the farmers’ field 
(h) Farmers’ fairs/field days for extension and awareness. 
During 2005-06, the Planning Commission ha s not allocated funds from Plan 
head for these Stations and has also advised the Department to stop fodder seed 
production in these stations.  The Department  has however, taken up the matter with the 
Planning Commission as well as the Minist ry of Finance for providing funds from 
suitable budget head for these Stations. 
The new revised scheme on Fodder Devel opment has been approved with total 
outlay of Rs. 24.50 crore for implementation during remaining period of 10 th Plan.  
Guidelines for submission of proposals for a ssistance under the scheme have been issued 
to the States in May, 2005.  In order to prevent wastage of crop residues/straw etc. left in 
the farmers’ fields after harvesting of cr ops, a component on `Assistance to fodder block 
making units’ under which gainful utilization of crop residues by their conversion into 
`Fodder blocks’ has been included.  Further, the Department also recommends to the 
Ministry of Railways from time to time on sp ecific requests from the States to permit 
transportation of fodder from are of surplus to those of defi cit on priority particularly 
during drought situations.  
Comments of the Committee 
2.10  For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No.1.12 of Chapter-I 
of the Report. 
 

 41
Recommendation No. 6 
Sheep Breeding Farm, Hissar 
2.11 The Sheep Breeding Farm at Hissar, Ha ryana had been esta blished with the 
objective to produce around 1,000 exotic and crossbred rams annually for supply to 
various State Governments/Organisations for implementing Sheep Development 
Programme launched in the resp ective States.  The Commi ttee are constrained to note 
that out of the Tenth Plan allocation of Rs . 25.00 crore, the Department could merely 
spend Rs. 3.05 crore during the first three years which is a meagre 12.2%. Also out of the 
Tenth Plan target of production and suppl y of 5,000 rams to various States, the 
Department could supply only 1,533 rams in the first two years, i.e. 2002-2003 and 2003-
2004.  However, the achievement during 2004-2005 was nil and also no target has been 
fixed for 2005-06 reportedly due to paucity of land in the farm.  The Committee also note 
that the issue of finalizing lease agreement and lease rent with the Haryana Government 
is yet to be resolved.  The Department in reply to a question informed the Committee that 
the matter will once again be taken up with the State Government.  
 The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to take up the matter 
expeditiously with the State of Haryana de novo in order to accelerate the implementation 
of the National Sheep Development Programme .  The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the response of the Government of Haryana.   
 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 The Government in their action taken reply has stated that it is not correct that in 
respect of supply of rams to various states there was no achievement during 2004-05 and 
no target has been fixed for 2005-06.  As a matter of fact, 1370 rams were supplied 

 42
during 2004-05 and target of 1050 has been fixed for 2005-06 (the target is lower because 
of the need to cull some animals). 
 Regarding the issue of lease agreement, the Government of Haryana has agreed to 
extend the lease agreement from 1998 to 2018 at the rate of Rs . 1100 per hectare per 
annum.  Necessary formalities are being completed for this. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
2.13 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Paragraph No.1.15 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
Recommendation No. 9 
Integrated Fisheries Project (IFP), Cochin 
2.14 The Integrated Fisheries Project is e ngaged in the development of technologies 
for harvesting and post-harvestin g of marine fish resources.  It has a well established 
fishery complex.  It has also well equipped processing unit for processing and marketing 
of diversified value added fish products and a Research and Development laboratory.  
The Project has the objective to popularize fi shing methods, crafts and gear, processing 
and development of products of fish landed by projects vessels, repair and maintenance 
of fishing craft, etc.  It also aims to cont ribute towards fisheries e ducation of the country 
by way of providing training and also to strengthen valu e added product processing 
activities, strengthening the domestic market, stabilizing the price and ensuring returns to 
primary producers.  For the purpose, the project is also engaged in imparting institutional 
training in different disciplines relating to fisheries. 
 The Committee are constrained to note the low utilization of plan funds by the 
Department.  During the first three years of the 10
th Plan, the Department could utilize 
only Rs. 1.54 crore out of the total allocated amount of Rs . 5.60 crore for the entire 10 th 

 43
Plan period.  The Committee were informed that  some of the reasons for the shortfall are 
insufficient raw material (fish) landed by the vessels from FSI and CIFNET to cater to 
the requirement of processing plant.  It was also mentioned that due to poor landings and 
variation in the price, the quality procured was limited a nd the fish processing and 
product development was also limited to the availability of the raw material.  The 
Committee do not accept the reasons for the shortfall since IFP, Cochin is an extension of 
the Department.  The Committee, therefore, e xpect the Department to ensure that the 
measures instituted for galvanizing differe nt schemes and projects are monitored 
scrupulously so that such shor tfall does not recur and the envisaged target s are achieved 
by the close of the Tenth Plan. 
Reply of the Government 
2.15 The Government in their action taken reply has stated that the Integrated Fisheries 
Project (IFP) is engaged in technology deve lopment, training in post harvest technology 
and popularization of value added products. The quantity of fish processed by IFP 
depends on the availability of required varieties for procurement from open market as the 
fish landed by vessels from FSI and CIFNET ar e inadequate to meet the requirement of 
processing plant.  The Department is making all efforts to increase the procurement of 
fish from open market and Matsyafed.   
 The Project processed more than 100 tonnes of fish during 2004-05 as against 
57.65 tonnes in 2003-04. The Project has been going through transitiona l stage subject to 
re-organization and redefini ng of its mandate.  Notwithst anding this, action has been 
initiated to accelerate the proc ess to implement the schemes for utilization of approved 
outlay.   The performance of the Project is  also being monitore d on monthly basis to 
ensure that the targets are achieved and shortfall does not occur. 

 44
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Development of Fisheries 
2.16 The Committee note that having almo st reached plateau in production from 
coastal waters, the scope for increasing fish  production now lies in the deep sea which 
brings to the foremost the safety of the fishermen at sea.  Since there is a large scope and 
potential in the deep-sea fish ing, the Committee feel that there is an imperative need to 
strengthen the infrastructure to facilitate landing and berthing and post harvest operations 
which would also benefit the consumers and processing industry as well.  The Committee 
also note that out of the total 10
th Plan outlay of Rs. 750.00 crore for Fisheries Sector, the 
Department have incurred an expenditure of only Rs. 260.17 crore during first three years 
of 10th Plan. The Committee would lik e to be apprised of the new measures initiated to 
speed up the tardy pace of expenditure.    The Committee also note that since fishery is a 
State subject and the State Governments, are responsible for overall development of the 
sector, the Union Government should suppl ement their efforts by extending and 
enhancing financial assistance to the States who are starve d of funds. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Department to ensure th at the funds allocated are fully utilized  by 
the close of the Tenth Plan on infrastructu re development for in creasing production and 
productivity of fish thereby raising the socio-economic conditions of the fishing 
community. 
Reply of the Government 
2.17 The Government in their action taken reply has stated that in order to exploit the 
deep-sea fishery resources and increase in the overall fish production of the country, the 
Department has been providing necessary financial and technical assistance for 
development of the fishery sector. In this direction, the Centrally Sponsored Scheme on 

 45
“Development of Marine Fisheries, Infras tructure and Post Harvest Operations” 
encompassing various components namely i) Development of Marine Fisheries- a) 
Introduction of Intermediate crafts of Impr oved Design, b) Resource specific Deep Sea 
Fishing Vessels including Vehicle Monitori ng System (VMS), c) Motorization of 
Traditional Craft, d) Safety of Fishermen at Sea, e) Fi shermen Development Rebate on 
HSD; ii) Development of Infrastructure and Post Harvest Operations-a) Establishment of 
Fishing Harbour and Fish Landing Centre s and b) Strengthening of Post Harvest 
Infrastructure; iii) Maintenance of Dre dger TSD Sindhuraj, have been implemented. 
Certain components namely Resource specific Deep sea Fishing Vessels including VMS, 
Fishermen Development Rebate on HSD, Intr oduction of Intermediate Craft of improved 
design etc have been introduced during the Tent h Plan primarily to exploit the deep sea 
fishery resources. 
 So far as development of safe landing and berthing facilitie s are concerned, 40 
new projects comprising of 10 fishing harbour s and 30 fish landing ce ntres are proposed 
for implementation during Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-07). Besides, modernization of 16 
existing fishing harbours and fish landing centres is also pr oposed. It is estimated that 
once these projects are completed, they would provide safe landing and berthing facilities 
to an additional 1500 small-mechanized boa ts and 4500 traditional / artisanal craft, 
besides benefiting consumers and processing industries etc. During the first three years of 
the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-05), financ ial assistance has been extended to the 
implementing agencies for the construction of  nine fishing harbour s and 19 fish landing 
centres and these are at various stages of construction. Further central assistance has been 
extended for modernization of four fishing harbours during the same period.  In order to 
ensure utilization of funds, periodical review, dialogue wi th the State Governments and 
other implementing agencies, field visits  are undertaken by the officials of the 

 46
Department.  It is expected that funds provided to implement the schemes would be fully 
utilized during the 10th Plan. 
Recommendation No. 13 
Strengthening of Database and Information Networking for Fisheries Sector 
2.18 The Committee are surprised to note that  due to delay in creation of posts under 
the scheme, “Strengthening of Database and Information Networking for fisheries 
sector”, it is not possible to submit economically  viable and technically feasible proposal 
seeking financial assistance for IT and other components. The Department, in reply to a 
question by the Committee, stated that all the States/Union Territories have not been able 
to create the posts as the matter is stated  to be pending in concerned state Finance 
Departments.  The Committee feel that the Department should take up the matter with the 
responsible State Departments at the highest level so that the database and information 
system for fisheries sector is put in pl ace either by enjoining additional duties/re-
deployment of existing staff or by creating additional posts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.19  The Government in their action taken re ply has stated that the Department took 
up the matter with the Fishery Departments of  all the State Governments to create the 
posts sanctioned under the scheme on “Stren gthening of Database and Information 
Networking” for the fisheries sector.  The requ isite posts have been created in the last 
quarter of 2004-05 in 17 States and the same are likely to be filled shortly by 
redeployment of existing staff in the States or otherwise. 
Comments of the Committee 
2.20 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Paragraph No.1.30 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 

 47
Recommendation No. 14 
Development of Inland Fisheries. 
2.21 The Committee have been constantly em phasizing the need for tapping the vast 
fish potential of the inland fisheries includi ng the Himalayan region which is full of 
rivers, rills and rivulets, lakes and ponds.  There are other vast areas of 
marshy/waterlogged land in the Gangetic plains  particularly in western UP and Bihar 
suitable for fresh water and saline fish.  Furt her, there are other inland water bodies of 
different varieties and sizes spread across the country in ponds, lakes,  rills and rivulets  
The Committee are surprised to note that the Department has not done any study or 
preliminary survey of such areas to harness the fishing potential in recent years as seen 
from their reply.  Further, a large area over three lakh hectar e is submerged under 
irrigation dams/reservoirs, which by the admissi on of the Department can increase fish 
production by 12 to 15 times.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that conc rete and time-bound action plan must be taken 
up for development and tapping of fisheries in  the vast Himalayan region, inland waters 
and the water in irrigation dams. The Committ ee also feel, should the need arise, the 
budget allocation for the Scheme can also be  increased in the co ming years of the 10 th 
Plan. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
2.22 As per the recommendations of th e Parliamentary Standing committee on 
Demands for Grants of the year 2000-01, a High Level Expert Committee was set up by 
the Department in July 2000 to evaluate pot ential available for de velopment of fresh 
water aquaculture in the country. In this di rection, Government formulated and launched 
the Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Developm ent of Inland Fisher ies and Aquaculture 
under Macro Management Approach in St ates / UTs during the Tenth Plan. The 

 48
components approved under the scheme are i)  Development of Freshwater Aquaculture; 
ii) development of Brackishwater Aquaculture; iii) Coldwater Fisheries and Aquaculture; 
iv) Development of Waterlogged Areas; v) Productive Utilization of Inland Saline / 
Alkaline soil for Aquaculture; and vi) Inte grated Development of Inland Capture 
Resources (reservoirs / rivers etc.) 
 The expenditure on developmental activ ities is shared on 75:25 basis by the 
Government of India and State / UT Governments in respect of all aforesaid components. 
While the expenditure on this scheme during the first two years of the plan was Rs. 21.17 
crore, the expenditure in 2004-05 was Rs. 21.12 crore.  
 
Recommendation No. 15 
Setting up of Fisheries Development Board 
2.23 It hardly needs reiteration that the Fisher ies Sector is such a vital sector of our 
economy which has enormous potential of ge nerating income and improve the economic 
status of the people by providing gain ful employment to over 11.00 million people 
engaged fully, partially or in subsidiary activities pertaining to the Sector, with an equally 
impressive segment of the population engaged in ancillary activitie s associated with 
fisheries and aquaculture.  The Committee also note that Fisheries were brought under the 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying in the hope that such an important sector 
of activity would receive due attention commensurate with its vast potential. 
 The Committee are happy to note that India is now the 3 rd largest producer of fish 
in the world and second largest producer of fresh water fish in the world.  The fish 
production during 2003-2004 is estimated to be 63.99 lakh tonnes.  The country exported 
5.21 lakh tonnes of marine products valued  at Rs. 6,793.05 crore in 2002-2003 compared 
to 4.58 lakh tonnes of marine products , valued at Rs. 5,815 crore in 2001-2002.  

 49
However, the Committee are also aware of th e decline in fish and fish products for 2003-
04 mainly due to the decline in  the export of frozen fish as  compared to the previous 
years. 
 Undoubtedly, the Fisheries sector deserves much greater investment for its further 
growth and expansion.  Most importantly, fisheries sector bein g one of the most 
important source of livelihood for a very large section of the economically backward 
population of the country, great er and concerted efforts ar e required for augmenting 
production and productivity.  The Committee are we ll aware of the fact that India has not 
been able to develop modern fishing technol ogy to utilize its huge  potential of fishery 
resources.  The harvesting of such highly po tential resource is being done mostly by non-
motorised traditional crafts due to shortage/non-availability of mechanized boats, modern 
communication system and fishing gears, nuts and other necessary modern equipments, 
with the result that hardly one-third of this  potential is being exploited.  The Committee 
also feel that allocation with regard to fisher ies sector may be enhanced so that shortage 
of funds does not become a hindrance in the proper f unctioning and updating of all 
infrastructural facilities and for maintenance and upkeep of the same.  
 The Committee get an unmistakable impre ssions that a vast sector like fisheries, 
having great potential for further growth is not being accorded the focused and undivided 
attention that it ought to get.   The Comm ittee, therefore, recommends strongly that 
Government must set up expeditiously an apex board to exclusively look after the various 
problems and aspects associated with the fisheries sector for its accelerated growth.   
Reply of the Government 
2.24 The Government in their ac tion taken reply has stated that during the Tenth Plan, 
two macro schemes namely Development of Ma rine Fisheries, Infrastructure and Post 
Harvest Operations and Development of Inland Fisheries and aquaculture covering gamut 

 50
of activities have been put in place to enhance production an d productivity in the fishery 
sector and thereby to improve the socio-economic condition of the people employed win 
the sector.  The scheme for the marine sector  has motorization of traditional crafts as one 
of its component.  During 2004-05, Centra l assistance of Rs . 410.00 lakh has been 
released to States/UTs to motorize 4100 traditional crafts.             
Action has already been initiated to establish a National Fisheries Development 
Board with the broad objective to bring all activities relating to Fisheries and Aquaculture 
under a single umbrella with a view to improve the production, processing and marketing 
of the fishing products.  The Planning Commission when approached in this  regard have 
suggested to have a detailed f easibility report before the proposal is considered by them 
for ‘ in principle’ approval.  A feasibility study has since been awarded in the first week 
of May 2005 for submission of the report in 3 month’s time .  Simultaneously the other 
details for setting up the proposed Board are being worked out in consultation with the 
concerned organizations. 
Comments of the Committee 
2.25  For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No.1.33 of Chapter-I 
of the Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
Acquisition of new vessel for Fisheries Survey of India 
2.26 Fisheries Survey of India is the nodal ag ency for survey and assessment of marine 
fisheries resources of the India Exclusive Ec onomic Zone with headquarters at Mumbai.  
At present, the Institute has 13 vessles for the Survey of Fisheries.  The thirteen vessels 
are deployed from seven operational bases at Porbandar, Mumbai, Mormugao, Kochi, 
Chennai Vishakhapatnam and Port Blair for fi sheries resources, surv ey and monitoring.  

 51
In reply to a question, the Committee were informed that 6-8 ships are more than 20-
years old and need to be replaced.  The Committee have been recommending in the past 
in their earlier reports for formation and im plementation of perspective plan of purchase 
of new vessels to replace the ineffective old survey vessels.  The Committee note that 
pursuant to their recommendation, the Department  has replaced two old vessels and have 
acquired two new vessels, namely Matsya Dr ushti and Matsya Vrushti on 21 February 
2005 which will conduct tuna surveys in the Exclusive Economic Zone.   The Committee, 
further, feel that repair of old vessel is  causing heavy recurring expenditure and thus 
desire that the Department should formulate a plan to purchase a few more fishing survey 
vessels with modern technologies  to carry out the survey work to ac hieve the targets of 
FSI.    
 The Committee are distressed to note that , despite endowed with a vast coast line 
and exclusive economic zone in the wide stre tch of the Indian ocean, our marine wealth 
therein is being exploited by unscrupulous fore ign vessels.  It is, therefore, incumbent 
upon the Government to take immediate measures to ensure that foreign vessels/ 
fishermen are barred and prevented from fishing in our exclusive economic zone with the 
active involvement and coopera tion of the Indian Coast Gu ard.  More sophisticated 
survey ships, if necessary, be acquired for the purpose.   Simultaneously, suitable and 
expeditious measures need to be taken to equip our fishermen with necessary fishing 
facilities/equipments for deep fishing. 
Reply of the Government 
2.27  The Government in their action taken re ply has stated that the Tenth Five Year 
Plan proposal of FSI included the activitie s of ongoing nature, which need to be 
continued and new activities such as acquisiti on of new survey ve ssels, technologies and 
related requirements for successful implemen tation of exploratory surveys, fish stock 

 52
production in EEZ.  The proposal also include d the blue print for phasing out the eight 
old vessels and acquisition of ne w ones in their place.  FSI has carried out the exercise 
and scrutinized the condition of the vessels  in its fleet and adopted a schedule of 
decommissioning and replacement of the ve ssels based on their age, physical and 
operational condition.  FSI has acquired two monofilament long liners on 21.02.2005 for 
conducting tuna survey in EEZ.  The vessels have already commenced survey operations 
of oceanic and pelagic Tuna resources of the west and east coast of sub-continent.  
 In accordance with the above Plan, FSI has formulated a proposal for acquisition 
of two mid water trawler as well.  Simulta neously, with the acquisition of the two new 
vessels, a decommissioning scheme for old an d obsolete vessels has also been chalked 
out so as to phase out aged vessels whic h are main cause of huge expenditure for 
maintenance and repairs. With the introducti on of two monofilament  long liners in the 
fleet, two older vessels, viz. Matsya Jeev an and Matsya Mohini  are processed for 
decommissioning. 

 53
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
 COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
 VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 

 54
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Infrastructural development in Central Cattle Breeding Farm 
4.1 Seven Cattle Breeding Farms located in di fferent agro climatic regions of the 
country maintain herds of some important in digenous and exotic cattle breeds as well as 
buffaloes for distribution to the States for use in the Cattle and Buffalo Development 
Programme.  The Plan allocation during 2004- 05 had been increased to Rs. 8.60 crore 
against BE of Rs. 6.00 crore in 2003-04 towards infrastructural development necessary 
for production of high quality bulls in Central Cattle Breeding Farm.  The Department in 
its Action Taken Reply to the recommendation made by the Committee in their 3rd Report 
on Demands for Grants 2004-2005 informed th at all the developmental work in the 
Central Cattle Breeding Farms will be comple ted within the financial year 2004-2005 as 
desired by the Committee.  The Committee, while examining the Demands for Grants 
2005-2006, asked about the progress of developmental works which are being carried out 
in the farms and also the expenditure incurr ed, thereon, the Department could not furnish 
the desired information.  The Committee furthe r note that allocations scaled down at RE 
stage of 2004-2005 were again raised to Rs . 11.16 crore at BE stage of 2005-2006.  The 
reasons put forth by the Department for enhancement of funds during 2005-2006 were 
some developmental works suggested by Cent ral Management Committee in the farms 
like Construction of Quarantine Sheds at each farm, purchase of agricultural equipments 
and machinery, etc.  The Committee are surpri sed to note that over the years while the 
funds are being used for enhancing developmental works in the farms, the Department 

 55
was unable to give details of the works being carried out and also the actual expenditure 
incurred on it so far.  Obviously, the Departme nt has not been able to utilize the funds 
allocated. Apparently, the Management Committee and the Advisory Committee 
constituted by the Department have been f unctioning in a lackadaisical manner.  The 
Committee would like the Department to assess the performance of the farms and initiate 
sincere efforts for their improvement.  They al so desire that the money allocated for the 
purpose should be fully utilized and definite  time frame may be fixed for completion of 
the developmental works in the farms so that poor animals in the farms do not suffer. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the efforts made to make available good 
breeds of indigenous cows and buf faloes during the last thre e years State-wise and year-
wise. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.2 The Government in their action taken re ply has stated that the funds for civil 
works were released to CPWD and most of  the work taken up during 2004-05 have been 
completed / are in the final stage of completion.  
The expenditure incurred during last 3 years under various Sub-Heads and Budget 
provision made for 2005-06 is as under:                                                                              
        (Rs. in thousand) 
Actual Expenditure Incurred Items of 
Expenditure 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 Total
Budget Provision 
made for 2005-06 
Major works 421 1581 4699 6701 27039 
Minor works 46 60 43 149 6500 
Machinery & 
Equipments 
2350 587 1933 4870 7725 
Total 2817 2228 6675 11720 41264 
 

 56
Higher outlay provided at BE level for the year 2005-06 is essentially required for 
undertaking urgent major & minor works in th e farms and purchase of critical machinery 
& equipment as recommended by the Farm Management Committee. The Management 
Committee discussed in detail the proposal of all the seven farms as suggested by Farm 
Technical Advisory Committees (FTACs) for bringing about essential improvement in 
the farms.  
  In order to accomplish the desired works to be undertaken by the farms the 
proposals are being processed and it is anti cipated that the funds earmarked for the 
scheme will be utilized fully.   
  The mandate of the Central Cattle Breeding farms is to supply cattle and buffalo 
breeding bulls to various States for breed  improvement programmes i.e artificial 
insemination and natural service. The bulls /bull calves supplied by CCBFs to different 
States during the last 3 years is given at Annexure-I and the cows/heifers supplied to 
States and Royal Govt. of Bhutan is given at Annexure-II. 
Comments of the Committee 
4.3  For comments of the Committee please re fer to Paragraph No.1.9 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
 
 

 57
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RFESPECT OF WHICH  
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Assistance to Co-operatives 
5.1 The scheme `Assistance to Co-operati ves’ is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
which was approved in January 2000 for providing assistance in the form of grants for 
rehabilitation of loss-making dairy co-operativ es/district level unions, as well as to the 
State Level Federations which are set up in  different parts of the country under the 
Operation Flood Programme.  The Scheme envisages rehabilitation assistance on 50:50 
sharing basis between the Government of India and the concerned State Governments. 
 The Committee are distressed to note th at a number of these unions/federations 
have accumulated losses for a variety of reas ons, causing severe hardships to the milk 
producers and their daily economy, resultin g in, among other things, delayed and 
irregular payments to the poor farmer member s of these co-operatives. In response to a 
query, the Committee were informed that excessive and low ma npower productivity, 
lower scale of operation of some milk union s with high per litre cost on procurement, 
transport, processing and dist ribution with lower sales realization and other factors as 
some of the reasons for the unsatisfactory performance of these unions/federations.   
The 10 th Plan outlay for this Scheme was Rs. 130.00 crore.  Surprisingly, the 
Committee observe that the Department could utilize only Rs. 25.29 crore during the first 
three years of the 10 th Plan leaving a huge unspent ba lance of Rs. 104.71 crore.  The 
Department had stated that the pace of e xpenditure will increas e once the progress of 
implementation of many unions is revived follo wing issue of appropria te instructions to 

 58
them.  The Department further pointed out that  in case of any shortfall in the utilization 
of the outlay earmarked, the same can be divert ed to other schemes and the effort of the 
Department will be to fully utilize the total outlay for the 10 th Plan.  The Committee 
strongly desire that the Depart ment should make all out and integrated efforts to fully 
utilize the entire outlay earmarked for the 10th Plan.  
The Committee also recommend that the funding pattern of the Scheme from the 
present sharing and rehabilitation of assistance on 50:50 sharing basis may be changed to 
75:25 to ensure better participation of the States.  The Committee hope that such a change 
in funding pattern will help  mitigate the plight of the milk producers/their 
unions/cooperatives across the country particul arly when in some parts of the country 
milk is being sold at rates much cheaper than the mineral water.  
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The Government in their action taken re ply has stated that the outlay for the 10 th 
Plan for the Central Sector Plan Scheme ‘ Assistance to Cooperatives’ is Rs 130.00 crore 
and the Department has utilized Rs 29.18 cror e during the first three years of the 10 th 
Plan. The scheme is purely demand driven and on an average, an amount of Rs 10-12 
crore is required annually to meet the co mmitted liabilities of some of the proposals 
already approved and new proposals.  
 The Department has entrusted the eval uation study of the scheme to National 
Institute of Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE), Hyderabad, an autonomous 
organization under the Departme nt of Agriculture & Coopera tion. Therefore, revision in 
the scheme in respect of funding pattern and other aspect will be considered after the 
findings of the evaluation study become available. 

 59
Comments of the Committee 
5.3 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Paragraph No.1.18 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Delhi Milk Scheme 
5.4 The Department in its reply to the r ecommendation made by the Committee in 3 rd 
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) stat ed that the Management Committee of 
DMS has taken measures to contain the losses of DMS.  The DMS is able to process and 
pack 3.50 lakh litre of variety of milk per day.  The Depart ment is making efforts to 
increase the processing capacity of different type of milk up to 6.00 lakh litre per day by 
undertaking modifications and upgradations of  the plant and machinery. It has been 
stated by the Department that the entire cost  for upgradation and modification of the plan 
to bring it to a semi-automatic level w ill be Rs. 23.00 crore out of which Rs. 5.00 crore 
have already been earmarked for DMS in the current financial year.  The Committee also 
note that National Capital Territory (NCT) was also requested to take over DMS and to 
run it.  However, the Government of NCT wa s not in favour of the proposal of taking 
over DMS unless the Government of India decides to accept al l up-to-date liabilities of 
DMS and grant adequate funds for mode rnization of plant machinery. In the 
circumstances, the Committee feel that the remaining amount of Rs. 18.00 crore required 
for the upgradation of plant shoul d be released in the next tw o years so that the fate of 
DMS is fully equipped with upgraded and mo dern plant and machinery to meet the 
growing milk requirement of the Capital. 

 60
Reply of the Government 
5.5  The Government in their action taken reply has stated that during the current 
year, no budget provision has been provided for the Delhi Milk Scheme. However, the 
Department has requested the Planning Comm ission to allocate Rs 18.00 crore to DMS 
during 10th Plan. 
Comments of the Committee 
5.6 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Paragraph No.1.21 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Export of Marine Fisheries 
5.7 The Committee note the importance of the fisheries sector which occupies a very 
important place in the socio-economic development of the country by providing 
employment to over 11 million people mostly  belonging to backward/weaker sections, 
engaged partially or in subsidiary activities associated with the fisheries and aquaculture 
sector.   
The Committee are pleased to note that there has been steady growth in the export 
of fish and fish products and that efforts are being made  to boost the e xport potential 
through diversification of products for exports . The Department in reply to a question 
raised by the Committee stated that the main re asons for the fall in export of frozen fish 
are stringent SPS conditions imposed by EU, anti-dumping duty imposed by the US and 
problems of muddy and moldy smell of shrimps in  certain parts of the eastern coast.  The 
Committee, therefore, hardly need to underline the need fo r launching new and sustained 
measures so as to maintain at least the st eady growth in the e xport of fish and fish 
products.  The Committee also desire the Depa rtment to ensure e ffective utilization of 

 61
funds allocated during the terminal years of the Tenth Plan so that the intended objectives 
are achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 The Government in their action taken re ply has stated that the Marine Products 
Export Development Authority (MPEDA) in cons ultation with this Ministry has initiated 
a number of measures to tackle the issue of antibiotics residues in the marine products 
exported from India, especially shrimp a nd also the anti-dumpi ng duty imposed by USA 
as well as on the other problems related to exports. 
During the visit of the European Union Mission to India in October, 2003 to 
evaluate the level of residue on banned antib iotics and environmental contaminants, an 
assurance was given by the Ministry of Co mmerce that for violating the conditions the 
license of a firm can be cancelled and further operations stopped on th e basis of the test 
results in respect of samples drawn from the firms testing positive for the banned drugs. 
A Core   Group comprising representatives fr om Aquaculture Authority, Central Institute 
of Fisheries Technology, Ce ntral Institute of Brackis hwater Aquaculture, Export 
Inspection Council, MPEDA, Governments of  Andhra Pradesh and Sea Food Exporters’ 
Association, was constituted to prepare the guidelines for this purpose, which shall be 
adopted to prevent the use of antibiotics in shrimp farming in tune with the sanitary 
requirements (SPS) of European Union (EU). 
An Indian Delegation led by the Minister of State for Commerce visited USA 
during the first week of April 2005 to negot iate the issue of an ti-dumping duty in the 
background of Tsunami incident. The US Administration had decided to have a review of 
the anti-dumping duty imposed on our exports.   

 62
The Coastal Aquaculture Authority Bill  (2005) passed by both Houses of 
Parliament has received President’s assent. This will definitely help in increasing the area 
under brackish water aquaculture and thereby increasing employment and exports.  
Suitable measures are being taken to ensure effective utilization of funds allocated 
for the various fisheries development schemes by the terminal year of the Tenth Plan and 
thereby to achieve their desired objectives. 
Comments of the Committee 
5.9 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Paragraph No.1.24 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Safety of Fishermen at Sea 
5.10 Having regard to the hazardous nature of sea fishing which often results in loss of 
life, fishing boats and implements, injury and permanent impairment of fishermen and 
even in their capture as prisoners by foreign countries for unwittingly straying in their 
Exclusive Economic zone, the Committee enquired as to what measures were taken by 
the Government for the safety of fisherma n. The Committee also noted the result of the 
recent studies which have pointed out that calamities occur due to ill equipped vessels 
and non-availability of an early warning system on board.  The scheme, “Safety of 
Fisherman at Sea” is being taken up to address this issue by equipping the small 
mechanized craft by providing a package of position finding and communication 
equipment.  This component envisages inst alling one Global Positioning System (GPS) 
and a wireless set on the small-mechanised fishing vessels.  The unit cost of these 
equipments together works out to about Rs. 1.50 lakh, 20% of whic h (but not exceeding 
Rs. 30,000) is provided as backended subsidy through the National Co-operative 

 63
Development Corporation (NCDC) to benefit 1,666 boats in the 10th Plan.  In response to 
a query, the representative of the Departme nt confessed that the Government has not 
achieved the target of vessel monitoring system  but assured of definite progress in the 
matter.  
The Committee strongly urge th e Department to give utmost priority to the safety 
of fishermen specially in the deep-sea fishing by taking necessary measures at the earliest 
by providing them with advance mechani zed boats, updated modern communication 
systems and fishing gears and other necessa ry modern equipments.  The Committee, 
further desire the Department to ensure that  the overall outlay a pproved for the scheme 
during the Tenth Plan is fully utilized by the terminal years of the plan.   
Reply of the Government 
5.11 The Government in their action taken re ply has stated that the macro scheme on 
“Development of Marine Fisheries, Infrastructure and Post Harvest Operations” launched 
in the 10 th Plan has safety of fishermen at sea as one of its component.  It envisages to 
equip the fishing vessels with Global Po sitioning System (GPS), wireless set, vessel 
Monitoring System (VMS) in a phased manner.  The Central assistance is extended to the 
implementing agencies as per need basis on receipt of proposals.  The progress in 
utilization of funds earmarked under various schemes implemented by the Department is 
reviewed regularly and it is expected that outlay approved for the fishing sector for the 
10th Plan will be utilized fully by the terminal year of the Plan. The implementation of the 
component relating to safety of fishermen will be taken up during the current year. 
Comments of the Committee 
5.12 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Paragraph No.1.27 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 

 64
 
Recommendation No. 17 
Rehabilitation of Tsunami-affected farmers/fishermen 
5.13 The Committee note that the Tsunami waves played havoc in the Southern 
Coastal Areas and in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  The devastating waves rendered 
several agricultural land incultivable and wi ped out the lives of so  many people and their 
place of settlement besides the loss of a great number of livestock severely affecting the 
poor farmers in particular.  The Committee also take note of the loss of  56,000 boats and 
the damage of around 20,000 boats in the Tsunami  tragedy which has affected around 37 
fishing harbours in the country.   
 In response to a query, the Committee were  informed in the course of evidence 
that Rs. 11.00 crore are kept for rehabilitati on which would be limited for the purpose of 
providing boats to fishermen for restoration of their means of livelihood.  The Committee 
also note the programme of the Government w ith regard to housing which would be of a 
short and also a long-term housing policy.  The Committee are ha ppy to note that the 
Government of India has set up a separate cell in the Planning Commission to monitor 
the proper implementation of this schemes and also to ensure the availability of funds.  
The Secretary assured the Committee that in the Andamans, where th e housing is getting 
delayed, temporary houses wi ll be constructed well befo re the Monsoon season, `though 
the permanent housing is going to be a long affair’. 
 The Committee hope that the package appr oved for the rehabilitation of fishermen 
which is 100% assistance for replacement/repair of traditional crafts/nets and also both 
subsidy and loans from the banks in th e case of motorized/mechanized boats is 
implemented scrupulously and speedily so as  to provide much needed succour to the 
affected fishermen.  The Committee also take no te of the oral reply from the Department 

 65
that housing will not be a problem for the Ts unami-affected people but that the problem 
would be the location and acquisition of la nd.  The Committee strongly desire that the 
Department should make concerted efforts to popularize the availability of 100% 
assistance for replacement/repair of traditi onal crafts and also the loans and subsidy 
available from the banks so that the affected people take advantage of the opportunity and 
restart their normal activity at the earliest. The Committee would also like to be apprised 
of the long term action plan drawn and put in  place for construction of permanent houses 
for fishermen state-wise. 
Reply of the Government 
5.14 The Government in their action taken reply has stated that under the Rajiv Gandhi 
Rehabilitation Package for Tsunami affected areas, assistance (as 100% subsidy) for 
replacement of catamaran boats plus nets  up to the unit cost of Rs. 32000 has been 
provided.  The affected fishermen who want to  replace boats and motors are entitled to 
get part of the cost as subsidy and the balan ce as bank loan at 7% rate of interest with 
repayment period of 7 years afte r one and a half year moratorium.  Further subsidy of 2 
% will be paid in case of prompt repayment. A Sub- Group on Fisheries has been set in 
the Department to review the progress of re habilitation programme of Tsunami affected 
fishers and its meeting are convened periodical ly. The Core Group set up in the Planning 
Commission is in the process of finalizing Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme including 
construction of permanent houses  and details would be ava ilable once the proposal is 
approved by the competent authority. 
Comments of the Committee 
5.15 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Paragraph No.1.36 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 

 66
Recommendation No. 18 
Setting up of Indian Council of Veterinary Research and Education 
5.16 The Committee have time and again emphasized the need for setting up of an 
Indian Council of Veterinary Research and Education on the line of ICAR. The 
Department in the earlier Action Taken Replies to the recommendations of the 
Committee have been holding the view that there is a need for an integrated approach to 
farming, encompassing agricultu ral live-stock and fisheris  sector and, therefore, 
expresses their satisfaction in the standing arrangements under which the Department 
banks upon the research conducted by Indian In stitute of Veterinary Research under the 
ICAR. The Committee observed that the live-stock sector provides more self-
employment for the socially disadvantaged including rural women and youth and has a 
vast potential for employment generation and export earnings as I ndia is endowed with 
57% of the buffalo, 16% of the cattle, 17% of goats and 5% of sheep population of the 
world. Undoubtedly, India can emerge as a major player in the export of animal products 
if the major issues confronting the animal production are addressed to meet the norms of 
international trade. In the considered view of the Committee, there is an overriding need 
for policy shift in the field of veterinary e ducation, research and extension so that the 
livestock sector is no longer treated as a s ub-sector of Agriculture. The Nation can ill-
afford to club veterinary education and res earch with the ICAR which essentially deals 
with plant sciences. The Committee further noted that the Government has prudently, set-
up specific Councils like Indian council of Me dical Research, Dental Council of India, 
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, Central Council for Research in 
Homeopathy etc. The Committee, therefore, reiterate the need for setting up a Council for 
Indian Veterinary Research and Education within the specific cognizance of Animal 

 67
Husbandry, dairying and Fisheries for the a ll round and accelerated development of live-
stock, poultry and fisheries through focused research, education and services. 
Reply of the Government 
5.17 The Government in their action taken re ply has stated that  the matter is under 
examination of the Department. 
 
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
18 January, 2006                                                    Chairman, 
28 Pausa, 1927 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Agriculture  
    
 

 68
APPENDIX –I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HE LD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 18 TH 
JANUARY, 2006 AT 1100 HRS. IN  ROOM, ‘139’, FIRST FLOOR, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri Raghunath Jha 
7. Smt. Rupatai D.Patil Nilangekar 
8. Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy 
9. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
10. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
11. Shri Harish Rawat 
12. Dr.M.S.Gill 
13. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
14. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
15. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
16. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
4. Shri D.S. Malha    -  Under Secretary 

 69
 
 At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman, welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and requested them to deliberate on the first item of the agenda of that day, 
i.e., the consideration of the statement pr epared by the Committee Secretariat comprising 
the comments/suggestions received from vari ous organisations on ‘The Food Safety and 
Standards Bill, 2005’ and after some deliberation decided that the draft report on the said  
Bill may be prepared by the Secretariat and be circulated to the Committee for their 
consideration by the first week of February, 2006.   
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up Memoranda No. 2 containing draft 13 th Action 
Taken Report on the 9 th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) for consideration and adoption. 
[Smt. Mohsina Kidwai, MP in the chair.] 
 The Committee also took up Memoranda  Nos. 3, 4 and 5 containing draft 14 th, 
15th and 16 th Action Taken Reports on the 10 th, 11 th and 12 th Reports on Demands for 
Grants relating to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education); Ministry of Agriculture (Depar tment of Animal Husbandry Dairying and 
Fisheries); and Ministry of Food Processing Industries for consideration and adoption. 
3. The Committee then adopted the draf t Action Taken Reports with certain 
additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee. 
4. The Committee thereafter authorized the Chairman to present the above-
mentioned Reports to the House on a date and time convenient to him. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

 70
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE FIFTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA) 
  
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     18 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Obser vations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Serial Nos. 1,2,4,5,6,9,10,13,14,15 and 16 
 
T o t a l          1 1  
 
Percentage        61.1%   
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Serial No. NIL 
            
P e r c e n t a g e  N I L          
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies 
Of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
Serial No.  3 
 
T o t a l          1    
 
Percentage        5.5% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which  
Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Serial No.  7,8,11,12,17 and18  
 
T o t a l          6    
 
Percentage        33.3% 
 
 
 
 