STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2004-2005) 
5
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005)  
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005)} 
 
 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) 
 

  
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
 
(2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005) 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on th e Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 2.3.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3.3.2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) 

  
CONTENTS 
  
           
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
INTRODUCTION 
  
CHAPTER I   Report  
 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have   
   been accepted by the Government  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the   
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect   
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of   
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee    
held on 17 February , 2005 
 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the   
Recommendations contained in the First Report 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2004-2005). 
 

  
 COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE  
(2004-2005) 
 
    Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri G.L. Bhargava 
5. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7. Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan 
8. Shri Lalchand Kol 
9. Shri Khagen Das 
10. Shri Dharmendra 
11. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
12. Shri Raghunath Jha 
13. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
14. Shri Prakash V. Patil 
15. Shri A. Ravichandran 
16. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
17. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
18. Shri Harihar Swain 
19. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
20. Shri Mahboob Zahedi 
21. # Smt. Anuradha Choudhary 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
23. Shri Harish Rawat 
24. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
25. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
26. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
27. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
28. Shri Datta Meghe 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
30. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
31. *Dr. M.S.Gill 
 
 

  
Chaudhary Munawwar Hassan  ceased to be the Member of this Committee owing to 
his nomination to  the Standing  Committee  on Labour  w.e.f.16.8.04 vide  L.S. 
Bt.Pt.-II dt.16.8.04 
 
# Smt. Anuradha Choudhary  has been nominated to this Committee  w.e.f. 30.8.2004 
vide  L.S. Bt.Pt-II, dt. 30.8.2004 
 
Shri Raashid Alvi ceased to be the Member of this Committee owing to his 
nomination  to the Committee on Personnel, Pu blic Grievances, Law & Justice w.e.f  
31.8.2004 
vide  R.S.  Bt Pt-II  dt. 31.8.2004 
 
*Dr. M.S. Gill has been nominated to this Committee w.e.f 31.8.2004 vide R. S. Bt  
Pt-II  dt. 31.8.2004 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Devender Singh   - Director 
 3. Shri K.D. Muley   - Under Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Walia   - Committee Officer 

  
   
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-
2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, present this Fifth Re port on Action Taken by Government on 
the recommendations/observations cont ained in the Firs t Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005) on Demands for Grants 
(2004-2005) of the Ministry of Agricu lture (Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation).  
 
2. The First Report of the Sta nding Committee on Agriculture (2004-
2005) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Agriculture, 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooper ation) was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 17.8.2004 and laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day.  The Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation was requested to furnish action taken 
replies of the Government to reco mmendations contained in the First 
Report.  The replies of the Gove rnment to all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were received. 
 
3. The Committee considered the ac tion taken replies furnished by 
the Government, approved the draf t comments and adopted the Fifth 
Report at their sitting held on 17 Febr uary, 2005.  Minutes of the sittings 
are placed in Appendix-I. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Take n by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the First Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
17 February, 2005             Chairman 
28 Magha, 1926(Saka)       Standing Committee on Agriculture. 
  
  

  
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on recommendations contained in  the First Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005) on Demands for Grants (2004-
2005) of the Ministry of Ag riculture (Department of Ag riculture and Co-operation) 
which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.8.2004. 
 
1.2 Action taken replies have been received fr om the Government in respect of all the 
16 recommendations contained in the Report.   These have been categorized as 
follows :- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II of the Report) 
 
Recommendations Sl. Nos.  1,3,5,7,8,9,11,12 and 14 
(Total- 9) 
 
  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter I II of the Report) 
NIL 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV of the 
Report to be commented upon in Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 2,4,6,10,13,15 & 16  (Total- 7) 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V of the Report) NIL 
 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations which have not been accepted and have been included in 
Chapter-IV and Chapter-II of the Report. 

  
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.2 
Investment in Agriculture 
1.4 Although the Agriculture Sector is the b ackbone of Indian economy, it is starved 
of capital.  The share of Agriculture in tota l Gross Capital Formation (GCF) has declined 
from 21 per cent in 1951-52 to 15.4 per cent in 1980-81, and further reduced to mere 8 
per cent in 1999-2000.  Investment in Agricultur e as per cent of gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) had declined from 1.9 per cent in th e early 1990s to 1.3 per cent in 2000, which is 
a matter of grave concern.  The contribution of  the public sector in GCF has also sharply 
declined.  The Committee are concerned to note that the decline in public sector Gross 
Capital Formation mainly reflects the decline in expenditure on irrigation works. 
 It is estimated that in order to achieve  the national growth of  8 per cent in the 
Tenth Plan period an investment of approximately Rs.33, 000 crore (at 1993-94 prices) in 
the years 2006-2007 would be re quired.  Government spending in the Agriculture will 
have to be significantly stepped up from the present level to meet the growth targets.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Government to increase the investment in Agriculture 
Sector and formulate suitable Schemes to attr act more capital from the Private Sector to 
give boost to the Agriculture in the country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.5 In order to facilitate highe r growth rate in Indian ag riculture, it is necessary to 
step up investment.  It is also necessary to  pay special attention to dry land farming.  
Equally important is the introduction of  marketing reforms aimed at promoting, inter-

  
alia, public-private partnership.  The following measures seek to  facilitate higher growth 
rate in Indian Agriculture:- 
• Doubling rural credit in three years, easi ng the burden of debt and high interest 
rate and nursing cooperative back to health. 
• Special programme for dry land farming in the arid and semi-a rid regions of the 
country, horticulture and water management. 
• Stepping up public investment in agri culture research and extension, rural 
infrastructure and irrigation 
• In order to guide the States in the implementation of reforms, Central Government 
had drafted a Model Act on Agricultural Marketing.  This Act would promote 
direct marketing of Agricultural commod ities from the farmers’ fields, without 
the necessity of going through licensed traders and regulated markets.  The Model 
Act also seeks to provide an institutional framework for contract farming.  It is 
expected that these arrangements will fac ilitate linking the farm sector to agro-
processing industry and to sources of extension advice, seeds, credit and markets. 
• Reforms in the APMC Act were discusse d at the National Conference of State 
Ministers on 19 th November, 2004 at Bangalore, wher ein States were advised to 
complete the process of amending APMC Act within a period of 2-3 months. 
The Ministry of Agriculture has also la unched a scheme to provide investment 
subsidy to marketing infrastructure projects in States undertaking reforms.  Large-scale 
investment in agri-infrastructure projects is expected to result  in far reaching benefits for 
all the stake holders. 
 

  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.6 The Committee note that the Governme nt measures aimed at stimulating 
growth in agriculture are totally shorn of attaining the desired investment 
targets.  Concrete and concerted effort s, therefore, need to be taken to 
achieve the investment target of Rs. 33,000 crore till the termin al year of the 
Tenth Plan, to attain the national grow th of 8 per cent and generate overall 
employment opportunities. The Committee are constrained to note that the 
Government’s routine reply smacks of utte r lack of farsightedness in achieving 
the targets.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the firm proposals to 
achieve the target investment of Rs. 33,000 crore in the remaining years of the 
10th Five Year Plan period.  Further, the Committee are unhappy to note that 
the Government has not paid any atte ntion to their recommendation for 
attracting capital from privat e sector to boost the agric ultural investment in the 
country. The Committee are of the view that the resources of public sector alone 
can scarcely be sufficient enough to  provide the requisite stimulus to 
agriculture. In their considered view the foremost step in this direction should 
be to take the concrete measures for making agriculture a paying preposition 
and a profitable venture so as to attrac t investment from private sector also.  
The Committee, therefore, expect th at the Ministry would make every 
endeavour to ensure that the measures  instituted for galvanising agricultural 
growth are monitored scrupulously to achieve the envisaged targets. 
 
 

  
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 3 
Utilisation of Plan Funds 
1.7 The Committee are constrained to note the low utilization of Plan funds by the 
Department.  During the Ninth Plan the Department could utilize Rs.7,673.70 crore out of 
the allocated amount of Rs.9,293 crore.   During 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 also the 
Department could not utilize the entire allo cated amount.  The Committee are informed 
that one of the reasons for unde r utilization is unspent balanc es with the St ates and also 
non-submission of utilization certificates by most of the States on time.  The Committee 
observe that most of the times Central Government delay release of funds to the States or 
release it at the fag end of the financial year and expect the States to utilize it in very 
short time.  Obviously, the States are not in a position to spend the entire amount and 
have unspent balance lying with them.  Th e Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
release of the funds to the St ates should be made on time so that they could utilize the 
amount rationally and there is proper monito ring of expenditure.  The Committee also 
desire that there shou ld be proper coordina tion with the State Governments so as to 
obtain Utilization Certificates and to safeguard that money released is spent only on 
approved Schemes and programmes. 
 The Committee notice that in respect of  some of the Schemes, the funds have 
been utilized by the States but they have expressed their inability to contribute the 
matching shares.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that while formulating Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes the financial capability of State Governments to contribute their 
share should also be assessed so that they do not face difficulties at a later stage and the 
Schemes are implemented effectively.  The G overnment may also consider the peculiar 

  
socio-economic conditions and industrial ba ckwardness of States so that suitable 
incentives and concessions are incorporated  in the Centrally Sponsored Schemes for 
harmonious growth and development of all Regions and States. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.8 For on-going schemes funds are released  in time.  However, so far as new 
schemes are concerned, it takes time in getti ng the approval of the competent authority, 
which at times results in delay in releasing funds. 
 The implementation of the schemes and expenditure is regularly monitored.  For 
proper utilization of the funds, the Government of India has got regular interaction with 
the State Governments and the problems, if any, are sorted out. 
 Under Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA) Scheme, States have flexibility 
to select the schemes of their felt needs and priorities.  The contribution of the State 
Governments has been brought down to 10 per cen t as against the normal level of 25 per 
cent.  In the case of North Eastern States, the entire fund is provi ded by the GOI under 
this Scheme.  For Technology Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture in 
North Eastern States including Sikkim, Ja mmu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttaranchal, 100 per cent contribution is given by the Government of India. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.9 The Committee note the reply of the Government that funds for on-going 
schemes are released in time to the States  but release of funds for new schemes get 
delayed due to late approval by the competent authority. The Committee strongly 
feel the urgent need to modify the approval procedure so that funds for implementation 
of these schemes could be released to th e State Governments well in time.  The 

  
Committee feel that some tangible timeframe for release of funds should be set up and 
an effective monitoring mechanism put in place at the Central level for proper and 
time-bound utilization of funds released to  the States. Needless to say, the timely 
release of funds will lead to proper and just utilization of funds by the States and 
effective expenditure monitoring by the Ministry. The Committee recommend that in 
case of any unwarranted delay in approval/release of funds,  responsibility must be pin 
pointed.  
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.4 
Suicides by farmers 
1.10 The Committee are appalled over the con tinuing incidences of suicide committed 
by the Farmers in the country.  In Andhra Pradesh – 435, in Karnataka – 469, in 
Maharashtra – 197, in Orissa – 100 cases, in Ra jasthan and Punjab – 3 cases in each state 
of suicides by farmers have been reported.  Similarly, cases of suicides have been 
reported in varying number from other States.  The extremity which drives the farmers to 
commit suicide demonstrates their agonizing pl ight and the scant attention paid by the 
concerned States to their problems.  On a query, the Committee were shocked to learn 
that even the actual reasons for suicides are also not reported by some of the State 
Governments.  The Committee draw an unmis takable conclusion that certainly crop 
failures due to drought and othe r natural calamities. heavy indebtedness of the farmers 
and the ruthlessness of the money lenders are some of the immediate and direct cause for 
these acts of suicides.  It is all the more painful that the State Governments, which are the 
investigating agencies; do not want to share the facts.  As a re sult the families of all such 

  
farmers do not get compensation and the Un ion Government cannot take appropriate 
preventive measures for want of factual position from the State Governments. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend th at the Union Government should not 
always wait for the reports from the State Go vernments, whenever there is a drought or 
any other natural calamity.  The Union Government ab initio should come forward and 
enquire the factual position on their own also and take adequate and immediate steps to 
mitigate the sufferings of the bereaved famil y.  The Committee are shocked to learn that 
in some cases the deaths of female farmers are not counted as farmer’s death as the 
agriculture holdings are owned by male member s with the result the bereaved family is 
deprived of compensation.  The Committee see no reason for such a gender based 
discrimination and remind that if any fema le farmer commits suicide for the same 
reasons, her family should also be equally compensated. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should take concrete 
preventive measures to arrest the recurrence of such tragic deaths.  The farmers should be 
educated by extension workers to face the ch allenges of life and not to take such an 
extreme step which, besides being self-destruc ting, devastates the family as well.  The 
India Meteorological Department (IMD) can also come to the rescue of farmers 
considerably by making correct forecast of the weather condition.  Farmers can be 
motivated to opt for crop-insurance by providi ng them soft-term packages and in case of 
crop failures; insurance claims  should be settled immediatel y.  To tackle their heavy 
indebtedness problem and to see that the farm ers are not trapped in the vicious circle of 
indebtedness, the flow of soft-term institutional credit should be increased so that they are 
not forced to take loans from private mone ylenders.  The Committee would also like the 

  
Government to make a case study of farmers committing suicide due to indebtedness and 
the suicides committed by the commercial borrowers, if any. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.11 Agriculture is a State subject.  St ate Governments are responsible for 
implementation of the policies and programme s for development of agriculture in the 
States.  At the Centre, the Union Governme nt recognizes its responsibility towards 
farmers and agriculture and undertakes requisi te steps to enhance agricultural production 
and productivity through various schemes and Centrally sponsored programmes that 
would assist the augmentation of living standards of the farmers and the rural poor. 
 Highest priority has been accorded to  revitalize agriculture for improving the 
conditions of the farmers, which has suffered because of successive drought in various 
regions during the last 4-5 years and other na tural calamites, high indebtedness and 
failing crops.  The Government is fully conscious of the magnitude of the problems of the 
farmers and taking steps for strengthening and streamlining the flow of agriculture credit. 
 Indebtedness has been identified as one of  the major causative factors for suicides 
by the farmers.  The constant pressure exerte d by the lending agencies to repay the loans 
without considering farmer’s repaying capac ity further accentuates his misery which 
ultimately forces him to resort to the extrem e step.  In the case of institutional credit, 
relief measures are available to the farmers but for the loans taken from informal sources, 
no such facilities are generally available. 
 The solution to the problem of indebtedness lies in galvanizing the institutional 
credit sources to devise appropriate m echanism and products for weaning away the 
farmers from informal credit sources as well as in enhancing the profitability of 

  
agriculture through increasing productivity, reducing cost of  production and formulating  
appropriate prices support measures. 
 Several measures have been initiated by the Government of India to galvanize the 
institutional credit system to make them more responsive to the need of farmers.  Some of 
the important measures initiated in this regard are as under:- 
 The Reserve Bank of India has issued  standing guidelines to the Banks for 
providing relief to the farmers in areas affected by natural calamities.  These guidelines 
have been issued to enable the banks to ta ke uniform and concerted action expeditiously, 
particularly to provide financial assistance to  the farmers affected by natural calamities.  
These guidelines inter alia envisage: 
• Conversion/rescheduling of loans in the event of natural calamity for periods 
ranging from 3 to 9 years depending upon th e successive crop failure/intensity of 
damage of crops 
• Grant of fresh crop loans to affected farmers. 
• Conversion of principal as well as interest due on the existing loans. 
• Grant of consumption loans. 
• Not to compound interest in respect of loans converted/rescheduled, etc. 
• Not to charge penal interest in respect of current dues in default. 
In order to protect the farmers from the adverse effect of natural calamities 
leading to failure of crops, National Agricu ltural Insurance Scheme is in vogue since 
Rabi 1999-2000.  The Scheme envisages coverage of all farmers (loanee and non-loanee 
both) irrespective of their size of holdings, more crops (including annual 
horticultural/commercial crops) and more risks. 

  
As a special dispensation for the agricultu re sector, the Government of India has 
advised all the Public Sector Banks to reduce their lending rate for agriculture to a single 
digit rate of not more than 9% per annum on crop loans up to a ceiling of Rs.50,000/-.  
Keeping in view the importance of flow of credit to agricu lture, in particular to the 
smaller borrowers who may not have the necessa ry assets as collateral, the banks have 
been advised to waive margin/security requirements for agricultural loans up to 
Rs.50,000/-  NABARD has also issu ed guidelines on scheme for redemption of Debts of 
Farmers from non-institutional sources. 
In so far as accurate weather forecasting in concerned, the IMD is now engaged in 
auditing its own system of forecast to give improved forecast in future.  The Department 
of Science and Technology has already announced a package of Rs.500 crore for 
procuring modern equipment and upgrading the facilities for this pur pose with the IMD.  
The Ministry of Agriculture has also ini tiated work on the project for Extended Range 
Forecast System (ERFS) for climate risk management in agriculture.  The appropriate 
model would be developed by IIT, Delhi that will also provide necessary support for 
implementation of the project by the Depart ment of Science and Technology.  The ERFS 
project is expected to fac ilitate extended range forecas t of rainfall and surface 
temperature from monthly to seasonal scale in India. 
To provide relief to the farmers due to crop failure, guidelines have been issued 
on rescheduling of loans and one time settlement of past defaults.  Safety nets to the 
farmers have been provided against loss of production through schemes like National 
Insurance Schemes (NAIS), Farmers Income Insurance Scheme (FIIS) which is being 
implemented on pilot basis.  The Government is also implementing Minimum Support 

  
Price (MSP) and Marketing Intervention Scheme (MIS) to ensure remunerative prices to 
the farmers.  Further drought re lief assistance is also given to  the States both in the form 
of financial assistance and food grains as and when necessary. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.12 The Committee are aware of the constitutional provisions as also the pivotal 
role of the Union Government in formulat ing and implementing national policies and 
programmes for increasing agricultural production and productivity.  While taking 
strong exception to the reply of  the Ministry, the Committee are of the considered view 
that the Union Government cannot escape it s responsibility towards the farmers by 
invoking the plea that agriculture is a State Subject’. It is deplorable that the 
Department’s selective reaction on the obs ervations made by the Committee merely 
indicates lack of seriousness on the part of the Union Government on this vital issue.  
A Government cannot and should not pledged to function for the welfare of the 
farmers rest satisfied by mere ly initiating measures aimed at alleviating the sufferings 
of farmers unless the adequacy and efficacy of such measures transform their lives and 
the agriculture sector.   Curiously, however, the Government has maintained studied 
silence as regards the recommendation of the Committee for making a case study of 
farmers committing suicide due  to indebtedness vis-à-vis commercial borrowers.  
The need for commissioning such a case study emerges all the more stronger in view 
of the revelation made to the Committee during their recent Study Visit that the 
money lenders employ strong-arm tactic s for recovery from the farmers.  The 
Committee are also dismayed to note that the Department is silent about gender-
based discrimination in the matter of awarding compensation to female farmers.  

  
While reiterating their earlier recommendation for stopping such gender-based 
discrimination, the Committee strongly urge the Government to ensure that the 
multiple-measures initiated by them ar e stringently monitored and periodically 
reviewed to secure the intere st of the farmer.  Further, the Committee believe that the 
State machinery, if alert and sensitive to the problems of farmers,  can certainly take 
effective pre-emptive measures to ward off incidents of suicide among farmers.  
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 5 
Credit Flow to Agriculture 
1.13 The Committee note that the total credit flow to Agriculture in the Ninth Plan 
(1997-2002) amounted to Rs. 2,29,956 crore.  A subs tantial jump in th e credit flow to 
Agriculture is envisaged in the Tenth Plan (2002-2007) which is projected at Rs. 7,36,570 
crore almost three times the Ninth Plan Achievement.  The total flow of institutional 
credit to agriculture during 2002-03 has been Rs. 70,810 crore as against Rs. 62,045 crore 
in 2001-2002.  During 2003-04, the estimated figure of such credit is Rs. 80,000 crore.  
The Committee feel that although there is some increase in the Agricultural credit in the 
first two years of the Tenth Plan, the in crease is not commensurate with the Plan 
projection.  The Committee, however, note th at the Finance Minister in his Budget 
Speech (2004) has announced to double the flow of agricultural credit in three years. 
 The Committee note that out of the 26 ma jor commercial banks only 8 banks have 
achieved the target of 18 per cent (as stipulated by RBI) of total agriculture advance to 
Net Bank credit.  While commending the Banks like State Bank of Indore, State Bank of 
Saurashtra, Punjab National Bank which exte nded credits to farmers even beyond the 
stipulated target of 18 per cent, the Comm ittee deplore the poor performance of some 

  
major banks like State Bank of Travancore, Bank of Maharashtra, Dena Bank, Oriental 
Bank of Commerce, UCO Bank who coul d not reach beyond 12 per cent and the 
Corporation Bank which could lend only 9.58 per cent. 
The Committee are concerned to note that some of the banks are not able to meet 
the RBI stipulation of 18 per cen t of total bank advances to Ag ricultural Sector, with the 
result, the farmers are taki ng loans from unscrupulous private money lenders on 
exorbitant rate of interest in the absence of institutional loan.  The Committee also note 
the lack of easy accessibility of bank branches in rural areas and the long and arduous 
procedural formalities for taking loans making them easy prey to the private money 
lenders.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the loan procedure should be 
simplified and the commercial banks should reach  the farmers, as they are doing in the 
cases of housing and auto loans, so that more  and more farmers are able to avail of the 
bank loans in time of need.  This would go a long way to save the farmers from the 
clutches of money lenders and the claws of  death.  The Committee would also like the 
Government to make it incumbent upon every bank to meet the stipulation of providing a 
minimum of 18 per cent agricultural credit. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.14 Expanding the outreach of Rural Financia l Institutions and simplification of 
lending procedures are high on the agenda of th e Ministry of Agriculture and this agenda 
is being pursued actively with the Ministry of Finance and the Reserve Bank of India. 
The Government of India in concert with th e Reserve Bank of India has initiated various 
policy measures to improve accessibility of fa rmers to the institutional credit sources and 
to simplify the lending procedures. The emphasis of these policies has been on 

  
progressive institutionalization for providing timely and adequate credit to farmers with 
particular focus on small and marginal farmers and weaker sections of society to enable 
them to adopt modern technology and im proved agricultural practices for increasing 
agricultural production and productivity.  The different elements of policy which make 
for a cogent framework under which agricultural credit is extended are adequacy of credit 
availability, equitable access, rationalization of rates of interest, enhancement in the limit 
for collateral free loans, timeliness, risk mitig ation, attention to credit starved sectors, 
regions and sections of the population, sust ainability of credit institutions, etc. 
Government of India and RBI have introduced policies in all these aspects and refined the 
same over a period of time based on the feedback received from its implementation. 
Banks have been advised to undert ake procedural simplification and 
modifications in regard to agricultural loans, including simplification of loan sanction and 
disbursement procedures, forms of loan appl ications, loan agreemen ts, rationalization of 
internal returns of banks, delegation of adequate powers to the Branch Managers, 
introduction of composite cash credit limits to farmers, introduction of new loan products 
and delivery system like Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs) & SHGs, disbursement of loans in 
cash wherever necessary, dispensing with th e ‘No Dues Certificate’, discretion to 
branches/banks on matters relating to waiver of margin/security requirements for 
agricultural loans upto Rs. 50,000 and upto Rs. 5 lakh in the case of agri-business and 
agri-clinics, etc. Considering the fact that the dividing line between production and 
consumption needs of the poor is very thin and lack of short-term consumption loans 
could result in the diversion of resources from investments,  the banks have been advised 
to consider providing a separate, flexible, revolving credit limit to small borrowers for 

  
meeting temporary shortfalls in family cash fl ows.  Banks have been advised to evolve 
suitable credit products/packages in this regard . It has been reported that the poor often 
keep away from banks for want of inform ation about procedures.  This is further 
compounded as information on requirements for obtaining loans is not  available in one 
go. Keeping this in view, banks have been a dvised to take necessary  steps to reduce any 
information gap to avoid such a situation. It has been suggested that loan application 
forms and information brochures should be in vernacular for loan products which should 
also contain a comprehensive checklist of doc uments/information to be furnished as also 
procedural requirements to be complied with fo r availing of loans.  The banks have been 
advised to display details of such information on banks’ notice boards.  
 For the domestic commercial banks, the Reserve Bank of Indi a has stipulated a 
target of 18 per cent of their Net Bank Cred it (NBC) for lending to agriculture. However, 
against this target, achievement as on March 2004 has been 15.45%. Ministry of 
Agriculture is concerned about the shortfall in achievement of  the stipulated target of 
lending to agriculture sector a nd has been taking up this issue from time to time at the 
appropriate levels in the Ministry of Fi nance and RBI, the latest being Agriculture 
Minister’s letter to Finance Minister on 8 June 2004. Prime Minister’s Office in its 
communication dated 18 August 2004    has advised the Ministry of Finance to take all 
necessary steps to ensure that the Commercial Banks achieve the ta rget of lending 18 per 
cent of their Net Bank Credit  to agriculture sector by Financia l Year 2005 -2006 
positively. 

  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.15 The Committee take note of the cons iderable efforts be ing made by the 
Ministry of Agriculture for expanding the outreach of rural financial institutions 
and for simplification of lending procedures. They, however, feel that the attitude of 
some of the major banks is rather intran sigent being far sh ort of meeting the 
stipulated target of 18 per cent of their Net Bank Credit (NBC) for lending to 
agriculture.  The Committee would like  the Ministry of Agriculture to convey the 
displeasure of the Committee to the Ministry of Finance and request them to obtain the 
comments of each of banks which have defaulted on one or the other count to meet the 
stipulated flow of agricultural credit. If necessary, the Committee shall not hesitate to 
haul up representatives of such defaulter banks.  The Committee also desire that the 
provision of penal action should also be introduced to rein in the defaulting banks. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 6 
Interest rate for Agricultural Loans 
1.16 The Committee are happy to note that following their earlier recommendations, 
the Government have lowered the rate of inte rest on Agricultural credit and all the public 
sector banks have been advise d to reduce their lending rate  for agriculture to a single 
digit of not more than 9 per cent per annum  on crop loans upto a ceiling of Rs. 50,000.  
But, they are disappointed to not e that this lower rate of interest is only upto a ceiling of 
Rs. 50,000 and in case of commerci al banks the interest rate is not to exceed the Prime 
Lending Rate (PLR) that is 10 -11 per cent.  Moreover, C ooperative Banks and Regional 
Rural Banks are free to fix their own interest rate ranging between 9 and 15 per cent.  The 
Committee are seriously concerned to note th at though the National Bank for Agriculture 

  
and Rural Development (NABARD) is giving re finance on Agricultural loans at the rate 
of 5.25 per cent to 6.75 per cen t (depending upon the size a nd purpose of loan) to the 
Banks but the rate of interest ultimately be ing charged by such lead ing institutions from 
the borrower is in the range of 9 to 15 per cent. 
The Committee came across a number of cases of farmers committing suicides 
due to their poor financial position and failu re of crops due to various reasons.  The 
Committee feel that high rate of interest and the perpetual burden of loans are perhaps the 
major factors compelling the poor farmers to commit suicide.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should instruct cooperative Banks and Rural Banks also 
to reduce the rate of interest rationally because small and marginal farmers take loans 
from these banks only.  They further recomm end that the ceiling of Rs. 50,000 should be 
increased to Rs. 1,50,000 for charging the minimum rate of interest.  The Committee also 
desire that since NABARD is pr oviding refinance at a lower ra te of interest, the actual 
rate of interest to be charged from the fa rmers should also be reasonably reduced and the 
difference should not, in any case, be more that 2-3 per cent. 
 The Committee further note that while giving agricultural loans, many a time, the 
land, crop or agricultural machinery of the farm ers is used as collat eral guarantee by the 
credit giving bank/institution.  In case of non-payment of the loans, some times farmers 
not only lose their lands but also undergo the trauma of being sent to jails and sometimes 
they have to pay all the expenditure incurred by the enforcement agencies, 
viz. police etc.  
in the process and for his food etc. in the ja il.  The Committee desire the Government to 
ensure that in case of their inability to pay the debts, the farmers may not be deprived of 

  
their hypothecated land or agricultural mach inery because the whole existence of poor 
farmers is entirely dependent on this land, cattle, machinery, etc. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.17 Ministry of Agriculture has been taki ng up the issue of lowering the rate of 
interest on agricultural loans from time to time at the appropriate levels in the Ministry of 
Finance, the latest being Agriculture Minister’s letter to Finance Minister on 8 June 2004.  
Though, as a part of financial sector reforms, the banks (Commercial Banks, 
Cooperative Banks and RRBs) have been given freedom to fix their lending rates to be 
charged from the ultimate borrowers but as a special dispensation for the agriculture 
sector, the Government of India has advised all the Public Sector banks to reduce their 
lending rate for agricu lture to a single dig it rate of not more than 9% per annum on crop 
loans upto a ceiling of Rs. 50,000/-. It is expected  that this rate will  benefit most of the 
crop loan account holders and will cover almost all the small and marginal farmers.  
In case of cooperative banks and RRBs there is complete freedom and they have been 
permitted to determine their ow n interest rates based on thei r cost of funds, transaction 
and risk costs etc. Refinance from NABAR D constitutes only a small proportion of the 
ground level credit disbursed by the cooperative banks a nd the major portion of the 
resources are arranged by the cooperative ba nks from the open market including deposit 
mobilization, the cost of which is generally high. Refinance support from NABARD need 
to be viewed only as a supplementary source  of funds to the cooperative banks rather 
than a benchmark for determining the inte rest rates to ultimate borrowers. NABARD, 
however, periodically reviews the rate of interest being charged by cooperative banks and 
RRBs and advises them to fix the interest rate s at a reasonable leve l so that it does not 

  
cause hardship to the farmers.  Mandating the spread at 2-3% between the refinance 
interest rate and ultimate lending rates may not be a feasible option as it may lead to 
deceleration in agriculture credit flow becau se fixation of spread depends on several 
factors like the transaction and risk cost, cost of raising funds by the banks, etc.   
Ministry of Agriculture appreciates the f act that interest rate is an important 
aspect of credit.  The expectations of bo rrowers for lower interest rates on loans to 
agriculture have increased.  In addition to re asonable rate of intere st, borrower is also 
concerned with the timeliness and adequacy  of credit and accompanying costs he/she 
may have to incur to avail credit.  In order to deliver adequate credit in time and in a cost 
effective manner, banks have been advise d to pay attention to their systems and 
procedures and to initiate appropriate measur es to ensure that no avoidable expenses are 
incurred by the borrowers for getting a loan sanctioned.  
Chief Ministers of all the States/ UT s have been requested by the Union 
Agriculture Minister to review  their State laws to remove the provision for arrest and 
detention of farmers and strengthen the other alternatives of recovery measures by 
analyzing and eliminating the real causes of poor recovery  like loan waivers, general 
remissions, bogus loaning, etc. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.18 The Committee view the high rate of in terest being charged on agricultural 
credit as one of the main causes for the plig ht of small and marginal farmers.  They, 
therefore, reiterate their ea rlier recommendation to in crease the ceiling of Rs. 
50,000 to Rs. 1,50,000 for charging the mi nimum rate of interest, i.e. a single digit 
rate of not more than 9 per cent per a nnum on crop loans.  The Committee also 

  
desire the Banks to give top priority to small and marginal farmers while disbursing 
the crop loans with lower interest rate.  The Committee would also like the 
Government to ensure that in no case the indebted farmer is deprived of his land since 
his existence and of his family depends entirely on it. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 7 
Crop Insurance 
1.19  The Committee are constrained to note that the ‘National Agricultural 
Insurance Scheme’ (NAIS), which is being implemented in 23 States and 2 Union 
territories is not delivering the desired result s.  The remaining States/Union territories are 
also reluctant to adopt the Scheme for one or the other reasons.  The Committee also note 
that a sum of Rs. 1,879.02 crore during 2002 -2003 (Kharif and Rabi) and Rs. 278.46 
crore during 2003 (Kharif) has been released to the Agriculture Insurance Company of 
India Ltd. (AIC), which is the Implementing Agency (IA) of NAIS, but claims to the tune 
of Rs. 474.26 crore are pending und er NAIS till July 2004.  It has been informed that in 
most cases, the concerned State Government’s share of funds is awaited.  The Committee 
are of the view that payment of insuran ce should not be delaye d due to any reason 
otherwise the very purpose of insurance is de feated and farmers are just helpless in the 
time of crisis.  They, therefore, desire th e Union Government to persuade the State 
Governments to make adequate provision in  their Budgets for meeting the financial 
liabilities under NAIS so  that farmers’ interests do not su ffer on account of inability of a 
State Government to make its contribu tion.  The Committee also recommend the 
Government to bring more crops under the purview of NAIS so that more and more 
farmers are benefited. 

  
The Committee observe that under NAIS ‘Block’ or ‘Tehsil’ is being taken as unit 
for collection of data for asse ssing the damage to the crops.  Under such a system, if the 
crop of a few farmers is damaged in a village, they do not receive the benefit of the 
Insurance Scheme as they are not counted  sufferer.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the village should be taken as a unit of collecting data.  Initially, 
‘Gram Panchayat’ level should be reached and ultimately it is the village level data which 
will accrue actual benefits to the poor farmers under the National Agricultural Insurance 
Scheme. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.20 National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (N AIS), at present, is being implemented 
by 23 States and 2 Union territories.   Other States like Punjab,  most of the North-
Eastern States etc. are not implementing th e Scheme due to various reasons.  But the 
Government of India from time to time is impressing upon the States/Union territories to 
implement the Scheme.   
NAIS envisages time bound settlement of claims.  It is Government’s endeavor 
that claims of a season, if any, are settled before the commencement of the same season 
next year.    Implementing States/Union terr itories are requested from time to time to 
make adequate budget provision  in their budget and for timely payment of their share 
towards financial liabilities.  Recently, Un ion Agriculture Minister has requested the 
Chief Ministers of all implementing States fo r expeditiously payment of share of their 
financial liabilities under NAIS.  Besides this  States are requested  to make available 
requisite yield data to the Implementing Agency  within stipulated time so that timely 
processing of admissible claims may be made. 

  
NAIS, at present, covers three categories of crops namely, (a) food crops (cereals, 
millets & pulses), (b) oilseeds and (c) annual commercial/horticultural crops.  Initially, 
three crops, namely sugarcane, cott on and potato were covered under Annual 
commercial/horticultural crops which have now risen to eleve n.  However, State 
Governments are free to increase the number of crops subject to the availability of past 
yield data based on crop cutting experiments fo r adequate number of years and capacity 
of State Government to conduct the requisite number of CCEs. 
At present, the Scheme is operating on the basis of ‘Area Approach’, i.e. defined 
areas which may be a Gram Panchayat, Mandal, Hobli, Circle, Firka, Block, Taluka             
etc. as decided by State Government, for each  notified crop.  No doubt, reduction in unit 
area of insurance will help in more realistic assessment of claims. But it may be difficult 
for implementing states to make assessment of yield based on Crop Cutting Experiments 
(CCEs) at smaller unit area level, because  of large number of CCEs required to be 
undertaken for making assessment of the yield.  The implem enting States do not have 
adequate infrastructure to conduct required number of CCEs.     
The efforts have been made to explore alternative methods for making assessment 
of yield at smaller unit ar ea of insurance through Sma ll Area Crop Estimation Method 
(SACEM) and Satellite Remote Sensing T echnique.  SACEM, which was based on 
farmer’s appraisal, was experimented in sele cted districts/ crops but it has not proved an 
effective method.  Similarly, Satellite Remote  Sensing Technique wi ll also take some 
more time in reaching out to Gram Panchayat level for making assessment of yield.   In 
spite of all this, reduction in the unit area of insurance is under consideration of the 
review process of NAIS.  Further, the Sche me provides for individual based assessment, 

  
in the case of localised calamities such as hailstorm, landslide, cyclone and flood, which 
is implemented in limited areas on an experi mental basis and may be extended to more 
areas in the light of operational experience gained. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.21 The Committee are pleased to note that the Government share their 
perception that the reduction in unit area  of insurance will help in more realistic 
assessment of the damage to the crops and consequential ac crual of benefits to the 
poor farmers under the National Agricult ural Insurance Scheme (NAIS).  The 
Committee also take note of the efforts be ing made to explore alternative methods 
for making assessment of yield at smaller unit area of insurance through Small Area 
Crop Estimation Method (SACEM) and Satellite Remote Sensing Technique 
(SRST). 
 The Committee desire the Government to collect all relevant details with 
regard to assessment method(s) adopted for crop insurance by some major 
developed and developing countries and apprise the Committee about the 
effectiveness of such methods in their respective countries and feasibility of adopting 
the same in India. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 10 
Seed Crop Insurance 
 
1.22 The Committee note that ‘Pilot Scheme  for Seed Crop Insurance’ was initiated 
from Rabi 1999-2000 on pilot basis in 10 States  with the objective to provide financial 
security and income stability to the Breeder Se ed growers in the event of failure of seed 
crop and encourage participation of new/br eeders/growers to undertake seed production 

  
programme of newly released hybrid/improved varieties.  The Committee find that the 
Scheme has not been found popular with the seed growers, therefore, it was proposed to 
drop the Scheme during Tenth Plan period on the advice of Pl anning Commission.  One 
of the reasons for non popularity of the Scheme among the farmers as advanced by the 
Department, is delay in settlement of clai ms by General Insurance Corporation (GIC), 
which is the implementing agency. 
 The Committee take strong exception to the dilatory settlement procedure of GIC.  
This is purely an administrative matter which can be amicably resolved by stipulating 
speedy settlement of claims of the farmer s.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the GIC should be asked to re view their procedure to  settle such claims 
on a priority basis.  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by GIC in this 
regard. 
 The Committee also note that the National Council for Applied Economic 
Research (NCAER) was assigned the task to evaluate the Scheme, but they have not 
submitted any Report so far.  The Committee de sire that the NCAER should be asked to 
submit their report within one month of presentation of this Re port and only after 
examining their evaluation Report any decision  regarding the fate of this important 
Scheme should be taken. 
 The Committee are of the considered view that unless protection is given to the 
seed growers through the Scheme of Seed Crop Insurance, it will be very difficult to 
encourage the private seed growers to take  up seed production.  The Committee consider 
that this Scheme is one of the rarest methods by which the seed production can be 
encouraged all over the count ry and risk in so wing such new variet y of seeds can be 

  
covered and adequate protecti on be given to the farmers.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Scheme s hould not be discontinued and e fforts should be made to 
suitably popularise the Scheme among the fa rmers by spreading awareness about the 
advantages of the Schemes. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.23 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has awarded a fresh study to 
evaluate the Seed Crop Insurance Scheme to Agriculture Finance Corporation, as the 
response from NCAER was not forthcoming.   The decision on continuance of the 
Scheme will be taken after the conclusion of this evaluation study. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.24 The Committee deplore that the Governme nt have made no manifest effort 
to persuade the GIC to streamline their cl aim settlement procedure so that farmers 
feel encouraged to opt for the Seed Crop  Insurance Scheme.  Surprisingly, the 
scheme launched in 1999-2000 is yet to be evaluated by the Government.  Obviously, 
due to want of proper follow up, the fate of the Scheme continues to hang in balance.  
The Committee expect a comprehensive report to be placed before them within one 
month of the presentation of this report regarding the conclusion of evaluation 
study as also the efforts being made to popularise the Scheme.   
RECOMMENDAION SERIAL NO.  13 
Remunerative Prices to Farmers 
1.25 The Committee are informed that the Commission on Agricultural Costs and 
Prices (CACP), which is an independe nt Commission, recommends the Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) for some crops under Price Support Scheme (PSS). The CACP fixes 

  
the price based on some formula taking into co nsideration many factors relating to costs, 
International Schemes and demand and supply position, etc. Based on their 
recommendation and after taking the Cabinet approval, the Government declare the MSP 
for notified Agricultural commodities. The Committee are further informed that MSP 
functions as one of the fact ors to encourage or discourag e production of any particular 
crop. 
The Committee observe that under th e Price Support Scheme (PSS) new 
crops/commodities are not being included. Th ey desire that some more agricultural 
commodities like cash crops, which largely aff ect the farmers financial condition, should 
also be included under the list of notified commodities for PSS. 
The Committee feel that the prices under MSP, really  do not quite reflect and 
include all the costs an d labour invested by the farmers.  There is substantial deviation 
from the actual costs and market price. The farmers are not getting remunerative price for 
their produce and the margin is becoming less day by day. The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Government to chalk out specific schemes for the farmers so that they are able 
to receive the full benefits of their produce at the appropriate time. 
The Committee are of the opinion that fi xing of MSP cannot be the criteria for 
discouraging any particular crop, because the farmer  knows best about his soil and the 
crop best suited for his land. He cannot grow a particular crop on the soil simply on the 
basis of high support price. It  is just unrealistic to fix low support price of a specific 
commodity for merely discouraging its production. It is unfair to impose low MSP on the 
farmers if they are not inclined to grow the alternative crop because of non-suitability of 
soil. The Committee, therefore, recommen d that the factor of encouraging or 

  
discouraging the production of an y particular crop should not be taken into consideration 
for fixing the Minimum Support Price of any Agricultural Commodity. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.26 The minimum support prices (MSP) for ma jor agricultural  products are fixed by 
the government, each year, af ter taking into account the recommendations of the CACP. 
While formulating these recommendations, th e Commission analyses a wide spectrum of 
data, covering the costs of cultivation/produc tion, trends and spread of input use, 
production and productivity of the crop conc erned, market prices, both domestic and 
global, inter-crop price parity, emerging supply-demand situation, procurement and 
distribution, terms of trade between agricultural and non-agri cultural sectors, and so on. 
Since the price policy involves considerations of long-run consequences, the Commission 
also looks at the yield- rais ing research being conducted by  institutions like ICAR. The 
basic data are generally  collected from the Directorate of  Economics and Statistics, State 
Governments, Central Ministries and the nodal agencies concerned with the 
implementation of agricultural price policy. It ma y be stated that the estimates of cost of 
cultivation/ production take into account al l the agricultural inputs including seed, 
fertilizer, pesticides, mandays, irrigation, power, interest on co st of land, depreciation on 
implements, and machinery. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.27 The Committee are surprised to note that the Department has conveniently 
overlooked the observation of the Committ ee regarding inclusion of some more 
agricultural commodities under the list of  notified commodities for Price Support 
Scheme (PSS).  The Committee, therefore, reiterate  their earlier recommendation to 

  
include some more agricultural commodities like cash crops etc. under the list of 
notified commodities for PSS because financia l position of many a farmer depends on 
these crops.  The Committee also suggest inclusion of one or two primary crops from 
every State/region  in consultation with th e State Governments, in the list of Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) so that farmers in each region/State could benefit by the Scheme.  
Undoubtedly, inclusion of more crops under the lists will be an appreciative step in the 
direction of providing remunerative prices to the farmers of the entire country. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.15 
Construction of Cold Storages/Rural Godowns 
1.28 The Committee note that under the Centra l Sector Scheme for construction of 
Rural Godowns, Rs.100 crore has been allo cated for 2004-2005.  During the last three 
financial years, 1,120 rural godowns have been renovated and 3,731 godowns have been 
sanctioned for modernization/construction bu t the Committee is surprised to know that 
the availability of cold stor age/rural godowns is almost nil in most of the North Eastern 
States.  The Committee are at a loss to find that north eastern region is completely 
neglected as such.  They, therefore, recomm end that cold storages/rural godowns should 
immediately be constructed in these areas. 
 In other areas of the country also the situation of cold storage is far from 
enthusing.  The farmers are se lling their produce at a throw- away price because there is 
no cold storage or godown available in thei r vicinity and brokers and middlemen are 
taking advantage of thei r plight.  The Committee, therefor e, desire that the Scheme of 
construction/renovation of cold  storage/rural godown should be strengthened for the 
benefit of small, medium, and marginal fa rmers.  The allocation under the scheme be 

  
enhanced at the revised estimate level so that more farmers could store their farm produce 
in the vicinity of their farms and are prevented from resorting to distress sale immediately 
after harvest. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.29 The Scheme had not initially receive d good response from NE region due to 
availability of less marketable surplus and scar city of land in hilly areas.  As per the 
feedback received, the Scheme is picki ng up in NE States also.  As on 31.03.2004, 24 
new projects with capacity of 54,000 MTs and 27 projects with capacity of 2,700 MTs in 
the Cooperative Sector have been sanctione d.  The publicity and training and awareness 
programmes are also being conducted in these areas to encourage people to undertake 
projects under the Scheme.  However, with  a view to encourage small farmers and 
entrepreneurs in North East Region in the country to unde rtake construction of projects 
under the scheme, the following modifications have been made:- 
a) Smaller godowns of 50 to 100 MTs have  been made eligible for subsidy under 
the Scheme to encourage on farm storage. 
b) For hilly areas, where there is a scar city of land, the si ze of godown eligible 
for subsidy under the scheme; of Rura l Godowns has further been reduced 
from 100 MT to 25 MT. 
c) Five lakh MTs capcity has been reserved for small farmers. 
Target of 90 lakh MTs of rural godown was fixed for construction during 10 th 
Plan period which has now been revised to 140 lakh MTs. 
 
 
 

  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.30 The Committee are pleased to note that  the work of construction of cold 
storages/rural godowns is picking up in North Eastern States also with the 
launching of publicity, training and awareness drive.  The Committee expect similar 
drive to be launched country-wide as fa rmers everywhere have been suffering huge 
losses for want of adequate cold storage fa cilities in their vicinity.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Government to enha nce the budgetary allocation under the 
scheme for construction/renovation of rural godowns/cold storages at the earliest.   
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.16 
Agri Clinics/Agri Business centres 
1.31 The Committee are happy to note that the Scheme of “Agri-clinics/Agri-business 
Centre” aims at providing training to the agricultural graduates to enable them to 
establish fee based extension services.  A sum of Rs.16.50 crore has been allocated for 
2004-05 under the scheme.  So far 4,854 candida tes have been trained but only 988 
candidates could set up their Agri-Clinics/ Agri-busines ventures.  The Committee in 
their earlier Reports on Demands for Gran ts of the Department had recommended for 
providing some subsidy to the willing candidates for opening ag ri-clinics but it has been 
informed that the demand of subsidy component has been dropped by the Department as 
the proposal could not get the nod of the Planning Commission. 
 The Committee observe that a large number of agriculture graduates in the 
country are unemployed.  Though they can re ceive training under the above mentioned 
scheme but they are not in a position to set up their ventures without the help of the 

  
Government.  The Committee, therefore, st rongly recommend that at least 25 per cent 
subsidy under the Scheme should be provided to  the willing agricultu re graduates to set 
up their venture if the Government really wa nt to make their scheme successful.  The 
Committee further recommend that the banks s hould be instructed to provide easy loans 
to the unemployed agricultural graduates so that they could set up their own centres.  
Needless to say, such an innovative step will encourage the young graduates to come 
forward to earn their livelihood and will also benefit the farmers  as they can avail 
agricultural services like soil testing facilities and expertise in their vicinity. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.32 The Central Sector Scheme “Establishm ent of Agri-Clinics and Agri-Business 
centres by Agriculture graduate s” aims at using vast pool of  agriculture graduates of the 
country to provide extension services to farmers on payment basis by setting up their 
private ventures.  The scheme  provides equal opportunities to all eligible agriculture 
graduates irrespective of age to support ag riculture development through economically 
viable self-employment ventures. 
 As on 1 st October, 2004, 5376 agriculture grad uates have been imparted training 
at different training institutes  in the country. As many as, 11 19 of Centres/ventures have 
been set up; by the agriculture graduates throughout the country.  Sixty six training 
institutions are engaged in imparting training to the applicants across the country. 
 The scheme is being closely monito red by Government of India, SFAC, 
MANAGE and NABARD.  The progress of th e scheme and bank related issues were 
reviewed in two meetings on 30 th July, 2004 and 3 rd August, 2004 under the 

  
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary and Secretary, Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation respectively. 
 Four banks namely State Bank of Indi a Union Bank of India, Canara Bank and 
Punjab National Bank had participated in the meeting chaired by Secretary (A&C) on 3rd 
August, 2004.  Each of these banks identified on e district in two States for further work 
on the Scheme. 
 National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE), 
Hyderabad has sent list of the agricultural graduates trained till now to all the 
nationalized banks. MANAGE has organized a two day workshop for twenty officers of 
NABARD to sensitize them about the scheme 
 The original scheme provided for subsidy and training components.  The Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance, while apprising the scheme, did not approve the 
subsidy component.  However, as per the recommendation of the first Report of the 
Standing Committee, the Planning Commission and Minist ry of finance would be 
approached again to consider subsidy under the scheme.  It is further submitted the 
budgetary provision for subsidy component exists under the scheme. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.33 While taking note of the reply of the Government, the Committee reiterate 
their earlier recommendation and desire the Government to persuade the Planning 
Commission and Finance Ministry to reconsid er their decision as introduction of 
subsidy component under the scheme ‘Est ablishment of Agri-clinics and Agri-
Business Centres by Agriculture Graduates’ will go a long way in gainful 

  
engagement of Agri-graduates in their vicinity and acceleration of agricultural  
production and productivity.   
 The announcement made by the Government in the Annual Budget 2004-05 
to aggressively promote agri-business looks hollow since only four banks have come 
forward to take one district in two states for further work on the scheme of agri-
clinics and agri.-business.  The Government have also not responded to the 
recommendation of the Committee for provision of easy loans to unemployed 
agricultural graduates to set up their ow n Agro-centers.  The Committee would like 
to be apprised within next three months as to what action has been taken by the 
Government to instruct commercial banks to provide loans to such graduates on 
easy terms and conditions 

  
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 1 
Allocation for the Department 
2.1 The Committee are happy to note that Agri culture and allied S ector registered a 
growth rate of 9.1 per cent in 2003-04, reflec ting the growth in physical production and 
remunerative prices of agricultural goods.  The growth rate  of the sector for 2003-04 has 
been one of the highest in recent years and onl y marginally lower than the previous high 
of 9.6 per cent achieved in 1996-97.  The Comm ittee also note that against the proposed 
outlay of Rs.25,001.75 crore by the Departme nt the Planning Commission made an 
allocation of Rs.13,000 crore during the Tent h Plan.  In the same way for 2004-05, the 
Department proposed an allocation of Rs. 4,513. 89 crore but the plan allocation made is 
only Rs.2,670 crore as against Budget Esti mates of Rs.2,187 crore during 2003-04 which 
shows an incrase of 22.08 per cent. 
 The Committee have been time and ag ain recommending that  there should be 
substantial increase in allocation of Plan funds in favour of th e Agriculture sector, as this 
is a crucial sector of the Indian economy providing employment to around 65 per cent of 
the total work force and contributing 24.2 per cent to the total Gr oss Domestic Product 
(GDP).   Despite the unparallel role of ag riculture in the national economy, agriculture 
has not received the desired attention.  The Committee also notes that despite the 
announcement of the Prime Minister to accord prio rity to it, agriculture sector is yet to 
receive adequate budgetary allocation.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 

  
that the Ministry of Agriculture must take  up the matter with the Planning Commission 
and Ministry of Finance and impress upon th em to take a realistic view about the 
quantum of Plan funds required for the Depa rtment of Agriculture and Cooperation and 
make allocations accordingly at least at the revised estimate stage as per the projections 
made by the Department. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.2 The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) had approached the 
Planning Commission to increase its Plan outlay in 2004-05.  Planning Commission has 
provided only an additional amount of Rs.440.00 crore to the DAC in 2004-05. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 3 
Utilisation of Plan Funds 
2.3 The Committee are constrained to note the low utilization of Plan funds by the 
Department.  During the Ninth Plan the Department could utilize Rs.7673.70 crore out of 
the allocated amount of Rs.9,293 crore.   During 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 also the 
Department could not utilize the entire allo cated amount.  The Committee are informed 
that one of the reasons for unde r utilization is unspent balanc es with the St ates and also 
non-submission of utilization certificates by most of the States on time.  The Committee 
observe that most of the times Central Government delay release of funds to the States or 
release it at the fag end of the financial year and expect the States to utilize it in very 
short time.  Obviously, the States are not in a position to spend the entire amount and 
have unspent balance lying with them.  Th e Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
release of the funds to the St ates should be made on time so that they could utilize the 
amount rationally and there is proper monito ring of expenditure.  The Committee also 

  
desire that there shou ld be proper coordina tion with the State Governments so as to 
obtain Utilization Certificates and to safeguard that money released is spent only on 
approved Schemes and programmes. 
 The Committee notice that in respect of  some of the Schemes, the funds have 
been utilized by the States but they have expressed their inability to contribute the 
matching shares.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that while formulating Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes the financial capability of State Governments to contribute their 
share should also be assessed to that they do not face difficulties at a later stage and the 
Schemes are implemented effectively.  The G overnment may also consider the peculiar 
socio-economic conditions and industrial ba ckwardness of States so that suitable 
incentives and concessions are incorporated  in the Centrally Sponsored Schemes for 
harmonious growth and development of all Regions and States. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.4 For on-going schemes funds are released  in time.  However, so far as new 
schemes are concerned, it takes time in getti ng the approval of the competent authority, 
which at times results in delay in releasing funds. 
 The implementation of the schemes and expenditure is regularly monitored.  For 
proper utilization of the funds, the Government of India has got regular interaction with 
the State Governments and the problems, if any, are sorted out. 
 Under Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA) Scheme, States have flexibility 
to select the schemes of their felt needs and priorities.  The contribution of the State 
Governments has been brought down to 10 per cent as against the normal level of 25 
percent.  In the case of North Eastern States, the entire fund is provided by the GOI under 

  
this scheme.  For Technology Mission for Inte grated Development of Horticulture in 
North Eastern States including Sikkim, Ja mmu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttaranchal, 100 percent contribution is given by the Government of India. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
2.5 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.9 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 5 
Credit Flow to Agriculture 
2.6 The Committee note that the total credit flow to Agriculture in the Ninth Plan 
(1997-2002) amounted to Rs. 2,29,956 crore.  A subs tantial jump in th e credit flow to 
Agriculture is envisaged in the Tenth Plan (2002-2007) which is projected at Rs. 7,36,570 
crore almost three times the Ninth Plan Achievement.  The total flow of institutional 
credit to agriculture during 2002-03 has been Rs. 70,810 crore as against Rs. 62,045 crore 
in 2001-2002.  During 2003-04, the estimated figure of such credit is Rs. 80,000 crore.  
The Committee feel that although there is some increase in the Agricultural credit in the 
first two years of the Tenth Plan, the in crease is not commensurate with the Plan 
projection.  The Committee, however, note th at the Finance Minister in his Budget 
Speech (2004) has announced to double the flow of agricultural credit in three years. 
 The Committee note that out of the 26 ma jor commercial banks only 8 banks have 
achieved the target of 18 per cent (as stipulated by RBI) of total agriculture advance to 
Net Bank credit.  While Commending the Banks like State Bank of Indore, State Bank of 
Saurashtra, Punjab National Bank who extend ed credits to farmers even beyond the 
stipulated target of 18 per cent, the Comm ittee deplore the poor performance of some 

  
major banks like State Bank of Travancore, Bank of Maharashtra, Dena Bank, Oriental 
Bank of Commerce, UCO Bank who coul d not reach beyond 12 per cent and the 
Corporation Bank which could lend only 9.58 per cent. 
The Committee are concerned to note that some of the banks are not able to meet 
the RBI stipulation of 18 per cen t of total bank advances to Ag ricultural Sector, with the 
result, the farmers are taki ng loans from unscrupulous private money lenders on 
exorbitant rate of interest in absence of in stitutional loan.  The Committee also note lack 
of easy accessibility of bank branches in rura l areas and the long and arduous procedural 
formalities for taking loans making them easy prey to the private money lenders.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the lo an procedure should be simplified and the 
commercial banks should reach the farmers, as they are doing in the cases of housing and 
auto loans, so that more and more farmers ar e able to avail of the bank loans in time of 
need.  This would go a long way to save the farmers from th e clutches of money lenders 
and the claws of death.  The Committee woul d also like the Government to make it 
incumbent upon every bank to meet the sti pulation of providing a minimum of 18 per 
cent agricultural credit. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.7 Expanding the outreach of Rural Financia l Institutions and simplification of 
lending procedures are high on the agenda of th e Ministry of Agriculture and this agenda 
is being pursued actively with the Ministry of Finance and the Reserve Bank of India. 
The Government of India in concert with th e Reserve Bank of India has initiated various 
policy measures to improve accessibility of fa rmers to the institutional credit sources and 
to simplify the lending procedures. The emphasis of these policies has been on 

  
progressive institutionalization for providing timely and adequate credit to farmers with 
particular focus on small and marginal farmers and weaker sections of society to enable 
them to adopt modern technology and im proved agricultural practices for increasing 
agricultural production and productivity.  The different elements of policy which make 
for a cogent framework under which agricultural credit is extended are adequacy of credit 
availability, equitable access, rationalization of rates of interest, enhancement in the limit 
for collateral free loans, timeliness, risk mitig ation, attention to credit starved sectors, 
regions and sections of the population, sust ainability of credit institutions, etc. 
Government of India and RBI have introduced policies in all these aspects and refined the 
same over a period of time base on the feedback received from its implementation. 
Banks have been advised to undert ake procedural simplification and 
modifications in regard to agricultural loans, including simplification of loan sanction and 
disbursement procedures, forms of loan appl ications, loan agreemen ts, rationalization of 
internal returns of banks, delegation of adequate powers to the Branch Managers, 
introduction of composite cash credit limits to farmers, introduction of new loan products 
and delivery system like Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs) & SHGs, disbursement of loans in 
cash wherever necessary, dispensing with th e ‘No Dues Certificate’, discretion to 
branches/banks on matters relating to waiver of margin/security requirements for 
agricultural loans upto Rs. 50,000 and upto Rs. 5 lakh in the case of agri-business and 
agri-clinics, etc. Considering the fact that the dividing line between production and 
consumption needs of the poor is very thin and lack of short-term consumption loans 
could result in the diversion of resources from investments,  the banks have been advised 
to consider providing a separate, flexible, revolving credit limit to small borrowers for 

  
meeting temporary shortfalls in family cash fl ows.  Banks have been advised to evolve 
suitable credit products/packages in this regard . It has been reported that the poor often 
keep away from banks for want of inform ation about procedures.  This is further 
compounded as information on requirements for obtaining loans is not  available in one 
go. Keeping this in view, banks have been a dvised to take necessary  steps to reduce any 
information gap to avoid such a situation. It has been suggested that loan application 
forms and information brochures should be in vernacular for loan products which should 
also contain a comprehensive checklist of doc uments/information to be furnished as also 
procedural requirements to be complied with fo r availing of loans.  The banks have been 
advised to display details of such information on banks’ notice boards.  
 For the domestic commercial banks, the Reserve Bank of Indi a has stipulated a 
target of 18 per cent of their Net Bank Cred it (NBC) for lending to agriculture. However, 
against this target, achievement as on March 2004 has been 15.45%. Ministry of 
Agriculture is concerned about the shortfall in achievement of  the stipulated target of 
lending to agriculture sector a nd has been taking up this issue from time to time at the 
appropriate levels in the Ministry of Fi nance and RBI, the latest being Agriculture 
Minister’s letter to Finance Minister on 08 th June 2004. Prime Minist er’s Office in its 
communication dated 18th August, 2004   has advised the Ministry of Finance to take all 
necessary steps to ensure that the Commercial Banks achieve the ta rget of lending 18 per 
cent of their Net Bank Credit  to agriculture sector by Financia l Year 2005 -2006 
positively. 
 
 

  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
2.8 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No.1 15 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 7 
Crop Insurance 
2.9 The Committee are constrained to note th at the ‘National Agricultural Insurance 
Scheme’ (NAIS), which is being implemented in  23 States and 2 Union Territories is not 
delivering the desired results.  The remaining States/Union Territories are also reluctant 
to adopt the scheme for one or the other reas ons.  The Committee also note that a sum of 
Rs. 1,879.02 crore during 2002-2003 (Kharif and Rabi) and Rs. 278.46 crore during 2003 
(Kharif) has been released to the Agricultu re Insurance Company of India Ltd. (AIC), 
which is the Implementing Agency (IA) of NAI S, but claims to the tune of Rs. 474.26 
crore are pending under NAIS till July 2004.  It has been informed that in most cases, the 
concerned State Government’s share of funds is awaited.  The Committee are of the view 
that payment of insurance should not be dela yed due to any reason  otherwise the very 
purpose of insurance is defeated and farmers are just helpless in the time of crisis.  They, 
therefore, desire the Union Government to persuade the State Governments to make 
adequate provision in their Budgets for mee ting the financial liabilities under NAIS so 
that farmers’ interests do not suffer on acc ount of inability of a State Government to 
make its contribution.  The Committee also recommend the Government to bring more 
crops under the purview of NAIS so that more and more farmers are benefited. 
The Committee observe that under NAIS ‘Block’ or ‘Tehsil’ is being taken as unit 
for collection of data for asse ssing the damage to the crops.  Under such a system, if the 

  
crop of a few farmers is damaged in a village, they do not receive the benefit of the 
Insurance Scheme as they are not counted  sufferer.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the village should be taken as a unit of collecting data.  Initially, 
‘Gram Panchayat’ level should be reached and ultimately it is the village level data which 
will accrue actual benefits to the poor farmers under the National Agricultural Insurance 
Scheme. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.10 National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (N AIS), at present, is being implemented 
by 23 States and 2 UTs.   Other States like Punj ab,  most of the Nort h-Eastern States etc. 
are not implementing the Scheme due to vari ous reasons.  But the Government of India 
from time to time is impressing upon the St ates/UTs to implement the scheme.  NAIS 
envisages time bound settlement of claims.  It is Government’s endeavor that claims of a 
season, if any, are settled before the commen cement of the same season next year.    
Implementing States/UTs are requested from  time to time to make adequate budget 
provision in their budget and for timely pa yment of their share towards financial 
liabilities.  Recently, Union Agriculture Minister has requested to the Chief Ministers of 
all implementing States for expeditiously paym ent of share of their financial liabilities 
under NAIS.  Besides this States are requested to make available requisite yield data to 
the Implementing Agency within stipulated time so that timely processing of admissible 
claims may be made. 
NAIS, at present, covers three categories of crops namely (a) food crops (cereals, 
millets & pulses), (b) oilseeds and (c) annual commercial/horticultural crops.  Initially, 
three crops, namely sugarcane, cott on and potato were covered under Annual 

  
commercial/horticultural crops which have now rose to eleven.  However, State 
Governments are free to increase the number of crops subject to the availability of past 
yield data based on crop cutting experiments fo r adequate number of years and capacity 
of State Government to conduct the requisite number of CCEs. 
At present, the Scheme is operating on th e basis of ‘Area Approach’ i.e. defined 
areas which may be a Gram Panchayat, Mandal, Hobli, Circle, Firka, Block, Taluka             
etc. as decided by State Government, for each  notified crop.  No doubt, reduction in unit 
area of insurance will help in more realistic assessment of claims. But it may be difficult 
for implementing states to make assessment of yield based on Crop Cutting Experiments 
(CCEs) at smaller unit area level, because  of large number of CCEs required to be 
undertaken for making assessment of yield.  The implementing States do not have 
adequate infrastructure to conduct required number of CCEs.     
The efforts have been made to explore alternative methods for making assessment 
of yield at smaller unit ar ea of insurance through Sma ll Area Crop Estimation Method 
(SACEM) and Satellite Remote Sensing T echnique.  SACEM, which was based on 
farmer’s appraisal, was experimented in se lected districts/ crops but it was not proved 
effective method.  Similarly, Satellite Remote  Sensing Technique wi ll also take some 
more time in reaching out to Gram Panchaya t level for making assessment of yield.   
Inspite of all this, reduction in the unit area of insurance is under consideration of the 
review process of NAIS.  Further, scheme provides for individual based assessment in 
case of localised calamities su ch as hailstorm, landslide , cyclone and flood, which is 
implemented in, limited areas, on an experime ntal basis, and may be extended to more 
areas in the light of operational experience gained. 

  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
2.11 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.21 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.8 
 
Agricultural Marketing 
 
2.12 There can be no denying the fact that the Marketing of agricultural produce is the 
most important factor for the farming commu nity, particularly for those who are small 
producers and completely dependent on the ma rketing of their crop.   They get their 
livelihood by marketing their agri produce which is the product of a year long labour of 
their entire families.  An inter-Minist erial Task Force set up by the Government 
suggested a package of reform measures, such  as amendments in th e State Agricultural 
Produce Marketing control (APMC) Act to encourage development of competitive 
agricultural markets on the private and cooperative sectors, and deregulation of marketing 
system to promote private investment in  marketing infrastructure.  The Committee 
recommend the Government to implement all the measures suggested by the Task Force 
in a time bound manner. 
 The Committee is pleased to note that  the government has formulated a Model 
Law on Agricultural Marketing and Contract Farming in consultation with the State 
Governments and representatives of Trade and Industry.  The Committee recommend the 
Government to insist upon the State Govern ments to make the desired amendments in 
their respective States APMC Act at the earl iest so that the implementation process is 
started in right earnest. 

  
 The Committee have noticed that one of the reasons for farmers for not getting the 
remunerative price for their crop/produce is th e inadequate marketing facilities, for want 
for which major part of their crop go waste.  Farmers are not in a position to reach the 
market in time due to improper forward linkages forcing them to resort to distress sale or 
complete degeneration of their produce for lack of timely market access 
The Committee consider this as an unmitig ated double disaster, that is to say, the 
loss of the farmer and the colossal national loss.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Government to provide the basic marketing facilities to the farmers in their vicinity so 
that they get full remuneration for their pr oduce within time before the food grain or 
produce get perished. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.13 The Inter Ministerial Task Force on agri cultural marketing in its report had made 
several recommendations on which action is to  be taken by various Departments of the 
Central Government and by the State Govern ments/ UT Administ rations.  The action 
taken so far in respect of these recommendations is as under:- 
(i) Reforms in Marketing Law 
 The Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India has formulated a “Model Act” 
on agricultural marketing in order to guide the States in implementing reforms by 
way of promotion of direct marketing and contract farming arrangements and 
allowing competitive markets in private and cooperative sectors.  The aforesaid 
reforms in the Model Law were discusse d in a meeting on State Agricultural 
Ministers held on 07
th January, 2004.  The Model Act has been circulated to all 
state Governments/UT Administration for further follow up action as the subject 

  
matter falls within their purview.  Hon’bl e Agriculture Minister has requested all 
the States/UTs on 16 th July, 2004 to suitably amend their APMC Act in the 
overall national/ State interest and more so in the interest of farmers. 
(ii) Department of Food and Public Dist ribution is actively considering introduction 
of negotiable ware house rece ipt system in the countr y, which would result in 
benefits viz. increased liquidity in rural areas, lower cost of financing, shorter and 
more efficient supply chains and enhan ced rewards for grading and quality of 
commodities including agricultural commod ities.  Department has set up a core 
group on 31.08.2004 with the following responsibilities:- 
a) to formulate the draft central le gislation for making warehouse receipt a 
negotiable instrument; 
b)  to examine the issue of setting up a regulatory mechanism and accreditation 
agency for public and private warehous es and suggest to the Government 
accordingly; 
c) any other work related to the objective of maki ng the warehouse receipts an 
effective negotiable instrument. 
(iii) In order to encourage pledge financ ing, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has issued 
instructions categorizing marketing credit to agriculture under “Priority Sector”.  
Limit of credit has been increased from Rs. 1 lakh to Rs. 5lakhs.  Duration of 
credit has also been increased to one year. 
(iv) Central legislation dealing with E ssential Commodities (E.C.) Act has been 
liberalized by the Department of Consum er Affairs to remove all controls on 

  
the movement, storage and marketing of  agricultural commodities including 
abolition of licensing system. 
(v) Forward and Future Markets have been id entified as an important tool of price 
discovery and risk management in agricultural commodity markets.  The 
Department of consumer Affairs has lifted ban in respect of 54 important 
commodities for futures trading and granted “National” status to two 
commodity exchanges in the country. 
(vi) A “Group of Ministers” is currently in the process of finalizing the framework 
of an “Integrated Food Law” in order to bring convergence of several laws 
including the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act to create an enabling 
environment for accelerated growth of agro-processing industry in the 
country.  Ministry of Food Processing Industries is servicing the Group of 
Ministers. 
(vii) With a view to attract large investments for development of agriculture 
markets in the country, this Ministry  has formulated a new Scheme under 
which assistance would be provided to the States, who amends APMC Act to 
promote direct marketing, contract farming and competitive markets in private 
and cooperative sectors.  The Scheme will be implemented during Tenth Plan 
with an outlay of Rs.175crore for providing subsidy @ 25 per cent of the 
capital investment and @ 33.33 per cent fo r NE, hilly and tribal areas and to 
SC/ST entrepreneurs.  In addition, th ere will a central allocation of Rs.15 
crore for strengthening labor atory network and for general awareness/training 
programmes and studies. 

  
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 9 
 
Watershed Development in Shifting Cultivation Areas in North Eastern States: 
2.14 The Committee are constrained to note that for Watershed Development in 
Shifting Cultivation Areas in North Eastern States only Rs.100 crores have been allocated 
for Tenth Plan.  Every year Rs.20 crore ar e being allocated under the Scheme.  The 
Committee fail to see the tokenism of provi ding same meager amount year after year 
without taking into consideration the rising inflation and th e mounting cost.  Considering 
the fact that the people in these areas do not have any perm anent land or House and they 
keep on shifting from one hilltop to another for cultivation and the financial constraints of 
these States, the Committee recommend that the allocation under Watershed 
Development in Shifting Cultivation Areas in North Eastern States be increased to Rs.50 
crore for 2004-05 at the Revised Estimate stage.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.15 The Department are implementing “Water shed Development Project in Shifting 
Cultivation Areas (WDPSCA) in 7 North-East ern States.  The Planning Commission is 
providing necessary funds as ‘Spe cial Additional Central Assistance to State Plan’.   The 
BE for 2004-05 is Rs.20 crores. 
 The Committee have recommended that this amount should be raised to Rs.50 
crores at RE stage. 
 The suggestion of the Committee is welc ome.  The matter will be taken up with 
the Planning Commission accordingly.  The outlay of the Project will be increased to 

  
Rs.50 crores in a phased manner subject to  Planning Commission providing necessary 
funds and keeping in mind the capacity of the States to utilize additional funds. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 11 
Organic Farming 
2.16 The Committee are pleased to note that a Scheme of ‘National Project on Organic 
Farming’ has been formulated during Tenth Plan and Rs. 32 crore have been allocated for 
2004-05 for the purpose.  The Committee also note that there is a proposal to set up the 
‘National Institute of Organic Farming’. 
 The Committee opine that there are special benefits and scope for Organic 
Farming in the country.  There is large aw areness among the people world over about the 
harmful effects of the inorganic farming with  the result the demand for organic products 
in the western world is increasing which also  increases the scope of export of organic 
produce.  The Committee, therefore, recomm end that the Government should provide 
incentives and encouragement to the farmers for Organic Farming and the financial 
provision under the Scheme should be enhanced to meet the requirement.  The project for 
‘National Institute of Organic Farming’ may be completed at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.17 A new Scheme, “National Project on Organic Farming” has been approved 
recently with an outlay of Rs. 57.05 crores for production, promotion and market 
development of organic farming in the country during the remaining period of 10 th Plan.  
The main components of the Scheme are:- 
(i) Putting in place a system of certification of organic produce. 

  
(ii) Capacity building through service providers. 
(iii) Financial support for commercial pr oduction units for production of organic  
            inputs like:- 
(a) Fruits and vegetable waste compost; 
(b) Bio-fertilizer production; and 
(c ) hatcheries for vermiculture. 
(iv) Promotion and extension of organic farming. 
The project will be implemented on pilot basis to begin with during the 10th Plan. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 12 
Availability of Quality Seeds 
 
2.18 On going through the documents furnished by the Department, the Committee 
understand that there is sufficient availability of certified quality seed as per the demands 
of the farmers.  However, some members of the Committee expressed their concern over 
the fact that the farmers are not getting ade quate quality seeds in time. In reply to a 
particular question, the Ministry have inform ed that during the year 2002-03 the quantity 
of seed distributed by private sector was 56.61 lakh quintals, which is 57.75 per cent of 
total seed distributed in the country.  Th e Committee observe that when the farmers 
require the quality seed, the Government ag encies do not have th e adequate stock to 
supply, in that case, the farmer either cannot sow the seeds in time or have to buy the 
same from the private dealers at exorbitant prices without any guarantee of germination 
and healthy produce.  The Committee expect the Government to ensure timely 
availability of certified quality seeds according to the needs of the farmers. 

  
 The Committee also hold the view that the farmers should also  be involved in 
development and strengthening of infrastructu re facilities in the production, preservation 
and distribution of quality seeds and the Government should provide technical and 
financial support to them so that the shortage of good quality seeds can be minimized. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.19 The overall seed replacement rate in the country is about 15% through formal 
seed sector and the remaining 85% is met th rough farmers saved see d.  Therefore, it is 
essential to improve usage of quality seeds through enhanced seed production and 
distribution.  Hence both public  and private seed sectors are to be encouraged.  State 
Government and State Seed Corporations (alongwith National Seeds Corporation, State 
Farms Corporation of India and private seed sector) have been aske d to increase their 
quantum of seed production to provide quality  seeds on time at reasonable prices.  The 
required facilities for public and private sectors have been provided.   
 The existing Seeds Act, 1966 provides th at the labeled seeds also conform to 
minimum seed standard of germination and purity.  The proposed Seeds Bill, 2004 
provides registration of the kind/variety of s eeds on the basis of its performance which is 
printed on the label. 
Involvement of farmers in production, storage and distribution will be 
strengthened with the implementation of the Scheme on Development and Strengthening 
of Seed Infrastructure Facilities for Producti on and Distribution of Quality Seeds.  Under 
this scheme it is proposed to provide foundati on seeds to the farmers at subsidized rates 
and impart technical training to farmer s on quality seed pr oduction, processing, 

  
packaging and storage at farms.  Seed Storage bins are also to be provided to the small 
and marginal farmers at subsidized rates to preserve the seeds. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL No.14 
 
Revival of Cooperatives 
2.20 The Committee note with satisfaction th at the Cooperative sector in India has 
emerged as one of the largest in the world with more than 5.45 lakh societies of various 
types with a membership of more than 23.62 crore. The Committee note that during the 
Ninth Plan period Rs.527.98 cror e have been utilised as  compared to Rs.662.43 crore 
allocated for cooperative division. During 2002-03 and 2003-04 also the utilisation had 
been around only 37 percent and 60 percent respectively. The Committee hardly need to 
emphasize that cooperatives play and important  role in agriculture and rural economy 
and, therefore, it is imperative  to increase the flow of investment to the sector so as to 
give it further impetus. They, therefore, desi red the Government to improve the financial 
performance of the cooperatives by strengthening the cooperative movement and utilise 
the funds allocated for the sector. 
 The Committee also note with concern the weak c onditions of some of the 
cooperative societies in the country. Unless these cooperatives are revived, the farmers 
cannot avail benefits from these societies. They, therefore, recommend the Government 
to ensure that the cooperatives are pr ovided necessary support, encouragement and 
assistance so that they work as autonom ous, self-reliant and democratically managed 
institutions accountable to their members and make a si gnificant contribution to the 
Agriculture sector of th e national economy. The Committee further recommended that 

  
one time catch up grant should be provided for th e revival of sick c ooperatives so that 
they start working for the welfare of the farmers and the community as a whole. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.21 In order to strengthen the coopera tive movement, the outlay during the 10 th Plan 
has been ear-marked  as Rs.458.50 crore and th e BE for 2004-05 has  been enhanced to 
Rs.74.17 crore. During the 10th Five Year Plan, the ongoing schemes of the 9 th Plan have 
been merged in the form of two restructured  schemes viz. “Central Sector Scheme of 
Cooperative Education & Training” and “Central  Sector Scheme of Assistance to NCDC 
Programmes for Cooperative Development”. During the first two years of the 10 th Plan, 
there was under utilisation of the funds mainly due to non approval of the two 
restructured schemes. Now, the EFC meeting for the two schemes have been held and the 
schemes are likely to approved during the current year.  
 The Multi State Cooperative Societies Ac t has been amended in the year 2002 to 
make cooperatives autonomous, self reliant and democratically managed institutions. The 
States are being persuaded to amend their State Acts on the same lines. Constitutional 
amendment to ensure the autonomous, demo cratic and professional functioning of the 
cooperatives under the State Cooperative Acts are also under consideration. The 
modalities for amendment of the Constitution are being worked out. 
A task force has been constituted to look into the aspects of providing financial 
assistance to rural cooperative and credit ins titutions. The task force has been asked to 
submit its recommendations  
A new scheme for rehabilitation of cooperative processing units under the 
restructured scheme of “Assistance to NC DC programmes for cooperative development” 

  
is under consideration of the Department. U nder this scheme, an allocation of Rs.443.00 
crore (Rs.348.00 crore loan a nd Rs.95.00 crore as subsidy has been proposed for the 10 th 
Plan. The Department will provide the gran ts component while the loan component will 
be arranged by the NCDC. The restructured sc heme is likely to be approved during the 
current year. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
CHAPTER-III 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s action taken replies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.2 
Investment in Agriculture 
4.1 Although the Agriculture Sector is the b ackbone of Indian economy, it is starved 
of capital.  The share of Agriculture in tota l Gross Capital Formation (GCF) has declined 
from 21 per cent in 1951-52 to 15.4 per cent in 1980-81, and further reduced to mere 8 
percent in 1999-2000.  I nvestment in Agriculture as per cent of gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) had declined from 1.9 per cent in th e early 1990s to 1.3 per cent in 2000, which is 
a matter of grave concern.  The contribution of  the public sector in GCF has also sharply 
declined.  The Committee are concerned to note that the decline in public sector Gross 
Capital Formation mainly reflects the decline in expenditure on irrigation works. 
 It is estimated that in order to achieve  the national growth of  8 per cent in the 
Tenth Plan period an investment of approximately Rs.33, 000 crore (at 1993-94 prices) in 
the years 2006-2007 would be re quired.  Government spending in the Agriculture will 
have to be significantly stepped up from the present level to meet the growth targets.  The 
committee, therefore, desire the Government to increase the investment in Agriculture 
Sector and formulate suitable Schemes to attr act more capital from the Private Sector to 
give boost to the Agriculture in the country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.2 In order to facilitate highe r growth rate in Indian ag riculture, it is necessary to 
step up investment.  It is also necessary to  pay special attention to dry land farming.  
Equally important is the introduction of  marketing reforms aimed at promoting, inter-

  
alia, public-private partnership.  The following measures seek to  facilitate higher growth 
rate in Indian Agriculture:- 
• Doubling rural credit in three years, easi ng the burden of debt and high interest 
rate and nursing cooperative back to health. 
• Special programme for dry land farming in the arid and semi-a rid regions of the 
country, horticulture and water management. 
• Stepping up public investment in agri culture research and extension, rural 
infrastructure and irrigation 
• In order to guide the States in the implementation of reforms, Central Government 
had drafted a Model Act on Agricultural Marketing.  This Act would promote 
direct marketing of Agricultural commod ities from the farmers’ fields, without 
the necessity of going through licensed traders and regulated markets.  The Model 
Act also seeks to provide an institutional framework for contract farming.  It is 
expected that these arrangements will fac ilitate linking the farm sector to agro-
processing industry and to sources of extension advice, seeds, credit and markets. 
• Reforms in the APMC Act were discusse d at the National Conference of State 
Ministers on 19 th November, 2004 at Bangalore, wher ein states were advised to 
complete the process of amending APMC Act within a period of 2-3 months. 
The Ministry of Agriculture has also la unched a scheme to provide investment 
subsidy to marketing infrastructure projects in States undertaking reforms.  Large-scale 
investment in agi-infrastructure projects is e xpected to result in far reaching benefits for 
all the stake holders 

  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.3 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.6 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.4 
Suicides by farmers 
4.4 The Committee are appalled over the con tinuing incidences of suicide committed 
by the Farmers in the country.  In Andhra Pradesh – 435, in Karnataka – 469, in 
Maharashtra – 197, in Orissa – 100 cases, in Ra jasthan and Punjab – 3 cases in each state 
of suicides by farmers have been reported.  Similarly, cases of suicides have been 
reported in varying number from other States.  The extremity which drives the farmers to 
commit suicide demonstrates their agonizing pl ight and the scant attention paid by the 
concerned States to their problems.  On a query, the Committee were shocked to learn 
that even the actual reasons for suicides are also not reported by some of the State 
Governments.  The Committee draw an unmis takable conclusion that certainly crop 
failures due to drought and othe r natural calamities. heavy indebtedness of the farmers 
and the ruthlessness of the money lenders are some of the immediate and direct cause for 
these acts of suicides.  It is all the more painful that the State Governments, which are the 
investigating agencies; do not want to share the facts.  As a re sult the families of all such 
farmers do not get compensation and the Un ion Government cannot take appropriate 
preventive measures for want of factual position from the State Governments. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Union Government should not 
always wait for the reports from the State Governments, whenever there is drought or any 
other natural calamity.  The Union Government ab initio should come forward and 

  
enquire the factual position on their own also and take adequate and immediate steps to 
mitigate the sufferings of the bereaved famil y.  The Committee are shocked to learn that 
in some cases the deaths of female farmers are not counted as farmer’s death as the 
agriculture holdings are owned by male member s with the result the bereaved family is 
deprived of compensation.  The Committee see no reason for such a gender based 
discrimination and remind that if any fema le farmer commits suicide for the same 
reasons, her family should also be equally compensated. 
The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should take concrete 
preventive measures to arrest the recurrence of such tragic deaths.  The farmers should be 
educated by extension workers to face the ch allenges of life and not to take such an 
extreme step, which besides being self-destruc ting devastates the fa mily, as well.  The 
India Meteorological Department (IMD) can also come to the rescue of farmers 
considerably by making correct forecast of the weather condition.  Farmers can be 
motivated to opt for crop-insurance by providi ng them soft-term packages and in case of 
crop failures; insurance claims  should be settled immediatel y.  To tackle their heavy 
indebtedness problem and to see that the farm ers are not trapped in the vicious circle of 
indebtedness, the flow of soft-term institutional credit should be increased so that they are 
not forced to take loans from private mone ylenders.  The Committee would also like the 
Government to make a case study of farmers committing suicide due to indebtedness and 
the suicides committed by the commercial borrowers, if any. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.5 Agriculture is a State subject.  St ate Governments are responsible for 
implementation of the policies and programme s for development of agriculture in the 

  
States.  At the Center, the Union Governme nt recognizes its responsibility towards 
farmers and agriculture and undertakes requisi te steps to enhance agricultural production 
and productivity through various schemes and centrally sponsored programmes that 
would assist the augmentation of living standards of the farmers and the rural poor. 
 Highest priority has been accorded to  revitalize agriculture for improving the 
conditions of the farmers, which has suffered because of successive drought in various 
regions during the last 4-5 years and other na tural calamites, high indebtedness and 
failing crops.  The Government is fully conscious of the magnitude of the problems of the 
farmers and taking steps for strengthening and streamlining the flow of agriculture credit. 
 Indebtedness has been identified as one of  the major causative factors for suicides 
by the farmers.  The constant pressure exerte d by the lending agencies to repay the loans 
without considering farmer’s repaying capac ity further accentuates his misery which 
ultimately forces him to resort to the extrem e step.  In the case of institutional credit, 
relief measures are available to the farmers but for the loans taken from informal sources, 
no such facilities are generally available. 
 The solution to problem of indebtedness lies in galvanizing the institutional credit 
sources to devise appropriate mechanism and products for weaning away the farmers 
from informal credit sources as well as in  enhancing the profitability of agriculture 
through increasing productivity, reducing cost of production and formulating  appropriate 
prices support measures. 
 Several measures have been initiated by the Government of India to galvanize the 
institutional credit system to make them more responsive to the need of farmers.  Some of 
the important measures initiated in this regard are as under:- 

  
 The Reserve Bank of India has issued  standing guidelines to the Banks for 
providing relief to the farmers in areas affected by natural calamities.  These guidelines 
have been issued to enable the banks to ta ke uniform and concerted action expeditiously, 
particularly to provide the financial assistance to the farmers affected by natural 
calamities.  These guidelines envisages inter alia: 
• Conversion/rescheduling of loans in the event of natural calamity for periods 
ranging from 3 to 9 years depending upon th e successive crop failure/intensity of 
damage of crops 
• Grant of fresh crop loans to affected farmers. 
• Conversion of principal as well as interest due on the existing loans. 
• Grant of consumption loans. 
• Not to compound interest in respect of loans convereted/rescheduled etc. 
• Not to charge penal interest in respect of current dues in default. 
In order to protect the farmers from the adverse effect of natural calamities 
leading to failure of crops, National Agricu ltural Insurance Scheme is in vogue since 
Rabi 1999-2000.  The scheme envisages covera ge of all farmers (loanee and non-loanee 
both) irrespective of their size of holdings, more crops (including annual 
horticultural/commercial crops) and more risks. 
As a special dispensation for the agricultu re sector, the Government of India has 
advised all the Public Sector Banks to reduce their lending rate for agriculture to a single 
digit rate of not more than 9% per annum on crop loans up to a ceiling of Rs.50,000/-  
Keeping in view the important of flow of credit to agriculture, in particular to the smaller 
borrowers who may not have the necessary a ssets as collateral, the banks have been 

  
advised to waive margin/security requirement s for agricultural loans up to Rs.50,000/-  
NABARD has also issued guidelines on scheme for redemption of Debts of Farmers from 
non institutional sources. 
In so far as accurate weather forecasting in concerned, the IMD is now engaged in 
auditing its own system of forecast to give improved forecast in future.  The Department 
of Science and Technology has already a nnounced a package of Rs.500 crores for 
procuring modern equipment and upgrading the facilities for this pur pose with the IMD.  
The Ministry of Agriculture has also ini tiated work on the project for Extended Range 
Forecast System (ERFS) for climate risk management in agriculture.  The appropriate 
model would be developed by IIT, Delhi that will also provide necessary support for 
implementation of the project by the Depart ment of Science and Technology.  The ERFS 
project is expected to fac ilitate extended range forecas t of rainfall and surface 
temperature from monthly to seasonal scale in India. 
To provide relief to the farmers due to crop failure, guidelines have been issued 
on rescheduling of loans and one time settlement of past defaults.  Safety nets to the 
farmers have been provided against loss of production through schemes like National 
Insurance Schemes (NAIS), Farmers Income Insurance Scheme (FIIS) which is being 
implemented on pilot basis.  The Government is also implementing Minimum Support 
Price (MSP) and Marketing Intervention Scheme (MIS) to ensure remunerative prices to 
the farmers.  Further drought re lief assistance is also given to  the states both in the form 
of financial assistance and food grains as and when necessary. 
 
 

  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.6 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No.1.12 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 6 
Interest rate for Agricultural Loans 
4.7 The Committee are happy to note that following their earlier recommendations, 
the Government have lowered the rate of inte rest on Agricultural credit and all the public 
sector banks have been advise d to reduce their lending rate  for agriculture to a single 
digit of not more than 9 per cent per annum  on crop loans upto a ceiling of Rs. 50,000.  
But, they are disappointed to not e that this lower rate of interest is only upto a ceiling of 
Rs. 50,000 and in case of commercial banks the interest rate is not to exceed the Prime 
Lending Rate (PLR) that is 10 -11 per cent.  Moreover, C ooperative Banks and Regional 
Rural Banks are free to fix their own interest  rate ranging between 9 to 15 per cent.  The 
Committee are seriously concerned to note th at though the National Bank for Agriculture 
and Rural Development (NABARD) is giving re finance on Agricultural loans at the rate 
of 5.25 per cent to 6.75 per cen t (depending upon the size a nd purpose of loan) to the 
Banks but the rate of interest ultimately be ing charged by such lead ing institutions from 
the borrower is in the range of 9 to 15 per cent. 
The Committee came across a number of cases of farmers committing suicides 
due to their poor financial position and failu re of crops due to various reasons.  The 
Committee feel that high rate of interest and the perpetual burden of loans are perhaps the 
major factors compelling the poor farmers to commit suicide.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should instruct cooperative Banks and Rural Banks also 

  
to reduce the rate of interest rationally because small and marginal farmers take loans 
from these banks only.  They further recomm end that the ceiling of Rs. 50,000 should be 
increased to Rs. 1,50,000 for charging the minimum rate of interest.  The Committee also 
desire that since NABARD is pr oviding refinance at lower rate of interest, the actual rate 
of interest to be charged from the farmer s should also be reasonably reduced and the 
difference should not, in any case, more that 2-3 per cent. 
 The Committee further note that while giving agricultural loans many a times, the 
land, crop or agricultural machinery of the farm ers is used as collat eral guarantee by the 
credit giving bank/institution.  In case of non-payment of the loans, some times farmers 
not only loose their lands but also undergo the trauma of being sent to jails and 
sometimes they have to pay all the expenditure incurred by the enforcement agencies viz. 
police etc.  in the process and for his food etc. in the jail.  The Committee desire the 
Government to ensure that in case of their in ability to pay the debts, the farmers may not 
be deprived of their hypothecated land or agricultural machiner y because the whole 
existence of poor farmers is entirely dependent on this land, cattle and machinery, etc. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.8 Ministry of Agriculture has been taki ng up the issue of lowering the rate of 
interest on agricultural loans from time to time at the appropriate levels in the Ministry of 
Finance, the latest being Agriculture Minister’s letter to Finance Minister on 08 th June 
2004.  
Though, as a part of financial sector reforms, the banks (Commercial Banks, 
Cooperative Banks and RRBs) have been given freedom to fix their lending rates to be 

  
charged from the ultimate borrowers but as a special dispensation for the agriculture 
sector, the Government of India has advised all the Public Sector banks to reduce their 
lending rate for agricu lture to a single dig it rate of not more than 9% per annum on crop 
loans upto a ceiling of Rs. 50,000/-. It is expected  that this rate will  benefit most of the 
crop loan account holders and will cover almost all the small and marginal farmers.  
In case of cooperative banks and RRBs there is complete freedom and they have been 
permitted to determine their ow n interest rates based on thei r cost of funds, transaction 
and risk costs etc. Refinance from NABAR D constitutes only a small proportion of the 
ground level credit disbursed by the cooperative banks a nd the major portion of the 
resources are arranged by the cooperative ba nks from the open market including deposit 
mobilization, the cost of which is generally high. Refinance support from NABARD need 
to be viewed only as a supplementary source  of funds to the cooperative banks rather 
than a bench mark for determining the inte rest rates to ultimate borrowers. NABARD, 
however, periodically reviews the rate of interest being charged by cooperative banks and 
RRBs and advises them to fix the interest rate s at a reasonable leve l so that it does not 
causes hardship to the farmers.  Mandating the spread at 2-3% between the refinance 
interest rate and ultimate lending rates may not be a feasible option as it may lead to 
deceleration in agriculture credit flow becau se fixation of spread depends on several 
factors like the transaction and risk cost, cost of raising funds by the banks etc.   
Ministry of Agriculture appreciates the f act that interest rate is an important 
aspect of credit.  The expectations of bo rrowers for lower interest rates on loans to 
agriculture have increased.  In addition to re asonable rate of intere st, borrower is also 
concerned with the timeliness and adequacy  of credit and accompanying costs he/she 

  
may have to incur to avail credit.  In order to deliver adequate credit in time and in a cost 
effective manner, banks have been advise d to pay attention to their systems and 
procedures and to initiate appropriate measur es to ensure that no avoidable expenses are 
incurred by the borrowers for getting a loan sanctioned.  
Chief Ministers of all the states/ UTs have been requested by the Union 
Agriculture Minister to review  their state laws to remove the provision for arrest and 
detention of farmers and strengthen the other alternatives of recovery measures by 
analyzing and eliminating the real causes of poor recovery  like loan waivers, general 
remissions, bogus loaning etc. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.9 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Para No. 1.18 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 10 
Seed Crop Insurance 
 
4.10 The Committee note that ‘Pilot Scheme  for Seed Crop Insurance’ was initiated 
from Rabi 1999-2000 on pilot basis in 10 States  with the objective to provide financial 
security and income stability to the Breeder Se ed growers in the event of failure of seed 
crop and encourage participation of new/br eeders/growers to undertake seed production 
programme of newly released hybrid/improved varieties.  The Committee find that the 
Scheme has not been found popular with the seed growers, therefore, it was proposed to 
drop the Scheme during tenth Plan period on the advice of Planning Commission.  One of 
the reasons for non popularity of the Scheme  among the farmers as advanced by the 

  
Department, is delay in settlement of clai ms by General Insurance Corporation (GIC), 
which is the implementing agency. 
 The Committee take strong exception to the dilatory settlement procedure of GIC.  
This is purely an administrative matter which can be amicably resolved by stipulating 
speedy settlement of claims of the farmer s.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the GIC should be asked to re view their procedure to  settle such claims 
on priority basis.  The Committee may be ap prised of the action taken by GIC in this 
regard. 
 The Committee also note that the National Council for Applied Economic 
Research (NCAER) was assigned the task to evaluate the Scheme, but they have not 
submitted any Report so far.  The Committee de sire that the NCAER should be asked to 
submit their report within one month of presentation of this Re port and only after 
examining their evaluation Report any decision  regarding the fate of this important 
Scheme should be taken. 
 The Committee are of the considered view that unless protection is given to the 
seed growers through the Scheme of Seed Crop Insurance, it will be very difficult to 
encourage the private seed growers to take  up seed production.  The Committee consider 
that this Scheme is one of the rarest methods by which the seed production can be 
encouraged all over the count ry and risk in so wing such new variet y of seeds can be 
covered and adequate protecti on be given to the farmers.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Scheme s hould not be discontinued and e fforts should be made to 
suitably popularise the Scheme among the fa rmers by spreading awareness about the 
advantages of the Schemes. 

  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.11 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has awarded a fresh study to 
evaluate the Seed Crop Insurance Scheme to Agriculture Finance Corporation, as the 
response from NCAER was not forthcoming.   The decision on continuance of the 
Scheme will be taken after the conclusion of this evaluation study. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.12 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Para No. 1.24 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.  13 
Remunerative Prices to Farmers 
4.13 The Committee are informed that the Commission on Agricultural Costs and 
Prices (CACP), which is an independe nt Commission, recommends the Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) for some crops under Price Support Scheme (PSS). The CACP fixes 
the price based on some formula taking into co nsideration many factors relating to costs, 
International Schemes and demand and supply position, etc. Based on their 
recommendation and after taking the Cabinet approval, the Government declare the MSP 
for notified Agricultural commodities. The Committee are further informed that MSP 
functions as one of the fact or to encourage or discourag e production of any particular 
crop. 
The Committee observe that under th e Price Support Scheme (PSS) new 
crops/commodities are not being included. Th ey desire that some more agricultural 
commodities like cash crops, which largely aff ect the farmers financial condition, should 
also be included under the list of notified commodities for PSS. 

  
The Committee feel that the prices under MSP, really  do not quite reflect and 
include all the costs an d labour invested by the farmers.  There is substantial deviation 
from the actual costs and market price. The farmers are not getting remunerative price for 
their produce and the margin is becoming less day by day. The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Government to chalk out specific schemes for the farmers so that they are able 
to receive the full benefits of their produce at the appropriate time. 
The Committee are of the opinion that fi xing of MSP cannot be the criteria for 
discouraging any particular crop, because the farmer  knows best about his soil and the 
crop best suited for his land. He cannot grow a particular crop on the soil simply on the 
basis of high support price. It  is just unrealistic to fix low support price of a specific 
commodity for merely discouraging its production. It is unfair to impose low MSP on the 
farmers if they are not inclined to grow the alternative crop because of non-suitability of 
soil. The Committee, therefore, recommen d that the factor of encouraging or 
discouraging the production of an y particular crop should not be taken into consideration 
for fixing the Minimum Support Price of any Agricultural Commodity. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.14 The minimum support prices (MSP) for ma jor agricultural  products are fixed by 
the government, each year, af ter taking into account the recommendations of the CACP. 
While formulating these recommendations, th e Commission analyses a wide spectrum of 
data, covering the costs of cultivation/produc tion, trends and spread of input use, 
production and productivity of the crop conc erned, market prices, both domestic and 
global, inter-crop price parity, emerging supply-demand situation, procurement and 
distribution, terms of trade between agricultural and non-agri cultural sectors, and so on. 

  
Since the price policy involves considerations of long-run consequences, the Commission 
also looks at the yield- rais ing research being conducted by  institutions like ICAR. The 
basic data are generally  collected from the Directorate of  Economics and Statistics, State 
Governments, Central Ministries and the nodal agencies concerned with the 
implementation of agricultural price policy. It ma y be stated that the estimates of cost of 
cultivation/ production take into account al l the agricultural inputs including seed, 
fertilizer, pesticides, mandays, irrigation, power, interest on co st of land, depreciation on 
implements and machinery etc. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.15 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Para No.1.27 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.15 
Construction of Cold Storages/Rural Godowns 
4.16 The Committee note that under the Centra l Sector Scheme for construction of 
Rural Godowns, Rs.100 crore has been allo cated for 2004-2005.  During the last three 
financial years, 1,120 rural godowns have been renovated and 3,731 godowns have been 
sanctioned for modernization/construction bu t the Committee is surprised to know that 
the availability of cold stor age/rural godowns is almost nil in most of the North Eastern 
States.  The Committee are at a loss to find that north eastern region is completely 
neglected as such.  They, therefore, recomm end that cold storages/rural godowns should 
immediately be constructed in these areas. 
 In other areas of the country also the situation of cold storage is far from 
enthusing.  The farmers are se lling their produce at a throw- away price because there is 

  
no cold storage or godown available in thei r vicinity and brokers and middlemen are 
taking advantage of thei r plight.  The Committee, therefor e, desire that the Scheme of 
construction/renovation of cold  storage/rural godown should be strengthened for the 
benefit of small, medium, and marginal fa rmers.  The allocation under the scheme be 
enhanced at the revised estimate level so that more farmers could store their farm produce 
in the vicinity of their farms and are prevented from resorting to distress sale immediately 
after harvest. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.17 The scheme had not initi ally received good response fr om NE region due to 
availability of less marketable surplus and scar city of land in hilly areas.  As per the 
feedback received, the scheme is picki ng up in NE States also.  As on 31.03.2004, 24 
new projects with capacity of 54,000 MTs and 27 projects with capacity of 2700 MTS in 
the cooperative sector have been sanctione d.  The publicity and training and awareness 
programmes are also being conducted in these areas to encourage people to undertake 
projects under the Scheme.  However, with  a view to encourage small farmers and 
entrepreneurs in North East Re gion in the country to undert ake construction of projects 
under the scheme, the following modifications have been made:- 
d) Smaller godowns of 50 to 100 MTs have  been made eligible for subsidy under 
the scheme to encourage on farm storage. 
e) For hilly areas, where there is a scar city of land, the si ze of godown eligible 
for subsidy under the scheme; of Rura l Godowns has further been reduced 
from 100 MT to 25 MT. 
f) Five lakh MTs capcity has been reserved for small farmers. 

  
Target of 90 lakh MTs of rural godown was fixed for construction during 10th Plan period 
which has now been revised to 140 lakh MTs. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.18 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Para No. 1.30 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.16 
Agri Clinics/Agri Business centres 
4.19 The Committee are happy to note that the Scheme of “Agri-clinics/Agri-business 
Centre” aims at providing training to the agricultural graduates to enable them to 
establish fee based extension services.  A sum of Rs.16.50 crore has been allocated for 
2004-05 under the scheme.  So far 4,854 candida tes have been trained but only 988 
candidates could set up their Agri-Clinics/ Agri-busines ventures.  The Committee in 
their earlier Reports on Demands for Gran ts of the Department had recommended for 
providing some subsidy to the willing candidates for opening ag ri-clinics but it has been 
informed that the demand of subsidy component has been dropped by the Department as 
the proposal could not get the nod of the Planning Commission. 
 The Committee observe that a large number of agriculture graduates in the 
country are unemployed.  Though they can re ceive training under the above mentioned 
scheme but they are not in a position to set up their ventures without the help of the 
Government.  The Committee, therefore, st rongly recommend that at least 25 per cent 
subsidy under the Scheme should be provided to  the willing agricultu re graduates to set 
up their venture if the Government really wa nt to make their scheme successful.  The 
Committee further recommend that the banks s hould be instructed to provide easy loans 

  
to the unemployed agricultural graduates so that they could set up their own centres.  
Needless to say, such an innovative step will encourage the young graduates to come 
forward to earn their livelihood and will also benefit the farmers  as they can avail 
agricultural services like soil testing facilities and expertise in their vicinity. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.20 The central sector scheme “Establishm ent of Agri-Clinics and Agri-Business 
centres by Agriculture graduate s” aims at using vast pool of  agriculture graduates of the 
country to provide extension services to farmers on payment basis by setting up their 
private ventures.  The scheme  provides equal opportunities to all eligible agriculture 
graduates irrespective of age to support ag riculture development through economically 
viable self-employment ventures. 
 As on 1 st October, 2004, 5376 agriculture grad uates have been imparted training 
at different training institutes  in the country. As many as 1119 of Centres/ventures have 
been set up; by the agriculture graduates throughout the country.  Sixty six training 
institutions are engaged in imparting training to the applicants across the country. 
 The scheme is being closely monito red by Government of India, SFAC, 
MANAGE and NABARD.  The progress of th e scheme and bank related issues were 
reviewed in two meetings on 30 th July, 2004 and 3 rd August, 2004 under the 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary and Secretary, Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation respectively. 
 Four banks namely State Bank of Indi a Union Bank of India, Canara Bank and 
Punjab National Bank had participated in the meeting chaired by Secretary (A&C) on 3rd 

  
August, 2004.  Each of these banks identified on e district in two States for further work 
on the Scheme. 
 National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE), 
Hyderabad has sent list of the agricultural graduates trained till now to all the 
nationalized banks. MANAGE has organized a two day workshop for twenty officers of 
NABARD to sensitize them about the scheme 
 The original scheme provided for subsidy and training components.  The Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance, while apprising the scheme, did not approve the 
subsidy component.  However, as per the recommendation of the first Report of the 
Standing Committee, the Planning Commission and Minist ry of finance would be 
approached again to consider subsidy under the scheme.  It is further submitted the 
budgetary provision for subsidy component exists under the scheme. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.21 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.33 of Chapter I of the 
report. 

  
CHAPTER –V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
17 February, 2005             Chairman 
28 Magha, 1926(Saka)       Standing Committee on Agriculture. 

  
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTIN G OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON THURSDAY, TH E 17 FEBRUARY, 2005 AT 1230 HRS. IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, BASEMENT, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW 
DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1230 hrs. to 1320 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri G.L. Bhargava 
5. Shri Shivraj Singh Chauhan 
6. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
7. Smt. Anuradha Choudhary 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Harish Rawat 
9. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
10. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
11. Dr. M.S. Gill 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1.   Shri N.K.Sapra    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh   -  Director 
3.  Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
4. Smt. Ratna Bhagwani   -  Assistant Director  
     

  
 At the outset, the Chairman , welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and requested them to take up Memoranda No. 5 containing draft Action 
Taken Report on First Report on Demands fo r Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) for consideration and adoption. 
2. The Committee then considered and a dopted the draft Action Taken Report with 
certain additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, authorised  the Chairman to present the above-
mentioned Report to the House on a date and time convenient to him. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

  
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     16  
     
(ii) Recommendations/Obser vations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Serial Nos. 1,3,5,7,8,9,11,12 and 14 
 
T o t a l          9   
        
 
Percentage        56.25% 
        
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Serial No.  NIL 
 
T o t a l   N I L         
 
Percentage   NIL 
         
(iv) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
Serial No. 2,4,6,10,13,15 and 16  
 
T o t a l          7    
        
 
Percentage        43.75% 
       
(v) Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Serial Nos. NIL  
 
T o t a l         N I L          
Percentage NIL  