      
  33 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2007-08) 
                 
         
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
         
         
                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008)          
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007)} 
         
 
THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
  
                                                          
  
         
              LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
           NOVEMBER, 2007/AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (Saka) 

THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2007-08) 
          
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
 
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008) 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations  contained in the Twenty Seventh Report 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007] 
         
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.11.2007 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.11.2007  
  
                                                             
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                      NOVEMBER, 2007/, AGRAHAYANA 1928 (Saka) 
  

 
COA No. 198 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price:  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
        © 2007 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  
(Eleventh Edition).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
<CONTENTS> 
                   P AGE 
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………   
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies ………………….. 
  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
held on 27.11.2007 .      
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh  
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2006-2007) on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of  
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2007-2008) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Ranen Barman 
3.  Shri Anil Basu 
4.  Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
5.  Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava  
6.  Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
7.  Shri Khagen Das 
8.  Shri Dharmendra 
9.  Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar 
10.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
11.  Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
12.  Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire 
13.  Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
14.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
15.  Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
16.  Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Nilangekar Patil 
17.  Shri K.J.S.P.Reddy 
18.  Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy 
19.  Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
20.  Shri M.P.Veerendrakumar 
21.  Shri Baleshwar Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Harish Rawa 
23.  Dr. M.S.Gill 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Vikram Verma 
26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28.  Shri Datta Meghe 
29.  Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
30.  Shri M.Rajasekara Murthy 
31.  Prof. M.S.Swaminathan 
 
 
  

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K.Sharma   -  Additional Secretary 
2.          Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Raj Kumar    -  Deputy  Secretary 
4.  Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Deputy  Secretary 
5. Ms. Amita Walia   -  Under Secretary     
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
         
I, the Chairm an, Standing Com mittee on Agri culture, [2007-2008] having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their beha lf, present this Thirty Third Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty Seventh 
Report of the Standing Com mittee on Agricu lture (2006-2007) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Agricultu re (Department of Agriculture and Co-operation) 
for the year 2007-2008. 
 
2. The Twenty Seventh Report of the St anding Com mittee on Agriculture (2006-2007) on 
Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of  Agriculture (Department of Agriculture& Co-
operation) was presented to Lok Sabha on 27.04.2007 a nd laid in Rajya Sabha on the sam e day.  
The Ministry of Agriculture (Dep artment of Agriculture& Co-operation) was requested to f urnish 
action taken replies of the Governm ent to the recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh 
Report.  The replies of the Governm ent to all the recom mendations contained in the Report were 
received. 
 
3. The Com mittee considered the action taken re plies furnished by the Governm ent at their 
sitting held on 27.11.2007, approved the draft com ments and adopted the Thirty Third Report.  
Minutes of the sitting are placed at Appendix I.  
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Governm ent on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
      
                     
                                                             
                                                 
NEW DELHI;                          PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
27 November, 2007                                                       Chairman, 
6 Agrahayana, 1929(Saka)                   Standing Committee on Agriculture.
   
  

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of  the Com mittee on Agricultu re deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recom mendations contained in  the Twenty-Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Com mittee on Agricultu re (2006-2007) on Dem ands for Grants (2007-
2008) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Departm ent of Agriculture & Co-operation) which was 
presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 27.4.2007. 
1.2 The Action Taken replies have been received fr om the Ministry of Agriculture (Department 
of Agriculture & Co-operation) in respect of a ll the 19 recom mendations contained in the Report.  
These have been categorized as under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that ha ve been accepted by the Governm ent 
(Chapter II of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 3, 8, 9, 10, 12, 15 and 16 (Total – 7) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations  which  the  Committee  do   not   desire to   pursue   
in  view  of   the  Govern ment’s   action  taken  reply  (Chapter III of the Report) -  
NIL 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations  in  respect  of  which  action taken replies of the  
Government  have  not  been  accepted  by  the  Com mittee  (Chapter IV of the 
Report)  
 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 2, 6, 7, 11, 13 and 14 (Total – 6) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Governm ent 
are still awaited (Chapter V ) 
 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 5, 17, 18 and 19 ((Total – 6) 
 
1.3 The Com mittee desire that the final replies in respect of the recom mendations for which 
only interim replies have been furnished by the Government should be furnished expeditiously. 
 
1.4 The Com mittee will now deal with the action taken by the Governm ent on som e of the 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
  

Allocation for the North-Eastern States 
         
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
1.5 The Committee have recommended as under :- 
 “The Committee note that 10% of Plan funds of the Department are allocated to the 
North-Eastern States for the special developm ent of this area.  However, it is observed that 
the actual release of the funds is m uch less than the amount allocated.  During the Xth Plan 
period, the am ount allocated at RE stages  was Rs.1550.25 crore though the actual release 
was Rs.1205.53 crore which is the 77.77% of the allocation.  The m ain reasons for shortfall 
in release of funds, as told by the Departm ent, are inadequate dem and from some of these 
States and non-submission of utilization certificates in respect of funds released.  It has also 
been informed that the unutilized portion of allocated funds to these States is credited to the 
Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources for North Eastern States for their development. 
 
 Taking a serious view of the situation, the Com mittee desire that all the funds 
allocated for the North-Eastern region should be spent for the developm ent of that area 
only.  As far as the issue of inadequate dem and from the North-Eastern States is concerned, 
it is the duty of the Central Government to apprise these States about various schemes of the 
Agriculture Department, devised for them .  The Committee feel that if the States are fully 
aware of the Schemes then only they can come up with their demands for funds for specific 
schemes.  The Com mittee also em phasize that the unutilized am ount of agriculture sector 
which goes to the non-lapsable pool should be spent for agriculture related activities only.  
Because once lapsed to that pool, there is no source of knowing that the funds which were 
allocated for the purpose of agriculture are r eally being spent on the same.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that all out efforts should be made to ensure that the funds m eant for 
North-Eastern States, are fully utilized and th at can be done by proper extension services 
and by having a mechanism to trace the proper utilization. 
 The Committee in its earlier Report on Dem ands for Grants have recommended that 
the expenditure actually incurred on Schem es in North-Eastern States should be reflected 
separately in Dem ands for Grants docum ent of the Department, so as to have a clear cut 
picture of the progress m ade in this regard.  The Com mittee have been inf ormed that this 
matter is still under consideration of the Minist ry of Finance.  The Com mittee, therefore, 
  

again recom mend that the m atter should be expedited and the actual expenditure be 
reflected, separately, in the demands for grants document of the Department. 
 
1.6 The Ministry in its Action Taken reply has stated as follows :- 
“Department of North-Eastern Region Deve lopment has intim ated, that the m ain 
reason for the inability of the N.E. States to  utilize allocated funds under various Central 
Sector Schemes is lack of physical infrastructu re.  Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources 
Scheme therefore aims at speedy development of infrastructure both in economic as well as 
social sector.  The projects under the schem e are sanctioned on the basis of priority lists 
submitted by concerned States. Once the inf rastructural facilities improve, the N.E. States 
will be able to utilize allocated funds under di fferent schemes. Funds in Non-lapsable pool 
come from  about 50 Ministries/Departm ents.  It is not possible to m aintain a sim ilar 
sectoral allocation under the scheme.  
 As regards DAC, with a view to cr eate awareness of the schem es being 
implemented by the Departm ent of Agricu lture & Cooperation am ongst North-Eastern 
States the following steps have been taken :- 
(a) Special awareness/training progra mmes are organized by NIAM and NABARD 
Consultancy Services (NABCONS), the implementing agencies of schem es of 
Agricultural Marketing Division.  Schem es are also being advertised through local 
newspapers. 
(b) Guidelines of the schemes are also being circulated to N.E States from to time. 
(c) Regional Centre of Organic Farm ing, Im phal has been entrusted with the work of 
advising NE States on im plementation and monitoring of  the schem e titled National 
Project on Organic Farming. 
(d) N.E. States are being apprised of the be nefits/details of the schem es through regular 
review m eetings, workshops, sem inars, interface cam paigns and publicity through 
website. 
(e) Orientation W orkshops are held in NE  States for fam iliarizing them  about the 
schemes. Regular handholding support is also provided to them for implementation of 
the schemes. 
(f) The experience of other States in im plementing the program mes is also shared with 
State Nodal Officers of NE States in quarterly national workshops. 
  

(g) NE States are requested form ally as al so in Zonal Conferences, Rabi and Kharif 
Campaigns held annually for form ulation and submission of Annual Action Plans for 
implementation of various schemes in order to fully utilize the allocated funds. 
The matter of reflecting actual expenditure on the schemes in North Eastern Region in 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry has already been taken up with the Budget Division of 
Ministry of Finance and they are examining the same.” 
Comments of the Committee 
1.7 The Committee are not convinced w ith the rep ly of the Government that it is not 
possible to maintain a sectoral allocation  under the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of 
Resources scheme as funds in non- lapsable pool come from about 50 
Ministries/Departments.  They, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
the unutilized amount of agriculture sector which goes to the non-lapsable pool should 
be spent only for agriculture related activiti es of North-Eastern States.  They also 
recommend that a mechanism should be devi sed to monitor the proper utiliz ation of 
funds for which these were originally sanctioned for each State of North-East Region. 
The Committee may also be apprised of the action taken by the Budget Division of 
Ministry of Finance in the matter of refl ecting actual expenditure on the schemes in 
the North-Eastern Region in Demands for Grants document of the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 
National Rainfed Area Authority 
                
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
1.8 The Committee have recommended as under :- 
 
 “The Committee note that the National Ra infed Area Authority (NRAA) has been 
constituted on 03.11.2006 with a budgetary provi sion of Rs. 100 crore during 2007-08 to 
coordinate all schemes relating to watershed de velopment, and to give focused attention to 
the problem of the rainfed areas of the count ry.  The Com mittee have been inform ed, that 
  

the f irst tier of  the Authority is a Govern ing Board that will provide the necessary 
leadership and appropriate coordination in the implementation of the program me, and the 
second tier would be the Executive Com mittee consisting of technical experts and 
representatives from  stakeholder Ministries .  The Com mittee also note that there is no 
proposal to include the State Governments in the NRA Authority. 
 The Com mittee are of the firm  opinion that the representation of the State 
Government on this Authority should be pre-requi site as Agriculture is a State subject and 
this Authority has to deal with the problem s of whole country having 24 clim atic zones.  
They, therefore, recom mend that at second tier, representatives of various State 
Governments should also be included so as to have a full picture of the requirem ents of the 
regions.  The Com mittee also feel that one representative of the farm ers should also be 
associated with the Executive Committee of the Authority.” 
 
1.9 In its Action Taken reply the Ministry has stated as under:- 
 
 “The structure, com position and m andate of  the National Rainf ed Area Authority 
(NRAA) are as approved by the Cabinet.  Ther e is no provision of giving representation to 
the State Governm ents either on the Governing Body or on the Executive Com mittee.   
However, the relevant States will be invited to the meetings of the Executive Committee of 
the NRAA, as and when required, as special invitees. 
 
 In so far as the inclusion of one farm ers’ representative in the Executive Com mittee 
is concerned, it is subm itted that there is a provision f or f armers’ representative at the 
Governing Body level and already Shri R.V.Chavan has been nom inated as member of the 
Governing Board.  All policy decisions will be taken by the Governing Board and the 
Executive Committee is the implementing arm.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.10 The Committee are not convinced w ith the rep ly of the Government that there is no 
provision of giving representation to the State Governments either on the Governing 
  

Body or on the Executive Committee of th e National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) 
and that relevant States w ill be invited to the meetings of the Executive Council of the 
NRAA as and when required, as special invitees .  Since Agriculture is a State subject 
and this authority has to deal w ith the pr oblems of all the 24 climatic z ones of the 
country, the Committee recommend that all the States should be represented on this 
authority so as to have a detailed discussion on the requirements of each of the regions 
and to have coordinated efforts in the implementation of all the schemes relating to the 
watershed development programme. 
Subsidies in Agriculture 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
1.11 The Committee have recommended as under :- 
 
 “The Com mittee note that the m ajor subs idies being provided in India are on 
Food/Seed, Indigenous (Urea) Fertiliser, Im ported (Urea Fertiliser), Sale of decontrolled 
fertilizer with concession to farm ers, petroleum subsidy and grant to NAFED under Market 
Intervention Schem es (MIS) and Price Suppor t System  (PSS). State Governm ents give 
subsidies for Irrigation and Electricity etc. 
 
 The Committee feel that the real benefits of subsidies do not reach the farmers. Most 
of our farm ing is based on rain/m onsoons and not many farmers in village actually have 
tubewells and operate it through electricity wher e subsidy is given. Even the benefits of 
subsidies on urea/fertilizer is reaped by the manufacturers and not by the poor farmers. 
 
 While com paring the subsidies being given in India and other countries the 
Committee note that the per hectare subsidie s in Japan in 1999 were $ 11,792, in EC $ 831, 
in OECD $ 218 and USA $ 129. In India it was only $ 53. Sim ilarly, the per farmer subsidy 
in 1999 was $ 26,000 in Japan, $ 21,000 in USA, $ 9000 in Canada, $ 17,000 in EC and $ 
11,000 in OECD. In India it was $ 66. The aggreg ate subsidy for agriculture in India was 
  

estimated at $ 8.50 billion in 2001-02 as against $ 49.08 billion in USA, $ 47.20 billion in 
Japan and $ 115.33 in European Union. 
 
 The Com mittee agree that agricultural subs idies are a powerf ul instrum ent in the 
hands of the Governm ent not only to protect the interest of the farmers but also to regulate 
or even to manipulate the domestic prices and import/export of agricultural commodities. 
 More than 50% of the agricultural holdings  in India are in rainfed areas, so the 
subsidy given on food, to Electricity Boards/C orporations and Fertilizer com panies do not 
count m uch for the farm ers of rainfed areas . Com mittee fail to understand this policy of 
giving subsidy to the electricity boards, f ertilizer com panies, petroleum  com panies and 
grants to NAFED for Market Intervention Sc heme (MIS), in the nam e of subsidy to 
agriculture sector, whereas the 90% farmers do not get any benefit of this subsidy policy, as 
they do not own Tubewells run on electricity and do not use fertilizers (Urea etc.). Food 
subsidy should not be treated as agricultura l subsidy as the beneficiaries are m ainly 
consumers and not producers. The Com mittee, therefore, recom mend that the subsidy 
should be given to the farm ers directly by providing him  seed, fertilizer, soil nutrients, 
diesel or electricity for his tubewells etc. at  cheaper rates as com pared to the prevalent 
market rates. 
 
 The Committee are of the opinion that, no doubt, our country cannot com pete with 
the developed countries in the am ount of subsidies they provide to their farm ers but at least 
we can try to give the real benefits of the subsidies to sm all and needy farm ers. The 
Committee recom mend that alternative m echanisms for delivery of subsidies should be 
tried and tested to provide cost effective income transfers to the truly needy farmers.”  
 
1.12 The Ministry has stated in its Action Taken reply as follows :-  
 “The Central Sector Schem e ‘Developm ent and Strengthening of Infrastructure 
Facilities for Production and Distribution of Qua lity Seeds’ which is intended to develop 
and strengthen the existing infrastructure for production and distribution of certified/quality 
seeds, has the provision of providing financia l assistance to the farm ers through the State 
Governments/UT Adm inistrations and au tonomous im plementing agencies under its 
following components:- 
  

 
 
1. Seed Village Programme:- 
 
To upgrade the quality of farm er-saved seed wh ich is about 80-85% of the total seed used 
for crop production programme, following financial assistance is provided: 
 
(i) for distribution of foundation/certified s eed at 50% cost for production of quality 
seeds by farm er. While distributing seeds, the farm ers are charged only 50% cost 
after deducting the subsidy at the rate 50%, thereby directly benefiting the farmers.  
(ii) for training of farmers on seed production and technology aspects @ Rs.15,000/- for 
a group of 50-150 farmers; 
(iii) for procuring of Pusa Bin/Mud Bin/Bin m ade from  pa per pulp etc. for storing of 
seed produced by the farmers on their farms at 25% for general farmers and 33% for 
SC/ST farmers. 
 
Scope of this program me is being sought  to be widened by providing subsidy for 
hybrid seed production @ 75% of cost of production. 
   
2. Assistance for Boosting Seed Production in the Private Sector: 
 
Under this component, credit linked back-ended capital subsidy at the rate of 25% of 
the project cost subject to a m aximum limit of Rs.10.00 lakh per unit on seed infrastructure 
development is being provided. Private co mpanies, partnership firm s, individual 
entrepreneurs, self help groups and seed cooperatives are eligible to get assistance under the 
component and this com ponent is bei ng im plemented through Com mercial Banks, 
Scheduled Com mercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks and National Cooperative 
Development Corporation. This assistance is primarily for low value high volume seeds. 
  
Department of Fertilizer has informed that fertilizer subsidy is presently provided to 
the farmers by way of subsidized selling prices as compared to the prevalent m arket prices 
or normative delivered cost of  the fertilizers at the farm gate level. The dif ference between 
  

the selling prices as notified by the Govern ment and the norm ative delivered cost of 
fertilizer at farm gate level is disbursed as subsidy to the manufacturers/importers on sale of 
subsidized fertilizers.  The subsidy, therefore,  reaches the farm er in the form  of notified 
selling prices, which are below the actual deliver ed costs.  The present dispensation is in 
line with the recom mendation, excep t for the fact that the subsidy is released to the 
manufacturers/importers after the fertilizer has been sold to the farmers at cheaper rates. 
 
Fertilizer industry has agreed to have a study on alternative framework for fertilizer 
subsidy disbursement in India conducted.  M/s.Tata Consultancy Services has been engaged 
by the Fertilizer Association of India for this  study.  The study report has been received and 
is under examination by the Department of Fertilizers. 
 
Ministry of Petroleum  & Natural Gas have informed that Diesel is already being 
sold across the country at price  lower than In ternational price. Customs Duty on Diesel has 
been reduced to 7.5% from  10%.  Price of Diesel was reduced on two occasions i.e. on 
30.11.2006 and 16.02.2007.  The ad-valorem  excise duty com ponent on diesel has been 
reduced from 8% to 6% and Central Sales Tax on diesel has been reduced from  4% to 3% 
in Union Budget 2007-08.  In view of this, furthe r subsidized supply of diesel to farm ers is 
not feasible. 
 
Ministry of Power have informed that a new tariff policy under Electricity Act, 2003 
has been notified in January,2006 which inter-alia provides that tariff for agricultural use 
may be set at different level for different pa rts of a State depending on the conditions of the 
groundwater table.  A higher level of subsidy could be considered to support poorer farmers 
of the region, where adverse ground water ta ble condition requires larger quantity of 
electricity for irrigation purposes subject to su itable restrictions to ensure adequate ground 
water levels and sustainable use thereof .  The policy outlines that subsidized rates of  
electricity should be perm itted only upto a pre-identified level of consum ption beyond 
which tariffs reflecting efficient cost of serv ice should be charged from  consumers. If the 
State Government wants to reimburse even part of this cost of electricity to poor category of 
consumers, the amount can be paid in cash or any other suitable way.” 
 
  

Comments of the Committee 
 
1.13 From the reply of the Government, the Co mmittee have noted that for boosting seed 
production and its storage, the Governme nt is providing subsidy to various 
components under the Development and Strengt hening of Infrastructure Facilities for 
Production and Distribution of Quality Seeds.   However, no subsidy is provided to the 
farmers directly with regard to the seed, fertilizer, electricity, diesel, etc. purchased by 
them from the market.  The Government in their reply have stated that Custom Duty 
on diesel has been reduced from 10%  to 7.5% and ad-valorem Excise Duty has been 
reduced from 8%  to 6%  and Central Sales Tax from 4% to 3% in the Union Budget 
2007-08, therefore, further subsidiz ed supply of diesel to farmer is not feasible.  The 
Committee are not convinced w ith the reply of the Government as this reduction in 
various duties on diesel are for all cons umers and these are not farmers specific 
concessions.  Similarly, the fertiliz er subsid y is also not directly percolating to the 
farmers as the same is disbursed to the manufacturers/importers directly.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earli er recommendation that in order to provide 
seed, fertiliz er, soil-nutrients, diesel, electrici ty etc. to the farm ers at cheaper rates 
compared to the prevalent market rates, the subsidy on these items should be provided 
directly to the farmers and for that a mech anism should also be devised to provide 
cost effective income transfers to the sma ll and marginal farmers particularly.  The 
Committee may also be apprised of the recommendations made by the Tata 
Consultative Services for fertiliz er subsidy disbursement and the action taken by the 
Government thereon. 
 
  

Agricultural Credit 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
  
1.14 The Committee have recommended as under :- 
 
“The Committee have been inform ed that during the first nine m onths of 2006-07, 
63 lakh new farm ers were financed by the banki ng system as against the target of 50 lakh 
new farmers set for the year 2006-07.  The Fi nance Minister in his budget speech 2007-08 
has indicated a target of Rs. 2,25,000 crore as farm credit for the year with an addition of 50 
lakh new farmers to the banking system  and also a provision of Rs. 1677 crore for two per 
cent interest subvention for short-term  crop lo ans.  This is a m ajor step forward, and 
indicative of Governm ent’s com mitment fo r im proving the econom ic well-being of the 
farmers.  However, the Committee is deeply concerned that even after announcement of the 
scheme of interest subvention of 2 per cent on lo an, the farmers are not able to com e out of 
the debt trap and are com mitting suicides.  The m oneylenders are still popular as they are 
still ruling the rural credit system  by giving timely credit to local f armers but on exorbitant 
interest rates.  Theref ore, the Com mittee recommend that the m oneylender’s role in 
farmer’s credit should be regulated in term s of loan amount as well as interest rates so as to 
treat them as part of rural credit system .  Ho wever, their role can be reduced only if the 
farmers have more access to the banking system and get timely credit on easy terms at their 
doorstep. 
 The Committee feel that announcem ent of th e loan factor will not stop the distress 
state of farmers, rather providing of  irriga tion facilities with ef ficient water m anagement, 
distribution of high-yielding variety seeds at subsidized rates and also incom e increasing 
opportunities through horticulture, livestock, poultr y, dairying and fisheries are also a m ust 
to decrease the suicide rate of  f armers.  The com prehensive rehabilitation package f or 
especially distressed districts should include these factors also. 
 
 The Committee recommend that the rate of interest on farm credit should be reduced 
to the level of 4 per cent sim ple interest as has been suggested by National Com mission on 
Farmers headed by M.S. Swam inathan, and in no case the interest should surpass the 
original amount of the loan so that the exploitation of farmers by the financial institutions is 
restricted. 
  

   
 The Committee have noted that in the cas e of poultry industry, due to loss created 
by the outbreak of Avian influenza, the Government of India announced a financial package 
along with one tim e interest subvention of 4 per cent in the last year i.e. 2006-07 for a 
period of one year on the outstanding principle amounts of loan availed by the poultry units. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend, that the interest subvention for the loans availed by 
the farmers of 31 suicide prone districts and othe r districts areas should also be increased to 
four per cent and may be distributed through RBI and its banking system as is being done in 
the case of poultry units.”   
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as follows :- 
 
 “Government is concerned about reducing th e role of m oneylenders in availability 
of the credit to the f armers and has initiated several measures for ensuring timely credit on 
easy terms to the farmers.  Some of the important initiatives are :-   
 
 (i) The Government of India on 18.6.2004 announced a special farm credit package. Following 
are the highlights of this announcement:–  
• Increase in credit flow to agriculture sector @ 30% per year. 
• Public Sector Com mercial Banks and RRBs to  bring 50 lakh new farm ers into the credit 
fold every year. 
• Credit to tenant farmers and oral lessees.   
• Debt restructuring and relief for:  
o Farmers in distress 
o Farmers in arrears 
o OTS for small and marginal farmers 
o Loans to farmers for Redemption of debts from non-institutional lenders. 
• Refinements in Kisan Credit Card (KCC) Schem e and revisiting of Scales of Finance and 
realigning the same to meet the realistic credit needs of the farmers. 
• Formation and financing of self-help groups of tenant farmers and oral lessees to provide 
credit to this category of farmers.   
  

(ii) In the Union Budget for the year 2006-07, it was announced that effective from  Kharif 
2006-07, farmers would receive crop loans up to a principal am ount of Rs. 3 lakhs at 7% 
rate of interest and the Governm ent would pr ovide necessary interest subvention for this 
purpose. This policy has been continued in the year 2007-08 also.  
(iii) Reserve Bank of  India has instructed the ba nks not to insist on collateral/ m argin/security 
requirements for agricultural loans up to Rs. 50,000/-. 
(iv) Government has approved a revival pack age for Rural Cooperative Credit Institutions 
(short-term) involving, inter-alia, a financial outlay estim ated at Rs. 13,596 crores to be 
shared by Central Government, State Governments and the Cooperative Credit Structure.   
(v) The Governm ent has constituted an Expert  Group under the Chairm anship of Prof. R. 
Radhakrishna, Director, Indira Gandhi Institute  of Development Research, Mumbai to look 
into the problem s of Agricultural indebtedne ss in its totality and suggest m easures to 
provide relief to farmers across the country.    
 The Governm ent of India has appr oved a rehabilitation package of Rs. 16978.69 
crore for 31 suicide prone districts in the f our states of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Karnataka and Kerala.  The package will be  im plemented over a period of  3 years and 
include both im mediate and m edium term  m easures.  The rehabilitation package aim s at 
establishing a sustainable and viable farm ing and livelihood support system  through debt 
relief to farm ers, im proved supply of institutional credit, crop centric approach to 
agriculture, assured irrigation f acilities, wa tershed m anagement, better extension and 
farming support services and subsidiary incom e opportunities through horticulture, 
livestock, dairying, fisheries etc.   
 The National Commission on Farmers headed by Dr. M.S. Swam inathan has, inter-
alia, recom mended for reduction of rate of inte rest on f arm credit to the level of  4%. A 
conference of State Agriculture Ministers was convened on 22 nd December, 2006 to discuss 
the recommendations of the National Com mission on Farmers (NCF) and the revised draft 
national policy for farm ers as suggested by NCF.  There was broad consensus am ong the 
states on the revised Draft national Policy for fa rmers.  Based on the feedback received in 
the conference, a note alongwith a “Draft Na tional Policy” has been subm itted to the 
Committee of Secretaries (COS) set up for the purpose. 
  

 
   As regards, interest on agriculture loans, Reserve Bank of India has advised 
commercial banks that when crop loans or in stallments under term  loans becom e overdue, 
banks can add interest outstanding to the pr incipal and com pound the interest.  However, 
total interest debited to an account should not exceed the principal am ount in respect of 
advances to sm all and m arginal f armers. This stipulation is applicable only to short-term  
loans.  Further, RBI has clarified to the banks that the above stipulation would be applicable 
only to short term loans advanced to small and marginal farmers.”   
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.16 The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Government with regard to the 
fact that on the issue of interest on Agricu ltural loans the Reserve Bank of India has 
advised Commercial Banks that w hen crop loans or instalments under Term Loans 
become overdue, banks can add interest outstanding to the principal and compound 
the interest.  How ever, total interest debi ted to an account should not exceed the 
principal amount in respect of advances to small and marginal farmers and this 
stipulation has been stated to be applicab le only to short-term loans.  The Committee 
are of the opinion that this term `small and marginal farmers’ is a very deceptive term 
as many a farmers have committed suicides due to failure of their crops irrespective of 
their being small and marginal or not.   Therefore, they recommend that the 
instructions for total interest debited to an account not exceeding the principal amount 
should be applicable to all the distressed fa rmers on short term as w ell as long term 
loans without any distinction as has been done by the RBI in this regard. 
The Committee w ould also like to be apprised of the status of the 
implementation of the National Policy fo r farmers as suggested by the National 
Commission on Farmers and also action taken by Government on fixing the rate of 
  

interest on farm credit @ 4%  as recomme nded by the National Commission on 
Farmers. 
Modified National Crop Insurance Scheme 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
1.17 The Committee have recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee has been inform ed that Modified National Agricultural Insurance 
Scheme (MNAIS) to take care of  shortc omings/limitations in National Agricultural 
Insurance Scheme (NAIS), like unit area of insu rance, calculation of insurance claim s, low 
indemnity level, calculation of guaranteed inco me, etc., was prepared by the Departm ent of 
Agriculture & Cooperation and subm itted for approval to Planning Com mission in 
February, 2005.  The Planning Com mission return ed the MNAIS suggesting to shift the 
scheme to Non-Plan side.  It favoured the funding only for overhead com ponent of costs of 
the modified scheme.  It also laid down a condition that the schem e can be supported on 
pilot basis but only in the districts/States which have requisite data collection capability and 
have infrastructure for obtaining the feedback.  And since this data is required to have 
actual calculations and there being need to have subsidy on the prem ium this cannot be 
started as a Plan Scheme. 
 
 The Com mittee in their 18 th Report (2006-07) recom mended that the on-going 
scheme of crop insurance being im plemented as Plan schem e since 2000, if m odified to 
make it m ore farm er friendly, should not be  shifted to non-plan side.  During the 
examination of DFG of 2007-08, the Com mittee have been inform ed that as suggested by 
Planning Commission, the Ministry of Agriculture  to start with, cam e with the schem e on 
pilot basis for 100 districts for the consideration of Expenditure Finance Committee, but the 
meeting was said to have been postponed at the instance of Planning Com mission on the 
ground that the schem e has not yet been given its “in principal” approval.  The m atter was 
taken up at the level of Agriculture Minist er with Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission 
but the issue is still to be resolved. 
 
  

 The Committee are anguished at the de laying tactics of the Planning Com mission 
for its non-serious attitude towards the farm ers of this country.  The Com mittee, therefore, 
recommend that this matter should be resolved amicably and MNAIS must be approved as a 
Plan-scheme as in the case of the earlier cr op insurance schem e.  The farm ers of this 
country also need a fair deal for the loss of their crops caused by natural and weather 
vagaries and for no fault of theirs.” 
  
1.18 The Ministry in its Action Taken reply has stated as follows :- 
 
 “Recently, the Planning Com mission vide letters dated March 8, 2007 and March 
29, 2007 has reiterated their earlier stand on the Modified NAIS that the subsidy on the 
insurance premium can not be treated as plan expenditure.  It has been suggested that the 
existing National Agricultural Insurance Schem e (NAIS) m ay be transferred to non-plan 
side and proposal on Modified NAIS m ay be initia ted on Pilot basis in selected districts, 
with a flexibility to formulate the scheme by the State if so desired.  The Central Assistance 
to meet the expenditure incurred on the form ulation of the scheme including data collection 
and other related expenses m ay be provided through a separate Central Sector/Centrally 
Sponsored scheme and the prem ium subsidy com ponent may be provided as an additional 
central assistance by the Planning Com mission on the recom mendations of the Ministry of 
Agriculture as per pre-decided terms and conditions. 
 
 The comments of Ministry of Agricultu re on the view of Planning Com mission has 
been sent by the Hon’ble Agricultu re Minister vide letter dated 2 nd April, 2007 and the 
Planning Com mission has been requested to expedite the clearance of the proposal on 
Modified NAIS.  The m atter again came up for discussion in the m eeting held on 5.4.2007 
at Yojana Bhavan, New Delhi wherein some positive response from  the Planning 
Commission was noticed.    By referring the di scussion of this m eeting, Secretary (A&C) 
has requested Secretary (Expenditure) for initiating the process of convening the EFC 
meeting.  Response from  the Ministry of Fi nance, Departm ent of Expenditure is still 
awaited.” 
 
  

Comments of the Committee 
1.19 The Committee express their displeasure ov er the inordinate delay in finaliz ing the 
Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) as a Plan scheme.  They, 
therefore, urge the Government to expedite the clearance of the said scheme w ithout 
any further loss of time. 
Minimum Support Price (MSP) 
         
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
1.20 The Committee have recommended as under:- 
 
“The Com mittee note that the Governm ent’s price policy for agriculture 
commodities seeks to ensure rem unerative prices to the growers for their produce with a 
view to encouraging higher investm ent a nd production to safeguard the interest of 
consumers by m aking available supplies at r easonable prices.  Towards this end, the 
Government announces each season Minim um Support Price (MSP) for m ajor agricultural 
commodities and organizes purchase operations through public and cooperative agencies. 
The Committee feel that the criteria of fi xing the Minimum Support Price, which is 
being done by the Com mission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) has becom e 
outdated, and the prices so fixed are not deliveri ng the desired benefits to the farm ers.  The 
Committee, therefore, recom mend that the Mi nimum Support Prices should be reviewed 
and it should be 50% m ore than the weighted average cost of production. The Com mittee 
further recommend that while calculating the costs, the farmer himself should be considered 
as a skilled worker, and his wages should be calculated equal to that of a skilled labour. 
 
The Committee further observe that to help raise the agricultural growth rate f rom 
2.3 per cent to 4 per cent, the MSP should be announced well before the sowing season 
which will help the farm ers to decide which crop they should grow.  In other words, the 
Government can play a major role in increasing or decreasing the net sown area of any crop.  
This will also help in determining the market prices.  The Committee are also of the opinion 
that in order to balance the interest of  farmers as well as consum ers, the procurement price 
  

of the Government may be kept at a higher leve l than the MSP, so that the m arket remains 
stable and the farm ers also get a good pri ce for their produce. The Com mittee strongly 
recommend that the bonus should form  the part of MSP itself and should not be announced 
separately for Governm ent procurem ent purposes. To offset the higher price of 
procurement, the Government may give subsidy to the consumer through public distribution 
system. This m echanism may help the farm er in getting a higher price depending on the 
market situation at the time of harvesting.” 
1.21 The Ministry in its Action Taken reply has stated as follows:- 
“The Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) recommends Minimum 
Support Prices (MSPs) for m ajor agricultural commodities (namely Paddy, W heat, Jowar, 
Bajra, Maize, Ragi, Barley, Arhar (Tur),  Urad, Moong, Gram , Lentil (Masur), Groundnut-
in-shell, Soyabean, Sunflower Seed, Sesam um, Nigerseed, Rapeseed/Mustard, Safflower, 
Cotton, Tobacco, Jute, Copra and Sugarcane) as per the Terms of Reference assigned to it. 
While recom mending MSP, the Com mission takes into account a num ber of relevant 
factors such as cost of production, trends in  input prices, m arket prices, dem and-supply 
situation and inter crop price parity, em erging demand supply situation, procurem ent and 
distribution, terms of trade between agriculture  and non-agriculture sectors. The estim ates 
of cost of production are considered vital in recommending MSP. The cost of production 
includes imputed value of wages of family labour. 
As regards the review of MSP suggested  by the Hon’ble Standing Com mittee, an 
expert Com mittee under the Chairm anship of  Prof. Y.K. Alagh, has exam ined the 
methodological issues for com putation of MSP. The report of the Com mittee is under 
consideration of the Government. 
In a vast country like India with different agro climatic regions and cropping pattern, 
sowing season is not uniform  across states / crops .  Efforts are, therefore, m ade to bridge 
the gap between the sowing season and the announ cement of MSPs so as to give necessary 
price signal to f armers, which helps them  in the choice of crops.  The dates of 
announcement of MSPs for kharif crops and rabi  crops in recent years are given in the 
following table. 
 
  

Year Kharif Rabi 
2001-2002 07.09.2001 02.04.2002 
2002-2003 26.09.2002 13.02.2003 
2003-2004 30.07.2003 18.12.2003 
2004-2005 10.08.2004 03.11.2004 
2005-2006 20.04.2005 29.09.2005 
2006-2007 27.07.2006 27 & 30.10.2006 
2007-2008 17.05.2007 Report from  CACP 
awaited. 
 
Since the MSPs are announced earlier and the procurement season starts much later (after 
harvest of crops), decision on bonus is taken just before the start of the procurement season 
depending on prevailing market situation and assessment of market prices. Moreover, 
incentive bonus announced over and above the MSP is exempted from State taxes and 
levies and thus it helps to contain food subsidy.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.22 The Committee are not satisfied w ith the rep ly of the Government over the issue of 
recommending Minimum Support Price to be 50% more than the w eighted average 
cost of production.  Just depending upon the recommendations of Commission for 
Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) with out assessing the actual plight of the 
farmers is not the solution.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation 
that MSP should be 50 per cent more than th e C2 cost.  Moreover, the farmer himself 
should be considered as a highly skilled labo ur while calculating the costs, because a 
farmer gains valuable experience over the years in the process of production that he 
becomes as good as a highly skilled labour in the field. Hence he should be paid 
accordingly. 
  

 The Committee also reiterate their reco mmendation to fix the MSP before the 
sowing season.  Procurement Pricing Policy including post-harvest adjustments should 
be devised carefully and higher procurement price should be announced at the 
harvesting time so that farmers get rem unerative price for their produce and the 
Government is also not short of foodgr ains in the buffer stock w hich result in 
importing the same at higher prices at la ter stage.  The Committee w ould also like to 
be apprised of the recommendations of Al agh Committee and follow -up action taken 
by the Government thereon. 
  

CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
Delay in approval of Schemes 
2.1 The Com mittee have been inform ed that in case of 15 new schem es proposed to be 
implemented during the Tenth Plan period i.e. 2002- 03 onwards, there have been inordinate delays 
in the approval.  Out of the 15 new schemes, only three could be approved during 2004, four during 
2005 and seven schemes were approved in 2006 only a nd one scheme was not approved at all.  The 
Committee fail to understand as how with this pace of the approval of the schem es, actual 
implementation can be effected.  This show s the seriousness with which the Governm ent 
implements its approved schem es.  At this rate, th e agriculture sector will never be able to achieve 
its targeted growth rate.  In view of  this loss of precious time and in view of the target of achieving 
agricultural growth rate in excess of  4% as  per National Agriculture policy, the Com mittee 
recommend that higher allocations should be m ade for the implementation of these schem es in the 
Revised Estimates of 2007-08 and for the whole 11 th Plan period also.  It should also be ensured 
that the Plan schem es do not take m uch tim e to take off and approval procedure should be 
completed within six months of decision of introduction of a new scheme. 
 
 The Committee desire that the Governm ent should bring this observation of the Com mittee 
to the pointed attention of the Planning Com mission and Ministry of Fina nce for appropriate and 
immediate action.  They further desire that Government to ensure that the schemes of Eleventh Plan 
do not m eet the sam e fate as the Schem es in the earlier Plan and the Schem es get im plemented 
without any undue hassles and delays. 
 
  

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 The Department of Agriculture & Coopera tion has requested the Planning Com mission to 
provide an additional outlay of Rs.2026.97 crores in the current fiscal over and above Rs.5560.00 
crores approved at BE stage for the year 2007-08.  The observation of the Hon’ble Com mittee 
regarding stream lining the approval procedure so as to com plete it within six m onths of  the 
decision of introduction of a new schem e has already been com municated to the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
ISOPOM 
 
2.3 The Com mittee are constrained to note the acute  shortage of  pulses and oilseeds in the 
Country.  Showing concern about stagnation in  the production and productivity of pulses, the 
Finance Minister during his Budget Speech on 28.02.2007 proposed to expand the Integrated 
Scheme for Oilseeds, Pulses, Oilpalm  and Maize (IOPOM) with a sharper focus on scaling up the 
production of breeder, foundation and certified seeds.   The Com mittee are also inform ed, that the 
Scheme of ISOPOM which was im plemented from 1st April, 2004 in 14 m ajor States for oilseeds 
and pulses, is being reviewed, in order to m odify it to increase the production and productivity of 
pulses and oilseeds. 
 The Committee recommend that the Governm ent should try to enhance the cultivable area 
under pulses and oilseeds.  Apart from  Nationa l Seeds Corporation(NSC) and State Farm  
Corporation of India (SFCI), NAFED being the ap ex organization in cooperative sector and with 
the largest m arketing network in the country, s hould also be involved in all the activities of 
  

ISOPOM, which will be beneficial for increas ing the production, productivity and m arketing of 
pulses and oilseeds in the country.  The Com mittee also strongly recom mend that under ISOPOM 
production and distribution subsidy should be increased to the extent of 50% of the cost of certified 
seed from the existing rate of 25%. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.4 Government has form ulated a short term  plan for increasing the area under cultivation of 
pulses and oilseeds and also to increase production and productivity of pulses and oilseeds in major 
growing States during Kharif 2007-08 under ISOPOM.  The production targets for these crops have 
been fixed for the year 2007-08 as under: 
  Oilseeds        312.00 lakh tonnes 
  Pulses   156.00 lakh tones 
 As regards the recom mendation of Com mittee to include NAFED as a designated Central 
Agency for Seed production/distribution under ISOPOM and also to increase production and 
distribution subsidy to the extent of 50% of the co st of certified seed from the existing rate of 25%, 
the Departm ent contem plates to suitably m odify the Integrated Schem e of  Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil 
Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) to incorporate these changes for im plementation of ISOPOM during 
XIth Plan. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
Organic Farming 
 
 
2.5 The Committee are happy to note that the ‘National Project on Organic Farming’ which was 
launched on a pilot basis in October, 2004, to inter-alia facilitate, encourage and prom ote 
development of organic agriculture in the country and putting in place a system  of certification of 
  

organic produce, is now proposed to be im plemented as a full fledged schem e during the 11th Five 
Year Plan period with an outlay of Rs.150 crore.  However, the Committee are dissatisfied with the 
poor performance of the project.  The Com mittee observe that the scope of organic farm ing is very 
wide.  Organic products are largely in dem and in foreign countries also.  US Bio-Terrorism  Act 
2002, European Union Food Law 178/2002 and U.S. National Organic Programme  - Organic Food 
Production Act 1999 have m ade it m andatory to ha ve traceability and organic certification on the 
organic food im ported in their countries.  Therefor e, if the nation has to take organic farm ing 
seriously, the Governm ent should encourage it and wo rk very system atically and efficiently.  The 
Committee recommend that agencies like NAFED should be involved in the organic projects. They 
should be encouraged to take the project right from the beginning, nurture it and then m arket the 
products in India and abroad so that traceability a nd organic certification issues are taken care of.  
The Com mittee are confident that this encourag ement to organic farm ing will go a long way in 
improving the fiscal and physical health of the Nation. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.6 On the recommendation of the Committee, NAFED has been requested to subm it proposal, 
in case they are interested in this activity, under National Project on Organic Farm ing.  Incidentally 
Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA), Ministry of 
Commerce & Industry has been undertaking this activity for export of organic products. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
Allocation for Credit Division 
 
2.7 The Committee have been inform ed that the focus of the credit policy of the country has 
been to provide tim ely and adequate support to farm ers at reasonable rates of interest.  However, 
  

the Central assistance to State Governm ents under various Centrally sponsored and Central sector 
plan schemes has been reduced from  Rs. 828.75 crore in 2005-06 to Rs. 680.38 crore in 2006-07 
and again to Rs. 545 crore in BE of 2007-08.  Th e Committee are unable to comprehend as to how 
the Agriculture credit is being strengthened by reducing the budgetary allocation regularly year 
after year.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the allocation for the Credit Division should 
be enhanced at Revised Estim ates stage to the leve l of the demands projected by the States, so that 
the schemes are not resource starved and are implemented in right earnest. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.8 Credit Division operates two Central Sector  plan schem es nam ely, Investm ent in 
Debentures of State Land Developm ent Banks and National Agricultural Insurance Schem e.  Both 
these schemes are demand driven and releases are made as per the dem ands made by the agencies 
concerned i.e. State Land Developm ent Banks and Agricultural Insurance Com pany of India Ltd.  
Though the budget estim ates for 2007-08 is Rs. 545.00 crore for these two schem es, but actual 
expenditure m ay exceed this am ount dependi ng on the dem and m ade by the im plementing 
agencies.  Accordingly, if m ore funds will be needed, enhanced allocation will be sought at 
Revised Estimates stage. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
Allocation for Crop Insurance 
 
2.9 The Committee note that under National Agricu ltural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) during the 
last twelve crop seasons (i.e. from  Rabi 1999- 2000 to Kharif 2005), 751 lakh farm ers have been 
covered over an area of 1220 lakh hectares insu ring a sum amounting to Rs. 70696 crore.  During 
11th Plan period an outlay of Rs. 4530 crore incl uding Rs. 906 crore has been proposed (Rs. 600 
  

crore for existing NAIS in about 400 Districts a nd Rs. 306 crore for propos ed Modified NAIS in 
100 Districts) for 2007-08, but only Rs. 500 crore has actually been provided in BE of 2007-08.  
During the oral evidence, representative of th e Departm ent also adm itted that under NAIS the 
allocation is m uch less than what they had asked for and they need another Rs. 600 crore for this 
Scheme.  Therefore, the Com mittee recom mend th at another 600 crore should be allocated at 
Revised Estim ates stage so that the farm ers do not suffer losses due to sudden and unforeseen 
circumstances causing damage to their crops. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.10 This departm ent appreciates the concern of the Com mittee for  increase in allocation of 
budget under Crop Insurance Schem e during 2007-2008 (a t Revised Estimates stage).   The m atter 
has already been taken up with the concerned au thority for increasing the budgetary provision.   
Increase in  budget allocations is m ainly required for meeting the claims liability of various States 
affected by natural calam ities.  In past also, f unds for Crop Insurance Schem e, whenever required,  
have been provided at the tim e of Revised Estim ates.  In this year also m ore funds will be 
demanded   at Revised Estimates 2007-08 stage. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 15 
Horticulture 
 
2.11 The Com mittee note that under the Horticu lture Division Rs. 2222.40 crore have been 
allocated as against the proposals of Rs. 2385.60 crore during 2007-08. Two flagship schem es 
which were launched by Governm ent in 2005-06, viz.  (i) National Horticulture Mission (ii) Micro 
Irrigation Scheme and a new schem e of National Bamboo Mission are to be im plemented in full 
swing during the current year. The National Ho rticulture Mission can offer m uch needed 
  

diversification to high valued crops so as to tap the benefits of the country’s varied agro-clim atic 
conditions in favour of horticultural produce. The Committee are of the opinion that Rs. 2222.40 
crore allotted to the Horticulture Division against the proposal of Rs. 2385.60 crore for Horticulture 
Mission, may affect the performance of these schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the allocation for horticulture sector should be e nhanced at the revised estim ate stage because the 
horticulture is fast gaining acceptability am ong the farmers and becom ing a good m eans to raise 
their financial position. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.12 As observed by the Com mittee, the horticu lture sector provides the m uch-needed 
diversification for growth to tap the benefits of  the country’s varied agro-clim atic conditions in 
favour of horticultural produce. The necessary impetus for such growth can be achieved by 
allocating requisite funds for im plementation of schem es. However, the quantum  of additional 
funds will depend on the progress of expenditure and pace of implementation by the  implementing 
agencies under different schem es. Keeping in view  the requirem ent of funds for these schem es, 
necessary action will be taken to provide the quant um of additional funds for im plementation of  
schemes at  revised estimate stage. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 16 
Agricultural Marketing 
 
2.13 The Committee note that the Public Private Pa rticipation (PPP) m odel was proposed to be 
implemented to set up m odel term inal m arkets in different parts of the country, whereby the 
terminal markets would be build, owned and opera ted by a corporate/ private/ cooperative entity 
(Private enterprise) either on its own or thr ough adoption of an outsourcing m odel, the Committee 
  

are informed that these agricultural markets can be set up only in the States that have amended their 
Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act (A PMC Act),  so as to allow direct m arketing 
and contract farm ing and to prom ote setting up of m arkets in private and cooperative sectors, but 
some States are yet to am end their APMC Act.  The Committee feel that this concept of  terminal 
markets is likely to be very benef icial to the farmers as well as consum ers.  Therefore, they 
recommend that the remaining States should be aske d to amend their respective Acts expeditiously 
and the terminal markets should be set up at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.14 The State Governm ents  which have, so far,  not am ended the APMC Act as suggested by 
the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation ar e being continuously reminded and pursued with 
to am end their APMC Act.  A D.O. rem inder from  Hon’ble Agriculture Minister addressed to   
Hon’ble Chief Ministers of the rem aining States was issued on 24 th January, 2007 requesting them  
to complete the reform  process. The progress rega rding setting up of m odern  terminal markets in 
the country is being reviewed with the State G overnments by this Ministry every m onth in the 
meetings  taken  at Secretary/Additional Secretar y level and  process of setting up such term inal 
markets has already been initiated by Chandigarh  Administration for Chandigarh, Madhya Pradesh 
Government for Bhopal & Indore, Maharashtra Government for Mum bai, Nasik & Nagpur and 
many  others States are also in the process of doing initial preparations under the Schemes. 
 
  

CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
      -- Nil -- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Allocation for the North-Eastern States 
4.1 The Committee note that 10% of Plan funds of  the Departm ent are allocated to the North-
Eastern States for the special developm ent of this  area.  However, it is observed that the actual 
release of the funds is m uch less than the am ount allocated.  During the Xth Plan period, the 
amount allocated at RE stages was Rs .1550.25 crore though the actual release was Rs.1205.53 
crore which is the 77.77% of the allocation.  The m ain reasons for shortfall in release of funds, as 
told by the Departm ent, are inadequate dem and from some of these States and non-subm ission of 
utilization certificates in respect of funds release d.  It has also been inform ed that the unutilized 
portion of allocated funds to these States is credite d to the Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources 
for North Eastern States for their development. 
 Taking a serious view of the situation, the Co mmittee desire that all the funds allocated for 
the North-Eastern region should be spent for the deve lopment of that area only.  As far as the issue 
of inadequate dem and from  the North-Eastern Stat es is concerned, it is the duty of the Central 
Government to apprise these States about various  schemes of the Agriculture Departm ent, devised 
for them.  The Com mittee feel that if the States are fully aware of the Schem es then only they can 
come up with their dem ands for funds for specifi c schemes.  The Com mittee also em phasise that 
the unutilized amount of agriculture sector which goes to the non-lapsable pool should be spent for 
agriculture related activities only.  Because once laps ed to that pool, there is no source of knowing 
  

that the funds which were allocated for the purpos e of agriculture are really being spent on the 
same.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that all out efforts should be m ade to ensure that the 
funds meant for North-Eastern States, are fully utilized and that can be done by proper extension 
services and by having a mechanism to trace the proper utilization. 
 The Committee in their earlier Report on Dem ands for Grants have recom mended that the 
expenditure actually incurred on Schem es in North-Eastern States should be reflected separately in 
Demands for Grants docum ent of the Departm ent, so as to have a clear cut picture of the progress 
made in this regard.  The Com mittee have b een inform ed that this m atter is still under 
consideration of the Ministry of  Finance.  The Com mittee, therefore, again recom mend that the 
matter should be expedited and the actual expenditure  be reflected, separately, in the dem ands for 
grants document of the Department. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.2 Department of North-Easter n Region Developm ent has intim ated, that the m ain reason for 
the inability of the N.E.States to utilize allocated  funds under various Central Sector Schem es is 
lack of physical infrastructure.  Non-Lapsable Cent ral Pool of Resources Schem e therefore aims at 
speedy development of infrastructure both in economic as well as social sector.  The projects under 
the scheme are sanctioned on the basis of  priority lists subm itted by concerned States. Once the 
infrastructural facilities im prove, the N.E.States  will be able to utilize allocated funds under 
different schemes. Funds in Non-lapsable pool com e from about 50 Ministries/Departm ents.  It is 
not possible to maintain a similar sectoral allocation under the scheme.  
 
  

 As regards DAC, with a view to create awar eness  of the schem es being im plemented by 
the Departm ent of Agriculture & Cooperation am ongst North-Eastern States the following steps 
have been taken :- 
(a) Special awareness/training progra mmes are organized by NIAM and NABARD 
Consultancy Services (NABCONS), the im plementing agencies of schem es of Agricultural 
Marketing Division.  Schemes are also being advertised through local newspapers. 
(b) Guidelines of the schemes are also being circulated to N.E States from to time. 
(c) Regional Centre of Organic Farm ing, Imphal has been entrusted with the work of 
advising NE States on implementation and monitoring of the scheme titled National Project 
on Organic Farming. 
(d) N.E. States are being apprised of the be nefits/details of the schemes through regular 
review meetings, workshops, seminars, interface campaigns and publicity through website. 
(e) Orientation W orkshops are held in NE States for fam iliarizing them  about the 
schemes. Regular handholding support is also pr ovided to them  for im plementation of the 
schemes. 
(f) The experience of other States in im plementing the programmes is also shared with 
State Nodal Officers of NE States in quarterly national workshops. 
(g) NE States are requested form ally as al so in Zonal Conferences, Rabi and Kharif 
Campaigns held annually for form ulation and subm ission of Annual Action Plans for 
implementation of various schemes in order to fully utilize the allocated funds. 
The matter of reflecting actual expenditure on th e schemes in North Eastern Region in Dem ands 
for Grants of the Ministry has already been ta ken up with the Budget Division of Ministry of 
Finance and they are examining the same. 
 
  

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.3 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I of this Report. 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
National Rainfed Area Authority 
4.4 The Com mittee note that the National Ra infed Area Authority (NRAA) has been 
constituted on 03.11.2006 with a budgetary provi sion of Rs. 100 crore during 2007-08 to 
coordinate all schem es relating to watershed deve lopment, and to give focused attention to the 
problem of the rainfed areas of the country.  The Com mittee have been inform ed, that the first tier 
of the Authority is a Governing Board that will provide the necessary leadership and appropriate 
coordination in the im plementation of the progra mme, and the second tier would be the Executive 
Committee consisting of technical experts and repr esentatives from  stakeholder Ministries.  The 
Committee also note that there is no proposal to  include the State Governm ents in the NRA 
Authority. 
 The Committee are of the firm  opinion that th e representation of the State Governm ent on 
this Authority should be pre-requisite as Agriculture is a State subject and this Authority has to deal 
with the problems of whole country having 24 clim atic zones.  They, therefore, recom mend that at 
second tier, representatives of various State Govern ments should also be included so as to have a 
full picture of the requirem ents of the regions.  The Com mittee also feel that one representative of 
the farmers should also be associated with the Executive Committee of the Authority. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.5 The structure, com position and m andate of the National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA) 
are as approved by the Cabinet.  There is no provision of giving representation to the State 
  

Governments either on the Governing Body or on the Executive Com mittee.   However, the 
relevant States will be invited to the m eetings of the Executive Com mittee of the NRAA, as and 
when required, as special invitees. 
 In so far as the inclusion of one farm ers’ representative in the Executive Com mittee is 
concerned, it is subm itted that there is a provision f or f armers’ representative at the Governing 
Body level and already Shri R.V.Chavan has been nominated as member of the Governing Board.  
All policy decisions will be taken by the Gove rning Board and the Executive Com mittee is the 
implementing arm. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.6 For comments of the committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I of this Report. 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Subsidies in Agriculture 
4.7 The Com mittee note that the m ajor subsidies being provided in India are on Food/Seed, 
Indigenous (Urea) Fertiliser, Im ported (Urea Fer tiliser), Sale of decontrolled fertilizer with 
concession to farmers, petroleum subsidy and grant to NAFED under Market Intervention Schemes 
(MIS) and Price Support System  (PSS). State Governm ents give subsidies for Irrigation and 
Electricity etc. 
 The Committee feel that the real benefits of subsidies do not reach the farmers. Most of our 
farming is based on rain/m onsoons and not m any farmers in village actually have tubewells and 
operate it through electricity where subsidy is given. Even the benefits of subsidies on 
urea/fertilizer is reaped by the manufacturers and not by the poor farmers. 
  

 While comparing the subsidies being given in  India and other countries the Committee note 
that the per hectare subsidies in Japan in  1999 were $ 11,792, in EC $ 831, in OECD $ 218 and 
USA $ 129. In India it was only $ 53. Sim ilarly, the per farm er subsidy in 1999 was $ 26,000 in 
Japan, $ 21,000 in USA, $ 9000 in Canada, $ 17,000 in  EC and $ 11,000 in OECD. In India it was 
$ 66. The aggregate subsidy for agriculture in India was estim ated at $ 8.50 billion in 2001-02 as 
against $ 49.08 billion in USA, $ 47.20 billion in Japan and $ 115.33 in European Union. 
 The Committee agree that agricultural subsidie s are a powerful instrum ent in the hands of 
the Governm ent not only to protect the interest of  the farm ers but also to regulate or even to 
manipulate the domestic prices and import/export of agricultural commodities. 
 More than 50% of the agricultural holdings in  India are in rainfed areas, so the subsidy 
given on food, to Electricity Boards/Corporations and Fertilizer com panies do not count m uch for 
the farm ers of rainfed areas. Com mittee fail to understand this policy of giving subsidy to the 
electricity boards, f ertilizer com panies, petrol eum com panies and grants to NAFED f or Market 
Intervention Scheme (MIS), in the nam e of subsidy to agriculture sector, whereas the 90% farm ers 
do not get any benefit of this subsidy policy, as they do not own Tubewells run on electricity and 
do not use fertilizers (Urea etc.). Food subsidy should not be treated as agricultural subsidy as the 
beneficiaries are mainly consumers and not produ cers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the subsidy should be given to the farm ers directly by providing him seed, fertilizer, soil nutrients, 
diesel or electricity for his tubewells etc. at cheaper rates as compared to the prevalent market rates. 
 The Com mittee are of the opinion that, no doubt, our country cannot com pete with the 
developed countries in the amount of subsidies they provide to their farmers but at least we can try 
to give the real benef its of the subsidies to  small and needy farm ers. The Com mittee recommend 
that alternative m echanisms for delivery of subsid ies should be tried and tested to provide cost 
effective income transfers to the truly needy farmers. 
  

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.8 The Central Sector Scheme ‘Development and Strengthening of Infrastructure Facilities for 
Production and Distribution of Qua lity Seeds’ which is intended to develop and strengthen the 
existing infrastructure for production and distribution of certified/quality seeds, has the provision of 
providing financial assistance to the farm ers through the State Governm ents/UT Administrations 
and autonomous implementing agencies under its following components:- 
1. Seed Village Programme:- 
To upgrade the quality of farm er-saved seed wh ich is about 80-85% of the total seed used 
for crop production programme, following financial assistance is provided: 
(i) for distribution of foundation/certified s eed at 50% cost for production of quality 
seeds by farm er. While distributing seeds, the farm ers are charged only 50% cost 
after deducting the subsidy at the rate 50%, thereby directly benefiting the farmers.  
(iv) for training of farmers on seed production and technology aspects @ Rs.15,000/- for 
a group of 50-150 farmers; 
(v) for procuring of Pusa Bin/Mud Bin/Bin made from  paper pulp etc. for storing of 
seed produced by the farmers on their farms at 25% for general farmers and 33% for 
SC/ST farmers. 
Scope of this program me is being sought  to be widened by providing subsidy for 
hybrid seed production @ 75% of cost of production.   
2. Assistance for Boosting Seed Production in the Private Sector: 
Under this component, credit linked back-ended capital subsidy at the rate of 25% of 
the project cost subject to a m aximum limit of Rs.10.00 lakh per unit on seed infrastructure 
development is being provided. Private co mpanies, partnership firm s, individual 
  

entrepreneurs, self help groups and seed cooperatives are eligible to get assistance under the 
component and this com ponent is bei ng im plemented through Com mercial Banks, 
Scheduled Com mercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks and National Cooperative 
Development Corporation. This assistance is primarily for low value high volume seeds.  
Department of Fertilizer has informed that fertilizer subsidy is presently provided to 
the farmers by way of subsidized selling prices as compared to the prevalent m arket prices 
or normative delivered cost of  the fertilizers at the farm gate level. The dif ference between 
the selling prices as notified by the Govern ment and the norm ative delivered cost of 
fertilizer at farm gate level is disbursed as subsidy to the manufacturers/importers on sale of 
subsidized fertilizers.  The subsidy, therefore,  reaches the farm er in the form  of notified 
selling prices, which are below the actual deliver ed costs.  The present dispensation is in 
line with the recom mendation, excep t for the fact that the subsidy is released to the 
manufacturers/importers after the fertilizer has been sold to the farmers at cheaper rates. 
Fertilizer industry has agreed to have a study on alternative framework for fertilizer 
subsidy disbursement in India conducted.  M/s.Tata Consultancy Services has been engaged 
by the Fertilizer Association of India for this  study.  The study report has been received and 
is under examination by the Department of Fertilizers. 
Ministry of Petroleum  & Natural Gas have informed that Diesel is already being 
sold across the country at price  lower than In ternational price. Customs Duty on Diesel has 
been reduced to 7.5% from  10%.  Price of Diesel was reduced on two occasions i.e. on 
30.11.2006 and 16.02.2007.  The ad-valorem  excise duty com ponent on diesel has been 
reduced from 8% to 6% and Central Sales Tax on diesel has been reduced from  4% to 3% 
in Union Budget 2007-08.  In view of this, furthe r subsidized supply of diesel to farm ers is 
not feasible. 
  

Ministry of Power have inform ed that a new tariff policy under Electricity Act, 2003 has 
been notified in January,2006 which inter-alia provides that tariff for agricultural use m ay be set at 
different level for different parts of a State de pending on the conditions of the groundwater table.  
A higher level of subsidy could be considered  to support poorer farm ers of the region, where 
adverse ground water table condition requires larger quantity of electricity for irrigation purposes 
subject to suitable restrictions to ensure adequate  ground water levels and sustainable use thereof.  
The policy outlines that subsidized rates of electricity should be perm itted only upto a pre-
identified level of consum ption beyond which tariffs reflecting efficient cost of service should be 
charged from  consum ers. If the State Governm ent wants to reim burse even part of this cost of 
electricity to poor category of consumers, the amount can be paid in cash or any other suitable way. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.9 For comments of the committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I of this Report. 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Agricultural Credit 
4.10 The Committee have been inform ed that during the first nine m onths of 2006-07, 63 lakh 
new farmers were financed by the banking system  as against the target of 50 lakh new farm ers set 
for the year 2006-07.  The Finance Minister in hi s budget speech 2007-08 has indicated a target of 
Rs. 2,25,000 crore as farm  credit for the year with  an addition of 50 lakh new farm ers to the 
banking system  and also a provi sion of Rs. 1677 crore for two per cent interest subvention for 
short-term crop loans.  This is a m ajor step forward, and indicative of Governm ent’s commitment 
for im proving the econom ic well-being of the fa rmers.  However, the Com mittee is deeply 
concerned that even after announcement of the scheme of interest subvention of 2 per cent on loan, 
  

the f armers are not able to com e out of  th e debt trap and are com mitting suicides.  The 
moneylenders are still popular as they are still ru ling the rural credit system by giving timely credit 
to local f armers but on exorbitant interest rate s.  Therefore, the Com mittee recom mend that the 
moneylender’s role in farm er’s credit should be regulated in term s of loan am ount as well as 
interest rates so as to treat them  as part of  rural credit system.  however, their role can be reduced 
only if the farm ers have more access to the banki ng system and get tim ely credit on easy term s at 
their doorstep. 
 The Committee feel that announcem ent of the lo an factor will not stop the distress state of 
farmers, rather providing of  irrigation f acilities w ith ef ficient water m anagement, distribution of  
high-yielding variety seeds at subsidized rate s and also incom e increasing opportunities through 
horticulture, livestock, poultry, dairying and fisheries are also a m ust to decrease the suicide rate of 
farmers.  The com prehensive rehabilitation pack age for especially distressed districts should 
include these factors also. 
 The Committee recommend that the rate of inte rest on farm credit should be reduced to the 
level of 4 per cent sim ple interest as has been suggested by National Com mission on Farm ers 
headed by M.S. Swaminathan, and in no case the inte rest should surpass the original amount of the 
loan so that the exploitation of farmers by the financial institutions is restricted.   
 The Committee have noted that in the case of poultry industry, due to loss created by the 
outbreak of Avian influenza, the Governm ent of India announced a financial package along with 
one time interest subvention of 4 per cent in the last year i.e. 2006-07 for a period of one year on 
the outstanding principle am ounts of loan availed by the poultry units. Therefore, the Com mittee 
recommend, that the interest subvention for the lo ans availed by the farm ers of 31 suicide prone 
districts and other districts areas should also be increased to four per cent and m ay be distributed 
through RBI and its banking system as is being done in the case of poultry units. 
  

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.11 Government is concerned about reducing the ro le of m oneylenders in availability of the 
credit to the f armers and has initiated several m easures for ensuring timely credit on easy term s to 
the farmers.  Some of the important initiatives are :-   
 (i) The Government of India on 18.6.2004 announced a special farm credit package. Following 
are the highlights of this announcement:–  
• Increase in credit flow to agriculture sector @ 30% per year. 
• Public Sector Com mercial Banks and RRBs to  bring 50 lakh new farm ers into the credit 
fold every year. 
• Credit to tenant farmers and oral lessees.   
• Debt restructuring and relief for:  
o Farmers in distress 
o Farmers in arrears 
o OTS for small and marginal farmers 
o Loans to farmers for Redemption of debts from non-institutional lenders. 
• Refinements in Kisan Credit Card (KCC) Schem e and revisiting of Scales of Finance and 
realigning the same to meet the realistic credit needs of the farmers. 
• Formation and financing of self-help groups of tenant farmers and oral lessees to provide 
credit to this category of farmers.   
(ii) In the Union Budget for the year 2006-07, it was announced that effective from  Kharif 
2006-07, farmers would receive crop loans up to a prin cipal amount of Rs. 3 lakhs at 7% rate of 
  

interest and the Governm ent would provide necessa ry interest subvention for this purpose. This 
policy has been continued in the year 2007-08 also.   
(iii) Reserve Bank of  India has instructed the ba nks not to insist on collateral/ m argin/security 
requirements for agricultural loans up to Rs. 50,000/-. 
(iv) Government has approved a revival pack age for Rural Cooperative Credit Institutions 
(short-term) involving, inter-alia, a financial outlay estimated at Rs. 13,596 crores to be shared by 
Central Government, State Governments and the Cooperative Credit Structure.   
(v) The Governm ent has constituted an Expert  Group under the Chairm anship of Prof. R. 
Radhakrishna, Director, Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai to look into the 
problems of Agricultural indebtedness in its totality and suggest m easures to provide relief to 
farmers across the country.    
 The Government of India has approved a rehabilitation package of Rs. 16978.69 crore for 
31 suicide prone districts in the four states of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala.  
The package will be implemented over a period of 3 years and include both immediate and medium 
term measures.  The rehabilitation package aim s at establishing a sustainable and viable f arming 
and livelihood support system  through debt relief to farm ers, im proved supply of institutional 
credit, crop centric approach to agriculture, a ssured irrigation f acilities, watershed m anagement, 
better extension and farm ing support services  and subsidiary incom e opportunities through 
horticulture, livestock, dairying, fisheries etc.   
 The National Com mission on Farm ers headed by Dr. M.S. Swam inathan has, inter-alia, 
recommended for reduction of rate of interest on fa rm credit to the level of  4%. A conference of 
State Agriculture Ministers was convened on 22nd December, 2006 to discuss the recommendations 
of the National Commission on Farmers (NCF) and the revised draft national policy for farm ers as 
  

suggested by NCF.  There was broad consensus among the states on the revised Draft national 
Policy for farm ers.  Based on the feedback received in the conference, a note alongwith a “Draft 
National Policy” has been submitted to the Committee of Secretaries (COS) set up for the purpose. 
  As regards, interest on agriculture loans,  Reserve Bank of India has advised com mercial 
banks that when crop loans or instalments under term loans become overdue, banks can add interest 
outstanding to the principal and com pound the interest.  However, total interest debited to an 
account should not exceed the principal am ount in respect of advances to sm all and m arginal 
farmers. This stipulation is applicable only to shor t term loans.  Further, RBI has clarif ied to the 
banks that the above stipulation would be applicable only to short term loans advanced to small and 
marginal farmers. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.12 For comments of the committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of Chapter I of this Report. 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
Modified National Crop Insurance Scheme 
4.13 The Committee has been inform ed that Modified National Agricultural Insurance Schem e 
(MNAIS) to take care of  shortcom ings/limitations in National Agricultural Insurance Schem e 
(NAIS), like unit area of insurance, calculation of insurance claim s, low indem nity level, 
calculation of guaranteed incom e, etc., was pr epared by the Departm ent of Agriculture & 
Cooperation and submitted for approval to Planning Commission in February, 2005.  The Planning 
Commission returned the MNAIS suggesting to shift th e scheme to Non-Plan side.  It favoured the 
funding only for overhead com ponent of costs of the m odified schem e.  It also laid down a 
condition that the scheme can be supported on pilot basis but only in the districts/States which have 
requisite data collection capability and have inf rastructure for obtaining the f eedback.  And since 
  

this data is required to have actual calculations  and there being need to have subsidy on the 
premium this cannot be started as a Plan Scheme. 
 The Committee in their 18 th Report (2006-07) recom mended that the on-going schem e of 
crop insurance being im plemented as Plan schem e since 2000, if m odified to make it more farmer 
friendly, should not be shifted to non-plan side .  During the exam ination of DFG of 2007-08, the 
Committee have been inform ed that as sugge sted by Planning Com mission, the Ministry of 
Agriculture to start with, came with the scheme on pilot basis for 100 districts for the consideration 
of Expenditure Finance Com mittee, but the m eeting was said to have been postponed at the 
instance of Planning Com mission on the ground that the schem e has not yet been given its “in 
principal” approval.  The m atter was taken up at the level of  Agriculture Minister with Deputy 
Chairman, Planning Commission but the issue is still to be resolved. 
 The Com mittee are anguished at the delaying tactics of the Planning Com mission for its 
non-serious attitude towards the farm ers of this  country.  The Com mittee, therefore, recom mend 
that this matter should be resolved am icably and MNAIS must be approved as a Plan-schem e as in 
the case of the earlier crop insurance schem e.  The farmers of this country also need a fair deal for 
the loss of their crops caused by natural and weather vagaries and for no fault of theirs. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.14 Recently, the Planning Com mission vide letters dated March 8, 2007 and March 29, 2007 
has reiterated their earlier stand on the Modified NAIS that the subsidy on the insurance prem ium 
can not be treated as plan expenditure.  It  has been suggested that the existing National 
Agricultural Insurance Schem e (NAIS) m ay be transferred to non-plan side and proposal on 
Modified NAIS m ay be initiated on Pilot basis in sel ected districts, with a f lexibility to f ormulate 
the scheme by the State if so desired.  The Cent ral Assistance to m eet the expenditure incurred on 
  

the formulation of the scheme including data collection and other related expenses may be provided 
through a separate Central Sector/Centrally Sponsored schem e and the prem ium subsidy 
component may be provided as an additional central assistance by the Planning Commission on the 
recommendations of the Ministry of Agriculture as per pre-decided terms and conditions. 
 The comments of Ministry of Agriculture on the view of Planning Com mission has been 
sent by the Hon’ble Agriculture Minister vide letter dated 2 nd April, 2007 and the Planning 
Commission has been requested to expedite the cl earance of the proposal on Modified NAIS.  The 
matter again came up for discussion in the m eeting held on 5.4.2007 at Yojana Bhavan, New Delhi 
wherein some positive response from  the Planni ng Commission was noticed.    By referring the 
discussion of this m eeting, Secretary (A&C) ha s requested Secretary (Expenditure) for initiating 
the process of convening the EFC meeting.  Response from the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure is still awaited. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.15 For comments of the committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter I of this Report. 
Recommendation No. 14 
Minimum Support Price (MSP) 
4.16 The Committee note that the Governm ent’s price policy for agriculture com modities seeks 
to ensure rem unerative prices to the growers fo r their produce with a view to encouraging higher 
investment and production to safeguard the intere st of consum ers by m aking available supplies at 
reasonable prices.  Towards this end, the G overnment announces each season Minim um Support 
Price (MSP) for m ajor agricultural commodities and organizes purchase operations through public 
and cooperative agencies. 
  

The Committee feel that the criteria of fixi ng the Minim um Support Price, which is being 
done by the Com mission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) has becom e outdated, and the 
prices so fixed are not delivering the desired benefits to the farm ers.  The Com mittee, therefore, 
recommend that the Minim um Support Prices should be reviewed and it should be 50% m ore than 
the weighted average cost of production. The Com mittee further recommend that while calculating 
the costs, the farm er himself should be consider ed as a skilled worker, and his wages should be 
calculated equal to that of a skilled labour. 
The Committee further observe that to help ra ise the agricultural growth rate from  2.3 per 
cent to 4 per cent, the MSP should be announced well before the sowing season which will help the 
farmers to decide which crop they should grow.  In  other words, the Governm ent can play a m ajor 
role in increasing or decreasing the net sown area of any crop.  This will al so help in determ ining 
the market prices.  The Com mittee are also of the opinion that in order to balance the interest of 
farmers as well as consum ers, the procurem ent price of the Governm ent may be kept at a higher 
level than the MSP, so that the market remains stable and the farmers also get a good price for their 
produce. The Com mittee strongly recom mend that th e bonus should form  the part of MSP itself 
and should not be announced separately for Gove rnment procurem ent purposes. To offset the 
higher price of procurem ent, the Governm ent m ay give subsidy to the consum er through public 
distribution system. This m echanism may help the farmer in getting a higher price depending on 
the market situation at the time of harvesting. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.17 The Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) recommends Minimum Support 
Prices (MSPs) for m ajor agricultural com modities (nam ely Paddy, W heat, Jowar, Bajra, Maize, 
Ragi, Barley, Arhar (Tur), Urad, Moong, Gram , Lentil (Masur), Groundnut-in-shell, Soyabean, 
  

Sunflower Seed, Sesamum, Nigerseed, Rapeseed/Mustard, Safflower, Cotton, Tobacco, Jute, Copra 
and Sugarcane) as per the Term s of Referen ce assigned to it. W hile recom mending MSP, the 
Commission takes into account a num ber of relevant factors such as cost of production, trends in 
input prices, market prices, demand-supply situation and inter crop price parity, em erging demand 
supply situation, procurem ent and distribution, terms of trade between agriculture and non-
agriculture sectors. The estimates of cost of production are considered vital in recommending MSP. 
The cost of production includes imputed value of wages of family labour. 
As regards the review of MSP suggested by the Hon’ble Standing Com mittee, an expert 
Committee under the Chairm anship of Prof. Y.K. Alagh, has exam ined the m ethodological issues 
for computation of MSP. The report of the Committee is under consideration of the Government. 
In a vast country like India with different  agro clim atic regions and cropping pattern, 
sowing season is not uniform  across states / crops.  Efforts are, therefore, m ade to bridge the gap 
between the sowing season and the announcem ent of MSPs so as to give necessary price signal to 
farmers, which helps them  in the choice of crops.  The dates of announcem ent of MSPs for kharif 
crops and rabi crops in recent years are given in the following table. 
Year Kharif Rabi 
2001-2002 07.09.2001 02.04.2002 
2002-2003 26.09.2002 13.02.2003 
2003-2004 30.07.2003 18.12.2003 
2004-2005 10.08.2004 03.11.2004 
2005-2006 20.04.2005 29.09.2005 
2006-2007 27.07.2006 27 & 30.10.2006 
2007-2008 17.05.2007 Report from CACP 
awaited. 
  

 
Since the MSPs are announced earlier and the procurem ent season starts m uch later (after harvest 
of crops), decision on bonus is taken just before  the start of the procurem ent season depending on 
prevailing market situation and assessment of market prices. Moreover, incentive bonus announced 
over and above the MSP is exem pted from State taxes and levies and thus it helps to contain food 
subsidy. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.18 For comments of the committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of Chapter I of this Report. 
  

CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Budgetary Allocation 
5.1 The Committee note that for the Tenth Five Y ear Plan (2002-2007), Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) had proposed an outlay of Rs.25002 crore keeping in 
view the thrust areas identifie d for the Tenth Plan.  However, Rs.16093.32 crore were allocated as 
budget estim ates and only an am ount of Rs.15612 cr ore was m ade available in the Revised 
Estimates from 2002-03 to 2006-07. 
 The Com mittee further note that the average growth in the Tenth Five Year Plan in 
agriculture and allied sector is 2.3% as com pared to an aggregate of 7.6% for all sectors of the 
economy.  The Committee are of the opinion that though the periodic failure of the m onsoon in the 
last few years can be attributed to be a contribut ory factor for shortfall in the agricultural growth 
rate, lack of adequate funding and investment in the agriculture is also one of the primary reason for 
deceleration.  
 The Com mittee has been inform ed that th e Plan Budget estim ates for 2007-08 has been 
Rs.5560 crore (1.72% of Central Plan Outlay) as against RE of Rs.4900 crore during 2006-07, 
though the Department had put forward a demand of Rs.7325.96 crore.  The Committee feel, and as 
also agreed by the representative of the depart ment during evidence, that this am ount of Rs.5560 
crore is not sufficient enough to m eet the requirem ent of the agriculture sector.  Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that if the Government is serious enough to increase the agricultural growth 
  

rate and investment in agriculture, the Planni ng Commission and Finance Ministry should be asked 
to allocate at least Rs.2000 crore more for 2007-08 at the Revised Estimates stage. 
 The Com mittee strongly feel that the strate gy of planned developm ent would lose its 
sanctity and would rem ain only on papers, if the life line of funds to this vital and basic sector is 
throttled, as the growth of  all other sectors is in extricably linked to the growth of  agricultural 
sector.  The Committee, therefore, expects a reas onable and liberal approach in m aking allocations 
in favour of agriculture and allied activities in the present and future budgets. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 The Planning Com mission has been specifically  requested to allocate over and above the 
approved outlay of Rs.5560.00 crore, an additional outlay of Rs.2026.97 crores to this Departm ent 
in the current fiscal as per the details given below :- 
                                                                            (Rs. in crore) 
S.No. Scheme / Activity Additional 
Outlay 
1. Additional Central Assistance 1500.00 
2. National Food Security Mission  
(i) National Food Security Mission - Rice 138.11 
(ii) National Food Security Mission - Wheat 291.95 
(iii) National Food Security Mission - Pulses 96.91 
 Total 2026.97 
 
 
 
  

Recommendation No. 4 
 
Scheme on Enhancing Sustainability of dryland farming systems 
5.3 The Com mittee are shocked to learn that the `Schem e on Enhancing Sustainability of 
Dryland Farming Systems’, for wh ich  provision was m ade under the Tenth Five Year Plan, has 
still not been launched.  Explaining the reasons for non-approval of the schem e, the Governm ent 
informed that it could not be launched as it wa s considered appropriate to f irm it up af ter 
consultation with the newly set up `National Ra infed Area Authority’.  The reason given by the 
Government is not at all satisfactory and amounts to   covering their own lapses.  
The Committee are highly critical of  this explanation and attitude of  the Government; as it 
is very m uch evident that this schem e was proposed during the Tenth Plan when the National 
Rainfed Area Authority was not even conceptua lized.  Now after expiry of whole of the 10 th Plan, 
the Government comes up with the idea of referri ng it to the Authority which has yet to becom e 
functional.  The Committee desire the Government to explain whether for all these years they were 
awaiting for the Authority to be set up to ref er this scheme to it which actually even they did not 
know at that point of time that it is going to be set up.  Then how could they propose it at all during 
tenth plan when there was no intention of appr oving and implementing.  The delay in launching of 
the Schem e will have an adverse ef fect on the f armers, a vast m ajority of  whom  are dependent 
upon monsoons. 
Taking serious cognizance of the whole m atter, and in view of th e im portance of the 
scheme, the Com mittee recom mend that the `Sch eme on Enhancing Sustainability of  Dryland 
Farming Systems should be approved im mediately for im plementation and it should be launched, 
with or without consultation with National Ra infed Area Authority, within three m onths of 
presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
  

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
5.4 The Scheme ‘Enhancing Sustainability of Dryland Farming Systems’ could not be launched 
during Tenth Plan because of non approval of th e outlay of  Rs.73.7 crores for the years 2005-06 
and 2006-07 by the Ministry of Finance.  They inst ead reiterated that the scheme may be examined 
by National Rainfed Area Authority before its approval.  Considering the recom mendations of the 
Committee contained in their 23 rd Report, the note for EFC of the  proposed schem e during 
Eleventh  Plan period with an outlay of Rs. 1548.74 crores has been subm itted to Planning 
Commission and National Rainfed Area Authority for approval.  However, Planning Com mission 
and Ministry of Finance will be requested again to accord their approval for the im plementation of 
the schem e pending consultation of National Rainfed Area Authority as desired by the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Global Warming 
 
5.5 The Com mittee notes with concern the adverse effects of global warm ing on 
Agriculture.  A recent study conducted by a reputed j ournal of U.K. has shown that about 30% of 
the variation in the global agricultural yield can  be explained by tem perature rise. Our country 
being the second largest producer of wheat, and the fifth largest producer of maize in the world, is 
bearing the brunt and suffering a silent kill on its  agrarian economy.  One study shows that even 
0.500 C rise in temperature may reduce the yield of wheat in India by 450 kg. per hectare. 
 The Committee are of the view that it is high time to take this issue seriously because the 
economic impact of such global warm ing is higher in developing and poor countries rather than in 
developed countries.  The Committee recommends that high temperature tolerant varieties of crops 
  

should be developed and the farm ers should be edu cated to take care of the issue and grow their 
crops accordingly.  Tsunam i affected areas should al so be studied to find out the im pact of global 
warming as these coastal areas are m ost likely to  be adversely affected.  The Departm ent should 
chalk out the alternative land and water use strategies to com bat global warming so as to minimize 
the impact and losses for food security of the country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.6 The subject of clim ate change is dealt by the Ministry of Environm ent & Forests. 
However, the effects of global warm ing on agri culture are being studied by Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research through their Net-work Programme on Impact Adaptation and Vulnerability 
of Indian Agriculture to Clim ate Change with an outlay of Rs.9.11 Crore. These research projects 
of ICAR aim  at study of the im pact of clim ate change on agriculture system s including the 
livestock, fisheries, horticulture and forestry at 16 locations spread across the country.  Though, 
no clear-cut findings are available, since research  project is under progress, however, intensity of 
the extrem e events like drought, flood, heat waves,  cold waves, cyclonic incidents etc. has 
increased.  Prelim inary studies taken up unde r the network program me on clim ate change 
sponsored by Indian Council of Agricultural Resear ch (ICAR) at Central Research Institute for 
Dryland Agriculture indicate that negative departure of annual rainfall (over the period of 1960-
2004) has been noticed in som e northern part of  the country com prising parts of W estern Uttar 
Pradesh, W est Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, Uttaranchal, Him achal Pradesh and entire North 
Eastern States and in som e parts of the Southe rn Peninsula covering South Telangana, parts of 
Rayalaseema, Vidarbha and Tamil Nadu.    
Further, the rainfall analysis carried out at 1140 stations located in the rainfed regions of 
the country has shown that 73 percent of the stations  are subjected to short term  fluctuations (less 
  

than 7 years) in annual rainfall. The increase in minimum temperature by 4 to 5 degree Celsius 
over its normal value coinciding with the reproductiv e (grain bearing) stage of wheat crop during 
2005-06 Rabi season, considerably affected the wh eat production.  As per inform ation available 
with the Indian Meteorological Departm ent (IMD), the surface air tem peratures over the Indian 
subcontinent show a slight warm ing trend by about  0.4 Degree Celsius during the past 100 years.  
This warning trend is however not uniform either in time or in space. 
  In non-irrigated areas the strategy for land and water use is based on watershed 
development approach.  Under the Ministry of  Agriculture, watershed program mes nam ely, (i) 
National Watershed Developm ent Project for Ra infed Areas (NW DPRA) (ii) Soil Conservation 
for Enhancing Productivity of Degraded Lands in the Catchments of River Valley Project and (iii) 
Watershed Development Project in Shifting Cultivation Areas (WDPSCA) are being implemented 
which have components of increasing vegetative cover and harvesting rain water including ground 
water recharge.  Under these programmes, agro-forestry and farm-forestry are also supported.  
In addition to these, Ministry of Rural De velopment is also im plementing three m ajor 
programmes, namely, Desert Developm ent Programme (DDP), Drought Prone Area Program me 
(DPAP) and Integrated W asteland Development Project (IWDP) which are also im plemented on 
watershed approach basis and help in minimizing the adverse effect of climate change.  
 Indian Council of Agricultural Research ha s developed a num ber of  varieties/hybrids 
of different food crops to suit different agro- ecological conditions. In wheat, the late sown 
varieties tolerate heat stress to a large extent. Late sown variety DBW -14 for Northeastern plain 
zone tolerates heat to a great extent. Heat  tolerant genotypes viz. HD 2808, RAJ 3765 and W H 
730 indicated considerably less reduction in grain yi eld per spike in response to high temperatures 
and low rate of leaf senescen ce. Som e of the heat tolerant wheat varieties are NW -2036, NW -
  

1014 and HW-2045, HD-2643 and K-8962. Th e adoption of these varieties and their production-
protection technologies help in mitigating the adverse effect of Global Warming. 
 Besides, the high tem perature tolerant and drought resistant varieties of crops are being 
promoted through Integrated Cereals Deve lopment Program mes (ICDP-Rice/W heat/Coarse 
cereals) in different states of the country. The farm ers are also advised to adopt light frequent 
irrigations in wheat in the event of rise in temperature during flowering/grain formation stages. The 
technologies developed and recom mended by the Na tional Research System  are also popularized 
amongst the farm ers under the schem es, which incl ude strategies to com bat Global W arming as 
well. 
Recommendation No. 17 
 
Agriculture Extension 
 
5.7 The Com mittee are perturbed to note that ev en the Finance Minister during the Budget 
speech had to adm it that the Agricultural Extensi on system seems to have collapsed and now the 
Training and Visit (T&V) program me, which brought in the Green Revolution of 1960s has to be 
replicated with suitable changes.  The Com mittee were inform ed by the representatives of the 
Department during oral evidence that the Agri culture Technology Managem ent Agency (ATMA) 
which has been established in 262 districts of 27 St ates and 2 Union Territories, is proposed to be 
extended to another 300 districts for which outlay has been enhanced from Rs. 50 crore in 2006-07 
to Rs. 230 crore in 2007-08. 
 The Com mittee are perplexed to note the contradictions, that on the one hand, the 
Government adm it the agricultural extension ha s failed, and on the other hand, the Governm ent 
propose to enhance budget for further strengtheni ng of ATMA, which has not shown any tangible 
results.  The Committee are of the view that if ATMA has not succeeded up to now, either it should 
  

be revamped or the Governm ent should com e up with a schem e which works better that ATMA 
because for several years agricultural extension ha s been responsible for not percolating the real 
benefits of research of the schemes of the Department to the farmers. 
 The Com mittee in their earlier reports on Demands for Grants, had recom mended to 
provide 25% subsidy to the agricultural graduates to set up their ventures under the schem e of 
Agri-Business and Agri-clinics, but the issue of  providing 25% subsidy has still not been f inalized.   
The Committee highly deplore the delay on this issue and desire that the com ponent of giving 25% 
subsidy to agriculture graduates to set up their ventures should be approved within 2 m onths of 
presentation of the Report to the Parliament. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Extension Reforms 
5.8.1 The Agriculture Technology Managem ent Agency (ATMA) m odel for prom oting reforms 
in extension system  was pilot tested unde r the Innovations in Technology Dissem ination 
(ITD) com ponent of the W orld Bank supporte d National Agriculture Technology Project 
(NATP) during 1998-2005.  A total of 28 districts were covered under ITD-NATP in phases 
in 7 States.  The names of these districts is given in Annexure-I.   
 
2. Reforms promoted under ATMA model include : 
(a) Bottom -up planning. 
(b) Decentralized decision making. 
(c) Multi-agency implementation system. 
(d) Farming systems approach. 
(e) Extension support to farmers’ groups. 
 
3. Salient achievem ents/impact of ATMA  program me under ITD-NATP are given in 
Annexure-II.    
 
  

4. In view of encouraging results of ITD- NATP, the Departm ent of Agriculture and 
Cooperation (DAC) had launched the Centrally S ponsored Schem e “Support to State Extension 
Programmes for Extension Reform s” based on  ATMA model.  The schem e was launched on 7 th 
May, 2005 with the target of covering 252 dist ricts during the X Plan.  The status of 
implementation of this scheme as on 31.3.2007 in brief is given hereunder: 
(a) 262 ATMAs have been set up. 
(b) 2150 Farmers’ Advisory Committees (FAC) have been constituted. 
(c) 2258 Block Technology Teams (BTTs) have been constituted. 
(d) About 7500 commodity based Farmers’ Interest Groups (FIGs) have been formed. 
(e) About 10 lakh farm ers have participated in different extension activities im plemented 
under this scheme as per details given in the following table: 
Activities  Total participants 
Exposure Visit of farmers 16,044 
Training of farmers 1,16,125 
Field Demonstrations 2,08,180 
Kisan Melas/Exhibitions 6,65,420 
Total: 10,05,769 
 
5. The Hon’ble Finance Minister has also stated in his Budget Speech 2007 that: “In order to 
revive extension work, the Ministry of  Agriculture will, in consultation with State Governm ents, 
draw up a new programme that will replicate T&V with suitable changes”.   
 
6. The matter was discussed with the States dur ing Kharif Conference 2007 held on 3-4 April, 
2007. States were requested to send their written s uggestions for revitalization of the extension 
system, including launch of a new progr amme, by 7.5.2007.  A day-long workshop for 
consultations on the subject with States and ot her stakeholders was held on 15.5.07. The im portant 
recommendations of the workshop are given in Annexure-III.  These recom mendations are being 
processed. 
 
7.   Subsidy as follows is being provided under Agri-Clinic and Agri-Business Centres 
Scheme:-: 
  

 
(i)      Credit linked back-ended capital subsidy @ 25% of the capital cost of the project 
funded through bank loan.  This subsidy w ould be 33.33% in respect of candidates 
belonging to SC, ST, W omen and other di sadvantaged section and those from  
North-Eastern and Hill States. 
(ii) Full interest subsidy for the first two year of the  project. 
 
Recommendation No. 18 
 
Seed Crop Insurance 
 
5.9 The Committee note that a Pilot Scheme for Seed Crop Insurance was initiated in 2000 with 
the objective to provide f inancial security and inco me stability to the Breeder Seed growers in the 
event of failure of seed crop and encourage pa rticipation of new breeders/growers to undertake 
seed production programme of newly released hybrid/improved varieties, but it was dropped during 
Tenth Plan. 
 The Standing Com mittee on Agriculture in their First Report (14 th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended for continuation and popularization of  the ‘Seed Crop Insurance Schem e’ and to 
remove the bottlenecks in im plementation of the Scheme. The Committee have been informed that 
the evaluation study for the Schem e was first awarded to the National Council for Applied 
Economic Research (NCAER) in Feb., 2002, then to Agriculture Finance Corporation in 
November, 2003 from  whom  the final report is yet to be received. The Com mittee fail to 
understand the logic behind awarding evaluation studies  to the aforesaid agencies year after year 
without any outcom e. How the Governm ent is not asking these agencies to subm it the Report in 
time. The Committee recommend that it is high tim e that the ‘Scheme of Seed Crop Insurance’ be 
implemented at the earliest and the ‘Agriculture Finance Corporation’ should be asked to subm it 
their Report within two months of presentation of this report so that som e protection is provided to 
  

the seed growers, otherwise, it will be very dif ficult to encourage the seed growers to take up seed 
production. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.10 The National Council for Applied Econom ic Research (NCAER) who were awarded the 
evaluation study in the first instance vide letter dated 26.02.2002 did not take up the work. 
Thereafter, the Departm ent of Agriculture  and Cooperation on 17.11.2003 requested Agriculture 
Finance Corporation to evaluate the Seed Cr op Insurance Schem e. The Agriculture Finance 
Corporation submitted the draf t report on the evalua tion of Pilot Schem e of Seed Crop Insurance 
on 10.08.2005. The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation sought the comments on the report 
from State Governm ents, Seed Corporations  and Seed Certifying Agencies. The com ments 
received were forwarded to Agricultural Finance Corporation for finalization of the evaluation 
report. The Agriculture Finance Corporation ha s since subm itted its report, which is being 
examined by the Department. 
Recommendation No. 19 
Cooperation 
 
5.11 The Committee note with satisfaction that the cooperative sector in India has em erged as 
one of the largest in the world with 542566 c ooperative societies and 424 m ulti-state cooperative 
societies.  The Com mittee also note that Rs. 128 crore have been allocated for 2007-08 as against 
RE of Rs. 50.25 crore during 2006- 07.  Having accepted this fact, the Com mittee cannot help but 
express their concern about the weak condition of m ost of the cooperative societies in the country.  
The Committee feel that unless these cooperatives are revived, the farmers cannot avail the benefits 
of these societies.  They, therefore, recom mend the Government to ensure that the cooperatives are 
provided necessary support, encouragem ent and fi nancial assistance so that they work as 
  

autonomous, self-reliant and democratically managed institutions accountable to their members and 
make a significant contribution to the agricultural sector of the national economy. 
 The Com mittee have been inform ed that the Task Force on revival of rural cooperative 
credit institutions under the chairmanship of Prof. A. Vaidyanathan has submitted its report and the 
Government has approved the package for revival of short-term rural cooperative credit structure 
involving financial assistance of Rs. 13596 crore.   The Com mittee desire the Governm ent to 
implement a package for revival of long-term  cooperative credit structure also, including the 
recommendations made by the Vaidyanathan Com mittee, in this regard, because m ost of the times, 
the loans taken by the farmers are for long term as well. 
 The Com mittee also desire that Vaikunth Mehta National Institute of Cooperative 
Management (VAMNICOM), Pune, a prem ier institute in the field of cooperative m anagement 
conducting professional degree courses, should be granted a deemed university status at the earliest 
so that exodus of highly talented and experienced  faculty Members for want of good pay scales, is 
avoided and the students, otherwise well-qualif ied and well-trained by the institute, get good 
placement commensurate with their real caliber. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.12.1.    To ensure the dem ocratic, autonomous and professional functioning of cooperatives, it 
has been decided to am end the Constitution.  Th e amendment to the Constitution, for the purpose, 
will address the key issues for em powerment of the cooperatives, through their voluntary 
formation, autonom ous functioning, dem ocratic control and professional m anagement.  The 
Constitution (one hundred and sixth am endment) Bill, 2006 has been introduced in the Lok Sabha 
on 22.05.2006.  There is no specific pr ovision in the Constitution (106 th) Amendment Bill 2006 to 
  

revive the sick cooperative units.  However, it is  expected that ensuing autonom ous functioning at 
cooperatives will enable the cooperatives to become self-reliant and economically viable. 
2. Revival package for short term  cooperative credit structure is under im plementation.  The 
task force has subm itted its report on long te rm cooperative credit structure (LTCCS) to 
Government of India on 23.08.2006.  In turn, Governm ent of India, Ministry of Finance has asked 
for comments of the state governm ents.  So far co mments from a few states have been received.  
Government is in touch with other states for obtaining their comments on the report. 
3. NCUI has subm itted a proposal to this De partment for setting up Jawaharlal Nehru 
International Cooperative University which will be located in the existing campus at VAMNICOM 
in Pune and all the institutions at  NCCT will be its constituents/af filiates. The Deptt. is exam ining 
the proposal submitted by NCUI. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
27 November, 2007                                                    Chairman, 
6 Agrahayana, 1929(Saka)                       Standing Committee on Agriculture. 
 
  

APPENDIX- I 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 27 TH NOVEMBER, 2007 AT 1500 HRS. 
IN  COMMITTEE ROOM, ‘B’, GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, 
NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1620 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Anil Basu 
 
3.  Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
4.  Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
 
5.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 
6.  Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
 
7.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
 
8.  Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
 
9.  Shri M.P.Veerendra Kumar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. 
 
 Shri Harish Rawat 
 
11. 
 
 Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
12.  Prof. M.S.Swaminathan 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.          Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Raj Kumar    -  Deputy  Secretary 
3. Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Deputy  Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Walia   -  Under Secretary 
 
  

At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairm an, welc omed the Mem bers to the sitting of  the 
Committee and requested them  to take up th e following Mem oranda on draft Action Taken 
Reports on Demands for Grants(2006-07) of the Mi nistry of Agriculture and Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries for consideration and adoption:- 
(1) Memorandum No. 2 regarding draft Ac tion Taken Report on the recom mendations 
contained in the 27th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) in respect of Ministry of 
Agriculture (Deptt. of Agriculture and Co-operation) 
 
(2) Memorandum No. 3 regarding draft Ac tion Taken Report on the recom mendations 
contained in the 28th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) in respect of Ministry of 
Agriculture (Deptt. of Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
(3) Memorandum No. 4 regarding draft Ac tion Taken Report on the recom mendations 
contained in the 29th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) in respect of Ministry of 
Agriculture (Deptt. of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries); and 
 
(4) Memorandum No. 5 regarding draft Ac tion Taken Report on the recom mendations 
contained in the 30th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) in respect of Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Com mittee considered and adopted th e draft action Taken Reports with m inor 
modifications. 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairm an to finalize and present the above-m entioned 
Reports to both Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA) 
  
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     19 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Serial Nos. 3, 8, 9, 10, 12, 15 and 16 
 
T o t a l           7  
 
Percentage        36.8%   
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
Nil 
 
T o t a l           0    
     
P e r c e n t a g e           0 %  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the 
           Committee 
 
Serial Nos.  2, 6, 7, 11, 13 and 14 
 
T o t a l           6    
 
Percentage        31.6% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Serial Nos.  1, 4, 5, 17, 18 and 19 
 
T o t a l          6    
 
Percentage        31.6%  