      
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2006-2007) 
                                                      
 31 
                  
                 
         
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND 
FISHERIES) 
              
THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND 
CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN ANIMALS BILL, 2005 
         
        
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
  
                                                      
  
         
               
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
MAY, 2007/ VAISAKHA, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2006-2007) 
          
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND 
FISHERIES) 
         
THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND 
CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN ANIMALS BILL, 2005 
         
 
         
Presented to Lok Sabha on  16.5.2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    16.5.2007 
  
                                                     
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
MAY, 2007/ VAISAKHA, 1929 (Saka) 

 
COA No.   196 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :   
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
        © 2007 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha  (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 

<CONTENTS> 
                   P A G E  
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
 
PART    I  An Overview                                                                           1  
   
PART   II              Clause-wise Analysis       13  
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix – I  Minutes of the    Sitting of the Committee        
held on  3.5.2006      29 
 
Appendix – II  Minutes of the Sitt ing of the Committee        
held on  18.10.2006      31 
 
Appendix – III  Minutes of the Twelft h Sitting of the Committee   34   
   held on  15 May, 2007 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
The Prevention and Control of Infectious  
And Contagious Diseases in Animals Bill, 2005     36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 

Composition of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Ranen Barman 
3. Shri Anil Basu  
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
6. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
7. Shri Khagen Das 
8. Shri Dharmendra 
9. Shri GadakhTukaram Gangadhar 
10. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
11. Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
12. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
13. Shri Prabodh Panda 
14. Smt. Rupatai D iliprao Patil Nilangekar 
15. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
16. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
17. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
18. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
19.        Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
20.        Shri Baleshwar Yadav    
21.        Smt. Kalpana  Ramesh Narhire 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
22.    Shri Harish Rawat 
23.   Dr. M.S.Gill 
24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25. Shri Vikram Verma 
26. Shri  Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28. Shri Datta Meghe 
29. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
30.     Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
31.   ^Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri  S.K.Sharma   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K.Singh   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Hardev Singh   - Director 
4. Shri N.S.Hooda   - Deputy Secretary  
5. Shri  Sreekanth  S   - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
 
^  Shri Debabrata Biswas, who was a member of this Committee has been nominated to 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers w.e.f. 3.5.2007 Vide LS Bulletin Part-II, Para No.3596, 
dated 7.5.2007. 
(iii)

INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their be half, present this Thirty-First Report on 
‘The Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animals Bill, 
2005’ pertaining to the Minist ry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries). 
 
2. One of the functions of the Standing Committee on Agriculture as laid down in 
Rule 331 E (1) (b) of ‘The Rules of Procedure a nd Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha’ is 
to examine such Bills pertaining to the conc erned Ministries/Departments as are referred 
to the Committee by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha or the Speaker, as the case may be, and 
make Report thereon.   In pursuance of this Rule, Honourable Speaker referred ‘The 
Prevention And Control Of Infectious And Co ntagious Diseases In Animals Bill, 2005’ 
to the Committee on 9th January, 2006 for examination and Report.    
 
3. The Committee devoted three sittings viz. on 3 rd May, 2006, 18 th October, 2006 
and 15th May, 2007 for detailed examination of the Bill.    On 3 rd May and 18 th October, 
2006, the Committee took evidence of the represen tatives of the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).  The Committee considered 
and adopted the report at their sitting held on 15 th May, 2007.  The Committee express 
their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry for making available the material and 
other information desired by the Committee in connection with the examination of the 
Bill. 
 
 
 
         
            
 
 
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
15 May, 2007                                            Chairman, 
25 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on Agriculture 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 1
REPORT 
PART I 
AN OVERVIEW 
 
1. India is the highest producer of milk and is also having the 
largest number of livestock population.   In spite of India’s position as 
the world’s highest producer of milk , productivity per animal is very 
low. One of the major factors re sponsible for low productivity is 
susceptibility of animals to various di seases and inadequate availability 
of feed and fodder. 
 
2. Increased trade in livestock a nd its products globally have also 
added to the risks of introduction of new and exotic diseases to our 
country.  Prevention of  loss due to various diseases require proper 
health care system, which can deal with the problems arising out of 
deficiencies of minerals, vitamins , etc. and infec tious diseases – 
bacterial, viral and parasitic.  To  reduce morbidity and mortality 
amongst livestock, government is making efforts to provide better 
health care through polyc linics, veterinary hosp itals, dispensaries and 
first-aid centers including mobile veterinary dispensaries which are 
supported by diagnostic laboratories for reliable diagnosis of diseases. 
 
3. As infectious and contagious diseases are not restricted to 
specific State borders and can spread across the country, a 
Parliamentary legislation applicable  to the length and breadth of the 
country alone can meet the needs of the situation.  Some of these 
diseases have serious implications fo r public health also being zoonotic 
in nature.  The movement and transportation of animals from one part of 
the country to another, having become faster and more commonly in 
vogue, the spread of contagious diseases has also become easier. 
 
 
4. India is a member of the O ffice International Des Epizooties 
(OIE), Paris.  It is the only in ter-governmental world organisation, 
whose aim is international coordinatio n in the matters of animal health 
and animal welfare.  It was create d by the International Agreement in 
1924.  In order for India to impor t/export animals and animal products 
(including milk, eggs, meat and othe r products/by-products) recognition 
by the OIE as regards freedom from particular disease/diseases in the 
country is necessary.  This recogn ition is accorded by the OIE to the 
member countries, subject to the fulfilment of certain requirements, as 

 2
prescribed in the Intern ational Animal Health Code of OIE now called 
as Terrestrial Animal health Code.    OIE has classified animal diseases 
according to their spre adability and adverse effects on livestock 
economy.   
 
5. The aim of the Terrestrial Animal  Health Code is  to assure the 
sanitary safety of international tr ade in terrestrial animals and their 
products.  This is achieved through the detailing of health measures to 
be used by the veterinary authorities of importing and exporting 
countries to avoid the transfer of  agents pathogenic for animals or 
humans, while avoiding unjustified sanitary barriers. 
 
6. OIE requires member countries to report incidence of specified 
Infectious and Contagious Animal Di seases within a specified period of 
time.  The responsibility of sendin g correct information about such 
diseases vests with the veterina ry administration of the Central 
Government. 
 
7. Economic loss arising from contagio us diseases such as Foot and 
Mouth Disease, Ranikhet disease, Haemorrhagic Septicaemia and Black 
Quarter are enormous.  Some of the animal diseases such as 
Tuberculosis, Brucellosis, Avian Flu and Rabies ar e zoonotic in nature, 
i.e., these are communicable to hum an beings and, therefore, the 
effectiveness of the legal and other m easures to control animal diseases 
also has, in many cases, a human he alth angle.  While creation of 
awareness about the diseases and p opularization of measures such as 
vaccination, to some extent, contribute to control the diseases, however, 
no appreciable results will be seen unless a law relating to prevention 
and control of animal diseases is in place, so as to enforce notification 
of infectious diseases and to impl ement control measures in the entire 
country.  The absence of  such a law is also ha mpering the efforts to 
augment export of livestock products including milk and milk products 
as the concerned international organizations and many importing 
countries regard it as an indication of  the ineffectiveness of the ongoing 
efforts to make the coun try or at least zones within it, free from certain 
infectious diseases.  E fforts to ensure better livestock hea lth in the 
country include prevention of ingre ss of diseases from outside the 
country and prescribing and ensuring standards for veterinary drugs, 
vaccines and formulations.   
 
8. The Department of Animal Husb andry, Dairying and Fisheries in 
the Ministry of Agriculture has fo rmulated the proposal to enact a 

 3
Central legislation for Prevention of  the Infectious and Contagious 
Animal Diseases under Article 253 of the Constitution to bring in a 
uniform law throughout the country to take care of  outbreak of diseases 
in animals and for the effective cont rol and containment of infectious 
and contagious diseases, including zoonotic diseases, and to prevent the 
spread thereof. 
 
9. The Prevention and Control of  Infectious and Contagious 
Diseases in Animals Bill, 2005 wa s introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 
December 21, 2005.  Th e Bill was referred to the Standing Committee 
by Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 09 January, 2006 for examination 
and Report. 
 
10. The Bill has been brought to (a ) prevent, control and eradicate 
infectious diseases affecting animal s (b) prevent the spread of such 
diseases from one State to another, and (c) fulfill requirements of the 
International Animal Health Code. 
 
11. The Bill seeks to repeal (i) Gl anders and Farcy Act, 1899, (ii) 
The Dourine Act, 1910 and (iii) any other law of any State inconsistent 
with the provisions of the Bill. 
The Bill, inter-alia, seeks to provide for:  
(i) monitoring, effective control and containment of infectious 
and contagious diseases which normally afflict animals so as 
to prevent the spread  of the diseases and in due course 
eradicate them from the nation as a whole; 
(ii) spelling out the diseases and declare certain areas as 
“controlled area” vis-à-vis any particular disease; 
(iii) getting freedom from a specif ic disease in respect of the 
specified areas for facilitating the international trade of 
livestock and livestock products; 
(iv) effective control, containmen t and eradication of infectious 
diseases from the country, by declaring the controlled areas; 
(v) imposing of restrictions to re gulate the movement of diseased 
animals;  
(vi) allowing free movement of vaccinated and marked animals 
within the specified area; 
(vii) ensuring protection from disease and eliminating the 
possibility of spreading of infection to healthy animals; 
(viii) facilitating the implementation of the regulatory measures by 
providing check posts and quarantine stations. 

 4
(ix) Adoption of improved anim al husbandry practices by the 
livestock owners coupled w ith timely immunizations and 
treatment of affected animals along with effective prevention 
of spread of disease pathogens. 
 
12. With reference to areas declar ed as ‘controlled areas’, several 
restrictions are proposed to be imposed to regulate the movement of 
diseased animals, while vaccinate d and marked animals would be 
allowed free movement within the ar ea.  The regulatory measures that 
are incorporated in the Bill are in tended to ensure protection from 
disease and to eliminate the possib ility of spreading of infection to 
healthy animals.  The concept of check posts and quarantine stations 
provided in the Bill would facilitate the im plementation of the 
regulatory measures. 
 
13. A chapter in the Bill is also devoted to the declaration of the 
‘infected areas’ by notice duly published.  This power is to be exercised 
by the Veterinary Officer having jurisdiction in that area, since 
immediate action would be  required to be initiate d.  Consequent upon 
such declaration, restrictions relating to ‘controlled area’ would, mutatis 
mutandis apply to ‘infected area’ as well.  Once the area is free from 
infection, it can be declared as such  and restrictions shall also stand 
relaxed. 
 
14. It would be made obligatory on the part of the owner of the 
livestock which is suffering from or is suspected to be suffering from 
any disease to report the matter to  the nearest Village Officer or 
wherever possible to the Veterinarian.  Similarly, if any person comes to 
know or has reasons to believe that an animal is suffering from a 
scheduled disease, he would be ob liged to report the matter to the 
Village Officer or the Veterinary Officer. 
 
15. Entry and exit of animals duly immunized will not be hampered.  
The appointment of officers and auth orities, the obligation to issue the 
vaccination certificate, th e mandatory provisions to clean and disinfect 
vessels or vehicles carrying animals,  the power of entry and inspection 
for the concerned authorities, etc., are all included and they are intended 
to facilitate the proper en forcement of the legisla tion.  Euthanisation of 
infected animals, disposal of ca rcass, post mortem examination of 
animals, etc. has also be en provided for to ensure  that the infectious or 
contagious diseases do not spread. 
 

 5
16. The detailed penal provisions ha ve been included to ensure the 
effective and proper enforcement of va rious provisions contained in the 
Bill.  A provision has also been made  to safeguard against the escape of 
causative agent during the process of production or handling of 
vaccines.  The Bill also contains  provisions for tackling zoonotic 
diseases, which are communicable to human beings from livestock and 
vice versa. 
 
17. The Committee have gone through the Bill threadbare and 
clause-wise comments have been gi ven in Part II of this Report.  
The clauses, which have not been  covered/commented upon in the 
Report, are found to be in order,  however, these clauses may be 
amended to the extent of their in consistency with the amendments 
suggested by the Committee.   S o m e  o f  t h e  i m p o r t a n t  
recommendations of the Committee which have far reaching effects 
on the implementation of this  Bill have been summarized 
hereunder. 
 
18. The Committee strongly recommend that Government 
should set up a Central Veterinary Research Institute on the line of 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research at their earliest so that the 
research work in all-round development of animal health and also 
zoonotic diseases can be coordinated and expedited. 
 
19. The Committee note that some of the diseases, originate from 
animals and spread to human beings as communicable diseases.  As 
was done in the recent outbreak of Avian Influenza, there should be 
a close coordination and cooperation between the medical and 
veterinary people for setting up an investigation system for 
communicable and zoonotic diseas es, which is very important for 
the national security.  There are more than 100 diseases, which are 
communicable from animal to man and some of these are very 

 6
dangerous.  The Govern ment should incorporate a suitable clause 
in the Bill to help co ntrol these communicab le diseases.  There 
should be a network of disease inve stigation system in the country.  
For such a vast country, containmen t labs at regional levels should 
be set up on the line of the High Security Animal Diseases 
Laboratory at Bhopal which is one of the 10 such laboratories, 
ranking sixth in the world.  The Committee are perturbed to know 
that there is no such lab for dete cting/diagnosing human diseases 
which may be caused by any chemical  or biological invasions in our 
country.  When ‘SARS’ entered the country, there wa s no such lab 
to diagnose and treat the human bein gs suffering from the disease.  
Fortunately, it disappeared soon and we were safe.  The 
Government have to be on alert and see what are the new diseases 
coming to our country through impo rt of animals.  When diseases 
enter, how quickly we can diagnose, detect and prevent their entry 
in our country, is the basic need to provide national security against 
the import of infectious diseases.  There are 42 animal diseases 
which are not present in our country.  The Animal Diseases Lab. at 
Bhopal  is doing work on 8 to 10 such diseases, 5 of these are foreign 
e.g. African Swine Fever, Porc ine Respiratory & Reproductive 
Syndrome, Arthritis & Encephalitis, Augeszky’s disease and Rabbit 
Hemorrhagic Disease. 
 
20. In KVKs, there should be awareness camps for farmers who 
own and rear cattle and buffaloes for disseminating information 
about the common diseases of the animals. The Committee have 
noted that 16 diseases entered I ndia through import of superior 
germplasms.  Therefore, they recommend that a Veterinarian 
should form part of KVKs. 
 

 7
21. Local language and vernacul ar press should be used to 
inform the local people about th e ‘infected’ and/or ‘controlled 
area’.  The Panchayat of the area should be made responsible for 
bringing awareness among the people of its area, which may be 
done by chowkidar or through a drum-beater making 
announcement of the same by going through the length and breadth 
of the affected village/area. 
 
22. The Committee recommend that farmers should also be 
made aware of the option of in suring their animals against life 
threatening diseases.  Village offi cers/Panchayats should be made 
responsible for the animal insurance awareness programme. 
 
23. In our country, we don’t have enough number of Veterinary 
hospitals or dispensari es and those in oper ation, are not fully 
equipped to deal with emergency situations and complications that 
may arise.  The owners, mostly una ware of the causes of diseases, 
try to cure their animals with their local methods.  The Government 
should conduct a survey of the availability of such veterinary 
hospitals/dispensaries and plan in such a way that there should be a 
veterinary dispensary in every village, whose economy is dependent 
on agriculture and milch animals or poultry etc.  Till such time the 
permanent dispensaries are set up, mobile dispensaries should be 
put in use, so that the diseased animals can be treated in their place, 
instead of taking them to a di stant hospital/dispensaries for 
treatment.  Sufficient budgetary pr ovisions should be made to set 
up such mobile and permanent disp ensaries, as the owners cannot 
afford to take their diseased animals by a motor-vehicle to a 
distantly placed hospital/dispensaries.  Moreover, in remote parts of 

 8
our countryside, the motor vehicles are not even available to carry 
such animals. 
 
24. The owner of the animal will fi rst identify that the animal is 
not well and then he/she will inform  the veterinarian and after that 
it is the duty of Veterinarian to identify the disease from which the 
animal is suffering.  Government officers can’t be exonerated for 
laxity in their duty/responsibility of taking care of diseased animal 
in any village.  Once he is informed of the illne ss of an animal, it is 
his duty to arrange for its cure. Government should keep in mind 
that officers should not be given wi de powers that they punish and 
impose penalty on the already suffering farmers. 
 
25. Veterinary infrastructure is very poor in our country.  We 
are not able to provide a veterinary surgeon per 5000 animals, 
which is said to be the minimum requirement.  There is a need for 
mobile polyclinics.   New resea rch in medicines and vaccines are 
needed along with medicinal requir ements and treatment of animal 
and zoonotic diseases.  
 
26. Committee are of the view that the Union Government 
should help in setting up of Vet erinary Universities’ in every State 
and the test and research labs should be set up within the reach of 
poor farmers to diagnose the diseas e relating to poultry or animals 
immediately.  Government of Indi a should also provide funds to 
every State for setting up of test labs and one such test lab should be 
set up for 10-15 villages depending on the population of animals in 
that area and the sta ff for these labs could be trained at the 
Veterinary Universities.   
 

 9
27. Committee have been informed that the use of oxytocyn 
injection is prohibited by the G overnment, but the problem is how 
to prevent its use, how to execut e the existing la w and for that, 
sufficient number of Village Offic ers/Veterinary officers need be 
appointed to execute the law an d adequate funds should be 
provided for the same. There is no research labo ratory in the 
country to deal with the effects of biological weapons. If the enemy 
releases some organism, there is no  research facility to deal with 
such situation. We can design a laboratory; we have the competency 
but it needs to be utilized.  
 
28. The Committee note that no qualifications has been 
prescribed for the Village Officer to  be appointed fo r the purposes 
of this Bill.  They therefore, recommend that the minimum 
qualification for appointment of a Village Officer should be given 
either in the Act itself or in the rules to be framed later on, so that it 
can uniformly be applied all over India to avoid arbitrary 
appointments by the State Government Authorities. 
 
29. The Committee recommend that vaccination certificates 
should be issued in the vernacular language of the State so that the 
local people can easily understand the contents of the certificate. 
 
30. The Veterinary Officer, a fter examining the animal may 
decide for euthanasia.  The Committee recommend that he should 
also evaluate the animal’s market price keeping in view its age, and 
usefulness to the owner and awar d compensation through state 
exchequer, which may be paid to hi m within 30 days of euthanasia 
of the animal.  The Committee al so recommend th at since word 
Euthanasia is generally used for mercy killing with the consent of a 

 10
person, and in case of animal, th e consent of the animal cannot be 
obtained in a legally acceptable ma nner, so the advisability of using 
the word euthanasia, in this Bill, needs to be re-examined. 
 
31. The Committee are of the opinion that in rural areas, where 
almost all our agrarian activities depend on the domestic animals, 
the Department of Animal Husban dry, Dairying and Fisheries of 
Ministry of Agriculture, should cre ate a separate cell or division at 
the national level to specially deal with animal’s health to 
implement the provisions of the Bill more effectively. 
 
32. The Committee are of the strong opinion that the members of 
the governing body working as fu ll time directors/managers or in 
any other capacity, of any company are in knowledge of and 
responsible for all actions of the company, and hence they should 
also be held responsible indivi dually and collectively for the 
offences committed by the compan y.  Therefore, they recommend 
that proviso to Clause 34 (1) should be deleted. 
 
33. The Schedule of di seases attached to the Bill under Sections 
2(o) and 38 may be replaced by species-wise diseases schedule. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 11
PART – II 
CLAUSE-WISE ANALYSIS 
Clause 2 
1. Clause 2 deals with ‘Definitions’ 
Clause 2 (r) has been defined as under: 
 
“Village Officer”, in relation to a village, means any person who 
is authorised or designated as such by the State Government. 
 
2. The Committee note that no qualification has been 
prescribed for the Village Officer to  be appointed fo r the purposes 
of this Bill.  They therefore, recommend that the minimum 
qualification for appoin tment to the post of Village Officer should 
be given either in the Act itself or in the rules to be framed later on, 
so that it can uniformly be applie d all over India to avoid arbitrary 
appointments by the State Government Authorities. 
Clause 4 
3. This clause makes Reporting of Scheduled diseases obligatory.  
The Committee note that under Clause  4, the concerned person, owner, 
non-governmental organization, public bodies or  the Village Panchayat 
in charge of an animal, which he or it has reason to believe to be 
infective of a scheduled disease, shall compulsorily report the fact to the 
Village Officer, and, wherever possibl e, also report the same in writing 
to the nearest available veterinari an and the person reporting shall be 
given an acknowledgement thereof in writing.   
 
4. The Committee feel that in remote rural areas, the person in 
charge of a diseased animal ma y not have enough time at his 
disposal to go to a veterinarian, wh ose office may be situated at a 
distant place.  Moreover, the person may not be literate enough to 

 12
report the same in writing.  So it  is recommended that he may also 
be allowed to report orally to th e Village Officer or the Village 
Panchayat, who may in turn report the same to the veterinarian, so 
that all necessary measures to pr event the outbreak or spread of 
any schedule disease can be resorted to.   
5. The Committee also feel that the onus of reporting an 
infected animal to the Village Offi cer, should not be  solely on the 
owner of the animal.  The Village Officer/Veterinarian should be 
equally responsible for detection of  the infected animals under his 
area of jurisdiction.  The Commi ttee therefore recommend that the 
owner and the Government authorit ies concerned should be held 
equally responsible inso far as detection/reporting of the disease is 
concerned.  The Village Officer should periodically visit (say once a 
week) the area under his charge for detecting and reporting any 
outbreak of the disease. 
Clause 2 (m), 6 & 20 
6. Clause 2 (m) reads as under: 
 “Publication” includes propaga tion of information through the 
media or newspaper or any other mass media; 
Clause 6 deals with Notification of controlled areas and free areas, and 
reads as under: 
 
‘6(1) The State Government may, with the object of preventing, 
controlling or eradicating any scheduled disease, by 
notification, declare any area to be a controlled area in respect 
of any scheduled disease affec ting any species of animal and 

 13
any other species that may be  susceptible to the disease 
specified in the said notification. 
(2) The State Government shall al so cause the substance of the 
notification issued under sub-sec tion (1) to be published in a 
local newspaper in the vernacular language.’  
 
7. Clause 20 deals with ‘Declarati on of infected areas’ and reads as 
under: 
 
 ‘If the Veterinary Officer, upon receipt of a report from a 
Veterinarian or otherwise, is satisfied that, in any place or premises 
falling within his jurisdiction, an an imal has been infected with any 
scheduled disease, or that an animal, which he has reason to believe, has 
been so infected, is kept, may, by no tification and publication in at least 
one local newspaper in the vernacular language, declare such area as he 
may deem fit (including the place or  premises aforesaid) to be an 
infected area.’ 
 
8. The Committee note that as per Clause 2 (m) ‘publication’ 
includes propagation of inform ation through the media or 
newspaper or any other mass medi a.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that in far flung areas to declare any place as infected area, 
this kind of publication of notifi cation needs to be expanded to 
include other effective means of  local communic ation including 
chowkidar declaration in loud voi ce and by beating drums in every 
nook and corner of the v illage as this practice is prevalent in rural 
inhabitations or through Gram Panchayat.   
Clause 9 
9. Clause 9 deals with ‘contents of  vaccination certificate’ and reads 
as under: 

 14
‘Every vaccination certificate issu ed under this Act shall be in 
such form and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government’. 
10. The Committee recommend that  such vaccination certificates 
should be issued in the vernacular language of the State so that the 
local people can easily understand the contents of the certificate. 
Clause 19 
11. Clause 19 which deals with powers of entry and inspection, reads 
as under: 
 
 ‘Any Veterinary Officer or ot her Competent Officer may enter 
upon and inspect any land or building or place, vessel or vehicle, for the 
purpose of ensuring compliance of the provisions of this Act or the rules 
or orders made thereunder, by the persons responsible for such 
compliance’. 
 
12. The Committee recommend that this Clause may be read as 
19 (1) and a new clause ‘19 (2)’ may be added as follows: 
 Any Veterinary Officer or  other Competent Officer 
appointed under this Act, vexatiously and unnecessarily enters or 
searches a place, or detains any animal on the pretence that it is 
diseased, shall be punishable with  imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one month, or wi th fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both.  
Clause 23 & 24 
13. Clause 23 deals with ‘segregatio n, examination and treatment of 
infected animals’  
 
Clause 23 (3) reads as under: 

 15
 ‘On receipt of a report from the Veterinarian, the Veterinary 
Officer shall, as soon as possible, examine that animal, as well as any 
other animal, which could have come in contact with it, and for that 
purpose, submit the animal to such test and medical examination as may 
be required under the circumstances’. 
 
14. Clause 24 (1) (2) deal with ‘drawing samples from diseased 
animals’ and reads as under:  
 
‘24 (1) Where the Veterinary O fficer considers it necessary for 
the purpose of ascertaining whether the animal which is 
suspected to have been in fected with any scheduled 
disease or susceptible to su ch infection, is actually 
infected, or for the purpose of ascertaining the nature of 
the scheduled disease with which an animal is infected, he 
may draw such samples, as may be required, from the 
animal for the purpose of carry ing out such investigations 
as he may deem necessary under the circumstances. 
 
a. The Veterinary Officer or any other Competent Officer 
shall draw samples from any animal for the purposes of 
ascertaining whether the animal has been vaccinated 
against any disease, or whet her the vaccination of the 
animal has been effective in conferring it immunity and 
have the sampled examined, in such manner as he may 
deem necessary.’ 
 
15. The Committee note that under Clause 23 (3) and Clause 24 
(1) and (2), the infected animal sh o u l d  b e  p u t  t o  s u c h  t e s t  a n d  
medical examination as may be required and samples may be taken 
for investigation of the causes of that disease or to ascertain about 
the vaccination of any animal agai nst any disease by the Veterinary 
Officer.  Since the diagnostic fa cilities for animal disease are 
deficient in our country, the Committee recommend that fully 
equipped veterinary diagnostic laboratory with adequate staff 
should be set up in every dist rict, which may be headed by 

 16
veterinary specialists on the lines of pathological labs for human 
beings and one veterinary aid cen tre and one mobile dispensary 
should be set up in each of the bl ocks in all the States and Union 
Territories for quick and reliable diagnosis of animal diseases and 
to keep them under control. 
Clause 25 
16. Clause 25 gives power to the Veterinary Officer to resort to 
euthanasia for infected animals.  It reads as under: 
 
 ‘If the Veterinary Officer deem s it necessary that an animal, 
which is infected with a scheduled disease, euthanasia has to be resorted 
to, for preventing the spread of the di sease to other animals in the area, 
he may, notwithstanding anything c ontained in any other law for the 
time being in force, by an  order in writing, direct euthanasia of the 
animal and the carcass disposed off immediately to his satisfaction’. 
 
17. The Committee feel that there are certain animals which are 
prohibited to be killed under certain Central/State Acts and 
therefore, a proviso needs to be adde d to this clause clearly stating 
as to which of the animals cannot be killed by euthanasia. 
18. The Committee have noted that in case of  castrating a horse 
or destroying a mare by a veteri nary practitioner, there was a 
compensation clause in ‘The Do urine Act, 1910’ which is being 
repealed by the present Bill.  Howe ver, no compensation clause has 
been added to this Bill, in case the animal’s death is caused by 
euthanasia.  They, therefore, recommend that the owner of the 
animal should be adequately co mpensated for the animal whose 

 17
death has been caused by euthanas ia, as the owner may have been 
earning his livelihood through that animal only and in case of its 
death, he may not be in a position  to buy a new animal due to his 
impoverishment or the value of the animal being high and hence 
beyond his means.   
19. The Committee also recommend that the present Clause may 
be read as 25 (1) and a new Clause 25 (2) may be added as under: 
‘The Veterinary Officer, after examining the animal, decides for 
euthanasia, should evaluate the animal’s market price keeping in 
view its age and usefulness to the owner and award compensation 
through state exchequer, which may be paid to him within 30 days 
of euthanasia of the animal’. 
Clause 28 & 29 
20. Clause 28 deals with ‘Seizure and removal of certain animals’ 
and reads as under: 
 
‘Where any animal which is infected or suspected to have been 
infected is found without any person claiming to be its owner, or where 
a valid order or direction given in relation to any such animal, is not 
promptly complied with by the owner or other person in control of the 
animal, it shall be open to the Veterinary Officer or any other 
Competent Officer, to se ize the animal and rem ove it to a place of 
isolation or segregation, as he may deem proper’. 
 
21. Clause 29 deals with ‘Enforce ment of orders and recovery of 
expenses’ and reads as under: 
 
29 (1)      Where by any rule, notif ication, notice, requisition, order or 
direction made under this Act, a ny person is required to take any 
measure or to do anything  

 18
(a) in respect of any animal, carcass  of any animal or other thing in 
his custody or charge, the same shall be promptly complied with 
by that person; 
(b) in case of any stray or ownerles s animal, carcass of such animal 
or parts thereof, the same shall be promptly complied with by the 
municipality or Panchayat, as the case may be, at its cost. 
 
(2) If the measures as referred to in sub-section (1) are not taken 
within such time as may be allo wed for the purpose , the authority 
issuing the notice, requisition, or der or direction, may cause the 
measures to be taken at the cost of the person or  municipality or 
Panchayat, as the case may be, who or which was required to take the 
measures. 
 
(3) The costs of any measures taken under sub-section (2), shall be 
recoverable from the person or the municipality or Panchayat, as the 
case may be, concerned in the manner provided by the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, for the recovery of  fines imposed by a Court, as if 
such costs were a fine imposed by a Court. 
 
22. The Committee have been info rmed that Veterinary Officer 
can resort to action concerning infected animals under Clause 25 or 
issue direction to the Municipality/ Panchayat in case of stray or 
ownerless animals at its cost und er the provisions of Clause 29 (1) 
(b) read with 29 (3).  However, the field experience shows that most 
of the Village Panchayats or sma ll municipalities do not have the 
facilities to look after the stray animals as directed under Clause 28. 
The Panchayats need extra budget to provide suitable 
accommodation for the diseased/infected stray animals which may 
be seized for removing it  to a place of isolatio n or segregation from 
other animals.  For this purpose the financial memorandum may 
have to be amended to accommodate this additional expenditure for 

 19
keeping the diseased/infected stray animals in a segregated/isolated 
place.  All the Panchayats or Mu nicipalities may be empowered to 
draw a budgeted amount from the State exchequer. 
Clause 30 
23. Clause 30 deals with ‘Village Offi cers, etc; to assist’ and reads as 
under: 
  
‘All Municipal, Panchayat or Villag e Officer and all officers of the 
rural and dairy development, reve nue, agriculture, animal husbandry 
and veterinary departments of the State Government, shall be bound- 
 
(a) to give immediate informati on to the Veterinary Officer and 
to the Veterinarian having juri sdiction in the area regarding 
the prevalence of a scheduled disease amongst any animal or 
species of animals, in the area; 
 
(b) to take all necessary measur es to prevent the outbreak or 
spread of any Scheduled disease; and 
 
(c) to assist the Veterinary Offi cer and the Veteri narian in the 
discharge of their duties or in the exercise of their powers 
under this Act.’ 
 
24. The Committee note that und er this Clause all Municipal, 
Panchayat or Village Officers of di fferent departments of the State 
Government will assist the author ities in providing information 
about the prevalence of schedule d disease amongst any animal or 
species of animals, in a particular  area.  The Comm ittee are of the 
opinion that in rural ar eas, where almost all ou r agrarian activities 
depend on the domestic animal s, the Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries of Ministry of Agriculture, 
should create a separate cell or di vision at the national level to 

 20
specially deal with animal’s heal th instead of depending on the 
assistance of the abovementioned  authorities to implement the 
provisions of the Bill more effectively.  
Clause 31 
25. Clause 31 deals with  ‘penalty for issuing vaccination certificate 
without authority or administering defective vaccine’.  It reads as under: 
 
 ‘If any person issues a vaccination certificate – 
(a) without authority or compet ence in that behalf, or  
(b) after administering the vaccine which is known to be 
defective in any manner, 
he shall be guilty of an offence punishable with a fine of two thousand 
five hundred rupees or in case  of non-payment of fine with 
imprisonment which may extend to on e month, and in the case of any 
subsequent offence, with fine of ten thousand rupees or with 
imprisonment which may extend to three months’. 
 
26. The Committee are of the opin ion that a fine of rupees two 
thousand five hundred for issuan ce of a vaccination certificate 
without authority or competence or with the knowledge of 
defectiveness of the vaccine is too less as the penalties for such an 
offence committed by a government official/veterinarian should be 
severe and harsher than what’s laid down at present so that it could 
serve as an effective deterrent.  Hence, the Committee recommend 
that the fine should be raised to rupees five thousand and the words 
‘two thousand five hundred rupees’ should be replaced with ‘five 
thousand rupees’ and the remaining clause may read as it is. 

 21
Clause 32 
27. Clause 32 deals with ‘pen alties’.  It reads as under: 
 ‘Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Act or 
obstructs the Competent Officer in performing his duties shall be guilty 
of an offence punishable with fine  which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, and in case of failure to pay the penalty with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one month; and in the case of any subsequent 
offence (whether under the same provision or any other provision of this 
Act except in case of sections 31 an d 33) with a fine of one thousand 
rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
months in case of non-payment of the penalty.’ 
  
28. The Committee note that th e offence committed under this 
Act shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees five 
hundred and in case of failu re to pay the penalty with 
imprisonment for a term which ma y extend to one month, and for 
subsequent offences, the fine will increase to rupees one thousand or 
with imprisonment which may extend to two months, in case of non-
payment of penalty.  It means th at rupees five hundred has been 
equated with a term of one mont h imprisonment which does not 
seem to be commensurate with the fine.  The Committee feel that 
the fine and imprisonment should act as a deterrent for obstructing 
a competent officer in performing  his official duties.  They, 
therefore, recommend that the fine for first offence should be raised 
to one thousand rupees and for subsequent offence the fine should 
be raised to two thousand rupees  and the clause may be amended 
accordingly. 

 22
Clause 33 
29. Clause 33 deals with ‘penalty for placing infected animals or 
carcass in river etc.’ It reads as under: 
 
‘Whoever places or causes or pe rmits to be placed in any river, 
lake, canal or any other water body , the carcass or any part of the 
carcass of any animal which at the time of its death was known to be 
infected, shall be guilty of  an offence, and, on conviction, be punished 
in the case of a first offence with fine of one thousand rupees or with 
imprisonment of one month in case of  non-payment of fine and in the 
case of subsequent conviction with a fine of two thousand rupees or 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with 
both.’ 
 
30. The Committee feel that pl acing of infected animals or 
carcass in the river is a serious offence which leads to pollution and 
contamination of the river. The Committee are of the opinion that 
the penalty for first offence should be raised to rupees two thousand 
and for subsequent offences, the fine should be raised to rupees five 
thousand instead of rupees two thousand.   The Clause may be 
amended accordingly. 
Clause 34 
31. Clause 34 deals with ‘offences by companies’ and reads as 
under: 
 
‘34(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at th e time the offence was committed was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company, as well as th e company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be lia ble to be proceeded and punished 
accordingly: 
 
     Provided that nothing containe d in this sub-section shall render 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves 

 23
that the offence was committed withou t his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been  committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect  on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or othe r officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secretary or other o fficer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly. 
 
Explanation – For the purposes of this section –  
(a) “company” means any body  corporate and includes a 
co-operative society registered or deemed to be 
registered under any law for the time being in force, a 
firm or other association of individuals; and  
 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm’ 
 
32. The Committee note that prov iso to Clause 34 (1) excludes 
the person(s) in charge of and or  responsible to the company for 
conduct of its business for being p unished for offences under this 
Act, if they could prove that the offence was committed without 
his/their knowledge.  The Committee are of the strong  opinion that 
the members of the governing body working as full time 
directors/managers or in any other capacity of any company, are in 
the knowledge of and responsibl e for the functioning of the 
company and hence they should  also be held responsible 
individually and collectively fo r the offences committed by the 
company.  Therefore, they recommend that proviso to Clause 34 (1) 
should be deleted. 

 24
Clause 35 
33. Clause 35 deals with ‘Preve ntion of escape of causative 
organism’.  It reads as under: 
 
‘35(1) In every institution, labor atory or clinic, engaged in the 
manufacture, testing or research, related to vaccines, sera, diagnostics or 
chemotherapeutic drugs and aimed at the prevention or treatment of any 
scheduled disease, adequate precautionary measures shall be taken –  
 
(a) to ensure that the causative organism of any scheduled 
disease does not escape or otherwise get released; 
(b) to guard against any such escape or release; and  
(c) to warn and to protect everyone concerned in the event of any 
escape. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contai ned in any other law for the time 
being in force, every animal – 
(a)      used for the manufacture, testing or research as referred to             
sub-section (1), or  
(b)      which is likely to carry or transmit any scheduled disease, 
shall be promptly administered euthanasia and disposed of by the person 
in charge of or having control of the institution, laboratory or clinic, as 
the case may be, referred to in that sub-section. 
 
(3) Every person who is in charge  of or having control of an 
institution, laboratory or clinic referred to in sub-section (1) comply 
with the provisions of sub-section (1 ) and sub-section (2); and in the 
event of non-compliance he shall be  guilty of an offence punishable 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or imprisonment for 
a term which extend to six months or with both.’ 
  
34. The Committee are of the op inion that fine imposed under 
Clause 35 (3) is not co mmensurate with the period of imprisonment 
provided for escape of causativ e organism.  They, therefore, 
recommend that in the event of non-compliance of  precautionary 
measures, the fine should be a deterrent one and it should be 
minimum of rupees five thousa nd which may extend to rupees 

 25
twenty thousand and the term of imprisonment should be a 
minimum of one month which may extend to six months. 
The Schedule 
35. The Schedule of disease atta ched to the Bill under Sections 
2(0) and 38 should be replaced by species-wise diseases schedule. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;           PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
15 May, 2007                                  Chairman, 
25 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Agriculture 

 26
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 
THE 3RD  MAY, 2006 AT 1230 HRS. IN  ROOM, ‘D’, GROUND 
FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1230 hrs. to 1300 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
4. Shri Khagen Das 
5. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
7. Dr.M.S.Gill 
8. Shri  Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1.        Shri A.K.Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
2.        Shri Hardev Singh  -  Deputy Secretary 
3.        Shri N.S.Hooda   -  Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
   
1.    Shri P.M.A. Hakeem Secretary (ADF) 
2.    Shri S. K. Bandyopadhyay AHC 
3.    Smt. Neerja Rajkumar JS(C&DD) 
4.    Smt. Upma Chawdhry (JS(A&LH) 
5.    Dr. A.B. Negi Joint Commissioner (LH) 
6.    Shri M.K. Saha Deputy Commissioner(B) 

 27
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture 
welcomed the Members and representatives of the Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisher ies, Ministry of Agriculture to the sitting of 
the Committee and read out the contents of Direction 55 (1) of directions by 
the Speaker.  Thereafter, the Chairman  requested the Secretary to introduce 
his colleagues to the Committee.  After the introductions the Secretary gave a 
brief of the varieties, clauses and stat ements of objects and reasons of ‘The 
Prevention and Control of th e Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animal 
Bill, 2005.’  He desired that since this Bill is very important in view of the 
prevalent diseased amongs t the animals in India this Bill should be 
expeditiously passed.  
2. The Committee thereafter decided to take evidence of some experts on 
a later date. 
3. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the meeting has been kept.    
The witnesses then withdrew. 
   The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

 28
Appendix-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 
THE 18 OCTOBER, 2006 AT 1100 HRS. IN COMMITTEE 
ROOM ‘B’, GROUND FLOOR ,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1231 hrs 
                                                                                   
PRESENT 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ranen Barman 
3. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
4. Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar 
5. Shri Prabodh Panda 
6. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
7. Shri Baleshwar Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Harish Rawat 
9. Dr.M.S.Gill 
10. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
11. Shri Vikram Verma 
12. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed  
13. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
14. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
15. Shri  M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1.       Shri Hardev Singh  -  Deputy Secretary 
2       Shri N.S.Hooda   -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

 29
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
1. Ms. Charusheela Sohoni  - Secretary (DADF) 
2. Dr. S.K.  Bandyopadhyay - Animal Husbandry Commissioner 
3. Smt. Upma Chawdhry  - J.S. (Livestock Health)  
4. Dr. A.B.  Negi   - Joint Commissioner (Livestock Health) 
5. Dr. M.K.  Saha   - Deputy Commissioner (Livestock Health)  
6. Dr. M.P.  Yadav  - Vice Chancellor, Meerut University 
7. Shri G.K.  Sharma  - NDDB 
8. Dr. H.K.  Pradhan  - Joint Director (HSADL), Bhopal 
9. Dr. Nem Singh   - Director, IVRI 
10. Dr. R.K.  Boyal   - General Manager, APEDA 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Departmen t of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries), and read out contents of Direction 55 (1) of the ‘Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
2.       After the introduction, the Committee took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).  The Secretary to the department 
explained various provisions of ‘The Prevention and Control of Infectious and 
Contagious Diseases in Animals Bill, 2005’ to the Committee viz. containing 
the diseased animal to specified State borders, transportation of animal from 
one part of the country to another, cr eating awareness about zoonotic diseases 
and obligations under the International Animal Health code etc.  The 

 30
department officials expressed the need of  legislation in orde r to put statutory 
responsibility on the owners, Villa ge Panchayats and Municipal 
Committees/Corporation and to improve  the situations of Veterinary 
dispensaries/ hospitals etc. 
3. The Members of the Committee rais ed some clarificatory queries, 
some of the points were answered by the Government representatives who 
assured the Committee to send written re plies to the queries which were not 
resolved during evidence. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceed ing of the sitting has been kept. 
 The witnesses then withdrew.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 31
 
Appendix-III 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 
15 MAY, 2007 AT 1500 HRS.  IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, 
GROUND FLOOR,  PARLIA MENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW 
DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1525 hrs 
                                                                                   
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ranen Barman 
3. Shri Anil Basu 
4. Shri Prabodh Panda 
5. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
6. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
7. Shri Baleshwar Yadav 
8. Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
10. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Addl. Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh  -  Director 
3. Shri N.S. Hooda  -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 32
At the outset, the Chairm an, Standing Committee on 
Agriculture welcomed the members and apprised them that the Draft 
Report on ‘The Prevention & Contro l of Infectious and Contagious 
Diseases in Animals Bill, 2005’ is ready for their consideration and 
adoption.  Then the Report was taken up for clause-by-clause 
consideration.  The Report was unanimously adopted with minor 
modifications.  The Committee then authorised the Chairman to 
finalise the Report and present to  the House on a date and time 
convenient to him. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 