STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty Seventh Report of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2007-2008)}
FORTY SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
42
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

FORTY SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Seventh Report
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2007-2008)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2008.
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2008.
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COA No.218
Price:  Rs.
© 2008 By Lok Sabha Secretariat
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok
Sabha  (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

<CONTENTS>
                   PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………………………. (iii)
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………… (v)
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have
   been accepted by the Government ……………    36
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view
   of the Government’s replies …………………..    57
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect
   of  which replies of the Government have
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….    58
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of
   which final replies of the Government are
   still awaited …………………………………….    71
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee
held on 16 December, 2008.        90
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Thirty Seventh
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2007-2008) (14th Lok Sabha)       92
(i)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMPOSITION OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2008-2009)
@ Shri Mohan Singh – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2.  Shri Ranen Barman
3.  Shri Anil Basu
4.  Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
5.  Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
6.  Shri Khagen Das
7.  Shri Dharmendra
8.  Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
10. Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire
11.  Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
12.  Shri Prabodh Panda
13.  Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil
14.  Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Nilangekar Patil
15.  Shri K.J.S.P.Reddy
16.  Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy
17.  Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh
18.  Shri M.P.Veerendra kumar
19.  Shri Baleshwar Yadav
*20.  Vacant
#21.  Vacant
RAJYA SABHA
22.  Shri Ishwar Singh
23.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
24.  Shri Vikram Verma
25.  Shri Vinay Katiyar
26.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
27.  Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
28.  Prof. M.S.Swaminathan
29.  Shri M.Rajasekara Murthy
$30.  Shri Kore Prabhakara%31.  Vacant
@ Shri Mohan Singh has been appointed Chairman of the Committee by Hon’ble Speaker, w.e.f. 5 December, 2008  vice Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
    elected to the Rajya Sabha, w.e.f. 14.11.2008.*   Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi ceased to be the Member of this Committee owing to disqualification under 10th Schedule by Hon’ble Speaker w.e.f. 10th
    September, 2008.           #
   Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah ceased to be the Member of the Committee owing to his Resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 6 November,
           2008.$   Shri Kore Prabhakara was nominated by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 1st September, 2008.%  Shri Harish Rawat ceased to be the Member of the Committee due to retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008.
(iii)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K.Sharma   -  Secretary
2. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary
3. Smt.Veena Sharma   -  Director
4.  Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sreekanth S.   -  Sr. Exec. Assistant
(iv)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2008-2009) having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Forty
Second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the Thirty Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2007-2008) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) for the year 2008-2009.
2. The Thirty Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2007-
2008) on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation) was presented to Lok Sabha on 16.04.2008 and laid in Rajya
Sabha on the same day.  The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation) was requested to furnish action taken replies of the Government to the
recommendations contained in the Thirty Seventh Report.  The replies of the Government
to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received.
3. The Committee considered the action taken replies furnished by the Government
at their sitting held on 16.12.2008, approved the draft comments and adopted the Forty
Second Report.  Minutes of the sitting are placed at Appendix I.
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the Thirty Seventh Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the
Committee is given in Appendix-II.
NEW DELHI;                    MOHAN SINGH
16 December, 2008 Chairman,
25 Agrahayana, 1930(Saka)                 Standing Committee on Agriculture.
(v)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER I
Report
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty Seventh Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2007-2008) on
Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation) which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya
Sabha on 16.04.2008.
1.2  The Action taken replies have been received from the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) in respect of all the 15 recommendations
contained in the Report.  These have been categorised as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government (Chapter II of the Report)
Recommendations No 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12 and 14 (Total-7)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the Government ¶s action taken reply (Chapter III of the
Report) (Total ± NIL)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter
IV of the Report)
Recommendations No. 3, 9, 10, 11 and 13 (Total-5)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited.  (Chapter V)
Recommendations No. 2, 4 and 15 (Total-3)
1.3 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of recommendations
for which the Government has given only interim replies, should be furnished to
the Committee expeditiously.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some
of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 3)
National Rainfed Area Authority & Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP)
1.5 The Committee had noted that the National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA)
established on 3 rd November, 2006 gives focused attention to the problems of rain fed
area of the country.  The Authority is an advisory, policy making and monitoring body
charged with the role of examining guidelines in various existing schemes in this area.
NRAA although not required to be an implementing and fund disbursing agency, needs
to be able to effectively converge the various schemes in different Ministries relating to
Watershed Development.  The Union Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development will
co-chair the Authority.
The potential of development of rain fed areas in the country is immense as rain
fed area accounts for 60% of the total cultivated area, but contribute only 45% of
agricultural production.  Hence, the role of NRAA is going to be pivotal.  The Committee
recommended that the mandate of NRAA should be widened and its operation has to be
holistic, touching upon all aspects of rain fed area agriculture.  Being an umbrella
organization, NRAA should lay down policies/guidelines relating to rain fed area
agriculture.
Special emphasis should be given on cardinal issues like credit, seeds, farm
implements, agricultural techniques and modern development, information on all
schemes in operation for rain fed area, the benefits being offered, and linkage with
grassroot level by constant interaction with farmers together with information that leads
to better policy implementation ´.
Regarding Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP), the Committee had
noted that food grain production in the country accrues from about 142 million hectares
of cultivated land.  Of this 57 million, i.e., 40% is irrigated and contribute 55% of
production.  The remaining 85 million hectares are rain fed and account for 45% of the
total production.  During 2007-08, Government waking up at last, proposed to introduce
µRain Fed Area Development Programme (RADP) to address the specific needs of rain
fed areas.   Rs. 100 crore was allocated for the scheme during 2007-08, but, the scheme
was not launched for want of µin-principle¶ approval from the Planning Commission.
However, the Planning Commission has set an outlay of Rs. 2500 crore for the XI Plan
period.  Budget allocation of Rs. 348.00 crore has been made for 2008-09.
The objectives of the Scheme inter-alia included development of about 22 lakh
hectares of rain fed areas in five years.  Considering that the total rain fed area under
cultivation in India is 85 million hectares, the target fixed for RADP seem to be minuscule
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(only 2.6%) of the magnitude of area needs to be developed and proves Government ¶s
non-seriousness towards rain fed area agriculture.  At this rate more than 100 years will
be required to cover the whole of 85 million hectares under RADP.
The Committee had also noted that it is because of neglect of rain fed areas of
States like Jharkhand & Chhattisgarh, that only single crop is grown there in spite of
1400 mm of rainfall, and lakhs of people remain without work and means of livelihood.
This is being considered to be the major cause of resentment and may be one of the
factors for the spread of Naxalite movement.
The Committee were of the opinion that a dossier of development of rain fed area
has to be brought out, that shall act as one point reference for all implementing agencies
and farmers.  Also crop-wise and region-wise developmental strategies should be
formulated.  This needs to be considered in the back drop of near saturation of
productivity from irrigated areas under cultivation.  Besides, the Committee expressed
their displeasure with the Planning Commission for delayed approval to such a scheme
that can deliver revolutionary changes in filling the food basket of our country and
provide employment to crores of rural inhabitants, if implemented effectively.  The
money being spent on importing wheat, oil, etc., at exorbitant rates can be saved, if
sufficient funds are allocated for developing rain fed areas for regular agriculture.  The
Committee recommend that the implementation of  RADP be carried out with top priority
and the scope be urgently expanded to cover as much rain fed area in the country in a
time bound manner.  The Committee may be informed of the time frame by which the
whole of the 85 million hectares of rain fed areas will be covered under the Programme.
1.6 Regarding NRAA, the Government in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as
follows:
 ³The views of Parliamentary Committee for widening the mandate of
NRAA so that its functioning becomes holistic touching upon all aspects of
Rainfed Area of Agriculture are very relevant.  These aspects have been
adequately addressed in the Office Order issued on 3 rd November, 2006.  The
Authority has been mandated to cover all aspects of sustainable and holistic
development of rainfed areas including appropriate farming and livelihood system
approaches.  Further, NRAA has been mandated to prepare a prospective plan
outlining the national strategy and roadmap for holistic and sustainable
development of rainfed farming areas and also to evolve guidelines.  The NRAA
has finalized the Common Guidelines for Watershed Development Projects
which have come into force from 1 st April, 2008.  Further, NRAA is also
mandated to identify gaps in input supply, credit availability, dissemination of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

technology, insurance cover etc. relating to rainfed area agriculture. Once this
exercise is done by the NRAA, appropriate action will be taken by the
Government as per recommendation made by the NRAA ´.
Regarding RADP, the Government in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as
follows:
³The Planning Commission has communicated the in-principle approval to
the implementation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Rainfed Area
Development Programme (RADP) at a total cost of Rs.3500 crores during the XI
Five Year Plan including a component of Rs.170 crores for National Rain fed
Area Authority (NRAA), on 20 th March, 2008.  Based on the revised outlay of
Rs.3330 crores as communicated by the Planning Commission and the
comments received from various Ministries/Departments/Divisions of the DAC,
the EFC Note has been revised and sent to the Ministry of Finance and the
Planning Commission.  In view of in the enhanced allocation for RADP it is
proposed to cover 25 lakh ha of rain fed area during the XI Plan period.
Development of rainfed and degraded areas is being taken up through
various watershed schemes of different Ministries / Externally aided projects.  Till
the end of the Tenth Plan about 50 million ha of area has been developed under
various watershed schemes / projects. The scheme of RADP will be
implemented both in areas where no watershed  programmes had been taken up
in the past and in areas where watershed development works have been already
taken up but supplementary production based activities are required to be
strengthened.  Efforts will be made to expand the coverage of developing rainfed
areas through other Schemes of Government as well as the RADP in
consultation with the Planning Commission, NRAA and other stake holder
Ministries, so as to cover entire rainfed area within a short period ´.
Comments of the Committee
1.7 Out of the 85 million hectares of rainfed area under cultivation in the
country, the Department claims to have covered 50 million hectares under
different schemes/projects, in 50 years of time.  The Committee is highly
dissatisfied with such limping progress in an extremely important aspect that can
bring revolutionary change in Indian agriculture.   Hence, they reiterate their
earlier recommendation that Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP) be
carried out with top priority and if schemes of different Ministries/Externally Aided
Projects are proposed/in operation, coordination should be established with them
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

with the ultimate aim of covering the entire rainfed area in the country.  It is also
stressed that a dossier of development of rainfed area should be brought out that
shall act as one-point reference for all implementing agencies.  The Committee
would like to be apprised of the rise in production as a result of the additional 50
million hectares put under different schemes/projects of rainfed area development
in the last 50 years.
(Recommendation No. 9)
Differential MSP
1.8 The Committee noted that in the case of jute, a single MSP is recommended by
the Commission and approved by the Government. Based on the basic MSP, different
MSPs for jute are announced subsequently, keeping in view the quality considerations
and consequent input price differentials, which vary from place to place. These MSPs
are in fact derived prices from the basic MSP fixed by the Government, mainly to ensure
that the farmers are paid better prices for their better varieties. It is recommended that
this system of calculating MSP should be adopted for all the other crops for which
Government announces MSP to give better price for better varieties and to compensate
regional imbalances in cost-inputs and risk factors of different crops.
1.9 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that the rationale
behind a uniform MSP throughout the country is that it encourages greater investment
and production in relatively low cost area due to a higher margin of profit and
discourages production in the high cost area. Further, a uniform price encourages crop
specialization and optimum use of nation ¶s land and other resources on the basis of
comparative advantage. The Agricultural Price Policy- A Long Term Perspective (1986)
has also justified the uniform support price for the whole country on the ground that it
alone can lead to efficient utilisation of resources.
The Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP), among other factors,
considers the cost of production of various crops for all the major producing States, as
collected by different State Agricultural Universities under the Comprehensive Scheme
for the Study of Cost of Cultivation  of Ministry of Agriculture. Under the sampling design
of the Comprehensive Scheme for Studying the Cost of Cultivation of Principal Crops,
each State is demarcated into a homogenous agro-climatic zone based on cropping
pattern, soil type, rainfall, etc. The primary sampling units (Tehsils) are allocated to
different zones in proportion to total area of all the crops covered in the study. Based on
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

this cost of production per quintal is worked out for the major growing states, for specific
crops, and their weighted average is estimated and considered by CACP, among other
factors, for recommending MSP.
While recommending MSP, an effort is made to cover at least the paid out
expenses (A2) of farmers in high cost regions plus the imputed cost (FL) of family labour.
(i.e., A2+FL cost) and C2 cost (i.e., full cost of production including the imputed rental
value of owned land and capital) in relatively efficient states, keeping some margin for the
benefit of farmers.
Comments of the Committee
1.10 The Committee are not convinced with the Action Taken Reply which states
that differential MSP based on quality considerations and input price differentials,
which works in the case of Jute, is not applicable to other crops.  Since
Genetically Modified (GM) seeds of Bt Cotton and hybrid seeds of different food
crops, oilseeds, pulses, vegetables have also been developed, whose quality is
better as compared to traditional seeds and the cost of these seeds to the farmer
is much higher, to encourage the farmer to grow good quality and high yield
variety of crops, he should be given a profitable price for his produce. The
Agriculture Price Policy - A Long-term Perspective drawn up in 1986 also be
revisited as tremendous changes have occurred in the Indian agricultural scene in
the succeeding two decades.
(Recommendation No. 10)
Contract Farming
1.11 The Committee were told that the benefits of Contract Farming include better
quality of inputs, extensive services and assurance of selling the produce at a pre-
determined price.  However, it was felt there were multitude of latent problems that were
emerging one by one. The absence of any rules/guidelines governing the operation of
contract farming had vitiated the whole scenario and would not enable sustainable
contract farming.   Whole lot of issues relating to contract farming remain to be legally
streamlined, and foremost consideration should be accorded to the interests of the
farmers.  Though the Department maintained that land ownership would not be taken
over by the contracting company, the Committee felt that company can become the
defacto owner, through terms and conditions of contract which may be heavily tilted
towards the company due to the help and support of expert legal opinion, lack of
awareness of the farmer, type of seeds provided and credit extended under the contract,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

etc.  Such uncontrolled continuation of contract farming can even result in µbonded
farming¶.  Besides, the interests of the company may not be in sync with the agricultural
priorities of the country, which may be sidelined.  Expansion of contract farming can also
lead to imbalance in land and water use; agricultural production under contract may not
cater to regional requirements and such products which are not used by locals may be
preferred, causing rise in price of locally used commodities that may have to be imported
or brought from far off places.
The Committee were of the firm view that contract farming might lead to taking
over/mortgage/buying of farmers land by the contracting company without lawful consent
through threat, coercion, undue influence, fraudulent behaviour, or misrepresentation of
facts etc.   The national priorities in agriculture and the interest of the farmers have to be
protected at any cost.   Farmers land should not at any cost be attached, sold,
mortgaged, pledged or taken over by the contracting firm, even with the consent of the
head of the family, as the agricultural land is an inherited property that can ¶t be sold
without the consent of all the legal heirs of the land owner i.e -the µKarta¶ of the family.
The family and village social fabric will be in jeopardy as contract farming may lead to
the loss of freedom of the farmer to produce food crops of his choice for his family needs
and feed and fodder for his cattle, poultry, etc. which also provide him extra income by
selling milk, butter, chicks, etc.
The Committee felt that the procurement policy of the Government will also be
failed as the farmers will not grow food crops for the nation but for the contracting party.
The Public Distribution System (PDS) of food items/cereals will be in danger as the
Government will not be able to procure enough wheat, rice, sugar, etc. and may have to
import all these items leading to heavy financial burden on our exchequer in the form of
more subsidy for PDS.  The Committee were of the considered opinion that contract
farming will benefit the contracting company/firm whose main aim is quite often profit-
making.  The food security of the nation and the farmers ¶ family interest will take a back
seat as he will work like a machine to earn his livelihood and thousand years old cultural
and social ethos wherein the whole village worked as a single and self-sufficient unit with
all kinds of artisans, dependent on each other worked for upliftment of the whole village
will be destroyed.
1.12 The Government in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that the promotion of
direct marketing and contract farming and development of competitive agricultural
markets in private and cooperative sectors have been identified as key areas of reforms
in the Agriculture Sector, to be implemented through the amendments to the State
APMC Acts.  Contract farming arrangements will provide an effective method of linking
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

small farm sector to sources of extension advice, mechanization, seeds, fertilizers and
credit and to assured and profitable markets, with due protection to farmer ¶s rights over
his land.  To provide guidance and support to States in amending their State Agricultural
Produce Marketing Committees (Regulation) Acts, a model Act was prepared by the
Ministry of Agriculture in consultation with all concerned and circulated to State
Governments in 2003.  Based on the model law, by now 20 States/UTs have either
amended their State APMC Acts fully/partially and Bihar Government has repealed the
Act.  In most of the States which have amended their APMC Acts, a legal framework is
in place now to regulate contract farming.  This framework provides for:-
• Contract Farming Sponsor to register himself with the Market Committee
or with a prescribed Officer
• The Contract Farming Sponsor to get the contract farming agreement
recorded with a prescribed Officer
• No title, rights, ownership or possession of land shall be transferred or
alienated or vest in the contract farming sponsor or his successor or his
agent as a consequence arising out of the contract farming agreement
• Dispute Redressal Mechanism
• The Agricultural produce covered under the Contract Farming agreement
may be sold to the Contract Farming Sponsor outside the market yards
• Specification of Model Agreement for Contract Farming so that producers
can ensure inclusion of various required clauses in their agreement.
To facilitate State Governments in notifying their amended Rules under the
APMC Act, Central Government has also formulated model APMC Rules and circulated
to States in November 2007.  It is expected that the regulatory provisions being made in
State APMC Acts and Rules thereunder, will ensure that under the contract farming
agreement both sponsors and the producers will be accountable to the terms &
conditions laid down for the farming through a written agreement, which will be recorded
in a public office and will be available for any dispute resolution.  Further, the rights of
the farmer over the title, ownership or possession, etc. will be protected over the land
under contract farming and as a consequence of the failure of the contract; they will not
lose any right over the land.  The agreement prescribed under the law will ensure that
farmers get the assured price on supply of the required quantity of produce and the
sponsors provide them certain agreed services and technical know-how, if so preferred
by both the parties.  Government has consciously decided not to promote any kind of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

contract farming model where land of the farmer is taken over by the sponsor or his
agent for cultivation.
Ministry of Agriculture is of the view that the State Governments through their
designated authorities shall ensure that the contract farming, which is generally
commodity specific and can lead to monoculture, does not grow beyond proportion to
disturb bio-diversity and agricultural ecology.  It may be necessary to provide necessary
guidelines for land use planning in each region in order to prevent such eventuality.
However, since contract farming is happening at a very small scale at the moment, no
such threat of spread of monoculture is being experienced in any part of the country at
present.
The Ministry of Agriculture is of the view that promotion of contract farming will
not affect the procurement of food grains as area covered under contract farming of food
grains will be only a limited area. Resorting to procurement at Minimum Support Prices
(MSP) is desirable only on occasions, when farmers cannot get a reasonable price in the
market and the endeavour of the Ministry of Agriculture would not be that the farmers
have only option of selling their produce at MSP at all the times.  The Ministry of
Agriculture is committed to take such policy measures which can ensure better price
realization by the farmers and cover their price risks, rather than keep them dependent
on the MSP system for getting minimum prices for their produce.  It is true that the
contract farming will benefit the sponsoring companies but on the other hand it will also
mitigate price risks of the farmers and will provide them remunerative prices, thus will be
quite beneficial to the farming community as well.
Comments of the Committee
1.13 Considering the fact that our country is still largely agrarian and a huge
percentage of population is dependent on agriculture for their livelihood, the
Committee finds it difficult to agree that Contract Farming will benefit the Indian
farmer.  The Committee are apprehensive that Contract Farming will create more
inequality owing to the extreme commercialisation of agriculture and will result in
sidelining of the small and marginal farmers. The choice of the farmer to grow
food crops for his own consumption and for his cattles etc. will also be adversely
affected. The Committee are of the firm opinion that extension programmes have
also not been prepared for adequately spreading awareness about the pros and
cons of Contract Farming among the farmers.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 11)
Development & Strengthening of Infrastructure Facility for Production &
Distribution of Quality Seeds
1.14 The Committee have observed that under the scheme µDevelopment and
Strengthening of Infrastructure facility for Production and Distribution of Quality Seeds ¶,
the allocation for 2008-09 is Rs.150.00 crore against a proposal of Rs.556 crore by the
Department.  According to the Department, the proposed amount included Rs.445.86
crore to be released during 2008-09 under the Prime Minister ¶s Relief Package for the
suicide affected districts of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala.  The
Department has informed that the allocation has to be augmented to meet the
requirements.
The Committee were unable to understand why the PM ¶s package, which has a
pre-set amount to be released in a pre-determined period, cannot be given in the outlay
for the year at the BE stage itself.  Moreover, the Committee felt that such schemes,
providing relief to people already battered by distress, have to be prioritized in providing
allocation.
The Committee recommended that outlays for relief packages/schemes should
be reflected separately under a different head and should not be clubbed with the outlay
of any regular scheme and be released as per the time-frame fixed for their disbursal to
the pre-determined needy people.
1.15 The Government in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that an outlay of
Rs.150 crore has been approved by the Planning Commission for the scheme
µDevelopment and Strengthening of Infrastructure Facility for Production and Distribution
of Quality Seeds¶ against the proposed outlay of Rs.556 crore.  This Department is of the
firm view that additional funds need to be allocated for the scheme to achieve the
desired growth rate. The Planning Commission has been accordingly requested to
increase the allocation under this scheme.
The Rehabilitation Package approved by the Cabinet for the farmers in suicide
prone districts of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Maharashtra does not
envisage creation of separate heads for scheme wise implementation of the
programmes.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Comments of the Committee
1.16 The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Government as the
PM¶s relief package is only for suicide prone areas of the affected States whereas
the scheme for Development and Strengthening of Infrastructure Facility for
Production and Distribution of Quality Seeds is meant for the whole country and
hence the budgetary allocation for this scheme need to be separately made.
 (Recommendation No. 12)
National Project on Organic Farming
1.17 The Committee had noted that the Scheme µNational Project on Organic
Farming¶ was launched from October 2004 onwards on a Pilot Basis replacing the earlier
scheme µNational Project on Development and use of Bio-fertilizer ¶.  The Scheme is
already implemented throughout the country.  Though a relatively new concept, the
response to the scheme is learnt to be picking up.  The Committee in their 27 th Report
had requested for greater attention to the scheme to eliminate problems involved in
certification of organic farm products and their marketing.  Even so, the funds allocated
for the scheme for 2008-09 is only Rs.30 crore, which is the highest allocation for a year
since its launch.  The total funds allocated for XI plan is only Rs.150 crore and the area
covered in the entire country under the scheme is also a paltry 3.12 lakh hectare.
The Committee felt that organic farming is a sustainable method of agriculture
and in the present scenario it can be economically viable if efforts are taken to develop
domestic market for the products along with the already thriving export market.  The
Committee recommended that the Scheme should be expanded to cover larger
cultivated area and the potential of profitable returns to farmers be tapped by bringing
down the cost of production that would ensure wider niche market for the products within
the country.  Programmes should be formulated for generating awareness of the holistic
benefits of consumption of organic farm products.  Synergic approach by involving the
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Department of health, Panchayati Raj
Institutions and NGOs/SHGs may be adopted for the purpose.  Krishi Vigyan Kendras
may be involved in making farmers aware of the benefits of shifting to organic farming
and be made knowledgeable of the ways to do it.  One of the off shoots of this
endeavour will be a healthier ecological system.
The Committee felt that the involvement of the use of animals, for manure,
consumption of by products and the production of energy through bio-gas, is essential
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

for a successful organic farming system.  Coordinated efforts should be made in unison
with the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries for integration of
livestock development for successful implementation of the National project on organic
farming.
1.18 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have submitted that the
Government is already laying great stress under the Central Sector Scheme National
Project on Organic Farming (NPOF), on capacity building, reduction of cost of production
and on covering a larger area under organic farming.  About 421 service providers have,
so far, been appointed with the above purpose in view.  Training and demonstrations are
being organized on regular basis to spread the message of organic farming amongst
more and more number of farmers.  Awareness about the benefits of organic farming
and organic products is also being created through the medium of seminars, exhibitions
and publicity through print as well as electronic media.  Under the Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) ± Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)
Interface, ICAR is implementing the programme of preparation of crop/area specific
package of practices of organic farming and technology for production of different
organic sources of nutrients and disease/pest management.  NGOs/SHGs and Krishi
Vigyan Kendras are already involved in the implementation of the programme and are
making farmers aware about the benefits of organic farming.  The National Centre of
Organic Farming (NCOF), Ghaziabad, under the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation, have been directed to involve the Department of Health and Panchayati
Raj Institutions in implementation of the programme.
The area under organic farming has recorded a big jump over the years.  From a
mere 45000 ha. in 2004-05, the area has increased to 5.38 lakh ha. during 2006-07.
Out of this, 3.12 lakh ha. have been certified, while the remaining area is under the
process of certification.  NPOF plan to bring an area of 1 million ha. under the organic
farming during the 11th Five Year Plan.
For successful implementation of the Scheme through coordinated efforts in
unison with the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, the matter for
identification of activities for integration of livestock development has been taken up with
the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.
Comments of the Committee
1.19 The Committee feel that R&D in organic farming is an option that will make
agriculture in India more profitable as organic farming is more environmentally
sustainable.  Hence, it has to be included as a priority area in agriculture.  The
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

National Project on Organic Farming should be taken well beyond the XI Plan
period to cover much greater area.  Implication of organic farming on national
food security may also be analysed.
 (Recommendation No. 13)
Subsidy to Fertilizer Industry
1.20  The Committee had recommended in their earlier reports that subsidy for
fertilizer should be directly provided to the farmers if the Government intends to obtain
maximum benefit of the fertilizer subsidy scheme.  Later on, the Government in its
implementation budget document for 2007-08 stated that modalities for providing
alternative method of delivering fertilizer subsidy directly to farmers was being worked
out.  The Department also informed that a study was commissioned by the fertilizer
industry, which included the provision of subsidy directly to farmers.  The report based
on the study was presented to the Department of Fertilizer.
However, the Group of Ministers (GOM), constituted to look into sustainable use
of fertilizers and pertinent subsidy and pricing issues, which considered the matter does
not seem to have made any such recommendation.
The Committee noted that the subsidy for fertilizers during the year 2004-05 was
of Rs.15,779 crores.   The estimation by the Department of Fertilizers for the year 2008-
09 stands at Rs.60,649.36 crore; subsidy quadrupling in four years.  Now, having known
the extent of subsidy, it would be disturbing to know that it took more than fifty years for
the foodgrains production to grow four-fold from 50.82 million tonnes in 1950-51 to
217.28 million tonnes (Fourth Advance Estimates) in 2006-07.  Moreover, the targets set
for foodgrain production are hardly ever met.  The Government has admitted the fact
that Total Cropped Area, Net Sown Area and Cropping Intensity have been stagnating or
rather decreasing. Then Committee are unable to understand where the fertilizer so
manufactured with a subsidy support to the tune of Rs.60649.36 crore is used.  It may
be that fertilizers are exported and companies are subsidized for that also.
This scenario points at inherent maladies in the subsidy regime related to
fertilizers, and it is evident that there is no correlation between the astronomical amount
of subsidy and the output of the agricultural produce.  In turn, it is not difficult to infer that
the benefits of subsidy are being enjoyed by some one other than the farmer.
The Committee strongly recommend that the present method of providing
subsidy for fertilizer has failed completely and require immediate revamp.  Providing
subsidy directly to the farmer is definitely one of the solutions.  All efforts should also be
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

made to eliminate the existing disparities in terms of subsidy between different types of
fertilizers causing usage imbalance ´.
1.21 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have submitted that the substantial
increase in the amount of subsidy over last 3-4 years is mainly on account of sharp
increase in prices of fertilizer inputs and finished fertilizers in the international market.
This has led to increase in the delivered cost of fertilizers at farm gate level and
consequently increase in per tonne subsidy released on fertilizers.  It may be noted that
the subsidy on fertilizers is the difference between the normative delivered cost of
subsidized fertilizers at farm gate level and the selling prices of these fertilizers notified
by the Government.  The selling prices of these fertilizers have remained constant since
28.2.02 and are as below:
MRPs of Fertilizers
Products Existing MRPs.
Urea 4830
DAP 9350
MOP 4455
Complex Fertilizers
16:20:00 7100
20:20:00 7280
23:23:00 8000
28:28:00 9080
10:26:26 8360
12:32:16 8484
14:28:14 8300
14:35:14 8660
15:15:15 6980
17:17:17 8100
19:19:19 8300
2. On the other hand, the prices of fertilizer inputs and finished fertilizers
have increased sharply over last four years.  The prevailing average international
price of fertilizers over last few years is as below:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

USD/PMT
Year DAP MOP Urea
C&F (FOB US
Gulf+freight Tampa
Mundra)
FOB(FSU) FOB (Arabian Gulf)
1 2 3 4
2003-04 239.10 97.37 154.44
2004-05 277.69 133.62 215.55
2005-06 296.04 158.75 245.77
2006-07 329.40 172.07 256.72
2007-08 657.57 263.27 341.20
May 08 prices 1270.00 540.00 645.00
3. There has also been a continuous increase in consumption of fertilizers
and consequently sales of fertilizers in last four years, which is as below:
Yearwise sales of fertilizers (LMT)
Year 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 % increase
in 2007-08
over 2004-05
UREA 205.47 221.91 244.85 261.67 27.3
DAP 60.79 67.51 69.24 75.55 24.2
MOP 23.14 28.01 23.93 27.82 20.2
4. As already submitted in para1 above, the substantial increase in the
amount of subsidy over the last 3-4 years is mainly on account of sharp increase
in prices of fertilizer inputs and finished fertilizers in the international market.
Thus, the astronomical amount of subsidy is not on account of any additional
increase in the consumption of fertilizers as the table under para 3 above would
bring out.  The present level of consumption of fertilizers in the country is, in any
case, only 112 kg. per hectare, which is lower than even the neighboring
countries.   The production of food grains in the country has, however, kept pace.
While the total foodgrain production in 2004-05 was 198.360 millions tonnes, the
production is estimated (according to 3rd estimates) to be 227.320 million tonnes
in2007-08.
5. As regards the mechanism for delivery of subsidy to the farmers, the
same has been considered by a Group of Ministers (GOM) constituted to look
into the sustainable use of fertilizers and other pertinent subsidy and pricing
issues.  The GOM has not recommended any change in the existing pattern of
delivery of subsidy.  The proposal of Department of Fertilizers for nutrient based
pricing of fertilizers was agreed to µin principle¶ by the GOM and further action is
underway to finalize the policy.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Comments of the Committee
1.22 The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Government that
nutrient based pricing of fertilisers will prove to be a success as the benefit of
subsidy will again go to large manufacturers and the farmers will face the same
problems they are facing now.  The reasons behind the decision of the GoM to
continue with the existing delivery mechanism of fertiliser subsidy, in spite of its
failure, is also not clear.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that a delivery
system where the farmer is directly benefited by subsidy would be the best
option. The Committee are not convinced with the argument of the Government
that there was sharp increase in the prices of fertilizer inputs and finished
fertilizers in the international market.  Since Government of India imports so many
other things other than food crops, do they compare the price of these goods with
indigenously produced goods.  It is not clear how the fertilizer company is getting
the subsidy on the ground of rise in international prices.  If the Government is
importing through these fertiliser-producing companies they may not produce it
indigenously as they get subsidy just by importing the fertilizers.  The rate of
subsidy on different kind of fertilizers is different and not the same, so the farmer
is purchasing the cheaper one and that had led to nutrient imbalance in soil.
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that
fertilizer subsidy should be given to the farmer directly, and the Government
should fix the modalities to give this benefit to the farmer, may be a cash incentive
on production of the cash receipt of fertilizer from a certified/registered
distributing agency.  As the farmers are not getting the fertilisers when they need
it, the present system of distribution of fertilisers through Cooperatives and other
agencies also need to be re-looked.
 (Recommendation No. 14)
Integrated Scheme for Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil palm and Maize (ISOPOM)
1.23 The Committee noted that 40-45% of the domestic demand of edible oils is being
met through imports.  It is a matter of concern that the country is at this juncture even
though the µTechnology Mission on Oilseeds ¶ has been in operation for almost two
decades now.  The reasons furnished by the Department for low production of oilseeds
in India are, non availability of hybrid seeds, low monetary returns due to low production
potential, high risk due to climatic vagaries and susceptibility to pests and diseases, use
of poor quality seeds and unassured market at remunerative prices resulting in distress
sale during harvest season.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Committee did not concur with the reason of non-availability of hybrid seeds
as the information provided by the Department clearly shows that there is no mismatch
between demand and availability of certified seeds. This has also been corroborated by
acclaimed agriculture Scientist Prof. M.S. Swaminathan.  Moreover, if any of the reasons
quoted by the Department holds good, it shows the failure, primarily of extension and
other related aspects, on part of the Ministry of Agriculture and sends warning signal in
case of oilseeds production.
India is a country blessed with all the major available oilseeds of the world
including our traditional oilseeds.  Still data indicate towards 200 to 300 per cent gap
between the potential and achievement, which shows the dismal time and efforts put in
by the Government in the oil seeds sector.
The Committee recommended that the Ministry should urgently get their act
together, find the exact reasons for the failure and effect a complete evaluation and
revamp of schemes aimed at increasing the production of oilseeds.  This poor state of
affairs should not be allowed to continue.
1.24 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that the Technology
Mission on Oilseeds (TMO) was launched by the Central Government to increase the
production, productivity of oilseeds and to achieve self-sufficiency in edible oils.
Consequent upon the setting up of Technology Mission on Oilseeds,a major
breakthrough in increasing oilseeds production was achieved through an integrated
approach by introducing new crop technologies, better supply of inputs and extension
services support for marketing and post harvest technologies and excellent
coordination/cooperation between various organizations/departments and Ministries. As
a result of concerted efforts by the TMOP, the production of oilseeds increased from
10.83 million tonnes in 1985-86 to 25.19 million tonnes in 2003-04. This was brought
about not only by increase in area but also by improving the productivity from 570 kg. to
1064 kg. per hectare. The Technology Mission was discontinued in the year 2004.
However, the oilseeds production touched an all time record of 28.20 million tonnes
during 2007-08(IIIrd Advance Estimates).
There are substantial yield gaps between and within states in respect of various
major oilseeds.  In order to bridge the yield gaps, frontline demonstrations are being
organized through Indian Council of Agriculture Research(ICAR) to demonstrate the
latest improved production and protection technologies.  Besides, seeds of high yielding
varieties/hybrids of oilseeds are being made available to the farmers free of costs in the
form of minikits with a view to popularizing them and to bring these varieties in the seed
production chain.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

With a view to enhancing the productivity and production of oilseeds in the
country and also to make the implementation of the integrated scheme of Oilseeds,
Pulses, Oilpalm and Maize (ISOPOM) more effective and result oriented, ISOPOM has
recently been modified as a part of National Food Security Mission with regard to norms
and pattern of assistance, inclusion of new components and additional implementing
agencies during 11 th Plan period.  The assistance on production of certified seeds has
been enhanced from Rs500 per quintal to Rs1000/- per quintal besides enhanced
subsidy on distribution of certified seed from Rs. 800/- per quintal to Rs1200 per quintal
during 11th five year plan.
Further, keeping in view the fact that there is a constraint in area expansion
under oilseeds, the thrust during 11 th plan will be given towards yield improvement in
oilseeds besides promoting the cultivation of oil palm, a crop with a potential of
producing 3-3.5 MT of palm oil per ha for augmenting the indigenous availability of
edible oils in the country´.
Comments of the Committee
1.25 The Committee appreciate the efforts put in by the Department to increase
the yield of oilseeds. However, the Committee desire that the Department should
take steps to expeditiously bridge the gap between the production of edible oil
and the domestic demand.  The reasons identified by the Department themselves
as the cause for low production of oilseeds should also be eliminated so as to
mitigate the dependence on import of edible oils.  Along with Oil Palm, Coconut
Oil may also be seen as an option that may be promoted to augment indigenous
availability of edible oils in the country.
 (Recommendation No. 15)
Some other issues related to DAC
1.26 The Committee deliberated on certain issues not directly related to examination
of DFG and were of the unanimous view that
(i)  the National Policy for Farmers should be operationalised at the earliest
in its entirety;
(ii)  there should be greater role for local self Government institutions in
development of Agriculture;
(iii)  all existing soil testing laboratories that are dormant should be revived
along with the establishment of new ones;
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(iv)  overall strategy should be devised, to improve the productivity of small
farms/farmers;
(v) there is dire need to keep gender-wise data on all aspects relating to
agriculture;
(vi) the gap between µknow-how¶ and µdo-how¶ is to be plugged
(vii) ATMA may be located in KVKs;
(viii) awards may be instituted to encourage outstanding farmers;
(ix) ecology should be conserved by the concept on conservation farming;
(x) help of Department of Information Technology may be requisitioned
to set up and make Gyan Chaupals efficient/effective;
(xi)  Agri-clinics and Agri-Business centers should be rejuvenated by engaging
one graduate each from the fields of agriculture, veterinary science,
commerce/marketing and home science;
(xii)  greater attention should be accorded to the provision of simple and
effective farm implements;
(xiii)  food security should be ensured during all types of disasters;
(xiv)  post-harvest infrastructure be strengthened more on priority basis;
(xv)  the issue of climate change should be considered in the gravity it merits;
(xvi)  all agricultural loans, long, medium and short, should be delivered at 4%
per annum as recommended by the National Commission for Farmers;
(xvii)  the cases of loan defaulters should be dealt by constituting Debt-
Reconciliation Boards at district level;
(xviii)  MSPs be made differential based on crop-wise and region-wise
considerations;
(xix)  forward markets be regulated more stringently to channel benefits to
farmers;
(xx)  all schemes under horticulture division be evaluated to assess their
performance; and
(xxi)  Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) be
implemented without further delay throughout the country.
1.27 The Government in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:
³Recommendation Serial No.15 (i)
The National Policy for Farmers should be operationalised at the earliest
in its entirety.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

1. Consequent to the approval of the National Policy for Farmers,
2007 (NPF), the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation constituted an Inter-
Ministerial Committee for preparation of a Plan of Action for operationalisation of
the policy.  The final draft Plan of Action has already been circulated to all the
Ministries and Departments concerned and also to the State Governments.  The
Action Plan is expected to be finalized and circulated for operationalisation by the
end of July, 2008.
2. However, many of the provisions of National Policy for Farmers
are being implemented / operationalised through a number of ongoing
programmes/schemes being implemented by various Central Ministries and
Departments and the State Governments. These, inter alia, include Bharat
Nirman for improving rural infrastructure and expanding irrigation potential;
National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme; National Rural Health
Mission; Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme to complete the irrigation
projects; pilot projects to repair, renovate and restore water bodies and schemes
for groundwater recharge to divert rainwater into dug-wells; revival of agricultural
extension system; reforms in agricultural marketing; schemes for development of
market infrastructure including Terminal Markets; establishment of National
Horticulture Mission; setting up of National Rainfed Area Authority and National
Bamboo Mission, etc.; provision of crop loans upto Rs. 3 lakhs to farmers at
reduced rate of interest; Rural Infrastructure Development Fund; Rajeev Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana; and several other initiatives. Further, several
initiatives and programmes like Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana and National Food
Security Mission have been launched by the Government recently, which would
operationalise or facilitate operationalisation of National Policy for Farmers. Debt
Relief / Debt Waiver scheme has been announced in the Union Budget 2008-09
to address the problems of the indebted farmers. Some schemes and
programmes have also been proposed in the Eleventh Plan period, which, once
implemented, augment the current schemes and programmes facilitating
operationalisation of the National Policy for Farmers.  Apart from these schemes
and programmes, concerted actions are taken through Central assistance to the
States for various activities connected to agriculture and allied sectors and
through special / relief / rehabilitation packages, whenever occasion arises.
Action is also constantly taken and monitored by the Central Ministries and
Departments through various organizations, institutions, research and training
institutes under their control and through other autonomous agencies.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3. The Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana, launched by the Government recently,
is an umbrella scheme under which most of the provisions of the National Policy
for Farmers can be operationalised and implemented depending on the priorities
of the State Governments.
4. The Agriculture Coordination Committee under the chairmanship of the
Hon¶ble Prime Minister would oversee and coordinate the integrated
implementation of the National Policy for Farmers, 2007.
Recommendation Serial No.15(ii)
There should be greater role for local self Government Institutions in
development of Agriculture
The National Policy for Farmers,2007 stipulates that steps would be taken
to strengthen and accord centrality to Panchayats  in addressing problems of
farmers.  A Committee was constituted by Cabinet Secretariat, to review
modifications to be made in the existing guidelines for Centrally Sponsored
Schemes to ensure the centrality of Panchayati Raj Institutions in their
implemention.  Guidelines issued under most of the Centrally Sponsored
Schemes of the Department already contain enabling provisions to associate
Panchayati Raj Institutions in implementation.  However, in pursuance of the
recommendations, State Governments have been requested by the Department
of Agriculture & Cooperation to take following steps in addition to action already
taken to associate Panchayati Raj Institution in implementation of Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the Department.
a) Identification of crops and beneficiaries of the schemes of the
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation should be in consultation with District
Panchayats.
b) Training, extension and awareness creation for these schemes should
be through Panchayats and Gram Sabhas.
c) The officials in charge of the implementation of various schemes of the
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation should attend the PRIs and Gram
Sabha meeting to furnish relevant information and data regarding the schemes
and to take appropriate action on the observations in these meetings.
Recommendation Serial No.15(iii)
          All existing soil testing laboratories that are dormant should be revived
along with the establishment of new ones
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

It is submitted that at present, there are 651 Soil Testing Laboratories
functioning in the country with an analyzing capacity of 7.00 million soil samples
per annum.  The level of capacity utilization is 82%.  The State Governments
have been requested to improve the capacity utilization further.
2. It is further submitted that the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation is already providing financial assistance for strengthening  of
existing Soil Testing Laboratories and also for setting up of new Soil Testing
Laboratories under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme ³Balanced and Integrated
Use of Fertilizers´ through the annual Work Plans of the States under the Macro
Management Schemes of Agriculture.  Further, in the newly formulated Centrally
Sponsored Scheme ³National Project on Management of Soil Health and
Fertility´, there is a proposal to provide financial assistance for setting up of 500
static Soil Testing Laboratories during the 11 th Plan and 250 mobile Soil Testing
Laboratories during 2008-09.
Recommendation Serial No.15(iv)
Overall strategy should be devised, to improve the productivity of small
farms/farmers;
The National Food Security Mission has been launched w.e.f.2007-08 in
311 identified districts of 17 States for enhancing the production and productivity
of  rice, wheat and pulses in the country. The total outlay of the Mission is
Rs.4882.48 crore for the XI Plan.  The States have been advised to allocate 30%
of the budget to small and marginal farmers including women farmers for
increasing the productivity of small farms.  The assistance for critical inputs like
seeds, micronutrients, integrated pest management and integrated nutrient
management is being provided for higher investment and output. Besides, the
farmers are given training on improved production and protection technologies in
rice, wheat and pulses for efficient use of available resources and applied inputs
to achieve higher productivity.
Recommendation Serial No.15(v)
There is a dire need to keep gender-wise data on all aspects relating to
agriculture
Agriculture Census Division of this Department has been collecting and
publishing gender-wise information on number and area of operational holdings
since 1995-96 Census for each State/UT and also at All India level.
A National Gender Resource Centre in Agriculture(NGRCA) has been set
up in the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation(DAC) in 2004 to act as a
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

focal point for the convergence of gender related activities and issues in
agriculture and allied areas within and outside DAC; add gender dimension to
agriculture policies and internalize gender specific interventions for bringing the
farm women in the mainstream of agricultural development.
The MIS/Reporting formats of all schemes/programmes of Extension
Division have been suitably revised to ensure flow of gender disaggregate
data/information.  These MIS formats were also shared with other divisions of
DAC for a similar action.
Recommendation Serial No. ± 15 (vi)
The Gap between µknow how¶ and µdo how¶ is to be plugged
1) As a support to the promotion of Agricultural mechanization, Farm
Machinery Training and Testing Institutes were set up at Budni (M.P.) in 1955,
Hissar (Haryana) in 1963, Garladinne, District Anantapur in 1983 and Biswanath
Chariali (Assam) in 1990.  These Institutes have since then engaged in
developing human resource for agricultural mechanization The FMTTIs have
been conducting different types of training programmes in the selection,
operation, repair/maintenance and management of farm machinery for the
benefit of nominees of Central/State Governments, Private Organizations,
retired/retiring Defence Personnel, technicians, rural youth, farmers, women in
agriculture and Foreign Nationals, sponsored under bilateral/international
programmes.
2) To supplement the efforts of the FMTTIs in human resource
development and to train large number of farmers at nearby places, outsourcing
of the training through the SAUs, Agricultural Engineering colleges, polytechnics,
etc., has been approved during the X plan w.e.f. from 2004-05. For training of
farmers, the identified institutions are reimbursed Rs 2500 per trainee per month,
which also includes a stipend of Rs 600 and to and fro travel expenses by normal
mode of transport.
3) For improving the adoption of new technology equipments by the
farmers for enhancing production and productivity, as well as for reducing the
cost of production, it is necessary to properly demonstrate the utility of such
equipments to the farmers.  Therefore, with this aspect in view, the
demonstration of newly developed agricultural equipment including horticultural
equipment at farmers' fields has been included as a component of the scheme,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

µPromotion and Strengthening of Agricultural Mechanization through Training,
Testing and Demonstration ¶, during the Tenth Plan. This scheme envisages
conduct of demonstration of improved/newly developed agricultural/horticultural
equipment, identified by the State Governments/Government Organizations at
farmers' fields, to acquaint them about their use and utility for production of
different types of crops.  100% grant is provided for the procurement of
equipment and contingency expenditure on their demonstrations to the
implementing agencies i.e State Governments, ICAR and SFCI.
The gap between µknow-how¶ and µdo-how¶ is also being addressed by
providing skill oriented training to Extension Functionaries in all the Extension
Education Institutes as also through Model Training Courses at various
ICAR/SAUs and other Central Training Institutes.
Efforts are being made under ATMA programme, which is in operation in
565 districts to plug the gaps between µknow-how¶ and µdo-how¶ by providing skill
based trainings and demonstrations to the farming community.  Since the
scheme follow a bottom-up and demand driven approach, the requisite extension
support is provided in a gap-filling mode in agriculture and allied sectors.
Recommendation Serial No.15(vii)
ATMA may be located in KVKs
The ATMAs are largely located in the close vicinity of the institutions
managing them.  In majority of the cases, ATMAs are located in District
Agriculture Office of the State Department of Agriculture if the charge of PD
(ATMA) is held by District Level  Officer of Agriculture Department.  However, in
places where the PD(ATMA) post is held by KVKs/Companies/NGOs, the offices
are located in the operational premises of the agency.
Recommendation Serial No.15(viii)
Awards may be instituted to encourage outstanding farmers.
There is an in-built provision to encourage outstanding farmers by way of
giving awards to the farmers under ATMA programme.  Farmer awards to the
best farmer representing different enterprises at block level (05 farmers per
block) have been incorporated in the cafeteria of activities with an amount of
Rs.0.50 lakhs provided to each block for this purpose.  Also, the outstanding
progressive farmers are encouraged to run the Farm Schools to promote farmer-
to-farmer extension under the ATMA Scheme.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation is in the process of
instituting Lal Bahadur Shastri Krishi Ratna Awards for  farmers for outstanding
performance in agriculture and allied fields.  The draft scheme has been pilot
tested by the National Productivity Council.  On the basis of the findings of the
study the scheme is being revised and is expected to be finalized shortly.
Recommendation Serial No.15(ix)
Ecology should be conserved by the concept on conservation farming
Conservation farming which envisages the efficient use of available
resources for optimum output is being followed in the National Food Security
Mission and Integrated Cereal Development Programme (Macro Management
Programme).  The resource conservation technologies like zero tillage,
rotavators and sprinkler system of irrigation are being promoted for the
conservation of natural resources- soil and water. Besides, the system of rice
intensification, a technology which economizes the use of water by about 25-30%
as compared to conventional method of rice cultivation is also being popularized
among farmers through organizing demonstrations at every 100 ha area
coverage of the crop under National Food Security Mission.  The total area
targeted under system of rice intensification is 5 million ha by the year 2011-
2012.
Recommendation Serial No.15(x)
Help of Department of Information Technology may be requisitioned to set up
and make Gyan Chaupals efficient/effective
The National Policy for Farmers announced in 2007 by this Department
states that:
³The potential of ICT would be harnessed by estabilishing Gyan Chuapals
in villages.  Further, the common service centres of the Department of
Information Technology, Government of India and those set up by the State
Governments and private initiative programmes will be evolved for inclusive and
broad-based development.  Thus, the structure of the ICT-based knowledge
system would, inter alia, include setting up of such village centres.  Last-mile and
last-person connectivity would be facilitated with the help of technologies such as
broadband internet, community radio, or internet-mobile phone synergies ´.
Presently, under the AGRISNET component of the Scheme
³Strengthening/Promoting Agricultural Information System ´, assistance is being
given to the State/UT Governments for establishing IT infrastructure and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

development of software at district and state level, with the objective of providing
agriculture related information/services to the farmers.
This Department is also presently engaged in the designing the National
e-Governance Plan in Agriculture (NeGP-A).  Phase-I is complete with
identification of 18 prioritized services and these identified services are
envisaged to be provided to the farmers through the Common Service Centres
(CSCs) of the Department of Information Technology (DIT).
Recommendation Serial No.15(xi)
Agri-clinics and Agri-Business Centres should be rejuvenated by
engaging one graduate each from the fields of agriculture, veterinary science,
commerce/marketing and home science.
The Agri-Clinics and Agri-Business Centres Scheme is open to the
graduates of agriculture as well as allied disciplines like Horticulture, Animal
Husbandry, Dairy, Veterinary, Poultry Farming and Pisciculture. The project
could be taken up by individual graduates or a group of 5 or more trained
graduates, one of whom could be non-agriculture graduate with experience in
Business Development and Management.  Thus, the scheme already provides
for a multi-disciplinary approach, as suggested by the Hon ¶ble Committee.
Recommendation Serial No. ± 15 (xii)
Greater attention should be accorded to the provision of simple and effective
farm implements.
In order to make available various agricultural implements and machines
at cheaper rates, assistance in the form of subsidy @ 25% of the cost with
permissible ceiling limits is available to all farmers for the purchase of various
agricultural equipments including hand tools, bullock-drawn/power-driven
implements, planting, reaping, harvesting and threshing equipment, tractors,
power-tillers and other specialized agricultural machines under the centrally
sponsored scheme of Macro Management of Agriculture.
Recommendation Serial No. 15(Xiii)
Food Security should be ensured during all types of disasters .
 In order to check the rising prices as well as filling the gap between
demand and supply the Govt. has reduced the import duties on following items
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and prohibited the export of most of these items in order to improve the
availability of the essential commodities in domestic market. The details as on
07.05.08 are as indicated below:
 (i) Edible Oils: The prices of edible oils have been rising during the last
one year. For increased availability and softening of the prices of edible
oils in the domestic market the import duty on crude and refined oils has
been reduced to zero and 7.5% w.e.f 01.04.2008.. The Govt. has also
banned the export of all edible oils under Chapter 15 except   Export of
Castor Oil, Export of Coconut Oil through Kochi Port, µDeemed export¶ of
edible oils to 100% export oriented units with the condition that the final
product be non-edible and Export of Oils produced out of minor forest
produce.
(ii) Wheat:  The import duty on Wheat (HS Code 1001 10 90 or 1001
90 20) and on Wheat flour(1101 00 00) has been reduced to zero w.e.f
09.09.06 and 31.12.07 respectively and the export of Wheat and Wheat
flour (HS Code 1001 & 1101) has been banned w.e.f 08.10.07.
(iii) Pulses:  The import duty on pulses has been reduced to zero w.e.f
08.06.06  and extended the period of validity of prohibition on exports of
Pulses(except Kabuli Chana) upto 31.3.2009.
(iv) Rice: The import duty on Rice (1006 30) has been reduced to
zero.  The Govt. has permitted the export of Basmati Rice  including
dehusked, brown, semi-milled, milled both in either par-boiled or raw
condition (10063020 if the minimum FOB price is US $ 1200 per ton or
Rs. 48,000/- per ton. Export of Basmati Rice will be restricted through
Kandla, Kakinada, Kolkata, JNPT, Mumbai, Mundra, and Pipavav. The
Govt. has prohibited the Export of  Non-Basmati Rice(1006 10, 1006 10
10, 1006 10 90, 1006 20 00, 1006 30, 1006 30 10, 1006 30 90, 1006 40
00 ) w.e.f 01.04.2008.
This Department is responsible for measures relating to coordination of
relief measures necessitated by drought, hailstorm and pest attack.  The Ministry
of Home Affairs is concerned with other natural calamities.  The Ministry of Rural
Development was implementing the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana
(SGRY) scheme, which came to an end on 31.3.2008.  That scheme had a
special component for augumenting food security through additional wage
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

employment in the natural calamity affected rural areas after due notification by
the State Government and its acceptance by the Ministry of Agriculture/Home
Affairs.  A separate allocation of food grains was considered and made to the
affected States on the recommendation of the Ministry of Agriculture/Home
Affairs.  With effect from 1.4.2008, the National Rural Employment Guarantee
Programme (NREGP) is implemented in the entire country with the exception of
districts that have a 100% urban population.  The objective of the programme is
to enhance livelihood security in rural areas by providing at least 100 days of
guaranteed wage employment in a financial year to every household whose adult
members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.
Recommendation Serial No. ± 15 (xiv)
Post harvest infrastructure be strengthened more on priority basis.
³Reforming Agricultural Markets & Promoting Post Harvest Technology ´ has
been identified as one of the thrust areas for the Ministry of Agriculture by the
Prime Minister ¶s Office.  Accordingly, the Department has formulated a new
scheme on µPost Harvest Technology and Management ¶ for implementation
during XI Plan period with budget outlay of Rs. 40.00 crores.  The main
components of the scheme are as under:
(i) Establishment of units for transfer of primary processing
technology, value addition, low cost scientific storage, packaging units
and technologies for by-product management in the production
catchments under tripartite agreement.
(ii) Establishment of low cost PHT units/supply of PHT equipments
with Government assistance.
(iii) Demonstration of technologies.
(iv) Training of farmers, entrepreneurs and scientists.
Development of Post-harvest/Marketing Infrastructure:
Ministry of Agriculture has recently formulated a reform-linked Central
Sector Scheme on µDevelopment of Marketing Infrastructure, Grading and
Standardization¶.  The scheme is aimed at the development of agricultural
marketing infrastructure in the country to cater to the post-harvest requirements
of production and marketable surplus of various farm products, promotion of
competitive alternative agricultural marketing infrastructure by inducing private
and cooperative sector investments, strengthening of existing agricultural
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

marketing infrastructure to enhance efficiency, providing infrastructure facilities
for grading, standardization and quality certification of agricultural produce,
creation of general awareness and providing training to farmers, entrepreneurs
and market functionaries etc. The scheme is reform-linked and has been
approved for implementation in those States only, which amend their Agricultural
Produce Market Committee (APMC)Act.
 Through subsequent modifications in the scheme, the State Agencies
such as State Agricultural Marketing Boards and APMCs have been allowed
assistance under the scheme for the modernization and strengthening of existing
marketing infrastructure and setting up of new facilities with no upper limit of
subsidy on an investment from their own funds without borrowing from the
financial institutions.  The Department has sanctioned 3603 numbers of projects
involving subsidy of Rs.16911.50 lakhs till 30.04.2008 under the scheme in the
country.
A Centrally Sponsored Scheme on ³National Horticulture Mission (NHM)´
is being implemented for the holistic development of horticulture sector duly
ensuring forward and backward linkages with the active participation of all the
stakeholders in 18 States and 2 Union Territories
Creation of post harvest management infrastructure is one of major
components under NHM, which includes establishment of pack houses, ripening
chambers, cold storages, CA storages, refer vans, mobile/primary processing
units.  Besides, wholesale markets, rural markets and terminal markets are also
being established under NHM.
Recommendation Serial No.15(xv)
The issue of climate change should be considered in the gravity of it merits
Considering the possible impact climate change could have on Indian
Agriculture production and economy, Indian Council of Agricultural
Research(ICAR), Department of Agricultural Research & Education (DARE),
Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture has launched a National Network
Project on ³Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to Climate
Change´ in 2004.
 The major objectives of this Project are to quantify the sensitivity of crops
including horticultural crops and plantations, soils, water, fish and livestock to
global climatic changes and this information is being transferred to the field level
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

for mitigation of adverse impact of climate change.  Therefore, there is no need
to have separate Cell or division as DARE is also a part of Ministry of Agriculture.
Recommendation No.15 (xvi)
All agricultural loans, long, medium and short, should be delivered at 4 %
per annum as recommended by the National Commission for Farmers.
The National Commission on Farmers have not made specific
recommendation for providing agricultural loan at the interest rate of 4 % per
annum in their Revised Draft National Policy for Farmers (RDNPF). In RDNPF
the Commission has recommended that the credit must be in time, in required
quantity and at appropriate interest rates (para 1.5.6.1 RDNPF).
The Government has taken affirmative action to provide credit to the
farmers at a lower rate. All the banks have been advised to lend crop loans to the
farmers upto a principal amount of Rs.3.00 lakhs at the rate of interest of 7 % per
annum.
Recommendation No.15(xvii)
The cases of loan defaulter should be dealt by constituting Debt
Reconciliation Boards at district level.
Since Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services, is the nodal
Ministry for the matter relating to constitution of Debt Reconciliation Boards, the
recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee has been conveyed
to them for taking appropriate action.  As soon as action taken report is received
from that Department, the Committee would be apprised.
Recommendation No.15(xviii)
MSPs be made differential based on crop-wise and region-wise considerations
The rationale behind a uniform MSP throughout the country is that it
encourages greater investment and production in relatively low cost area due to
a higher margin of profit and discourages production in the high cost area.
Further, a uniform price encourages crop specialization and optimum use of
nation¶s land and other recources on the basis of comparative advantage.  The
Agricultural Price Policy ± A Long Term Perspective (1986) has also justified the
uniform support price for the whole country on the ground that it alone can lead
to efficient utilisation of resources.
The Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP), among other
factors, considers the cost of production of various crops for all the major
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

producing States, as collected by different State Agricultural Universities under
the Comprehensive Scheme for the Study of Cost of Cultivation of Ministry of
Agriculture.  Under the sampling design of the Comprehensive Scheme for
Studying the Cost of Cultivation of Principal Crops, each State is demarcated into
a homogenous agro-climatic zone based on cropping pattern, soil type, rainfall,
etc.  The primary sampling units (Tehsils) are allocated to different zones in
proportion to total area of all the crops covered in the study.  Based on this, cost
of production per quintal is worked out for the major growing states, for specific
crops, and their weighted average is estimated and considered by CACP, among
other factors, for recommending MSP.
While recommending MSP, an effort is made to cover at least the paid out
expenses (A2) of farmers in high cost regions plus the imputed cost (FL) of family
labour (i.e. A2+FL cost) and C2 cost(i.e.full cost of production including the
imputed rental value of owned land and capital) in relatively efficient states,
keeping some margin for the benefit of farmers.
Recommendation No.15(xix)
Forward markets be regulated more stringently to channel benefits to farmers
The subject matter pertains to the Department of Consumer Affairs in the
Ministry of Consumer Affairs and Food & Public Distribution.  DAC has conveyed
the recommendation of the Committee to that Department and requested them to
furnish the ATN to Lok Sabha Secretariat directly under intimation to this
Department.
Recommendation No. 15(xx)
 All schemes under Horticulture Division be evaluated to assess their
performance
 Mid Term Evaluation of the schemes of National Horticulture
Mission, Micro Irrigation, Coconut Development Board and National Horticulture
Board have been entrusted to different agencies and the reports are likely to be
received shortly.
Recommendation No:  15 ( xxi )
Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) be
implemented without further delay throughout the country.
 Based on the recommendations of the Joint Group on Crop Insurance
constituted by this Department and views/comments of various stake-holders,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

draft Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) was prepared,
and sent to the Planning Commission  and Department of Expenditure, Ministry
of Finance for µin principle ¶ approval as early as  3 rd February, 2005.   The
Modified NAIS was subsequently, discussed in the Planning Commission and in
the meeting of AM with FM on 22.06.2005 and 24.06.2005 respectively.
Keeping in view the suggestions of Planning Commission and Hon ¶ble Finance
Minister, further improvements in the proposed MNAIS were made and the
proposal was sent to the Planning Commission and Deptt. of Expenditure for µin
principle¶ approval on 27th February, 2006 and 29th March, 2006 respectively.
In the meantime, this Department finalized the Memorandum for the
Expenditure Finance Committee on the MNAIS on the basis of views/comments
of the appraisal agencies including the Planning Commission and Department of
Expenditure and submitted the same for the consideration of the EFC.  EFC
meeting was scheduled to consider the proposal on MNAIS on 20 th December,
2006, but the meeting was postponed at the instance of the Planning
Commission.   The Planning Commission has been repeatedly requested at the
level of Agriculture Minister/Secretary (A&C) for clearance of the proposal of
MNAIS so that further action in the matter can be taken. ´
Comments of the Committee
1.28 The Committee agree with Recommendation Points numbering 15(ii), (iii),
(v), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x), (xi), (xii), (xiii), (xiv), (xv) and (xiv). But Recommendation
Points (i), (xvii), (xx) and (xxi) are of interim nature where final replies need to be
given.  However, the Committee are not convinced with the replies to
Recommendation points (iv), (vi), (x) and (xvi).
Under Recommendation Point 15(iv), the Committee recommended that an
overall strategy should be devised, to improve the productivity of small
farms/farmers.  However, the Committee are not convinced with the reply of the
Government. The Improvement in the productivity of small farms/farmers need
much greater effort.  The National Food Security Mission (NFSM) is presently
limited to rice, wheat and pulses.  However, small farms/farmers are engaged in
growing a plethora of crops, mostly as means of their livelihood.  It is the
productivity of these farms/farmers that has to be improved to turn agriculture
into a profitable vocation for them and also to fill the food basket of the country.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures adopted to raise and
assess the growth rate of farmers ¶ income commensurate with the growth rate
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and agricultural production.  The Department need to devise an overall strategy
for this purpose.
Under Recommendation Point 15(vi), the Committee had recommended
that as pointed out by the National Commission for Farmers, the gap between
µknow-how¶ and µdo-how¶ needed to be plugged. The Committee find the reply of
the Government explaining the measures taken for bridging the gap between the
µknow-how¶ and µdo-how¶ unacceptable.  Also the Committee are not convinced of
the effectiveness of the agriculture extension activities in India either through
ATMA or otherwise.  The Committee reiterate that the Government should devise
newer extension techniques to popularise its programmes among the farmers.
In their reply to Recommendation Point 15(x), the Department is completely
silent on setting up of Gyan Chaupals with the help of Department of Information
& Technology.  The reply only mentions establishment of IT infrastructure and
development of software at the district and State level. Whereas, Gyan Chaupals
need to be established at the village level.  The Committee are perturbed to note
the ignorance of the Department and reiterate their recommendation to set up
Gyan Chaupals expeditiously.
As regards Recommendation Point 15(xvi), the Committee are not
convinced with the reply of the Government to provide credit to the farmers at
lower interest rate of seven per cent per annum.  The Committee are of the
considered view that all agricultural loans; long, medium and short, should be
delivered at four percent per annum as some of the States like Kerala are giving
farm credit below six per cent interest rate.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
(Recommendation No. 1)
Budgetary Allocation
2.1 The Committee noted that for the X Plan the Department proposed an outlay of
Rs.25,002 crore but got an allocation BE of Rs.13,200 crore only. However, the actual
expenditure incurred was higher at Rs.15,958.42 crore.  For the XI Plan, the DAC
proposed an outlay of Rs.51,052.12 crore while the tentative allocation for the Plan has
been indicated at Rs.41,903 crore.  The allocation of Rs.25,000 crore for the Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana, which is a State Plan Scheme, is not included in this.  The Plan
outlay for 2008-09 for the Department is Rs.6,900 crore against a proposal made for
Rs.8973.49 crore.
It was observed that the Central Plan outlay of Rs.6,900 crore for the Department
has registered an increase of 25% over BE (2007-08) of Rs.5520 crore.  The total plan
outlay of Rs.10105.67 crore (Plan Schemes 6900 + State Plan Scheme 3205.67) for
DAC, though below the projected requirement, saw an increase of more that 80% as
compared to BE (2007-08).  Compared to RE (2007-08) of Rs.6927.94 crore in plan
allocation for DAC (inclusive of State Plan Schemes) the increase is about 45%.  It is
noted that there has been significant increase in the outlay for crops (pulses and
oilseeds), credit, seeds, rainfed farming system and extension.  However, there has
been slight decrease in the outlay in some schemes like macro-management,
horticulture and agriculture marketing.
The Department had informed that a substantial increase in allocation for DAC
compared to BE (2007-08) is considered adequate and, if need arises, additional funds
may be sought at the RE stage.
During the examination of Demands for Grants (2007-08), the Department had
lamented that Rs.5560 crore (including Rs.40 crore for North-Eastern States) was not
sufficient to meet the requirement of the agricultural sector.  The Committee note the
volte-face by the Department on the adequacy of fund allocation.
It was after a long time that the Department has expressed satisfaction in fund
allocation by the Planning Commission.  The Committee recommend that DAC should
make 100% utilization of the adequate fund allocated for 2008-09 and convert the spurt
in allocation to agricultural production / growth.  With this financial leeway it is a true
occasion to the Department to prove their mettle and worthiness.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Committee were of the considered view that near body-tight nature of
schemes operated by the Ministry of Agriculture, is causing lack of coordination and is
also impinging upon their performances.  It is recommended that the Ministry should
make the schemes inter-operable to produce synergic efforts of agricultural
development.
A major hurdle, observed by the Committee, in complete utilization of funds
under various schemes was the non-production of Utilization Certificates by the
Implementing Agencies.  The Department often takes this plea as reason for under
utilization.  It is noted after an initial release, the further release of funds depend on the
production of Utilization Certificates that vouch for the authenticity of implementation.
Besides, the Committee were not convinced of the control of the Ministry of
Agriculture over utilization of funds released to the North-Eastern States.  They are also
apprehensive that the funds allocated for agriculture in the region are not spent entirely
for the development of agriculture in North Eastern region and the veracity of Utilization
Certificates is not assessed, considering the social and security peculiarities of the
region.  The Committee should be appraised of the status of the last 2 years non-
lapsable fund accumulation and its utilization.
The methods of delivering the results had to be devised and for that the
Committee recommend that in addition to the present system of Utilization Certificate, on
the spot monitoring of the scheme ¶s implementation by the senior officers / expert of the
subject / scheme be taken care of, to ensure proper and prudent utilization of public
money allocated for development of the all important agricultural sector.
The Committee also recommended that there is dire need of co-ordination
between Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana, National Food Security Mission and National
Rainfed Area Authority, more so, keeping in view the critical food situation in the country
and the world over.
Reply of the Government
2.2 The Government, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that it might be noted
that while BE for the DAC in 2007-08 was Rs.5560 crore(including Rs.40 crore for State
Plan Schemes), RE for 2007-08 was enhanced to Rs.6927.94 crore(inclusive of State
Plan Schemes) in order to address  the requirement of funds of the Department for the
financial year 2007-08.
Under recently launched Scheme of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana(RKVY),
considerable flexibility has been given to States to devise schemes and take up projects
according to the requirements and priorities of State Governments.
Efforts are also being made to rationalize norms of subsidy under different
schemes of the Department to produce synergy in agricultural development. Guidelines
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

of schemes such as Macro-Management of Agriculture, Support to State Extension
Programmes for Extension Reforms, Development of Market Infrastructure, Grading and
Standardization and the Grameen Bhandaran Yojana are being modified to rationalize
them.  Common guidelines for Watershed Development Projects have been evolved by
the National Rainfed Area Authority(NRAA) envisaging greater convergence of efforts
under different Schemes implemented in watershed areas.
The Department has taken a number of steps to ensure full and proper utilization
of funds which, interalia, include timely release of funds to the implementing agencies,
regular monitoring and review of implementation of schemes and utilization of funds,
obtaining utilization certificates from the implementing agencies to whom the funds have
been released, and continuous interaction with the States/implementing agencies.
 Field visits are made by Senior Officers of the Department to oversee
implementation of Schemes.  External evaluation of schemes has also been introduced
to obtain feedback on efficacy of their implementation.
The progress of releases made to the implementing agencies is regularly
monitored by the Secretary (A&C) in the weekly meetings held with the Senior Officers
of the Department. The Government has also imposed the condition that not more than
33% of the annual allocation made can be utilized in the last quarter of the fiscal
concerned.  The result has been an improvement in the pace of the release of funds
during the year.   During 2006-07, 95.50% of allocated funds have been released.
For coordination purposes and to ensure synergy between different schemes
being implemented for development of agriculture and allied sector, the Rashtriya Krishi
Vikas Yojana (RKVY) envisages the preparation of District Agriculture Plans (DAPs) by
the State Government, which will be integrated into State Agriculture Plans (SAP) as a
criterion for eligibility of the State for funding under RKVY.  Under DAPs convergence of
all the centrally sponsored schemes like National Food Security Mission (NFSM),
National Horticulture Mission (NHM), Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA), Central
Sector & State Plan Schemes will be ensured.   Planning Commission has issued
detailed guidelines for preparation of DAPs by States in association with Panchayati Raj
Institutions.
The budgetary allocation for the North Eastern States  has been increasing over
the years.  As against the Revised Estimates of Rs.588.00 crores for Central Plan outlay
for North East States of this Department during 2007-08, the Budget Estimates for 2008-
09 are Rs.690.00 crores, an increase of about 17.3%.  It is persistent to mention that the
budget allocation of Rs.690.00 crores for 2008-09 (for N.E.States) does not include the
amount that would be available to  NE States under the State-Plan Scheme of  Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana(RKVY).  As against the Revised Estimates of Rs.389.00, 486.00 and
588.00 crores during 2005-06, 2006-07 and 2007-08 for North East States, the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

expenditure has been Rs.289.36, 425.21 and 531.74 crores respectively.  In terms of the
percentage of actual expenditure under the schemes of the Department for the NE
States vis-à-vis the Revised Estimates during 2005-06, 2006-07 and 2007-08 are 74.39,
87.49 and 90.31 crores respectively.  This shows an increasing trend of utilization of
funds in respect of programmes relating the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation in
respect of North East States.  Therefore, the percentage of funds transferred to non-
lapsable pool of Government of India in this respect is declining.
(Recommendation No. 5)
Women in agriculture
2.3 The Committee noted that women play a very active role in the agriculture sector.
She works with the men folk in the fields, rears livestock, backyard poultry and brings
feed and fodder   for their cattle etc.  In addition, they also run the household activities.
However, their status as agriculturist is not recognized and she is denied of the credit
facilities for her needs.  The Committee strongly recommended that the farm women
should be treated as skilled labour and along with the men of the household they should
also be extended Kisan Credit Card facility and loans through other institutional credit
agencies.  They should be given the right to own agricultural land which may help in
meeting the national goals of improving food and livelihood security, women ¶s
empowerment and children ¶s welfare and agricultural productivity.  Women Self Help
Groups may be encouraged to take part in agriculture and allied activities in a bigger
way.
The Committee also recommended that as presently Village Panchayats have
one-third representation of women, a Gram Panchayat Mahila Fund should be created
for providing agriculture technological skills, information   about credit facilities and
empowering the women farmers by meeting their common needs, Literacy and training
programmes for women should also be run so they have direct access to agriculture
policies and programmes for their upliftment.
Reply of the Government
2.4 The Government, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:
Horticulture Division:  Ministry of Agriculture has launched Centrally
Sponsored Scheme ³Technology Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture in
North Eastern States including Sikkim during the year 2001-02 in North Eastern region
and further extended the scheme to Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and
Uttarakhand during the year 2003 -04.  Under the scheme the role of women has been
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

adequately addressed wherein entrepreneurial development of women farmers has
been emphasized.  Under the programme, it is envisaged to make women farmers self-
reliant by providing them equal opportunities, so that they are able to avail of the benefits
and opportunities of the existing agricultural systems by:
• Organization / identification of women groups which would act as a
network for channelizing the horticultural support.
• Need assessment of women farmers in terms of the horticulture Support
such as input support, technological support and extension support etc.,
• Prioritizing the activities of the individual women ¶s groups on the basis of
the need assessment.
• Provide adequate organizational and financial support to the women
groups to make their ³self-help groups´.
• Provide technical training in horticulture and allied and allied areas to
women farmers,
• Provide training in increased managerial, organizational, entrepreneurial
and decision making skills.
• Enable them to develop into viable bodies so that they are able to
orchestrize their own activities, resources and group interaction.
Assistance is provided for base line survey to identify the amount and type of the
work being contributed by the women in the field of horticulture, their role in decision
making process and the problems faced by them in farming.  The assistance  available
is @ Rs.10000 per district.  Rs.20000 per District for development of curriculum and
Rs.5000 per ³Self help group of women ´.  Assistance is also available @ of Rs.10000
per District for refresher training of facilitators.
Besides, training of farm women for 5 days @ Rs.1000/ farmer about the
production technology, methods to obtain credit loans for the farming purpose and to
understand the marketing techniques of the produce, the opportunities and the
directions.  Training of the master trainers is designed to train a group of trainers on
various disciplines of horticulture / allied fields, credit, banks, input agencies, marketing
etc.
National Horticulture Mission: In all the horticulture schemes, viz. National
Horticulture Mission (NHM), Micro Irrigation Scheme (MI) and the Schemes under the
National Horticulture Board (NHB) and Coconut Development Board (CDB), participation
of women beneficiaries/farmers is encouraged and women are treated as equal
partners.  While issuing administrative approvals for flagship schemes like NHM and MI ,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

it has been stipulated that the implementing agencies of these Schemes will ensure that
at least 30% of the budget allocations are earmarked for women beneficiaries/farmers.
Besides, Human Resource Development programme also envisages training on
technology transfer, capacity building for women farmers and specific arrangement like
separate women¶s hostel, separate batches, etc are made by the Trainer ¶s organization.
This Division will follow the recommendation at the State level and district level involving
Gram Panchayats.
Credit Division:   Kisan Credit Card (KCC) is one of the key products developed to
improve farmers¶ accessibility to bank credit for production purposes, simplify the credit
delivery mechanism and provide more flexibility in the use of credit.  KCC scheme aims
at providing adequate and timely credit support from the banking system to farmers for
their cultivation needs  in a flexible, hassle-free and cost effective manner.  The content
of the scheme has been revised to include the investment and consumption credit needs
of the farmers.
There is no gender bias in issuance of KCCs nor has any such incident been
brought to the notice of DAC.
Cooperation Division:  With the overall objective of bringing women in the cooperative
fold from grass root levels through an  informal approach to revitalize and encourage
women participation in group activities and to improve the socio-economic conditions of
women of selected blocks, NCUI is now running 4 exclusive women development
projects located at Shimoga (Karnataka,), Berhampur (Orissa), Imphal (Manipur) and
Bhopal (MP) under the Special Scheme of Intensification of Cooperative Education in
the  cooperatively under-developed states.  Besides, each field project has got a special
women development component.  Under this, women are organized into self-help
groups and help them develop thrift habits.  Women are also given training to undertake
income-generating activities by mobilizing their own resources or by borrowing from
cooperatives.  The projects personnel help them in marketing their produce in the local
market and by organizing fairs/exhibitions.  One women educational and development
project is running in North Eastern Region at East Imphal in the State of Manipur.
During the period April, 2007 to November 2007, 53,533 persons were imparted
education and training by these projects.
NCDC encourages women cooperatives to avail of assistance under its various
schemes.  A large number of women members are engaged in cooperatives dealing with
fisheries, powerloom garment knitting units, spinning mills, fruits & vegetables etc.
Prominent among the women cooperatives which were sanctioned financial assistance
by NCDC during the year 2006-07 were 3 handloom weaver women cooperatives in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Nagaland, Jharkhand Mahila Swablambi Poultry Sahakari Sangh, Ranchi, Gujarat State
Women SEWA Coop., and Federation Ltd., women cooperatives in 20districts under
ICDP and to Self Help Groups of women in 11 districts.
Rainfed Farming System Division: The RFS Division is implementing the National
Watershed Development Project for Rainfed Areas (NWDPRA) which has been
subsumed under the Macro Management of Agriculture Scheme since November 2000.
The programme is being implemented on a Watershed approach aimed at improvement
of farming systems in rainfed areas.  Two major components, viz, farm production
systems and livelihood support system are mostly taken up through Self-Help Groups /
User Groups.  During the formation of such Groups women beneficiaries are given
adequate importance and many such groups are constituted exclusively for the women.
The project implementing agencies are advised to encourage formation of women Self-
Help groups for active involvement of women in agriculture and allied activities in
watershed areas.
Trade Division:  Trade Division ¶s existing Central Sector Scheme ± Capacity  Building
to enhance the competitiveness of Indian Agriculture and Registration of Organic
Products Abroad ¶ no separate provision has been made  for Gender Budgeting.  The
component of the Scheme is such that funds are being released on Project/Programmes
basis.  It has however been impressed upon the agencies concerned to give due
consideration to the women trainees in different training programmes undertaken under
the project approved under the scheme.
Crops Division:  The Division is implementing three schemes viz., (i) Mini Mission-II of
Technology Mission on Cotton (ii) Mini Mission-II of Jute Technology Mission and (iii)
National Food Security Mission, wherein States have been directed to channelise 30%
of the allocated funds to Women Farmers.
Mechanization & Technology Division:
1) The Division is implementing the Central Sector Scheme ³Promotion and
Strengthening of Agricultural Mechanization through Training, Testing &
Demonstration´ having components of Training, Testing, Demonstration and
Outsourcing of training.  The development of skill of the women farmers/workers
have been adequately taken care of by earmarking 10% of funds and fixing
physical targets separately for women. Under the µTraining and testing
component¶ Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institutes have been
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

organizing short duration training programmes ± both institutional & On site for
farmers in the areas of selection, operation, maintenance and management of
agricultural implements.  These institutes have introduced a Training Programme
on µGender friendly Equipments for Women farmers w,e,f, 2004 -05.  Under a
new component µOutsourcing of Training ¶ during  the 10 th Plan to train large
number of farmers in nearby places, despite no separate target being for training
of women, the State Govts, have been requested to earmark 10% of the funds
under this component for training of women farmers.
2) The demonstrations on the farmers ¶s field including women farmers are
organized by State Governments.  Though, there are no specific targets for
women farmers under µDemonstrations¶ however, the women farmers have been
actively made to participate in the demonstrations.  The State Governments have
been requested to earmark 5 -10% of the funds for women and furnish their
reports separately on gender disaggregate basis.
3) In order to reduce the drudgery and increasing efficiency in farm operations, a
number of agricultural implements and hand tools suitable for farm women have
been developed by Research & Development organizations under ICAR. The list
of gender friendly equipments (enclosed as Annexure I) has been sent to all the
States/UTs for popularizing them through Macro Management scheme.  The
State Governments/UTs have been requested to earmark 10% of the funds for
these equipments.
Agriculture Extension:  The scheme ³Support to State Extension Programme for
Extension Reforms ´ aims to provide demand driven extension services through active
involvement of farmers/women farmers/subject matter specialists/NGOs/Krishi Vigyan
Kendras etc wherein the gender concerns are being addressed by allocating 30% of
resources for programmes and activities for women farmers and women extension
functionaries.  2,12,483 women farmers have been benefited through various extension
activities including exposure visits, trainings, demonstrations and kisanmelas under the
scheme during  2007-08.   30% Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA)
resources have been allocated for women farmers and Women Extension Functionaries
related to focus on formation of Self Help Groups, providing training, extension, input,
managerial, entrepreneurial and other support services and mandatory representation of
women in all Committees/Bodies at district/block level.  186 women Agril. Graduates
have been trained and 27 women have set up Agri.Ventures under the scheme
µEstablishment of Agri Clinics and Agri Business Centres ¶ during 2007-08.
Special programmes are also being produced & telecast by Doordarshan & AIR
in areas of pre-dominant involvement of women such as vermicompost, nursery-raising,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

seed treatment, floriculture, kitchen garden, gender friendly tools etc under the scheme
µMass Media Support to Agriculture Extension ¶.
Technology Mission on Oil Seeds & Pulses Division (TMOP):   Government of India
is implementing a centrally Sponsored Scheme ³Integrated Scheme on Oil Seeds,
Pulses, Oilpalm and Maize (ISOPOM)´ in 14 major oilseeds and pulses growing states in
the country.  Under the scheme, benefits to the tune of 30% of allocation can flow to
women.  Therefore, in components like distribution of agricultural inputs, training and
demonstrations etc., preference can be given to women farmers who head the house
hold.  State Govts have been advised to work out the physical and financial targets for
the women-related components in their state.
Macro Management Division (MM):    The Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA)
Scheme is the centrally sponsored scheme implemented by the Department to
supplement/complement the efforts of the State Government for enhancement of
agriculture production and productivity.  It provides sufficient flexibility to the States to
prepare Work Plans as per their felt needs and priorities.
The State Governments have been advised through Administrative Approval
letters to provide funds for gender component under MMA scheme.
     Under the MMA Scheme, financial assistance has been provided for gender
based activities under different components.  For instance, gender friendly equipment
have been promoted under Farm Mechanization, formation of self-help groups of women
have been encouraged under watershed development programmes.  Similarly trainings
have been imparted to women farmers under crop production programmes.  Preference
has been given to women under extension activities.
     During 2007-08, an outlay of Rs.350 crore out of the total outlay of Rs.1100.00
crore was earmarked for gender component under the scheme.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Annexure I
WOMAN FRIENDLY TOOLS & EQUIPMENTS
1. Seed Treatment Drum
2. Naveen Dibbler
3. Rotary Dibbler
4. Seed Drill
5. Paddy Drum Seeder
6. Rice Transplanter (manual)
7. Cono Weeder
8. Long Handled Weeder (Grubber)
9. Weeder (Wheel hoe)
10. Fertilizer Broadcaster
11. Spraying Safety Kit
12. Improved Sickle
13. Sugarcane Stripper
14. Tubular Maize Sheller
15. Rotary Maize Sheller
16. Groundnut Stripper
17. Groundnut Decorticator (Sitting type)
18. Groundnut Decorticator (Standing type)
19. Pedal operated Paddy Thresher
20. Hanging type Double Screen Grain Cleaner with Sec Holder
21. Pedal operated Cleaner Grader
22. Potato Peeler
23. Potato Slicer
24. Mini Dal Mill
25. Hand operated Chaff Cutter
26. Wheel Ridger
27. Cotton Stalk Puller
28. Hand Ridger
29. Bhindi Plucker
30. Fruit Harvester
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 6)
Coconut Development Board
2.5 The Committee had informed that the Coconut Development Board, which came
into existence in 1981, is implementing the schemes ³Integrated Development of
Coconut Industry in India including Technology Mission on Coconut ´.  The Coconut
Development Board participates in domestic and international fairs/exhibition for
promotion and marketing expansion of coconut products.
The Committee noted that the Board has identified the potential for export of
coconut based products like desiccated coconut powder, virgin coconut oil, tender
coconut water, coconut shell, charcoal, activated carbon, spray dried milk powder etc.
However, the Committee feel that the potential of domestic consumption has not been
fully tapped and that marketing of coconut based products in the domestic market is
inadequate.  The Committee were of the opinion that without developing a market
strategy for coconut based products, the coconut industry cannot make progress.  They,
therefore, recommend that the Coconut Development Board should make all out efforts
to tap national as well as international markets to sell coconut based products,
especially, in the States that do not produce coconut.  Awareness campaign should also
be run in mass media to highlight the benefit of these products ´.
Reply of the Government
2.6 The Government, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:
³As recommended by the Committee, the importance of adopting a focussed
strategy for marketing of various coconut based products, especially new products in
both national as well as international markets, for fully tapping the market potential, is
endorsed by the Government of India and the Coconut Development Board (CDB).
 The CDB is working, through a well-coordinated promotional and marketing
strategy for creation of product awareness in respect of new coconut products shaped
on the basis of market research studies with the objective of achieving product
diversification.   Research on assessment of consumption pattern of coconut and
coconut products, consumer preferences, price trend analyses, market promotion, etc.
are funded under its scheme of Technology Mission on Coconut.    Financial assistance
is also extended to entrepreneurs, co-operative societies, NGOs for carrying out market
promotion activities, media support, participation in exhibitions, and dissemination of
literature.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

 Market promotion activities to create product awareness of new products, with a
view to stimulate domestic demand in all parts of the country for coconut products,  as
well as to ensure sustained market supply of such products are supported
technologically and financially by the CDB.  Encouragement is given to field testing of
technologies developed at laboratory level.
Adoption of a focussed marketing strategy has also enabled the entry of Indian
coconut products to some international markets, which have a relatively large
Population of Indian origin.  Export prospects have been boosted.  In order to tap the
international market, the Board recognises the importance of participating in important
events and exhibitions in potential markets such as the Gulf, the USA, Europe and the
Far East.  It will be possible to develop the international market only by repeated
participation in events in countries having a high population of Indian origin.  As there is
stiff competition from countries like Thailand and Malaysia it is important to participate in
good international exhibitions and fairs.  The Board also participated in a total number of
248 domestic exhibitions during the past five years.  The Board  provides free space in
its pavilion to exhibitors to exhibit their products.
The Board regularly organizes programmes and seminars to increase awareness
about the goodness of coconut and coconut products.  The CDB organized two national
level Coconut Festivals in Kerala at Ernakulam (Coconut Festival 2005) and at
Thiruvananthapuram (Cocofest 2007), Kerala.  Business meets are also held to help
manufacturers and buyers to interact with each other and expand their business.  These
festivals saw the convergence of stakeholders from all areas of coconut research and
development.  Such festivals were also held in Delhi, Jaipur, Chandigarh, Patna etc.
On the national front, a well-knit multi-media product promotional campaign was
carried out by the Board all over the country during 2007-08 to promote  goodness of
coconut, dispel the malicious propaganda against coconut and enhance the level of
consumption of coconut products.
The media plan including print campaign reached out to approximately 110
million readers and TV campaign to 130 million viewers.  The endorsement of Tender
Nut Water by Dr. P.T.Usha through the TV commercial of the Board has contributed to
the increasing popularity of Tender Nut Water as a healthy and refreshing drink.  This
has resulted in 15% increase in consumption of tender coconut.  The campaign on
tender coconut water has motivated the entrepreneurs to apply for the transfer of
technology developed by the Board for processed and packaged tender nut water.  An
integrated film titled ³Goodness of coconut and Tender Coconut Water ´ was telecast
through various leading national/regional channels.  A Print campaign focussing on ³the
goodness of coconut, coconut oil and virgin coconut oil as hair care, skin care and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

cosmetic and the promotional ads on the same were released in mainline publications,
with positive feedback.
In view of the ensuing seasonal advantage for promotion of tender coconut and
for the promotion of coconut oil, the Board displayed hoardings at various points in the
important cities of Delhi, Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad and Major towns in Kerala.
The Board is undertaking various steps for the generic promotion of coconut products in
different parts of the country.
The Board is continuing the Media Plan through TV, Print and Outdoor Media,
with an outlay of Rs.5.50 crores during 2008-09.
(Recommendation No. 7)
Micro Irrigation
2.7 The Committee were informed that Micro-Irrigation helps in better water use
efficiency (60-70%), increase in yield (30-100%), better quality of produce, saving in
fertilizer usage (40%) and weeding cost along with easy intercultural operation in all
types of soil including saline soil.   The technique can be highly effective in agricultural
tracts in challenging agro-climatic conditions like hilly, Dryland and arid regions.
However, all these benefits will be of no use if the farmers are forced to pay 50%
of the total cost of drip and sprinkler systems as envisaged in the scheme.   The
Committee sees this as one of the reasons why the physical performance of the scheme
leaves much to be desired.
It was recommended that the farmers should not be made to pay more than 25%
of the cost of the drip and sprinkler systems, and if need be, a method may be devised
wherein another portion of the cost is recovered depending on the marketable surplus
she/he produces by benefiting from the scheme.  Fertigation, which is an optional
component of the scheme may be promoted in a bigger way by creating greater
awareness of the benefits of the method.   It is expected this can give major impetus to
agriculture sector especially horticulture in hilly, Dryland and arid regions of the country.
The Committee came to know that  overpriced and substandard minor irrigation
equipment are being sold to the farmers which needs to be investigated and
accountability may be fixed on the authorities which approved this over-priced and sub-
standard minor irrigation equipments.
Reply of the Government
2.8 The Government, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:
³The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the Committee in
respect of Micro Irrigation Scheme under which 50% of the total cost of the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

system is provided as subsidy to all categories of farmers in the ratio of 40:10
between the Central Government and State Government. Keeping in view the
importance of the scheme and demand from farmers, some of the States have
increased the State share varying from 10% to 20-40%.  The Government of
Madhya Pradesh has increased its share to 30% for farmers of general category
and 40% for SC/ST farmers.   The Government of Karnataka has increased its
State share to 35% for all districts except two where it has raised it to 60% and
there is no burden on the farmers. The Governments of Andhra Pradesh,
Rajasthan and Gujarat have also increased the State share in a similar manner.
The increased level of State subsidy is providing greater degree of comfort to the
farmers. Fertigation, though an optional component under the scheme  is
promoted by way of imparting training, highlighting  the savings in fertilizer and
increase in productivity as a consequence of adoption of fertigation. Around 7.76
lakh ha area have been covered under Drip and Sprinkler Irrigation between
2005-06 and 2007-08 which is substantially higher than the growth achieved prior
to the launch of the Scheme. The programme has provided an impetus to the
agriculture/horticulture sector in the country including hilly, dryland and arid
regions.
The Micro Irrigation scheme guidelines prescribe the procedure for
enlistment of manufacturers/suppliers of equipment.   Each state has to follow
this procedure and register a number of manufacturers who can provide quality
systems and good after sales service.  So far, no complaint has been received in
respect of substandard quality or overpriced equipment. The programme is
monitored by the District Micro Irrigation Committee at the State level. From time
to time, Joint Inspection Team (JIT) constituted by the DAC also visit the States
to check the quality of system supplied ´.
(Recommendation No. 8)
Technology Mission on Cotton
2.9 The Committee noted that the Mini Mission-II of Technology Mission on Cotton
was restructured in 2005-06 and is under implementation in 13 States.  Under the
revised scheme, the subsidy on the components like distribution of certified seeds and
sprayers has been increased besides the rationalization of subsidy on other
components.
One of the reasons observed as the cause of poor performance of the scheme is
the reduced demand for seeds of conventional varieties / hybrids due to more area
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

covered under Bt. Cotton.  The seeds of Bt. Cotton are not certified and hence not
eligible for assistance under the scheme.  Also, the assistance under the scheme could
not help people absorb the high cost of drip irrigation systems.  Even more surprising
reason for under utilization of funds quoted by the Department is that the States could
not send enough proposals to match the doubling of allocation for the year 2007-08.
Committee found these reasons ridiculous, considering the fact the scheme was
restructured during 2005-06 to make it more effective.  It is strongly recommended, that
the scheme should urgently be made more farmer friendly by making proper
arrangements to cover the widely preferred Bt. Cotton seeds duly certified through field
trials, under the scheme and to make necessary amendments to bring the cost of drip
irrigation systems within reach of all farmers.  The scheme shall also lay more emphasis
on cotton growing regions of the country identified as distress hotspots.
In order to measure the risks and benefits from Bio-technology in a transparent,
progressive, professional and credible manner, an autonomous National Bio-technology
Regulatory Authority should be set up as soon as possible on the lines of the
recommendation made in the Swaminathan Committee Report.
Reply of the Government
2.10 The Government, in their Action Taken Reply stated that the Mini Mission ± II of
TMC became operational since 2000-01 in 13 states viz. Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat,
Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil
Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The Mini Mission-II is for increasing
production and productivity of cotton.  Because of the implementation of Mini Mission-II
of TMC along with other favourable Government policies and supporting schemes, there
has been significant increase in production and productivity of the cotton during the last
7 years.  The production which was 95.24 lakh bales of lint cotton (each bale of 170 kg)
in 2000-01, has increased to 226.96 lakh bales during 2006-07 ( 238%) .  Similarly, the
productivity of lint cotton increased from 190 kg. per ha to 422 kg per  hectare( 222%)
during the same period.  This not only has increased the income of the farmers but also,
import of the cotton has reduced substantially and at the same time export has
increased  from almost one lakh bales to nearly 58 lakh bales during 2006-07.  During
2007-08, again a record production of cotton is anticipated in the country.
The scheme has large number of components (activities) for increasing
production and productivity of cotton.  As diseases and pests are number one threat for
cotton cultivation, scheme has given topmost thrust for pest management/control.  A
continuous interaction with the States and implementing agencies as well as monitoring
of the scheme has been done and will be carried out in a more focused manner, so that
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the prioritization of strategies/actions would be chalked out to achieve higher productivity
of  cotton which is the ultimate goal of the scheme. Besides mid-term corrections are to
be made by allowing State governments for inter-componental changes.  Flexibility will
be given to States for utilization of 10% of fund allocated to them for undertaking
location- specific  components  (activities) to tackle the local problems hindering the
growth of cotton.  These strategies / action plan will continue in the ensuing years.
As indicated above, major thrust will be given for pest control activities, farmers
field schools and transfer of technology through demonstrations so that it becomes more
farmer- friendly as recommended by Parliament Committee. Regarding recommendation
of the Committee for proper arrangement to cover widely preferred Bt. Cotton seeds, the
scheme provides assistance for popularizing the same through demonstration, training
of farmers¶, extension / dealers as well as other plant protection measures to protect the
Bt. Cotton crop, particularly from sucking pests etc.  The assistance for supply of Bt.
seeds will be made for the certified seeds of hybrids / varieties released and notified
during last 15 years.
The scheme is operational in all cotton growing areas of the country including
non-traditional areas like Orissa, West Bengal and Tripura.   The Sates have been given
full flexibility to identify the important cotton areas requiring attention for development
under  the scheme so that all the areas requiring attention for cotton development are
looked after properly.  Regarding recommendation on drip irrigation system, the scheme
provides assistance to farmers at the rate of 50% of the cost limited to Rs.25,000/- per
ha and 60%  of the cost limited to Rs.30,000/- per ha in watershed areas.  As the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation is also implementing a major Centrally
Sponsored Scheme on ³ Micro  Irrigation ( Drip and Sprinkler Irrigation) , the assistance
under cotton scheme will also be made in  tune with Micro Irrigation Scheme.
    The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has decided  to evaluate the Mini
Mission ±II of Technology Mission on Cotton in the ensuing season and accordingly
based upon  the suggestions, further changes in the scheme, if required, will be made.
Government has approved the setting up of a National Biotechnology Regulatory
Authority. The Department of Biotechnology has been designated as the Administrative
Department for setting up of National Biotechnology Regulatory Authority.  The
Department of Biotechnology is in the process of establishing the same for which
consultations with various stakeholders are being held.  The Authority would be set up
as an independent, autonomous and professionally led body to provide a single window
mechanism for bio-safety clearance of genetically modified products and processes.
Existing mechanisms, however, would continue till a full-fledged body is cleared with the
required infrastructure and fully functional autonomy.  Details of organization, scope,
hierarchical flow of information, transparency of working, autonomy, training and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

retraining of regulatory professionals, nature of legislation required are currently being
worked out.
(Recommendation No. 12)
National Project on Organic Farming
2.11 The Committee had noted that the Scheme µNational Project on Organic
Farming¶ was launched from October 2004 onwards on a Pilot Basis replacing the earlier
scheme µNational Project on Development and use of Bio-fertilizer ¶.  The Scheme is
already implemented throughout the country.  Though a relatively new concept, the
response to the scheme is learnt to be picking up.  The Committee in their 27 th Report
had requested for greater attention to the scheme to eliminate problems involved in
certification of organic farm products and their marketing.  Even so, the funds allocated
for the scheme for 2008-09 is only Rs.30 crore, which is the highest allocation for a year
since its launch.  The total funds allocated for XI plan is only Rs.150 crore and the area
covered in the entire country under the scheme is also a paltry 3.12 lakh hectare.
The Committee felt that organic farming is a sustainable method of agriculture
and in the present scenario it can be economically viable if efforts are taken to develop
domestic market for the products along with the already thriving export market.  The
Committee recommended that the Scheme should be expanded to cover larger
cultivated area and the potential of profitable returns to farmers be tapped by bringing
down the cost of production that would ensure wider niche market for the products within
the country.  Programmes should be formulated for generating awareness of the holistic
benefits of consumption of organic farm products.  Synergic approach by involving the
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Department of health, Panchayati Raj
Institutions and NGOs/SHGs may be adopted for the purpose.  Krishi Vigyan Kendras
may be involved in making farmers aware of the benefits of shifting to organic farming
and be made knowledgeable of the ways to do it.  One of the off shoots of this
endeavour will be a healthier ecological system.
The Committee felt that the involvement of the use of animals, for manure,
consumption of by products and the production of energy through bio-gas, is essential
for a successful organic farming system.  Coordinated efforts should be made in unison
with the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries for integration of
livestock development for successful implementation of the National project on organic
farming.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Reply of the Government
2.12 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have submitted that the
Government is already laying great stress under the Central Sector Scheme National
Project on Organic Farming (NPOF), on capacity building, reduction of cost of production
and on covering a larger area under organic farming.  About 421 service providers have,
so far, been appointed with the above purpose in view.  Training and demonstrations are
being organized on regular basis to spread the message of organic farming amongst
more and more number of farmers.  Awareness about the benefits of organic farming
and organic products is also being created through the medium of seminars, exhibitions
and publicity through print as well as electronic media.  Under the Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) ± Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)
Interface, ICAR is implementing the programme of preparation of crop/area specific
package of practices of organic farming and technology for production of different
organic sources of nutrients and disease/pest management.  NGOs/SHGs and Krishi
Vigyan Kendras are already involved in the implementation of the programme and are
making farmers aware about the benefits of organic farming.  The National Centre of
Organic Farming (NCOF), Ghaziabad, under the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation, have been directed to involve the Department of Health and Panchayati
Raj Institutions in implementation of the programme.
The area under organic farming has recorded a big jump over the years.  From a
mere 45000 ha. in 2004-05, the area has increased to 5.38 lakh ha. during 2006-07.
Out of this, 3.12 lakh ha. have been certified, while the remaining area is under the
process of certification.  NPOF plan to bring an area of 1 million ha. under the organic
farming during the 11th Five Year Plan.
For successful implementation of the Scheme through coordinated efforts in
unison with the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, the matter for
identification of activities for integration of livestock development has been taken up with
the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.
Comments of the Committee
2.13 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.19 of Chapter-I
of the Report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No.14)
Integrated Scheme for Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM)
2.14 The Committee noted that 40-45% of the domestic demand of edible oils is being
met through imports.  It is a matter of concern that the country is at this juncture even
though the µTechnology Mission on Oilseeds ¶ has been in operation for almost two
decades now.  The reasons furnished by the Department for low production of oilseeds
in India are, non availability of hybrid seeds, low monetary returns due to low production
potential, high risk due to climatic vagaries and susceptibility to pests and diseases, use
of poor quality seeds and unassured market at remunerative prices resulting in distress
sale during harvest season.
The Committee did not concur with that the reason of non-availability of hybrid
seeds as the information provided by the Department clearly shows that there is no
mismatch between demand and availability of certified seeds.
This was corroborated by acclaimed agriculture Scientist Prof. M. S.
Swaminathan.  Moreover, if any of the reasons quoted by the Department holds good, it
shows the failure, primarily of extension and other related aspects, on part of the Ministry
of Agriculture and sends warning signal in case of oilseeds production.
India is a country blessed with all the major available oilseeds of the world
including our traditional oilseeds.  Still data indicate towards 200 to 300 per cent gap
between the potential and achievement, which shows the dismal time and efforts put in
by the Government in the oil seeds sector.
The Committee recommended that the Ministry should urgently get their act
together, find the exact reasons for the failure and effect a complete evaluation and
revamp of schemes aimed at increasing the production of oilseeds.  This poor state of
affairs should not be allowed to continue.
Reply of the Government
2.15 The Government, in their Action Taken Reply stated that the Technology Mission
on Oilseeds (TMO) was launched by the Central Government to increase the production,
productivity of oilseeds and to achieve self-sufficiency in edible oils.
 Consequent upon the setting up of Technology Mission on Oilseeds,a major
breakthrough in increasing oilseeds production was achieved through an integrated
approach by introducing new crop technologies, better supply of inputs and extension
services support for marketing and post harvest technologies and excellent
coordination/cooperation between various organizations/departments and Ministries. As
a result of concerted efforts by the TMOP, the production of oilseeds increased from
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

10.83 million tonnes in 1985-86 to 25.19 million tonnes in 2003-04. This was brought
about not only by increase in area but also by improving the productivity from 570 kg. to
1064 kg. per hectare. The Technology Mission was discontinued in the year 2004.
However, the oilseeds production touched an all time record of 28.20 million tonnes
during 2007-08(IIIrd Advance Estimates).
There are substantial yield gaps between and within states in respect of various
major oilseeds.  In order to bridge the yield gaps, frontline demonstrations are being
organized through Indian Council of Agriculture Research(ICAR) to demonstrate the
latest improved production and protection technologies.  Besides, seeds of high yielding
varieties/hybrids of oilseeds are being made available to the farmers free of costs in the
form of minikits with a view to popularizing them and to bring these varieties  in the seed
production chain.
With a view to enhancing the productivity and production of oilseeds in the
country and also to make the implementation of the integrated scheme of Oilseeds,
Pulses, Oilpalm and Maize (ISOPOM) more effective and result oriented, ISOPOM has
recently been modified as a part of National Food Security Mission with regard to norms
and pattern of assistance, inclusion of new components and additional implementing
agencies during 11 th Plan period.  The assistance on production of certified seeds has
been enhanced from Rs500 per quintal to Rs1000/- per quintal besides enhanced
subsidy on distribution of certified seed from Rs. 800/- per quintal to Rs1200 per quintal
during 11th five year plan.
Further, keeping in view the fact that there is a constraint in area expansion
under oilseeds, the thrust during 11 th plan will be given towards yield improvement in
oilseeds besides promoting the cultivation of oil palm, a crop with a potential of
producing 3-3.5 MT of palm oil per ha for augmenting the indigenous availability of
edible oils in the country.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT¶S REPLIES
NIL
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
(Recommendation No. 3)
National Rainfed Area Authority & Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP)
4.1 The Committee had noted that the National Rainfed Area Authority (NRAA)
established on 3 rd November, 2006 gives focused attention to the problems of rain fed
area of the country.  The Authority is an advisory, policy making and monitoring body
charged with the role of examining guidelines in various existing schemes in this area.
NRAA although not required to be an implementing and fund disbursing agency, needs
to be able to effectively converge the various schemes in different Ministries relating to
Watershed Development.  The Union Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development will
co-chair the Authority.
The potential of development of rain fed areas in the country is immense as rain
fed area accounts for 60% of the total cultivated area, but contribute only 45% of
agricultural production.  Hence, the role of NRAA is going to be pivotal.  The Committee
recommended that the mandate of NRAA should be widened and its operation has to be
holistic, touching upon all aspects of rain fed area agriculture.  Being an umbrella
organization, NRAA should lay down policies/guidelines relating to rain fed area
agriculture.
Special emphasis should be given on cardinal issues like credit, seeds, farm
implements, agricultural techniques and modern development, information on all
schemes in operation for rain fed area, the benefits being offered, and linkage with
grassroot level by constant interaction with farmers together with information that leads
to better policy implementation ´.
Regarding Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP), the Committee had
noted that food grain production in the country accrues from about 142 million hectares
of cultivated land.  Of this 57 million, i.e., 40% is irrigated and contribute 55% of
production.  The remaining 85 million hectares are rain fed and account for 45% of the
total production.  During 2007-08, Government waking up at last, proposed to introduce
µRain Fed Area Development Programme (RADP) to address the specific needs of rain
fed areas.   Rs. 100 crore was allocated for the scheme during 2007-08, but, the scheme
was not launched for want of µin-principle¶ approval from the Planning Commission.
However, the Planning Commission has set an outlay of Rs. 2500 crore for the XI Plan
period.  Budget allocation of Rs. 348.00 crore has been made for 2008-09.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The objectives of the Scheme inter-alia included development of about 22 lakh
hectares of rain fed areas in five years.  Considering that the total rain fed area under
cultivation in India is 85 million hectares, the target fixed for RADP seem to be minuscule
(only 2.6%) of the magnitude of area needs to be developed and proves Government ¶s
non-seriousness towards rain fed area agriculture.  At this rate more than 100 years will
be required to cover the whole of 85 million hectares under RADP.
The Committee had also noted it is because of neglect of rain fed areas of States
like Jharkhand & Chhattisgarh, that only single crop is grown there in spite of 1400 mm
of rainfall, and lakhs of people remain without work and means of livelihood.  This is
being considered to be the major cause of resentment and may be one of the factors for
the spread of Naxalite movement.
The Committee were of the opinion that a dossier of development of rain fed area
has to be brought out, that shall act as one point reference for all implementing agencies
and farmers.  Also crop-wise and region-wise developmental strategies should be
formulated.  This needs to be considered in the back drop of near saturation of
productivity from irrigated areas under cultivation.  Besides, the Committee expressed
their displeasure with the Planning Commission for delayed approval to such a scheme
that can deliver revolutionary changes in filling the food basket of our country and
provide employment to crores of rural inhabitants, if implemented effectively.  The
money being spent on importing wheat, oil, etc., at exorbitant rates can be saved, if
sufficient funds are allocated for developing rain fed areas for regular agriculture.  The
Committee recommend that the implementation of  RADP be carried out with top priority
and the scope be urgently expanded to cover as much rain fed area in the country in a
time bound manner.  The Committee may be informed of the time frame by which the
whole of the 85 million hectares of rain fed areas will be covered under the Programme.
Reply of the Government
4.2 Regarding NRAA, the Government in their Action Taken Reply stated that the
views of Parliamentary Committee for widening the mandate of NRAA so that its
functioning becomes holistic touching upon all aspects of Rainfed Area of Agriculture are
very relevant.  These aspects have been adequately addressed in the Office Order
issued on 3rd November, 2006.  The Authority has been mandated to cover all aspects of
sustainable and holistic development of rainfed areas including appropriate farming and
livelihood system approaches.  Further, NRAA has been mandated to prepare a
prospective plan outlining the national strategy and roadmap for holistic and sustainable
development of rainfed farming areas and also to evolve guidelines.  The NRAA has
finalized the Common Guidelines for Watershed Development Projects which have
come into force from 1st April, 2008.  Further, NRAA is also mandated to identify gaps in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

input supply, credit availability, dissemination of technology, insurance cover etc. relating
to rainfed area agriculture. Once this exercise is done by the NRAA, appropriate action
will be taken by the Government as per recommendation made by the NRAA.
Regarding RADP, the Government in their Action Taken Reply stated that the
Planning Commission has communicated the in-principle approval to the implementation
of Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP) at a
total cost of Rs.3500 crores during the XI Five Year Plan including a component of
Rs.170 crores for National Rain fed Area Authority (NRAA), on 20th March, 2008.  Based
on the revised outlay of Rs.3330 crores as communicated by the Planning Commission
and the comments received from various Ministries/Departments/Divisions of the DAC,
the EFC Note has been revised and sent to the Ministry of Finance and the Planning
Commission.  In view of in the enhanced allocation for RADP it is proposed to cover 25
lakh ha of rain fed area during the XI Plan period.
Development of rainfed and degraded areas is being taken up through various
watershed schemes of different Ministries / Externally aided projects.  Till the end of the
Tenth Plan about 50 million ha of area has been developed under various watershed
schemes / projects. The scheme of RADP will be implemented both in areas where no
watershed  programmes had been taken up in the past and in areas where watershed
development works have been already taken up but supplementary production based
activities are required to be strengthened.  Efforts will be made to expand the coverage
of developing rainfed areas through other  Schemes of Government as well as the
RADP in consultation with the Planning Commission, NRAA and other stake holder
Ministries, so as to cover entire rainfed area within a short period ´.
Comments of the Committee
4.3 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.7 of Chapter-I
of the Report.
(Recommendation No. 9)
Differential MSP
4.4 The Committee noted that in the case of jute, a single MSP is recommended by
the Commission and approved by the Government. Based on the basic MSP, different
MSPs for jute are announced subsequently, keeping in view the quality considerations
and consequent input price differentials, which vary from place to place. These MSPs
are in fact derived prices from the basic MSP fixed by the Government, mainly to ensure
that the farmers are paid better prices for their better varieties. It is recommended that
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

this system of calculating MSP should be adopted for all the other crops for which
Government announces MSP to give better price for better varieties and to compensate
regional imbalances in cost-inputs and risk factors of different crops.
Reply of the Government
4.5 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that the rationale
behind a uniform MSP throughout the country is that it encourages greater investment
and production in relatively low cost area due to a higher margin of profit and
discourages production in the high cost area. Further, a uniform price encourages crop
specialization and optimum use of nation ¶s land and other resources on the basis of
comparative advantage. The Agricultural Price Policy- A Long Term Perspective (1986)
has also justified the uniform support price for the whole country on the ground that it
alone can lead to efficient utilisation of resources.
The Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP), among other factors,
considers the cost of production of various crops for all the major producing States, as
collected by different State Agricultural Universities under the Comprehensive Scheme
for the Study of Cost of Cultivation  of Ministry of Agriculture. Under the sampling design
of the Comprehensive Scheme for Studying the Cost of Cultivation of Principal Crops,
each State is demarcated into a homogenous agro-climatic zone based on cropping
pattern, soil type, rainfall, etc. The primary sampling units (Tehsils) are allocated to
different zones in proportion to total area of all the crops covered in the study. Based on
this cost of production per quintal is worked out for the major growing states, for specific
crops, and their weighted average is estimated and considered by CACP, among other
factors, for recommending MSP.
While recommending MSP, an effort is made to cover at least the paid out
expenses (A2) of farmers in high cost regions plus the imputed cost (FL) of family labour.
(i.e., A2+FL cost) and C2 cost (i.e., full cost of production including the imputed rental
value of owned land and capital) in relatively efficient states, keeping some margin for the
benefit of farmers.
Comments of the Committee
4.6 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.10 of Chapter-I
of the Report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 10)
Contract Farming
4.7 The Committee were told that the benefits of Contract Farming include better
quality of inputs, extensive services and assurance of selling the produce at a pre-
determined price.  However, it was felt there were multitude of latent problems that were
emerging one by one. The absence of any rules/guidelines governing the operation of
contract farming had vitiated the whole scenario and would not enable sustainable
contract farming.   Whole lot of issues relating to contract farming remain to be legally
streamlined, and foremost consideration should be accorded to the interests of the
farmers.  Though the Department maintained that land ownership would not be taken
over by the contracting company, the Committee felt that company can become the
defacto owner, through terms and conditions of contract which may be heavily tilted
towards the company due to the help and support of expert legal opinion, lack of
awareness of the farmer, type of seeds provided and credit extended under the contract,
etc.  Such uncontrolled continuation of contract farming can even result in µbonded
farming¶.  Besides, the interests of the company may not be in sync with the agricultural
priorities of the country, which may be sidelined.  Expansion of contract farming can also
lead to imbalance in land and water use; agricultural production under contract may not
cater to regional requirements and such products which are not used by locals may be
preferred, causing rise in price of locally used commodities that may have to be imported
or brought from far off places.
The Committee were of the firm view that contract farming might lead to taking
over/mortgage/buying of farmers land by the contracting company without lawful consent
through threat, coercion, undue influence, fraudulent behaviour, or misrepresentation of
facts etc.   The national priorities in agriculture and the interest of the farmers have to be
protected at any cost.   Farmers land should not at any cost be attached, sold,
mortgaged, pledged or taken over by the contracting firm, even with the consent of the
head of the family, as the agricultural land is an inherited property that can ¶t be sold
without the consent of all the legal heirs of the land owner i.e -the µKarta¶ of the family.
The family and village social fabric will be in jeopardy as contract farming may lead to
the loss of freedom of the farmer to produce food crops of his choice for his family needs
and feed and fodder for his cattle, poultry, etc. which also provide him extra income by
selling milk, butter, chicks, etc.
The Committee felt that the procurement policy of the Government will also be
failed as the farmers will not grow food crops for the nation but for the contracting party.
The Public Distribution System (PDS) of food items/cereals will be in danger as the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Government will not be able to procure enough wheat, rice, sugar, etc. and may have to
import all these items leading to heavy financial burden on our exchequer in the form of
more subsidy for PDS.  The Committee were of the considered opinion that contract
farming will benefit the contracting company/firm whose main aim is quite often profit-
making.  The food security of the nation and the farmers ¶ family interest will take a back
seat as he will work like a machine to earn his livelihood and thousand years old cultural
and social ethos wherein the whole village worked as a single and self-sufficient unit with
all kinds of artisans, dependent on each other worked for upliftment of the whole village
will be destroyed.
Reply of the Government
4.8 The Government in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that the promotion of
direct marketing and contract farming and development of competitive agricultural
markets in private and cooperative sectors have been identified as key areas of reforms
in the Agriculture Sector, to be implemented through the amendments to the State
APMC Acts.  Contract farming arrangements will provide an effective method of linking
small farm sector to sources of extension advice, mechanization, seeds, fertilizers and
credit and to assured and profitable markets, with due protection to farmer ¶s rights over
his hand.  To provide guidance and support to States in amending their State
Agricultural Produce Marketing Committees (Regulation) Acts, a model Act was
prepared by the Ministry of Agriculture in consultation with all concerned and circulated
to State Governments in 2003.  Based on the model law, by now 20 States/UTs have
either amended their State APMC Acts fully/partially and Bihar Government has
repealed the Act.  In most of the States which have amended their APMC Acts, a legal
framework is in place now to regulate contract farming.  This framework provides for:-
• Contract Farming Sponsor to register himself with the Market Committee
or with a prescribed Officer
• The Contract Farming Sponsor to get the contract farming agreement
recorded with a prescribed Officer
• No title, rights, ownership or possession of land shall be transferred or
alienated or vest in the contract farming sponsor or his successor or his
agent as a consequence arising out of the contract farming agreement
• Dispute Redressal Mechanism
• The Agricultural produce covered under the Contract Farming agreement
may be sold to the Contract Farming Sponsor outside the market yards
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

• Specification of Model Agreement for Contract Farming so that producers
can ensure inclusion of various required clauses in their agreement.
To facilitate State Governments in notifying their amended Rules under the
APMC Act, Central Government has also formulated model APMC Rules and circulated
to States in November 2007.  It is expected that the regulatory provisions being made in
State APMC Acts and Rules thereunder, will ensure that under the contract farming
agreement both sponsors and the producers will be accountable to the terms &
conditions laid down for the farming through a written agreement, which will be recorded
in a public office and will be available for any dispute resolution.  Further, the rights of
the farmer over the title, ownership or possession, etc. will be protected over the land
under contract farming and as a consequence of the failure of the contract; they will not
lose any right over the land.  The agreement prescribed under the law will ensure that
farmers get the assured price on supply of the required quantity of produce and the
sponsors provide them certain agreed services and technical know-how, if so preferred
by both the parties.  Government has consciously decided not to promote any kind of
contract farming model where land of the farmer is taken over by the sponsor or his
agent for cultivation.
Ministry of Agriculture is of the view that the State Governments through their
designated authorities shall ensure that the contract farming, which is generally
commodity specific and can lead to monoculture, does not grow beyond proportion to
disturb bio-diversity and agricultural ecology.  It may be necessary to provide necessary
guidelines for land use planning in each region in order to prevent such eventuality.
However, since contract farming is happening at a very small scale at the moment, no
such threat of spread of monoculture is being experienced in any part of the country at
present.
The Ministry of Agriculture is of the view that promotion of contract farming will
not affect the procurement of food grains as area covered under contract farming of food
grains will be only a limited area. Resorting to procurement at Minimum Support Prices
(MSP) is desirable only on occasions, when farmers cannot get a reasonable price in the
market and the endeavour of the Ministry of Agriculture would not be that the farmers
have only option of selling their produce at MSP at all the times.  The Ministry of
Agriculture is committed to take such policy measures which can ensure better price
realization by the farmers and cover their price risks, rather than keep them dependent
on the MSP system for getting minimum prices for their produce.  It is true that the
contract farming will benefit the sponsoring companies but on the other hand it will also
mitigate price risks of the farmers and will provide them remunerative prices, thus will be
quite beneficial to the farming community as well.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Comments of the Committee
4.9 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.13 of Chapter-I
of the Report.
(Recommendation No. 11)
Development & Strengthening of Infrastructure Facility for Production &
Distribution of Quality Seeds
4.10 The Committee have observed that under the scheme µDevelopment and
Strengthening of Infrastructure facility for Production and Distribution of Quality Seeds ¶,
the allocation for 2008-09 is Rs.150.00 crore against a proposal of Rs.556 crore by the
Department.  According to the Department, the proposed amount included Rs.445.86
crore to be released during 2008-09 under the Prime Minister ¶s Relief Package for the
suicide affected districts of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala.  The
Department has informed that the allocation has to be augmented to meet the
requirements.
The Committee were unable to understand why the PM ¶s package, which has a
pre-set amount to be released in a pre-determined period, cannot be given in the outlay
for the year at the BE stage itself.  Moreover, the Committee felt that such schemes,
providing relief to people already battered by distress, have to be prioritized in providing
allocation.
The Committee recommended that outlays for relief packages/schemes should
be reflected separately under a different head and should not be clubbed with the outlay
of any regular scheme and be released as per the time-frame fixed for their disbursal to
the pre-determined needy people.
Reply of the Government
4.11 The Government in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that an outlay of
Rs.150 crore has been approved by the Planning Commission for the scheme
µDevelopment and Strengthening of Infrastructure Facility for Production and Distribution
of Quality Seeds¶ against the proposed outlay of Rs.556 crore.  This Department is of the
firm view that additional funds need to be allocated for the scheme to achieve the
desired growth rate. The Planning Commission has been accordingly requested to
increase the allocation under this scheme.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Rehabilitation Package approved by the Cabinet for the farmers in suicide
prone districts of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Maharashtra does not
envisage creation of separate heads for scheme wise implementation of the
programmes.
Comments of the Committee
4.12 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.16 of Chapter-I
of the Report.
(Recommendation No. 13)
Subsidy to Fertilizer Industry
4.13  The Committee had recommended in their earlier reports that subsidy for
fertilizer should be directly provided to the farmers if the Government intends to obtain
maximum benefit of the fertilizer subsidy scheme.  Later on, the Government in its
implementation budget document for 2007-08 stated that modalities for providing
alternative method of delivering fertilizer subsidy directly to farmers was being worked
out.  The Department also informed that a study was commissioned by the fertilizer
industry, which included the provision of subsidy directly to farmers.  The report based
on the study was presented to the Department of Fertilizer.
However, the Group of Ministers (GOM), constituted to look into sustainable use
of fertilizers and pertinent subsidy and pricing issues, which considered the matter does
not seem to have made any such recommendation.
The Committee noted that the subsidy for fertilizers during the year 2004-05 was
of Rs.15,779 crores.   The estimation by the Department of Fertilizers for the year 2008-
09 stands at Rs.60,649.36 crore; subsidy quadrupling in four years.  Now, having known
the extent of subsidy, it would be disturbing to know that it took more than fifty years for
the foodgrains production to grow four-fold from 50.82 million tonnes in 1950-51 to
217.28 million tonnes (Fourth Advance Estimates) in 2006-07.  Moreover, the targets set
for foodgrain production are hardly ever met.  The Government has admitted the fact
that Total Cropped Area, Net Sown Area and Cropping Intensity have been stagnating or
rather decreasing. Then Committee are unable to understand where the fertilizer so
manufactured with a subsidy support to the tune of Rs.60649.36 crore is used.  It may
be that fertilizers are exported and companies are subsidized for that also.
This scenario points at inherent maladies in the subsidy regime related to
fertilizers, and it is evident that there is no correlation between the astronomical amount
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

of subsidy and the output of the agricultural produce.  In turn, it is not difficult to infer that
the benefits of subsidy are being enjoyed by some one other than the farmer.
The Committee strongly recommend that the present method of providing
subsidy for fertilizer has failed completely and require immediate revamp.  Providing
subsidy directly to the farmer is definitely one of the solutions.  All efforts should also be
made to eliminate the existing disparities in terms of subsidy between different types of
fertilizers causing usage imbalance ´.
Reply of the Government
4.14 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have submitted that the substantial
increase in the amount of subsidy over last 3-4 years is mainly on account of sharp
increase in prices of fertilizer inputs and finished fertilizers in the international market.
This has led to increase in the delivered cost of fertilizers at farm gate level and
consequently increase in per tonne subsidy released on fertilizers.  It may be noted that
the subsidy on fertilizers is the difference between the normative delivered cost of
subsidized fertilizers at farm gate level and the selling prices of these fertilizers notified
by the Government.  The selling prices of these fertilizers have remained constant since
28.2.02 and are as below:
MRPs of Fertilizers
Products Existing MRPs.
Urea 4830
DAP 9350
MOP 4455
Complex Fertilizers
16:20:00 7100
20:20:00 7280
23:23:00 8000
28:28:00 9080
10:26:26 8360
12:32:16 8484
14:28:14 8300
14:35:14 8660
15:15:15 6980
17:17:17 8100
19:19:19 8300
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2. On the other hand, the prices of fertilizer inputs and finished fertilizers
have increased sharply over last four years.  The prevailing average international
price of fertilizers over last few years is as below:-
USD/PMT
Year DAP MOP Urea
C&F (FOB US
Gulf+freight Tampa
Mundra)
FOB(FSU) FOB (Arabian Gulf)
1 2 3 4
2003-04 239.10 97.37 154.44
2004-05 277.69 133.62 215.55
2005-06 296.04 158.75 245.77
2006-07 329.40 172.07 256.72
2007-08 657.57 263.27 341.20
May 08 prices 1270.00 540.00 645.00
3. There has also been a continuous increase in consumption of fertilizers
and consequently sales of fertilizers in last four years, which is as below:
Yearwise sales of fertilizers (LMT)
Year 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 % increase
in 2007-08
over 2004-05
UREA 205.47 221.91 244.85 261.67 27.3
DAP 60.79 67.51 69.24 75.55 24.2
MOP 23.14 28.01 23.93 27.82 20.2
4. As already submitted in para1 above, the substantial increase in the
amount of subsidy over the last 3-4 years is mainly on account of sharp increase
in prices of fertilizer inputs and finished fertilizers in the international market.
Thus, the astronomical amount of subsidy is not on account of any additional
increase in the consumption of fertilizers as the table under para 3 above would
bring out.  The present level of consumption of fertilizers in the country is, in any
case, only 112 kg. per hectare, which is lower than even the neighboring
countries.   The production of food grains in the country has, however, kept pace.
While the total foodgrain production in 2004-05 was 198.360 millions tonnes, the
production is estimated (according to 3rd estimates) to be 227.320 million tonnes
in2007-08.
5. As regards the mechanism for delivery of subsidy to the farmers, the
same has been considered by a Group of Ministers (GOM) constituted to look
into the sustainable use of fertilizers and other pertinent subsidy and pricing
issues.  The GOM has not recommended any change in the existing pattern of
delivery of subsidy.  The proposal of Department of Fertilizers for nutrient based
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

pricing of fertilizers was agreed to µin principle¶ by the GOM and further action is
underway to finalize the policy.
Comments of the Committee
4.15 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.22 of Chapter-I
of the Report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
(Recommendation No. 2)
Creation of Non-Lapsable Central Pool of  Resources for Agriculture
5.1 The Committee noted that as per the Direction of Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission, 10% of funds allocated to the Department are allocated to the North-
Eastern States.  The un-utilised portion of allocated funds to these States is credited to
the Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources for North-Eastern States for their
development.
 The performance of agriculture sector keeps the Indian economy buoyant and
ensures that fire keeps burning in the kitchen of millions of rural farm households.  The
Committee note that Government has decided to give special attention to the
development of agriculture during the XI Plan and has launched certain ambitious
schemes like National Food Security Mission and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana in this
direction.  However, the Committee feel that such endeavours have been undertaken in
the past also and have failed to bring the desired level of development in agriculture.
This time more decisive action is required.
 The circumstances under which agriculture is carried out in India; the challenging
agro-climatic and topographical conditions warrant focused attention.  The funds
allocated to the arid, temperate, hilly, high altitude and non-accessible areas, do not
reach on time and remain unutilised, as 31 st March is the dead end for any fund to be
utilized in a particular financial year.  The Committee recommend that a Non-lapsable
Central Pool of Resources for Agriculture should be formed from this financial year itself
without any further delay in line with similar funds for North-Eastern States.  Also, an
appropriate percentage of funds out of total budgetary allocation for the Government of
India has to be fixed for agriculture sector on which around 70% of the population
depend for their feed, fodder and employment and also produces/feeds the remaining
30% population of our country. This will help ensure steady and constant flow of funds to
agriculture and prevent diversion/re-appropriation of funds demarcated for the sector.
The operationalisation of the National Policy for Farmers,2007  will also be more
meaningful if this path-breaking step is taken and it will lead us to a Ever Green
Revolution which will save the nation from unwarranted import of staple food items
comprising mainly wheat, edible oils and pulses.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Reply of the Government
5.2 The Government in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that Para 3 of the
Recommendation No.2 requires creation of Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources for
Agriculture.  At present there is no Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources for
Agriculture.  Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has therefore conveyed this
recommendation of PSCA to the Planning commission for taking appropriate action in
the matter.
 The total plan outlay of Rs.10105.67 crore (Plan Schemes 6900+State Plan
Scheme 3205.67) for the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation(DAC), during
2008-09 saw an increase of more that 80% as compared to BE(2007-08).  Compared to
RE (2007-08) of Rs.6927.94 crore in plan allocation for DAC (inclusive of State Plan
Schemes), the increase is about 45% during 2008-09.  It is seen that there has been a
significant increase in the outlay on crops (pulses and oilseeds), credit, seeds, rainfed
farming systems and extension.  Recently the DAC has announced two schemes i.e.
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) for
increasing production and productivity in the agriculture and allied sectors and to
incentivise the states to increase public investment in the agriculture and allied sectors.
(Recommendation No. 4)
Debt Waiver Scheme
5.3 The waiver of agricultural debt from institutional sources of credit amounting to
an estimated Rs.60,000 crore announced by the Finance Minister in his budget speech
2008-09 has created a lot of interest in the agricultural fraternity. However, the
Committee feels that a lot of issues are not clear about the scheme as of now about the
modalities of implementation, the qualifying parameters, the loan periods eligible for the
waiver, non-consideration of region-wise and crop-wise disparities, possible slant of
benefits towards financially better placed farmers, negative message to prompt repayers
of loans, half-way paid loans, overlapping with revival package announced for
cooperatives, etc.
 The Committee were informed that the Government has considered financial
constraints and the degree of hardship faced by farmers while drawing up the scheme.
 Keeping the above in view, the Committee have observed that:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(i) The Debt Waiver Scheme should invariably be accompanied by
appropriate efforts that enable the farmers consolidate the gains from debt relief
and are given subsidized and good quality seed and fertilizer to produce enough
marketable surplus   to sustain themselves from the next season onwards.
 For holistic development of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, dairying and
fisheries and related research work, the Department of Agriculture should initiate
efforts to bring the expertise of all the three Departments of the Ministry of
Agriculture under one umbrella for this purpose. Merely, making the farmers
eligible for fresh credit will just make him wait for the next waiver scheme,
particularly, if the waiver is accompanied by fresh restrictions on agricultural
trade.
(ii) If indebtedness of farmers to moneylenders cannot be covered by the
scheme, the Banks may give loans @4% p.a. to the farmers to redeem their
debts to moneylenders and the Government may give interest submission to
compensate the Banks.
(iii) Prompt repayers of loans during the period covered by the debt waiver
scheme should be allowed full interest subvention in immediate future agricultural
loans for the next three years so as not to send wrong signals to debtors
promoting them to default in payment and disincentivise prompt repayers .
(iv) The limit of 2 hectares of land for full waiver of the loans of small and
marginal farmers should be revised keeping in view the difference in productivity
of irrigated and non-irrigated land.
(v) Since the Debt Waiver Scheme is directly related to the agriculture sector,
as soon as the modalities for its implementation are  finalized,  the Committee
may be apprised of the same.
Reply of the Government
5.4 The Ministry of Finance is the nodal Ministry for implementation of Debt Waiver
and Debt Relief Scheme announced in the Union Budget 2008-09. The modalities and
guidelines for the implementation of said scheme are being finalized by the Ministry of
Finance and the recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to them for
consideration. The modalities for the implementation of Debt Waiver and Debt Relief
Scheme will be submitted to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture as
soon as it is finalized by the Government.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 15)
Some other issues related to DAC
5.5 The Committee deliberated on certain issues not directly related to examination
of DFG and were of the unanimous view that
(i)  the National Policy for Farmers should be operationalised at the earliest
in its entirety;
(ii)  there should be greater role for local self Government institutions in
development of Agriculture;
(iii)  all existing soil testing laboratories that are dormant should be revived
along with the establishment of new ones;
(iv)  overall strategy should be devised, to improve the productivity of small
farms/farmers;
(v) there is dire need to keep gender-wise data on all aspects relating to
agriculture;
(vi) the gap between µknow-how¶ and µdo-how¶ is to be plugged
(xi) ATMA may be located in KVKs;
(xii) awards may be instituted to encourage outstanding farmers;
(xiii) ecology should be conserved by the concept on conservation farming;
(xiv) help of Department of Information Technology may be requisitioned
to set up and make Gyan Chaupals efficient/effective;
(xi)  Agri-clinics and Agri-Business centers should be rejuvenated by engaging
one graduate each from the fields of agriculture, veterinary science,
commerce/marketing and home science;
(xii)  greater attention should be accorded to the provision of simple and
effective farm implements;
(xiii)  food security should be ensured during all types of disasters;
(xiv)  post-harvest infrastructure be strengthened more on priority basis;
(xv)  the issue of climate change should be considered in the gravity it merits;
(xvi)  all agricultural loans, long, medium and short, should be delivered at 4%
per annum as recommended by the National Commission for Farmers;
(xvii)  the cases of loan defaulters should be dealt by constituting Debt-
Reconciliation Boards at district level;
(xviii)  MSPs be made differential based on crop-wise and region-wise
considerations;
(xix)  forward markets be regulated more stringently to channel benefits to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

farmers;
(xx)  all schemes under horticulture division be evaluated to assess their
performance; and
(xxi)  Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) be
implemented without further delay throughout the country.
Reply of the Government
5.6 The Government in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:
³Recommendation Serial No.15 (i)
The National Policy for Farmers should be operationalised at the earliest
in its entirety.
1. Consequent to the approval of the National Policy for Farmers,
2007 (NPF), the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation constituted an Inter-
Ministerial Committee for preparation of a Plan of Action for operationalisation of
the policy.  The final draft Plan of Action has already been circulated to all the
Ministries and Departments concerned and also to the State Governments.  The
Action Plan is expected to be finalized and circulated for operationalisation by the
end of July, 2008.
2. However, many of the provisions of National Policy for Farmers
are being implemented / operationalised through a number of ongoing
programmes/schemes being implemented by various Central Ministries and
Departments and the State Governments. These, inter alia, include Bharat
Nirman for improving rural infrastructure and expanding irrigation potential;
National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme; National Rural Health
Mission; Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme to complete the irrigation
projects; pilot projects to repair, renovate and restore water bodies and schemes
for groundwater recharge to divert rainwater into dug-wells; revival of agricultural
extension system; reforms in agricultural marketing; schemes for development of
market infrastructure including Terminal Markets; establishment of National
Horticulture Mission; setting up of National Rainfed Area Authority and National
Bamboo Mission, etc.; provision of crop loans upto Rs. 3 lakhs to farmers at
reduced rate of interest; Rural Infrastructure Development Fund; Rajeev Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana; and several other initiatives. Further, several
initiatives and programmes like Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana and National Food
Security Mission have been launched by the Government recently, which would
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

operationalise or facilitate operationalisation of National Policy for Farmers. Debt
Relief / Debt Waiver scheme has been announced in the Union Budget 2008-09
to address the problems of the indebted farmers. Some schemes and
programmes have also been proposed in the Eleventh Plan period, which, once
implemented, augment the current schemes and programmes facilitating
operationalisation of the National Policy for Farmers.  Apart from these schemes
and programmes, concerted actions are taken through Central assistance to the
States for various activities connected to agriculture and allied sectors and
through special / relief / rehabilitation packages, whenever occasion arises.
Action is also constantly taken and monitored by the Central Ministries and
Departments through various organizations, institutions, research and training
institutes under their control and through other autonomous agencies.
3. The Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana, launched by the Government recently,
is an umbrella scheme under which most of the provisions of the National Policy
for Farmers can be operationalised and implemented depending on the priorities
of the State Governments.
4. The Agriculture Coordination Committee under the chairmanship of the
Hon¶ble Prime Minister would oversee and coordinate the integrated
implementation of the National Policy for Farmers, 2007.
Recommendation Serial No.15(ii)
There should be greater role for local self Government Institutions in
development of Agriculture
The National Policy for Farmers,2007 stipulates that steps would be taken
to strengthen and accord centrality to Panchayats  in addressing problems of
farmers.  A Committee was constituted by Cabinet Secretariat, to review
modifications to be made in the existing guidelines for Centrally Sponsored
Schemes to ensure the centrality of Panchayati Raj Institutions in their
implemention.  Guidelines issued under most of the Centrally Sponsored
Schemes of the Department already contain enabling provisions to associate
Panchayati Raj Institutions in implementation.  However, in pursuance of the
recommendations, State Governments have been requested by the Department
of Agriculture & Cooperation to take following steps in addition to action already
taken to associate Panchayati Raj Institution in implementation of Centrally
Sponsored Schemes of the Department.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

a) Identification of crops and beneficiaries of the schemes of the
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation should be in consultation with District
Panchayats.
b) Training, extension and awareness creation for these schemes should
be through Panchayats and Gram Sabhas.
c) The officials in charge of the implementation of various schemes of the
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation should attend the PRIs and Gram
Sabha meeting to furnish relevant information and data regarding the schemes
and to take appropriate action on the observations in these meetings.
Recommendation Serial No.15(iii)
          All existing soil testing laboratories that are dormant should be revived
along with the establishment of new ones
It is submitted that at present, there are 651 Soil Testing Laboratories
functioning in the country with an analyzing capacity of 7.00 million soil samples
per annum.  The level of capacity utilization is 82%.  The State Governments
have been requested to improve the capacity utilization further.
2. It is further submitted that the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation is already providing financial assistance for strengthening  of
existing Soil Testing Laboratories and also for setting up of new Soil Testing
Laboratories under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme ³Balanced and Integrated
Use of Fertilizers´ through the annual Work Plans of the States under the Macro
Management Schemes of Agriculture.  Further, in the newly formulated Centrally
Sponsored Scheme ³National Project on Management of Soil Health and
Fertility´, there is a proposal to provide financial assistance for setting up of 500
static Soil Testing Laboratories during the 11 th Plan and 250 mobile Soil Testing
Laboratories during 2008-09.
Recommendation Serial No.15(iv)
Overall strategy should be devised, to improve the productivity of small
farms/farmers;
The National Food Security Mission has been launched w.e.f.2007-08 in
311 identified districts of 17 States for enhancing the production and productivity
of  rice, wheat and pulses in the country. The total outlay of the Mission is
Rs.4882.48 crore for the XI Plan.  The States have been advised to allocate 30%
of the budget to small and marginal farmers including women farmers for
increasing the productivity of small farms.  The assistance for critical inputs like
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

seeds, micronutrients, integrated pest management and integrated nutrient
management is being provided for higher investment and output. Besides, the
farmers are given training on improved production and protection technologies in
rice, wheat and pulses for efficient use of available resources and applied inputs
to achieve higher productivity.
Recommendation Serial No.15(v)
There is a dire need to keep gender-wise data on all aspects relating to
agriculture
Agriculture Census Division of this Department has been collecting and
publishing gender-wise information on number and area of operational holdings
since 1995-96 Census for each State/UT and also at All India level.
A National Gender Resource Centre in Agriculture(NGRCA) has been set
up in the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation(DAC) in 2004 to act as a
focal point for the convergence of gender related activities and issues in
agriculture and allied areas within and outside DAC; add gender dimension to
agriculture policies and internalize gender specific interventions for bringing the
farm women in the mainstream of agricultural development.
The MIS/Reporting formats of all schemes/programmes of Extension
Division have been suitably revised to ensure flow of gender disaggregate
data/information.  These MIS formats were also shared with other divisions of
DAC for a similar action.
Recommendation Serial No. ± 15 (vi)
The Gap between µknow how¶ and µdo how¶ is to be plugged
1) As a support to the promotion of Agricultural mechanization, Farm
Machinery Training and Testing Institutes were set up at Budni (M.P.) in 1955,
Hissar (Haryana) in 1963, Garladinne, District Anantapur in 1983 and Biswanath
Chariali (Assam) in 1990.  These Institutes have since then engaged in
developing human resource for agricultural mechanization The FMTTIs have
been conducting different types of training programmes in the selection,
operation, repair/maintenance and management of farm machinery for the
benefit of nominees of Central/State Governments, Private Organizations,
retired/retiring Defence Personnel, technicians, rural youth, farmers, women in
agriculture and Foreign Nationals, sponsored under bilateral/international
programmes.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2) To supplement the efforts of the FMTTIs in human resource
development and to train large number of farmers at nearby places, outsourcing
of the training through the SAUs, Agricultural Engineering colleges, polytechnics,
etc., has been approved during the X plan w.e.f. from 2004-05. For training of
farmers, the identified institutions are reimbursed Rs 2500 per trainee per month,
which also includes a stipend of Rs 600 and to and fro travel expenses by normal
mode of transport.
3) For improving the adoption of new technology equipments by the
farmers for enhancing production and productivity, as well as for reducing the
cost of production, it is necessary to properly demonstrate the utility of such
equipments to the farmers.  Therefore, with this aspect in view, the
demonstration of newly developed agricultural equipment including horticultural
equipment at farmers' fields has been included as a component of the scheme,
µPromotion and Strengthening of Agricultural Mechanization through Training,
Testing and Demonstration ¶, during the Tenth Plan. This scheme envisages
conduct of demonstration of improved/newly developed agricultural/horticultural
equipment, identified by the State Governments/Government Organizations at
farmers' fields, to acquaint them about their use and utility for production of
different types of crops.  100% grant is provided for the procurement of
equipment and contingency expenditure on their demonstrations to the
implementing agencies i.e State Governments, ICAR and SFCI.
The gap between µknow-how¶ and µdo-how¶ is also being addressed by
providing skill oriented training to Extension Functionaries in all the Extension
Education Institutes as also through Model Training Courses at various
ICAR/SAUs and other Central Training Institutes.
Efforts are being made under ATMA programme, which is in operation in
565 districts to plug the gaps between µknow-how¶ and µdo-how¶ by providing skill
based trainings and demonstrations to the farming community.  Since the
scheme follow a bottom-up and demand driven approach, the requisite extension
support is provided in a gap-filling mode in agriculture and allied sectors.
Recommendation Serial No.15(vii)
ATMA may be located in KVKs
The ATMAs are largely located in the close vicinity of the institutions
managing them.  In majority of the cases, ATMAs are located in District
Agriculture Office of the State Department of Agriculture if the charge of PD
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(ATMA) is held by District Level  Officer of Agriculture Department.  However, in
places where the PD(ATMA) post is held by KVKs/Companies/NGOs, the offices
are located in the operational premises of the agency.
Recommendation Serial No.15(viii)
Awards may be instituted to encourage outstanding farmers.
There is an in-built provision to encourage outstanding farmers by way of
giving awards to the farmers under ATMA programme.  Farmer awards to the
best farmer representing different enterprises at block level (05 farmers per
block) have been incorporated in the cafeteria of activities with an amount of
Rs.0.50 lakhs provided to each block for this purpose.  Also, the outstanding
progressive farmers are encouraged to run the Farm Schools to promote farmer-
to-farmer extension under the ATMA Scheme.
The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation is in the process of
instituting Lal Bahadur Shastri Krishi Ratna Awards for  farmers for outstanding
performance in agriculture and allied fields.  The draft scheme has been pilot
tested by the National Productivity Council.  On the basis of the findings of the
study the scheme is being revised and is expected to be finalized shortly.
Recommendation Serial No.15(ix)
Ecology should be conserved by the concept on conservation farming
Conservation farming which envisages the efficient use of available
resources for optimum output is being followed in the National Food Security
Mission and Integrated Cereal Development Programme (Macro Management
Programme).  The resource conservation technologies like zero tillage,
rotavators and sprinkler system of irrigation are being promoted for the
conservation of natural resources- soil and water. Besides, the system of rice
intensification, a technology which economizes the use of water by about 25-30%
as compared to conventional method of rice cultivation is also being popularized
among farmers through organizing demonstrations at every 100 ha area
coverage of the crop under National Food Security Mission.  The total area
targeted under system of rice intensification is 5 million ha by the year 2011-
2012.
Recommendation Serial No.15(x)
Help of Department of Information Technology may be requisitioned to set up
and make Gyan Chaupals efficient/effective
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The National Policy for Farmers announced in 2007 by this Department
states that:
³The potential of ICT would be harnessed by estabilishing Gyan Chuapals
in villages.  Further, the common service centres of the Department of
Information Technology, Government of India and those set up by the State
Governments and private initiative programmes will be evolved for inclusive and
broad-based development.  Thus, the structure of the ICT-based knowledge
system would, inter alia, include setting up of such village centres.  Last-mile and
last-person connectivity would be facilitated with the help of technologies such as
broadband internet, community radio, or internet-mobile phone synergies ´.
Presently, under the AGRISNET component of the Scheme
³Strengthening/Promoting Agricultural Information System ´, assistance is being
given to the State/UT Governments for establishing IT infrastructure and
development of software at district and state level, with the objective of providing
agriculture related information/services to the farmers.
This Department is also presently engaged in the designing the National
e-Governance Plan in Agriculture (NeGP-A).  Phase-I is complete with
identification of 18 prioritized services and these identified services are
envisaged to be provided to the farmers through the Common Service Centres
(CSCs) of the Department of Information Technology (DIT).
Recommendation Serial No.15(xi)
Agri-clinics and Agri-Business Centres should be rejuvenated by
engaging one graduate each from the fields of agriculture, veterinary science,
commerce/marketing and home science.
The Agri-Clinics and Agri-Business Centres Scheme is open to the
graduates of agriculture as well as allied disciplines like Horticulture, Animal
Husbandry, Dairy, Veterinary, Poultry Farming and Pisciculture. The project
could be taken up by individual graduates or a group of 5 or more trained
graduates, one of whom could be non-agriculture graduate with experience in
Business Development and Management.  Thus, the scheme already provides
for a multi-disciplinary approach, as suggested by the Hon ¶ble Committee.
Recommendation Serial No. ± 15 (xii)
Greater attention should be accorded to the provision of simple and effective
farm implements.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

In order to make available various agricultural implements and machines
at cheaper rates, assistance in the form of subsidy @ 25% of the cost with
permissible ceiling limits is available to all farmers for the purchase of various
agricultural equipments including hand tools, bullock-drawn/power-driven
implements, planting, reaping, harvesting and threshing equipment, tractors,
power-tillers and other specialized agricultural machines under the centrally
sponsored scheme of Macro Management of Agriculture.
Recommendation Serial No. 15(Xiii)
Food Security should be ensured during all types of disasters .
 In order to check the rising prices as well as filling the gap between
demand and supply the Govt. has reduced the import duties on following items
and prohibited the export of most of these items in order to improve the
availability of the essential commodities in domestic market. The details as on
07.05.08 are as indicated below:
 (i) Edible Oils: The prices of edible oils have been rising during the last
one year. For increased availability and softening of the prices of edible
oils in the domestic market the import duty on crude and refined oils has
been reduced to zero and 7.5% w.e.f 01.04.2008.. The Govt. has also
banned the export of all edible oils under Chapter 15 except   Export of
Castor Oil, Export of Coconut Oil through Kochi Port, µDeemed export¶ of
edible oils to 100% export oriented units with the condition that the final
product be non-edible and Export of Oils produced out of minor forest
produce.
(ii) Wheat:  The import duty on Wheat (HS Code 1001 10 90 or 1001
90 20) and on Wheat flour(1101 00 00) has been reduced to zero w.e.f
09.09.06 and 31.12.07 respectively and the export of Wheat and Wheat
flour (HS Code 1001 & 1101) has been banned w.e.f 08.10.07.
(iii) Pulses:  The import duty on pulses has been reduced to zero w.e.f
08.06.06  and extended the period of validity of prohibition on exports of
Pulses(except Kabuli Chana) upto 31.3.2009.
(iv) Rice: The import duty on Rice (1006 30) has been reduced to
zero.  The Govt. has permitted the export of Basmati Rice  including
dehusked, brown, semi-milled, milled both in either par-boiled or raw
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

condition (10063020 if the minimum FOB price is US $ 1200 per ton or
Rs. 48,000/- per ton. Export of Basmati Rice will be restricted through
Kandla, Kakinada, Kolkata, JNPT, Mumbai, Mundra, and Pipavav. The
Govt. has prohibited the Export of  Non-Basmati Rice(1006 10, 1006 10
10, 1006 10 90, 1006 20 00, 1006 30, 1006 30 10, 1006 30 90, 1006 40
00 ) w.e.f 01.04.2008.
This Department is responsible for measures relating to coordination of
relief measures necessitated by drought, hailstorm and pest attack.  The Ministry
of Home Affairs is concerned with other natural calamities.  The Ministry of Rural
Development was implementing the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana
(SGRY) scheme, which came to an end on 31.3.2008.  That scheme had a
special component for augumenting food security through additional wage
employment in the natural calamity affected rural areas after due notification by
the State Government and its acceptance by the Ministry of Agriculture/Home
Affairs.  A separate allocation of food grains was considered and made to the
affected States on the recommendation of the Ministry of Agriculture/Home
Affairs.  With effect from 1.4.2008, the National Rural Employment Guarantee
Programme (NREGP) is implemented in the entire country with the exception of
districts that have a 100% urban population.  The objective of the programme is
to enhance livelihood security in rural areas by providing at least 100 days of
guaranteed wage employment in a financial year to every household whose adult
members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.
Recommendation Serial No. ± 15 (xiv)
Post harvest infrastructure be strengthened more on priority basis.
³Reforming Agricultural Markets & Promoting Post Harvest Technology ´ has
been identified as one of the thrust areas for the Ministry of Agriculture by the
Prime Minister ¶s Office.  Accordingly, the Department has formulated a new
scheme on µPost Harvest Technology and Management ¶ for implementation
during XI Plan period with budget outlay of Rs. 40.00 crores.  The main
components of the scheme are as under:
(v) Establishment of units for transfer of primary processing
technology, value addition, low cost scientific storage, packaging units
and technologies for by-product management in the production
catchments under tripartite agreement.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(vi) Establishment of low cost PHT units/supply of PHT equipments
with Government assistance.
(vii) Demonstration of technologies.
(viii) Training of farmers, entrepreneurs and scientists.
Development of Post-harvest/Marketing Infrastructure:
Ministry of Agriculture has recently formulated a reform-linked Central
Sector Scheme on µDevelopment of Marketing Infrastructure, Grading and
Standardization¶.  The scheme is aimed at the development of agricultural
marketing infrastructure in the country to cater to the post-harvest requirements
of production and marketable surplus of various farm products, promotion of
competitive alternative agricultural marketing infrastructure by inducing private
and cooperative sector investments, strengthening of existing agricultural
marketing infrastructure to enhance efficiency, providing infrastructure facilities
for grading, standardization and quality certification of agricultural produce,
creation of general awareness and providing training to farmers, entrepreneurs
and market functionaries etc. The scheme is reform-linked and has been
approved for implementation in those States only, which amend their Agricultural
Produce Market Committee (APMC)Act.
 Through subsequent modifications in the scheme, the State Agencies
such as State Agricultural Marketing Boards and APMCs have been allowed
assistance under the scheme for the modernization and strengthening of existing
marketing infrastructure and setting up of new facilities with no upper limit of
subsidy on an investment from their own funds without borrowing from the
financial institutions.  The Department has sanctioned 3603 numbers of projects
involving subsidy of Rs.16911.50 lakhs till 30.04.2008 under the scheme in the
country.
A Centrally Sponsored Scheme on ³National Horticulture Mission (NHM)´
is being implemented for the holistic development of horticulture sector duly
ensuring forward and backward linkages with the active participation of all the
stakeholders in 18 States and 2 Union Territories
Creation of post harvest management infrastructure is one of major
components under NHM, which includes establishment of pack houses, ripening
chambers, cold storages, CA storages, refer vans, mobile/primary processing
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

units.  Besides, wholesale markets, rural markets and terminal markets are also
being established under NHM.
Recommendation Serial No.15(xv)
The issue of climate change should be considered in the gravity of it merits
Considering the possible impact climate change could have on Indian
Agriculture production and economy, Indian Council of Agricultural
Research(ICAR), Department of Agricultural Research & Education (DARE),
Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture has launched a National Network
Project on ³Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to Climate
Change´ in 2004.
 The major objectives of this Project are to quantify the sensitivity of crops
including horticultural crops and plantations, soils, water, fish and livestock to
global climatic changes and this information is being transferred to the field level
for mitigation of adverse impact of climate change.  Therefore, there is no need
to have separate Cell or division as DARE is also a part of Ministry of Agriculture.
Recommendation No.15 (xvi)
All agricultural loans, long, medium and short, should be delivered at 4 %
per annum as recommended by the National Commission for Farmers.
The National Commission on Farmers have not made specific
recommendation for providing agricultural loan at the interest rate of 4 % per
annum in their Revised Draft National Policy for Farmers (RDNPF). In RDNPF
the Commission has recommended that the credit must be in time, in required
quantity and at appropriate interest rates (para 1.5.6.1 RDNPF).
The Government has taken affirmative action to provide credit to the
farmers at a lower rate. All the banks have been advised to lend crop loans to the
farmers upto a principal amount of Rs.3.00 lakhs at the rate of interest of 7 % per
annum.
Recommendation No.15(xvii)
The cases of loan defaulter should be dealt by constituting Debt
Reconciliation Boards at district level.
Since Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services, is the nodal
Ministry for the matter relating to constitution of Debt Reconciliation Boards, the
recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee has been conveyed
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

to them for taking appropriate action.  As soon as action taken report is received
from that Department, the Committee would be apprised.
Recommendation No.15(xviii)
MSPs be made differential based on crop-wise and region-wise considerations
The rationale behind a uniform MSP throughout the country is that it
encourages greater investment and production in relatively low cost area due to
a higher margin of profit and discourages production in the high cost area.
Further, a uniform price encourages crop specialization and optimum use of
nation¶s land and other recources on the basis of comparative advantage.  The
Agricultural Price Policy ± A Long Term Perspective (1986) has also justified the
uniform support price for the whole country on the ground that it alone can lead
to efficient utilisation of resources.
The Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP), among other
factors, considers the cost of production of various crops for all the major
producing States, as collected by different State Agricultural Universities under
the Comprehensive Scheme for the Study of Cost of Cultivation of Ministry of
Agriculture.  Under the sampling design of the Comprehensive Scheme for
Studying the Cost of Cultivation of Principal Crops, each State is demarcated into
a homogenous agro-climatic zone based on cropping pattern, soil type, rainfall,
etc.  The primary sampling units (Tehsils) are allocated to different zones in
proportion to total area of all the crops covered in the study.  Based on this, cost
of production per quintal is worked out for the major growing states, for specific
crops, and their weighted average is estimated and considered by CACP, among
other factors, for recommending MSP.
While recommending MSP, an effort is made to cover at least the paid out
expenses (A2) of farmers in high cost regions plus the imputed cost (FL) of family
labour (i.e. A2+FL cost) and C2 cost(i.e.full cost of production including the
imputed rental value of owned land and capital) in relatively efficient states,
keeping some margin for the benefit of farmers.
Recommendation No.15(xix)
Forward markets be regulated more stringently to channel benefits to farmers
The subject matter pertains to the Department of Consumer Affairs in the
Ministry of Consumer Affairs and Food & Public Distribution.  DAC has conveyed
the recommendation of the Committee to that Department and requested them to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

furnish the ATN to Lok Sabha Secretariat directly under intimation to this
Department.
Recommendation No. 15(xx)
 All schemes under Horticulture Division be evaluated to assess their
performance
 Mid Term Evaluation of the schemes of National Horticulture
Mission, Micro Irrigation, Coconut Development Board and National Horticulture
Board have been entrusted to different agencies and the reports are likely to be
received shortly.
Recommendation No:  15 ( xxi )
Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) be
implemented without further delay throughout the country.
 Based on the recommendations of the Joint Group on Crop Insurance
constituted by this Department and views/comments of various stake-holders,
draft Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) was prepared,
and sent to the Planning Commission  and Department of Expenditure, Ministry
of Finance for µin principle ¶ approval as early as  3 rd February, 2005.   The
Modified NAIS was subsequently, discussed in the Planning Commission and in
the meeting of AM with FM on 22.06.2005 and 24.06.2005 respectively.
Keeping in view the suggestions of Planning Commission and Hon ¶ble Finance
Minister, further improvements in the proposed MNAIS were made and the
proposal was sent to the Planning Commission and Deptt. of Expenditure for µin
principle¶ approval on 27th February, 2006 and 29th March, 2006 respectively.
In the meantime, this Department finalized the Memorandum for the
Expenditure Finance Committee on the MNAIS on the basis of views/comments
of the appraisal agencies including the Planning Commission and Department of
Expenditure and submitted the same for the consideration of the EFC.  EFC
meeting was scheduled to consider the proposal on MNAIS on 20 th December,
2006, but the meeting was postponed at the instance of the Planning
Commission.   The Planning Commission has been repeatedly requested at the
level of Agriculture Minister/Secretary (A&C) for clearance of the proposal of
MNAIS so that further action in the matter can be taken. ´
Comments of the Committee
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5.7 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.28 of Chapter-I
of the Report.
NEW DELHI;                                                  MOHAN SINGH
16 December, 2008 Chairman,
25 Agrahayana, 1930(Saka)                  Standing Committee on Agriculture
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 16 TH DECEMBER, 2008 AT 1000 HRS. IN
COMMITTEE ROOM NO. µ139¶, FIRST FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE,
NEW DELHI
    The Committee sat from 1000 HRS TO 1100 HRS
PRESENT
Shri Mohan Singh  - Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
5. Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire
6. Shri Prabodh Panda
7. Smt. Rupatai D.Patil Nilangekar
8. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
RAJYA SABHA
9. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
10. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
11. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
12. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. K. Singh    -  Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma   -  Director
3. Shri Raj Kumar    -  Deputy Secretary
4. Shri N. S. Hooda   -  Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Amita Walia   -  Under Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

At the outset, the members welcomed Shri Mohan Singh, the new Chairman of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture appointed in place of Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav who has been
elected to the Rajya Sabha.  The Hon ¶ble Chairman then welcomed the Members to the sitting of
the Committee and requested them to take up the following draft Action Taken Reports on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Food Processing
Industries for consideration and adoption:
(1) 42nd Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in the 37th Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) in respect of Ministry of Agriculture (Deptt. of
Agriculture and Co-operation)
xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx
2 The Committee then considered and adopted the draft Action Taken Reports with minor
additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee.
3. The Committee, thereafter, authorized the Chairman to finalise and present the above-
mentioned Reports to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON
THE THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA)
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     15
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
Accepted by the Government
Serial Nos. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, and 14
T o t a l         7
Percentage        46.67%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ¶s replies
NIL
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
 of the Government have not been accepted by the
 Committee
Serial No.  3, 9, 10, 11 and 13
T o t a l         5
Percentage        33.33%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited
Serial Nos.  2, 4 and 15
T o t a l         3
Percentage        20%
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages