 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2005-2006) 
                 
         
17
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
              
THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS BILL,2005 
         
        
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2006/Magha, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

 2
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2005-2006) 
          
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
         
         
         
THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS BILL,2005 
 
  
         
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.02.2006  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.02.2006  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
February, 2006/Phalguna, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 

 3
 
 
 
 
 
COA No.182  
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
            © 2006 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  
 

 4
 
<CONTENTS> 
                   P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
REPORT …………………………………………………………………………  1-39  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
The Food Safety and Standards Bill, 2005 as introduced in  
Lok Sabha by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
1. Minutes of the Third Sitting of the  
Standing Committee on Agriculture held on      40-41 
21st   September, 2005      
 
2. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the  
standing committee on agriculture held on      42-44 
14th  October, 2005 
 
3. Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the  
Standing Committee on Agriculture held on      45-46 
7th November, 2005 
 
4. Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the  
Standing Committee on Agriculture held on      47-48 
8th November, 2005 
 
5. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture held on      49-51 
13th December, 2005 
 
6. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the  
Standing Committee on Agriculture held on      52-55 
18th January, 2006 
 
6. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the  
Standing Committee on Agriculture held on      55-56 
10th February, 2006 
 
 

 5
Composition of  the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
6. Smt. Anuradha Choudhary 
7. Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan 
8. Shri Khagen Das 
9. Shri Dharmendra 
10. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
11. Shri Raghunath Jha 
12. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan  
13. Smt. Rupatai D iliprao Patil Nilangekar 
14. Shri Sippiparai Ravichandran  
15. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
16. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
17. Shri Harihar Swain 
18. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
19. Shri Mahboob Zahedi 
20   * Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
21   # Vacant 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
23.    Shri Harish Rawat 
24.   Dr. M.S.Gill 
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
26. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
27. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
29. Shri Datta Meghe 
30. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
31. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
____________________________________________________________________ 
 
* Shri Prakash V.Patil ceased to be a member of  this Committee owing to his demise on 21 
October, 2005 and the vacancy thus created w as filled by nomination of Shri Deepender Singh 
Hooda,  vide L.S. Bulletin Part-II, Para No.1905, dated 9th December, 2005 
# Shri Lal Chandra Kol ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his expulsion 
from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 23 December, 2005. vide L.S. Bulletin Part-II, Para No.1982  dated 
23rd  December, 2005 
 
 

 6
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   -  Secretary 
2.          Shri  A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri  Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
4 Shri D.S. Malha    -  Under Secretary 
5 Smt.P.Jyoti    -  Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
     
  

 7
               INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agri culture having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this Seventeenth Report on the 
`Food Safety and Standards Bill, 2005’ which was referred to this Committee by the 
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha for examination and Report. 
2.  The Standing Committee on Agriculture was constituted on 5 th  August, 2005.  One of 
the functions of the Standing Co mmittee as laid down in Rule 331E (1) (b) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha is    to examine such Bills pertaining to the 
concerned Ministries/Departments as are refe rred to the Committee by the Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha or the Speaker, Lok Sabha, as the case may be, and make reports thereon.  In pursuance 
of this rule Hon’ble Speaker referred the ‘T he Food Safety and Standards Bill, 2005’ to the 
Committee on 30 August, 2005 for examination and report. 
3. The Committee held a briefing meeting with the representatives of the Ministry  of 
Food Processing Industries on 21 st September, 2005, 14 th October, 2005 and 8 th 
November,2005. Thereafter, they considered  the memoranda received from various 
experts/NGO/ Farmers organizations in the fiel d of food safety.   The Committee heard the 
views of the representatives of the following  organisations on 7 th  November, 2005 and 13 th 
December, 2005:- 
(i) All India Food Processors Association (AIFPA), New Delhi. 
(ii) Centre for Science and Environment (CSE), New Delhi. 
(iii) Shetkari Sangthan, Maharashtra 
(iv) Confederation of Indi an Industry, (CII), New Delhi 
(v) Gandhi Peace Foundation, (GPF), Kottayam; 
(vi) Voluntary Organisation in Interest of  Consumer Education (VOICE), New Delhi; 
(vii) Consumer Coordination Council; 
(viii)      All India Retailers Federation (AIRF) 
 
4. The Committee took evidence of the representa tives of the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries; Ministry of Law; Ministry of Agricu lture (Department of Agriculture & Co-

 8
operation); Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries),  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs; Food and P ublic Distribution (Department of Consumer 
Affairs); Ministry of Huma n Resource Development (Dep artment of Women & Child 
Development),  Ministry of Sm all Scale Industries (Departmen t of Commerce) (SSI),  and 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.    
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to  all officers of the Ministries / 
Departments for placing before them the material and information which they desired in 
connection with the examination of ‘The Food Safety and Standards Bill, 2005’ and for giving 
evidence before the Committee.  The Committee al so benefited from the views/suggestions of 
individuals/NGO and express their thanks to all of them who furnished memoranda and  who 
tendered evidence before the Committee as referred to in para 3 above. 
6. The draft Report was circulated to the members on 30 th January, 2006. 
The Committee considered a nd adopted the Report at their sitting held on 10 th 
February, 2006.   
         
 
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
10, February 2006                                                  Chairman, 
21, Magha, 1927 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on Agriculture 
    
 
 

 9
 
REPORT 
 
 Background  
 
 Multiplicity of food laws and standard setting and enforcement agencies pervades 
different sectors of food, which creates confusion in the minds of consumers, traders, investors 
and manufacturers.  Provisions regarding admissibility and levels of food additives and 
contaminants, food colours, preservatives etc. and the requirements of labeling have varied 
standards under these laws.  The standards ar e often rigid and non-res ponsive to scientific 
advancements and enforced by multiplicity of inspectors under various laws. 
2 Moreover, thin spread of manpower, f ood laboratories and ot her resources under 
various authorities administeri ng these laws is not conducive to  effective fixa tion of food 
standards and their enforcement.  Such a situa tion is also detrimental to the growth of the 
nascent food processing industry, which is so  vital for generating employment and enhancing 
income of farmers in our country. 
3. At present there are a plethora of laws on f ood and its operations which lead to a lot of 
confusion in the minds of consumers, traders, in vestors and manufacturers.  Some of the laws 
which affect the food and its operations are as under :- 
(i)  The Prevention of Food A dulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954) 
 (ii)  The Fruit Products Order, 1955 
 (iii) The Meat Food Products Order, 1973 
 (iv) The Vegetable Oil Prod ucts (Control) Order, 1947 
 (v)  The Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998 
 (vi) The Solvent Extracted Oil, De oiled Meal, and Edible Flour (Control) Order, 1967 
(vii) The Milk and Milk Products Order, 1992 
 
A number of  Ministries lik e Health and  Family Welfar e, Food Processing Industries, 
Agriculture, Commerce, Food and Consumer Affairs, etc  administer these laws. 
4. A need was felt for integration of all such laws for giving a boost to the food processing 
industries and regulating the quality of food.  Th e matter regarding cons olidation of the food 

 10
laws was considered by the Government on various occasions.    The  Committees  which 
recommended for comprehensive legislation on food were :-  
(i) Prime Minister’s Council on Trade and Industry in 1998; 
(ii) Joint Parliamentary Committee (J PC) on Pesticides residues in  2004 
(iii) Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Agriculture in their report on 
Demands for Grants of the  Ministry of Food Processing Industries  in 2005’ 
(12th Report, 14th  Lok Sabha) 
(iv) The  Law Commission recommended interalia that the Pr evention of Food 
Adulteration Act, 1954 be repealed  and orders under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 be subsumed within the proposed  Integrated Food 
Law with certain modifications. 
(v) The Government of India constitu ted a Group of Ministers to propose 
legislative and other changes considered necessary for finalizing the 
proposed  Integrated Food Law.    The GOM  approved the proposed  
Integrated Food Laws.  
(vi) The Cabinet at its meeting held on 04.08.2005 considered the proposal to 
enact “Food Safety and Standards Bill, 2005” and approved the same.   
Accordingly the Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 25.08.2005. 
 
The Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha  referre d the Bill to the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture on  30.8.2005  for examination and report. 
 Objectives of the Bill : 
 The main objectives of The Food Safety & Standards Bill, 2005  are :- 
(i) single reference poi nt for all matters relating to Food Safety & Standards, and 
regulations; 
(ii) lay food standards based on scien ce, transparency and consultation; 
(iii) effectively regulate manufacture, storag e, distribution and sale of food to ensure 
consumer safety and promote global trade; 
(iv) integrated response to strategic issues like novel/genetical ly  modified foods, 
international trade; 
(v) shift from mere regulatory regime to self-compliance through Food Safety 
Management Systems; 
(vi) rationalize and strengthen existing enforcement  mechanism, 
(vii) provision for graded penalties dependi ng on the gravity of offence and accordingly, 
civil penalties for minor offences/lapses and criminal action for serious violations; 
(viii) pool infrastructure, manpower, testing facilities for better standard fixation and 
enforcement through their proper redeployment. 
 
The Bill has 12 chapters containing 101 clauses briefly and 2 Schedules. 

 11
The Food Safety & Standards Bill, 2005 wa s introduced in the Parliament by the 
Ministry of Food Processing I ndustries with the objective of ensuri ng safe food to the 
consumers. 
5. The Standing Committee on Agriculture delib erated on the Bill during its meeting held 
on 21.9.2005, 14.10.2005 and 8.11.2005.   The Committee received the written views/ 
suggestions on various provisions of the Bill and  in an interactive session held on 7.11.2005 
representatives of the following Associations/ Organizations attended the meeting and offered 
their views/comments on the Bill:- 
(viii) All India Food Processors Association (AIFPA); New Delhi. 
(ix) Centre for Science and Environment (CSE); New Delhi. 
(x) Shetkari Sangthan, Maharashtra 
 
6. The Committee also heard the views of  fo llowing Organizations at its meeting held on 
13.12.2005:-  
 
(i)   Confederation of Indian Industry; (CII) 
(ii) Gandhi Peace Foundation (GPF), Kottayam; 
(iii) Voluntary Organi sation in Interest of Consumer Education (VOICE), New 
Delhi; 
(iv) Consumer Coordination Council; 
(v) All India Retailers Federation  (AIRF). 
 
7. The Committee took oral evidence of the re presentatives of the Ministries of Food 
Processing Industries, Law,  Agriculture, Consum er Affairs,  Food & Public Distribution, 
Women & Child Development, Human Resource Development, Commerce,  Small Scale 
Industries and Health & Family Welfare on 21.9.2005, 14.10.2005 and 8.11.2005. 
8. The recommendations and observations of the Committee on various clauses of the Bill  
are dealt with in the subsequent paragraphs. 
 
 
 
 

 12
 
(1)  Introductory Para/Preamble 
 
9.1 The introductory para reads as under:- 
A Bill to consolidate the laws  relating to food and to es tablish the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India for laying down scie nce based standards for articles of food and 
to regulate their manufact ure, storage, distribution, sale and import, to ensure availability of 
safe and wholesome  food for human consumption and for matters connected there with or 
incidental thereto. 
9.2 While VOICE suggested that the nomenclature of “The Food Safety and 
Standards  Bill, 2005” should be “Food Auth ority of India”, the GPF desired that it 
should be named as “Food Safety Authority of India”. 
9.3 The Committee feel that since standards for food safety would be laid down in the 
Rules and Regulations under the Act, the nomenclature “ The Food Safety and Standards  
Bill” proposed by the Ministry is appropriate. 
 

 13
(2) Definitions (clause 3 of the Bill)  
 
(a) Food  
 
10.1 Clause 3(1) (j) of the Bill reads as under:   
3(1)(j), "food" means any substa nce, whether processed, partia lly processed or unprocessed, 
which is intended for human consumption and in cludes primary food, gene tically modified or 
engineered food or food containing such ingredients, infant food, packaged drinking water, 
alcoholic drink, chewing gum, and any substance, including water used into the food during its 
manufacture, preparation or treatment but does not include any animal feed, live animals unless 
they are prepared or processed for placing on th e market for human consumption, plants prior 
to harvesting, drugs and medicinal products, cosm etics, narcotic or psychotropic substances: 
Provided that the Central Government may declar e, by notification in the Official Gazette, any 
other article as food for the purposes of this Act having regards to its use, nature, substance or 
quality; 
 
10.2 The AIFPA in their written views submitted to the Committee indicated that the food 
industry uses water supplied by municipalities/ Jal Boards for various operations including 
addition into the finished products and hence the food industry should not be penalized for 
using such water.   They suggested that th e words ‘water used in to the food during its 
manufacture, preparation or treatment’ should be deleted from the clause.   The CSE stated that 
if the definition of the word food includes wate r used into the food dur ing its manufacture, the 
civic institutions that are responsible for supply of wate r  will need to be taken as 
manufacturers of food as well.   Under the PFA Act, water is excluded from the definition of 
food Clause 2(v)-{‘food” means any article used as food or drink for human consumption other 
than drugs and water}. 
10.3 The Committee are aware that the quality of water differs from place  to place all over 
India.  In a majority of the pl aces especially in the countrysi de, groundwater is used as water 
supply by the municipal authorities/Jal Boards is not available.  The Committee feel that 
certain minimum standards of the quality of dri nking water/water used in  preparation of food 
have to be fixed for prevention of diseases sp reading through contamin ated water and for the 
health of the human beings. 

 14
10.4 The Committee therefore, opine that th e definition of Food should include 
drinking water/water provided or supplied to  consumers by Municipal Authorities/ Jal 
Boards, etc. for free or by charging a co nsideration; and the words, “ including water 
used into the food during its manufacture , preparation or treatment” should be 
substituted by the following: 
10.5 “including drinking water/  water provided or supplied to consumers by Municipal 
Authorities/ Jal Boards/ Civic Institutions/ Private Suppliers  for free or by charging a 
consideration and/or procured by any other ways and means and used into the food 
during its manufacture, preparation or trea tment, including usage of water as an 
addition into the finished product, by the manufacturer, producer of that food himself or 
by people engaged or hired by the manufacturer or producer of that food”. 

 15
(b) Food Business 
11.1 Clause 3 (1) (n) reads as under:- 
 ‘Food Business means any undertaking, whether for profit or not and whether public or 
private, carrying out any of the activities relate d to any stage of  manufacture, processing, 
storage, transportation distribut ion of food and includes food se rvices, sale of food or food 
ingredients; 
 
11.2 VOICE  had indicated in their written subm ission that import, packaging and catering 
services may be included in the clause.   They desire that the clause may be modified as under:- 
 ‘Food Business means any undertaking, whether for profit or not and whether public or 
private, carrying out any of the activities related to any stage of  import, manufacture, 
processing, packaging, storage, transportation and dist ribution of food and includes food 
services, sale of food or food ingredients;’ 
 
11.3 The Committee are aware that several inst ances have come in the Press where people 
have fallen ill or even died due to bad food served at marriag e parties, mid-day meal schemes 
etc.   To prevent recurrence of such cases, catering servi ces who prepare food at such 
parties/functions or the contractors who supply meals to the schools, should also be included in 
the definition of ‘food business’. 
11.4 The Committee recommends that the words ‘import’, ‘packaging’ and ‘catering 
services’ may also be included in the definition. 
 
 

 16
 
(c)   Package 
12.1 Clause 3 (1)(zh) of the Bill reads as under : 
  “package” means a box, bottle, casket, tin, barrel, case, pouch, re ceptacle, sack, bag, 
wrapper or other thing in pre-packed condition, in which an article of food is packed. 
 
12.2 These days, the commodities are sold either in pre-packed  containers or in multi-piece 
and wholesale packages as well.   
12.3 The Committee, therefore, re commend that pre-packed commodities, multi-piece 
packages and wholesale packages m ay also be incorporated in the definition of ‘package’ 
in the above clause. 

 17
(d)   Primary Food 
13.1 Under Clause 3 (1) (zk) "primary food" means an article of food, being a produce of 
agriculture or horticulture or an imal husbandry and dairying or aquaculture in its natural form, 
result from the growing, rais ing, cultivation, picking, harvesti ng, collection or catching in the 
hands of a person other than a farmer; 
 
13.2 Since fish is also a produce of aquaculture in its natural form, the fisherman should also 
be included in the definition. 
13.3 The Committee, therefore, recommends that  the words ‘or fisherman’ should be 
included at the end of the sub-clause after the word ‘farmer’. 

 18
 (e)   Sale 
14.1 Clause 3(1)(zr) of the Bill reads as under 
 
  “Sale” with its grammatical variations a nd cognate expressions, means the sale of any 
article of food, whether for cash or on credit or by way of exchange and whether by wholesale 
or retail, for human consumption or use or for analysis, and includes an agreement for sale, an 
offer for sale, the exposing for sale or having in  possession for sale of any such article, and 
includes also an attempt to sell any such article; 
  
14.2 A lot of sale is also don e through the vending machines, specially in the big cities.  
 
14.3 The Committee, therefore, recommend that  sale through the vending machines 
should also be included in the definition of  “sale”. 

 19
 (f)   Unsafe food 
15.1 Clause3(1) (zz)reads as under: 
  "unsafe food" means an article of food whos e nature, substance or quality is so affected 
as to render it injurious to health: 
 
(i) by the article itself, or its package thereof, whic h is composed, whether wholly or in part, of 
poisonous or deleterious substances; or 
(ii) by the article consisting, wholly or in part, of any filthy, putrid, rotten, decomposed or 
diseased animal substance or vegetable substance; or 
(iii] by virtue of its unhygienic processing or the presence in that article of any harmful 
substance; or 
(iv) by the substitution of any inferior or cheaper substance whether wholly or in part; or 
(v) by addition of a substance directly or as an ingredient which is not permitted; or 
(vi) by the abstraction, wholly or in part, of any of its constituents; or 
(vii) by the article being so coloured , flavoured or coated, powdered or polished, as to damage 
or conceal the article or to make it appear better or of greater value than it really is; or  
(viii) by the presence of any colouring matter or preservatives other than that specified in 
respect thereof or 
(ix) by the article having been infected or infested with worms, weevils or insects; or 
(x) by virtue of its being prepared, packed or kept under in sanitary conditions; or 
(xi) by virtue of its being mis-branded or sub-standard or food containing 
extraneous matter. 
 
15.2 The Committee recommend that the defini tion of ‘unsafe food’ may include 
another sub-clause after (xi) as under: 
  
(xii) By virtue of containing pesticides and other contaminants. 
 

 20
Composition of Food Authority 
16.1 Clauses 4 and 5 of the Bill read as under: 
  
4 (1)  The Central Government shall, by notif ication, establish a body to be known as the 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India to exercise the powers conferred on, and to 
perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act, 
(2) The Food Authority shall be a body corpor ate by the name afor esaid, having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Food Authority shall be at Delhi.  
(4) The Food Authority may establish its offices at any other place in India. 
 
5. (I) The Food Authority shall consist of a Ch airperson and the following eighteen members 
namely:- 
(a) Seven Members, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to be 
appointed by the Central Government, to respectively represent the Ministries or Departments 
of the Central Government dealing with- 
(i) Agriculture, 
(ii) Commerce, 
(iii) Consumer Affairs, 
(iv) Food Processing, 
(v) Health, 
(vi] Legislative Affairs, 
(vii) Small Scale Industries 
 
who shall be Members ex officio; 
(b) two representatives from food industry of which one shall be from small scale 
industries; 
(c) two representatives from consumer organizations; 
(d) one eminent food technologist or scientist; 
(e) five members to be appointed by rotation every three years, one each in 
seriatim from the Zones as specified in the First Schedule to represent the States and 
the Union territories; 
(f) one person to represent farmers  organisation. 
 
16.2 In view of the large variet y and diversity of food and f ood products, it is felt that 
experts in the field of toxicologist, microbiology and nutrition may be represented on the 
Authority.   To safeguard, the in terests of farmers, th eir representation s hould be increased.   
The AIRF had desired that few members from the retailers should be included in the Authority. 
  
 

 21
16.3 The Committee recommend that the representa tion of the following categories on 
the Food Authority may be increased as under: 
(i) Instead of one eminent food technologi st or scientist, there should be three 
eminent scientists having expertise in any discipline of food science-one Food 
Technologist,  one Food Microbiologist an d one Nutritionist or expert in Food 
Hygiene.   [Clause 5(1)(d)] 
 
(ii) Instead of one, there should be tw o persons to represent farmers organization 
[Clause 5(1)(f)] 
 
 
(iii) One member from recognized retailers organization. [new sub clause] 
 
16.4 The Committee note that women form fifty  percent of the total population in the 
country.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that adequate representation should be 
given to the fair gender and as far as possible, one-third of the representatives on the 
Food Authority should be women. 
 

 22
 
Selection Committee for selection of Chairperson and Members of Food Authority 
17.1 Clause 6 (1) reads as of the Bill as under: 
 
The Central Government shall, for the purpose  of selection of th e Chairperson and the 
Members other than ex officio Members of the Food Authority, constitute a Selection 
Committee consisting of- 
(a) Cabinet Secretary - Chairperson, 
(b) Secretary-in-charge of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries as the 
convener Member, 
(c) Secretary-in-charge of the Ministries or the Departments of the Central 
Government dealing with Health, Legislative and Personnel -Members, 
(d) Chairman of the Public Enterprises Selection Board - Member, 
(e) An eminent food technologist to be nominated by the Central Government-Member. 
 
17.2 The Committee observe that the Selection Co mmittee is highly bureaucratic in nature.   
There is no representation of el ected representatives in the Committee.  Several Autonomous 
Body of the Government have MPs on their Boards, like APEDA, MPEDA, Governing Body 
of ICAR, etc.    The Committee feel that two members of Parliament should be represented on 
the Selection Committee to derive benefit out of  their wisdom and experience.  The Chairman 
of the Selection Committee shou ld be the Minister of Food Processing Indust ries.   The 
Secretary Incharge of the Ministry of Agriculture should also be one of the members of the 
Selection Committee. 
17.3 The Committee therefore recommend that in addition to the existing members: 
 
(a) The Minister of Food Processing Indus tries should be the Chairman of the 
Selection Committee ( instead of the Cabinet Secretary); 
 
(b) Two Members of Parliament should be members of the Committee; and 
 
(c) Secretary Incharge of the Ministry of Agriculture should also be one of the 
members  [sub-clause(c)] 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 23
Officers and Other Employees of Food Authority  
Functions of the Chief Executive Officer 
18.1 Clause 9, 10 and 17 of the Bill read as under: 
 
9(1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer  of the Food Authority, not below the rank of 
Additional Secretary to the Government of India, who sh all be ex-officio Commissioner of 
Food Safety, to be appointed by the Central Government. 
 xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 
10. (1) The Chief Executive Officer shall be the legal representative of the Food  Authority and 
shall be responsible for-  
(a) the day-to-day administration of the Food Authority;  
(b) drawing up of proposal 'for the Food Authority's work programmes in consultation with the 
Central Advisory Committee; 
(c) implementing the work programmes and the decisions adopted by the Food Law Authority; 
(d) ensuring the provision of appropriate scientific, technical and administrative support for the 
Scientific Committee and the Scientific Panel; 
(e) ensuring that the Food Authority carries out its tasks in accordance with the requirements of 
its users, in particular with regard to the adequacy of the services  provided and the time taken; 
(f) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the execution of the budget 
of the Food Authority; and 
(g) developing and maintaining contact with the Central Government, and for ensuring a 
regular dialogue with its relevant committees. 
  
Clause 17(5) 
 
18.2 The Chief Executive Officer shall take part in the meetings of the Food Authority but 
without a right to vote. 
 
In each Organisation the senior most officer has been given autonomous as well as 
independent powers.  But in this case th e Chief Executive Officer (CEO) is neither 
a Member nor a Secretary to the Food Authority and in view of this he is not 
having even a voting right.  Since the Chief Executive Officer would be a key 
functionary of the Food Authority, the Committee recommend that he should also 
function as the 
Member Secretary to the Authority. 

 24
Central Advisory Committee 
19.1 Clause 11  of the Bill reads as under: 
 
 11. ( I ) The Food Authority shall, by notification, establish a Comm ittee to be known as the 
Central Advisory Committee.  
(2) The Central Advisory Committee shall consist of two members each to represent 
the interests of food industry, agriculture, cons umers, relevant research bodies and food 
laboratories, and all Commissioners of Food Safety, and the Chairpers on of the Scientific 
Committee shall be ex-officio member. 
(3) The representatives of the concerned Ministri es or Departments of the Central Government 
in Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Bio-technology, Commerce and Industry, 
Consumer Affairs, Environment and Forests, Food Processing Industrie s, Health, Panchayati 
Raj, Small Scale Industries and Food and Pub lic Distribution shall be invitees to the 
deliberations of the Central Advisory Committee. 
(4) The Chief Executive Officer shall be ex o fficio Chairperson of the Central Advisory 
Committee. 
(5) The Central Advisory Committee shall fo llow such rules of pr ocedure including its 
transaction of business as may be specified by regulations. 
 
19.2 Under the extant Provision of Food A dulteration Act 1954,  there is a Central 
Committee for  Food Standards which advices the Central and State Governments on matters 
rising out of the administration of the Act and to carry out th e other functions assigned to it 
under the Act (Clause 3 of the PFA  Act).   The Committee consis ts of the following members 
namely:- 
(a) The Director-General, Health Services, ex-officio, who shall be the Chairman; 
(b) The Director of the Central Food Laborat ory or, in  a case where more than one 
Central Food Laboratory is established, th e Directors of such  Laboratories, ex-
officio; 
(c) Two experts nominated by the Central Government; 
(d) One representative each of the Departme nts of Food and Agricu lture in the Central 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture and one representative each  of the Central 
Ministries of Commerce, Defence, Indus try and Supply and Railways, nominated 
by the Central Government. 
(e) One representative each nominated by the Government of each State; 

 25
(f) Two representatives nominated by the Ce ntral Government to represent the Union 
Territories; 
(g) One representative each nominated by the Central Government to represent the 
agricultural, commercial and industrial interests; 
(gg) Five representatives  nominated by th e Central Government to  represent the 
consumer’s interests, one of whom shall be from the hotel industry; 
(h) One representative of the medical pr ofession nominated by the Indian Council of 
Medical Research; 
(i) One representative nominated by the I ndian Standards Institution referred to in 
Clause (e) of section 2 of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act, 
1952 (36 of 1952). 
xx  xx   xx  xx 
19.3 Under the present Bill, the Central Advisory Committee (Similar to the Central 
Committee under the PFA Act) would consist of  51 members as categorized below: 
(i) Two members each  to represent the interests 
Of food industry, agriculture, consumers,         - 10 
Relevant research bodies and food laboratories 
 
(ii) All Commissioners of Food Safety     - 28 
 
(iii) Chairperson of the Scientific Committee    -    1 
 
(iv) Representatives of Ministries/D eptts. of Central Govt.   -  11 
 
(v) Chief Executive Officer      -     1 
 
19.4 To render proper and professional advice, the Committee recommend that a 
representative each from the following Organis ations/Institutes may also be included in 
the Central Advisory Committee:- 
 
(i)   Indian Standards Institute; 
(ii) Indian Council of Medical Research; and 
(iii) Recognized farmers organizations. 
 The Committee also feel that the member of representatives of 
Ministries/Departments of Central Government mentioned above may be reduced 
from11 to 5 but giving special  representation to the Ministries of Food Processing 
Industries, Agriculture and Health. 

 26
 
General Principles to be followed in administration of the Act 
 
(Clause 18) 
 
20.1 Clause 18(2) of the Bill reads as: 
 
 (2) The Food Authority shall, while framing regulations or specifying standards under this Act 
(a) take into account- 
(i) prevalent practices and condi tions in the country including agricultural practices and 
handling, storage and transport conditions; and 
(ii) international standards and practices, where inte rnational standards or practices exist or are 
in the process of being formul ated, unless it is of opinion that  taking into account of such 
prevalent practices and conditions or international standards or practices or  any particular part 
thereof would not be effective or appropriate  means for securing the objectives of such 
regulations or where there is a scientific justif ication or where they would result in a different 
level of protection From the one determined as appropriate in the country; 
 
  xx  xx  xx   xx 
 
20.2 Although the above provision provides that the Food Authority shall, while 
framing regulations or standards, take into account the prevailing practices and 
conditions in the country, including agricultural practices and handling, storage and 
transport, conditions, the Committee feel that the poor uneducated farmers will neither 
be able to comprehend the complicated provisi ons of the Act nor be able to meet the 
stringent standards prescribed under the Act. 
20.3 The Committee, therefore, strongly reco mmend that the provisions of the Act 
should not apply to any farm er/fishermen or farming oper ations or crops, including 
fisheries, livestock, and supplies used or produced in farming or products of crops 
produced by a farmer at farm level or the fishermen in their operations. 
 
 
 
 

 27
 
Restriction on Advertisement and prohibition as to unfair trade practices 
21.1  Clause 24 of the Bill reads as under: 
 
24. (1) No advertisement shall be made of any f ood which is misleading or contravenes the 
provisions of this Act, the rules and regulations made thereunder. 
 
(2) No person shall engage himself in any unfai r trade practice for purp ose of promoting the 
sale, supply, use and consumption of articles of  food o: adopt any unfair or deceptive practice 
including the practice of making any statement,  whether orally or in  writing or by visible 
representation which- 
 
(a) falsely represents that the foods are of a particular standard, qua lity, quantity or grade-
composition;  
 
(b) makes a false or misleading representation concerning the need for, or the usefulness; 
 
(c) gives to the public any guarantee of the e fficacy that is not base d on an adequate or 
scientific justification thereof:  
 
Provided that where a defence is raised to the effect that such guarantee is based on 
adequate or scientific justification, the burden of  proof of such defence shall lie on the person 
raising such defence. 
 
21.2 The Committee feel that the process of adve rtisement should be a healthy process.  
With the advent of new technology and day to day projections on TV and media the 
experience has shown that food products most ly of different varieti es find a place on the 
Ads thus attracting the notice of the gene ral public.  No fool proof system has been 
proposed in the Act that could deter the Advertisers of sub-standard items from 
projecting such Ads. 
Revised 
21.3 The Committee, therefore, recommend that  a proper mechanism needs to be 
evolved to check such misleading  ads, including ads relating to  sale of soft drinks, sodas, 
etc., manufactured by companies which manufac ture/sell liquor also by the same brand 
name,  before they are released in the print or electronic media. 

 28
Liability of the manufacturers , distribution and sellers 
22.1 Clause 27 of the Bill reads as under :- 
(1) The manufacturer of an article  of food shall be liable for such  article of food if it does not 
meet the requirements of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder.  
(2) The distributor shall be liable under this Act for any article of food which is- 
(a) supplied after the date of its expiry or which is likely to expire; or 
(b) stored or supplied in violation of the safety standard; or 
(c) misbranded, or 
(d) unidentifiable of manufacturer from whom the artic!e of food have been received; or 
(e) stored or handled or kept in violation of the provisions of this Act, the rules and regulations 
made thereunder. 
(3) The seller shall be liable under this Act, for any article of food which- 
(a) is sold after the date of its expiry or which is likely to expire; or 
(b) is handled or kept in unhygienic conditions; or 
(c) is misbranded; or 
(d) unidentifiable the manufacturer  or the distributor from whom  such article of food were 
received; or 
(e) received by him with knowledge of being unsafe. 
 
22.2 VOICE  had suggested that sub-clause  (2)  may be modified as under :- 
 
 The distributor shall be liable under this Act for any article of food which is:-  
(a) Supplied after the date of its expiry  or which is likely to expire; or  
(b) Stored or supplied in violation of th e Safety Instructions of the Manufacturer, or 
wholesaler or packer or 
(c) Misbranded, or 
(d) Unsafe, or 
(e) Unidentifiable of manufacturers or wholesaler or packer  from whom the article of 
food have been received; or 
(f) Stored or handled or kept in violation of the Provisions of this Act, the rules and 
regulations made thereunder. 
22.3 The Committee agree with the above suggestion and desire that the words 
“wholesaler or packer” and “unsafe” be included at the appropriate places in the 
Clause. 

 29
Unsafe Food 
23.1 Clause 28 of the Bill reads as under: 
 
(1) If a food business operator considers or has reason to believe that a food which it has 
processed, manufactured or dist ributed is not in compliance with this Act and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder, it shall immediately initi ate procedures to w ithdraw the food in 
question from the market and consumers indicati ng reasons for its withdrawal and inform the 
competent authorities thereof. 
(2) A food business operator’ shall immediatel y inform the competent authorities and co-
operate with them, if it consider s or has reasons to believe that a food which it has placed on 
the market may be injurious to human health. 
 
23.2 Clause 28(2) provides  in the public interest how the unsafe food, which is 
injurious to human health be recalled fr om the market and the Committee recommend 
Clause 28(2) may be rewritten as :- 
(2) A food business operator’ shall immediately inform the competent authorities 
and co-operate with them, if he/ it considers or has reasons to believe that a food which 
he/ it has placed on the market may be ‘unsafe for the health of purchasers’ (instead of 
‘injurious to human health’). 

 30
Licensing and Registration of Food Business 
24.1 Clause 31  of the Bill reads as under: 
 
(1) No person shall commence or any on any food business except under a license  food.  
 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (I) shall apply to such petty manufacturer who himself 
manufactures or sells any article of food or a retailer as may be notified by the Food Authority, 
or a hawker, itinerant vendor or a temporary stall holder: 
 
Provided that such petty manufacturer, retailer, hawker, itinerant vendor or a temporary 
stall holder shall only register their business w ith concerned municipality or the Panchayat, as 
the case may be. 
 
(3) Any person desirous to commence or carry on any food business shall make an 
application for grant of a license to the Desi gnated Officer in such manner containing such 
particulars as may be specified by regulations. 
  xx  xx  xx  xx 
24.2 Under the above clause, each person is requi red to obtain a licence for starting or 
carrying on any food business, except any petty manufacturer, retailer, hawker, itinerant 
vendor or a temporary staff holder , who are required to regist er their business with the 
concerned Municipality or Panchayat, as the case may be. 
 The Committee feel that such  petty manufacturer, retailer, hawker, itinerant vendor or a 
temporary staff holder, may not be able to adhere to the standards to be pr escribed under the 
Act.  Even the small scale or cottage industrie s engaged in food busine ss may not be able to 
meet the standards. 
24.3 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the food operators may be classifed 
into the following three categories and different standards be prescribed for them: 
(a) Petty manufacturer who himself manufactures or sells an y article of food or a 
retailer, hawker, itinerant vendor or a temporary staff holder;  
(b) Small scale, cottage, tiny food business operator; and 
(c) Other food business operators. 
Categories (a) and (b) above may be exempted, without prejudice to the availability of 
safe and wholesome food for human consum ption or affecting the interests of the 

 31
consumers, from the requirements of the Act relating to licensing or registration or  
regulations thereunder.  A suitably worded clause to this effect may be included in the 
Bill. 

 32
Designated Officer 
25.1  Clause 36 of the Bill reads as under: 
(1)  The Commissioner of Food Safety shall, by order, appoint the Designated Officer, who 
shall not be below the rank of a Sub-Divisional Officer, to be in-charge of food safety 
administration in such area as may be specified by regulations. 
(2) There shall be a Designated Officer for each district. 
(3)  The functions to be performed by the Desi gnated Officer shall be as follows namely :- 
(a) to issue or cancel licen se of food business operators; 
(b) to prohibit the sake of  any article of food which is  in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act and rules and regulations made thereunder; 
(c) to receive report and samples of arti cle of food s from Food Safety Officer 
under his jurisdiction and get them analysed; 
(d) to make recommendations to the Co mmissioner of Food Safety for sanction to 
launch prosecutions in case of contraventions punishable with imprisonment; 
(e) to sanction or launch prosecutions in case of contraventions punishable with 
fine; 
(f) to maintain record of all inspections made by Food Safety  Officers and action 
taken by them in the performance of their duties; 
(g) to get investigated any complaint which may be made in writing in respect of 
any contravention of the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations 
made thereunder; 
(h) to investigate any complaint which may be made in writing against the Food 
Safety Officer; and  
(i) to perform such other duties as may be entrusted by the Commissioner of Food 
Safety 
 
25.2 The Committee feel that the Food Safety Officer in each district may be harassed 
by submitting false complaints.  Therefore,  the Committee recommend that in case any 
false complaint is made agains t a FSO and it is proved so, provision be made for giving  
exemplary punishment to such a complainant under the law.   

 33
 
Liability of Food Safety Officer in Certain Cases 
26.1 Clause 39   of the Bill reads as under: 
 
39. Any Food Safety Officer exercising powers unde r this Act or the ru les and regulations 
made thereunder who- 
(a) vexatiously and without any reasonable ground seizes any article of food or adulterant; or 
(b) commits any other act to the injury of a ny person without having reason to believe that 
such act is necessary for the execution of his duty, shall be guilty of an offence under this 
Act and shall be punishable for such an offen ce with fine which may extend to twenty-five 
thousand rupees. 
 
26.2 Clause 39 is about liablity of  Food Safety Officer in certai n cases.  Under this clause, 
any food safety officer while exercising powers under this Act commits any other act to the 
injury of any person without having reason to believe that such act is necessary for the 
execution of his duty, shall be guilty of an offence under this Act and shall be punishable for 
such offence with fine which may extend to Rs. 25,000 only. 
26.3 The Committee feel that this officer is th e most important officer while executing 
his duties in food related matters and the ordi nary public can be very badly injured if by 
intention or otherwise he commits a crim e/mistake.  Deterrent  punishment should 
therefore be given to the Food Safety Officer for any malafide action.    
26.4 To prevent any Food Safety Officer from harassing the food business 
operators/vendors, etc.  the Committee recommend that he/she should be punished with a 
minimum fine of Rs.50,000/- extending upto Rs.1 la kh besides making an entry in his CR 
dossier.   Disciplinary proceedings may  also  be initiated against the guilty officer by 
having a time-bound summary trial procedure. 

 34
Powers of Search, Seizure, investigation, prosecution and procedure thereof. 
 
27.1 Clause 41   of the Bill reads as under: 
 
The Food Safety Officer may search any place, seize any article of food or adulterant, if 
there is a reasonable doubt about them being involved in commission of any offence relating to 
food: 
Provided that no search shall be deemed to be  irregular by reason only  of the fact that 
witness for the search are not inhabitants of the locality in which the place searched is situated. 
 
27.2 The Committee note that  wholesome and safe food is a must for the people and 
therefore the Committee recommend that Clause 41(1) may be re-written   as :- 
  The Food Safety Officer may search any place including the ordinary vendor, etc. 
who are exempted in proviso to Clause 31 (2) or seize any article of f ood or adulterant, if 
there is a reasonable doubt, to be recorded  in writing  about them being involved in 
commission of any offence relating to food. 

 35
Analysis of Food 
28.1 Clause 43  of the Bill reads as under: 
 
43. (1) The Food Authority may notify food laboratories and research institutions accredited by 
National Accreditation Board for Testing a nd Calibration Laboratories or any other 
accreditation agency for the purposes of cawing out  analysis of samples by the Food Analysts 
under this Act. 
(2) The Food Authority shall, establish or recogn ize by notification, one or  more referral food 
laboratory or laboratories to carry  out the functions entrusted to the referral food laboratory by 
this Act or any rules and regulations made thereunder. 
(3) The Food Authority may frame regulations specifying- 
(a) the functions of food laboratory and referra l food laboratory and the local area or areas 
within which such functions may be carried out; 
(b) the procedure for submission to the said laboratory of samp les of articles of food for 
analysis or tests, the forms of the laboratory's re ports thereon and the fees payable in respect of 
such reports; and 
(c) such other matters as may be necessary or ex pedient to enable the said laboratory to carry 
out its functions effectively. 
 
28.2 The Committee note that a network of laborato ries is essential as analysis of food 
is possible only if analysis of samples is conducted in a proper and smooth manner and 
therefore, the Committee recommend that a new provision has to be introduced requiring 
the Food Safety Authority to specify the crite ria to be used to recognize laboratories and 
referral laboratories for the purposes of the Act. 
Revised 
28.2 The Committee requested the Ministry of Food Processing Industries in October 2005 for 
detail of Food Testing Laboratories functioning at present in the country, state-wise and whether 
they have been equipped properly along with the required manpower including as 
implementation of this Bill mainly depends on te sting/analysis food samples.  The reply of the 
Ministry revealed that a proper infrastructure(laboratories) is yet to be established.   
  The Committee feel that in the absence of fully equipped laboratories with adequate 
trained staff, it is not possible to implement th e Act effectively.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that immediate steps should be taken to establish at least one fully equipped lab with 
trained manpower in each district of the country .  The standards for analyzing various categories 
of food may also be laid down. 

 36
 
 
Functions of Food Analyst 
 
29.1 Clause 46   of the Bill reads as under: 
 
46(1) On receipt of a package containing a sample for analysis from a Food Safety Officer or 
any other person, the Food Analyst shall compare the seal on the container and the outer cover 
with specimen impression received separately and shall note the conditions of the seal thereon: 
Provided that in case a sample container receiv ed by the Food Analyst is found to be in broken 
condition or unfit for analysis, he shall within a period of seven days from the date of receipt of 
such sample inform the Designated Officer a bout the same and send requisition to him for 
sending second part of the sample. 
(2) The Food Analyst shall cause to be analyzed such samples of article of food as may be sent 
to him by Food Safety Officer or by any other person authorised under this Act. 
46(3) The Food Analyst shall, within a period of fourteen days from the date of receipt of any 
sample for analysis, send: 
(i) where such sample is received under secti on 38 or section 47, to the Designated Officer, 
four copies of the report indicating the method of sampling and analysis; and 
(ii) where such sample is rece ived under section 40, a copy of th e report indicating the method 
of sampling and analysis to the person who had purchased such article of food with a copy to 
the Designated Officer: 
 
Provided that in case the sample can not be analyzed within fourteen days of its receipt, 
the Food Analyst shall inform the Designated Officer and the Commissioner of Food Safety 
giving reasons and specifying the time to be taken for analysis. 
 
29.2 The representatives of All India Retailer s Federation (AIRF) and Confederation of 
Indian Industries (CII) in their presentati on before the Committee submitted that the Food 
Business Operator should be aut horized to send the f ourth sample to an accredited laboratory 
and the analysis report of that  laboratory should be allowed to be used by the food business 
operator as an  evidence before the  Court of Law. 
29.3 The Committee tend to agree with the above views and recommend that the food 
business operator may be entitled to send the fo urth sample analysed by  an accredited 
laboratory, etc. and the report thereof may be considered as a part of  evidence.  The 
Food Safety Officer must ensure that the fo urth sample  given to the Food Business 
Operator is sealed properly and signed to make it tamper proof. 
  

 37
Penalty for selling food not of the nature or substance or quality demanded. 
 
30.1 Clause 50 of the Bill reads as under: 
 
 (1) Any person who sells to the purchaser's prejudice any food which is not in compliance 
with the provisions of this Act or the regula tions made there under, or of the nature or 
substance or quality demanded by the purchaser, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding two 
lakh rupees. 
 
30.2 The Committee note that ordinary vendor, petty manufacturer, hawker, etc. is not 
in a position to pay a sum of rupees 2 lakhs in  the form of fine and therefore, the Clause 
51 may be re-written as:- 
 “Any person who sells to the purchaser's prejudice any food which is not in 
compliance with the provisions of this Act or the regulations made th ereunder, or of the 
nature or substance or quality demanded by th e purchaser, shall be liable to a penalty 
not less than  Rs.5 lakh excluding the petty manufacturer/ ordinary vendor, etc. who may 
pay penalty not exceeding  Rs. 25,000/-. 

 38
Punishment for carrying out a business without licence 
31.1 Clause 63 of the Bill reads as under: 
 
If any person or food business operator hims elf or by any person on his behalf who is 
required to obtain licence, manufact ures, sells, stores or distribu te or imports any article of 
food without licence, shall be punishable with imprisonment fo r a term which may extend to 
six months and also with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 
 
 
31.2 The Committee held discussion on tr aditional food culture/ordinary 
manufacturers, retailers, hawkers, temporary st all holder, etc. to be  exempted from the 
license.  Therefore, the Committee recomme nd that Clause 63 may be re-written as 
follows :- 
If any person or food business operator, except the persons exempted under the 
Act, himself or by any person on his be half who is required to obtain licence, 
manufactures, sells, stores or distributes or  imports any article of food without licence, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and 
also with a fine which may extend to  Five lakh rupees. 

 39
Compensation in case of any injury or death to the Consumers 
32.1 Clause 65 of the Bill reads as under: 
 (1) Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Chapter, if any person whether by himself 
or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures or sells or imports  any article, of food 
causing injury to the consumer or his death, it shall be lawful for the Adjudicating Officer or as 
the case may be, the court to direct him to pay compensation to the victim or the legal 
representative of the victim, a sum- 
(a) not less than five lakh rupees in case of death; 
(b) not exceeding three lakh rupees in case of grievous injury; and 
(c) not exceeding one lakh rupees, in all other cases of injury. 
 
(2) Where any person is held guilty of an offence leading to grievous injury or death, the 
Adjudicating Officer or the court may cause the name and place of residence of the person held 
guilty, the offence and the penalty imposed to be published at the offender's expense in such 
newspapers or in such other manner as the Adjudicating Officer or the court may direct and the 
expenses of such publication shall be deemed to be part of the cost attending the conviction 
and shall be recoverable in the same manner as a fine. 
 
(3) The Adjudicating Officer or the court may also,- 
 
(a) order for cancellation of licence , re-call of food from market, forfeiture of establishment 
and property in case of grievous injury or death of consumer;  
 
(b) issue prohibition orders in other cases 
 
32.2 The Committee feels that the victims should be paid compensation at the earliest 
and in no case later than six months from th e date of occurrence of the incident.  In case 
of death, interim relief may be paid to the next of kin of the victim within fifteen days of 
the incident.  Suitable clauses(s) to this effect may be incorporated in the Bill. 

 40
Offences by Companies 
33.1 Clause 66  of the Bill reads as under: 
 
66. (1) Where an offence under this Act which has been committed by a company every person 
who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company for the conduct of the business of th e company, as well as the company, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be  liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 
 
Provided that where a company has different establishments or branches or different 
units in any establishment or branch, the concer ned Chief Executive or the person in-charge of 
such establishment, branch, unit nominated by the company as responsible for food safety shall 
be liable for contravention in respect of such establishment, branch or unit. 
 
Provided further that nothing contained in this  sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment provided in this Act,  if he proves that the offence was committed 
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (I), where an offence under 
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such  director, manager, secretary 
or other officer shall also be deemed to be gu ilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purpose of this section,- 
(a) " company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and 
(6) "director" in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
 Clause 66(1) if involvement in any o ffence is proved, the concerned must not go 
without punishment but proviso to 66(1) reads as  Provided that where a company has different 
establishments or branches or different units in any establis hment or branch, the concerned 
Chief Executive or the person in-charge of such  establishment, branch, unit nominated by the 
company as responsible for food safety shall be  liable for contravention in respect of such 
establishment, branch or unit.  
 
33.2 The Committee feel that all persons nominated by the company should be held 
responsible for food safety.   The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that the second  
proviso to Clause 66(1), which read as under, should be deleted: 
“Provided further that nothing contained in  this sub-section shall render any such 
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence 
was committed without his knowledge or th at he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent the commission of such offence”. 

 41
 
Check in Policing and Inspector Raj 
34.1 The primary objective of the Bill is to ensu re availability of sa fe and wholesome Food 
for human consumption.  Further, the Bill intends to shift from mere regulatory regime to self-
reliance through Food Safety Management Systems.  But this laudable step of the Ministry to 
have a consolidated Food Law, may not be successful if the ambiguities, existing in the Bill are 
not removed.  
34.2 The Bill has stressed more on fine/punish ment than on protecti ng the common man/ 
farmers/consumers/fisherman etc.  Penalty clauses in general do not specify a minimum fine or 
a minimum imprisonment till rising of the court, etc.   
   This requires a modification/amendment in all the concerned clauses. 
New especially those relating to grant of licence, enforcement of the act, analysis of food      
additions   offences and penalities, etc. 

 42
Administration of the Act 
35.1 Some of the Organisations during the co urse of their presen tations before the 
Committee mentioned that since the Ministry of  Food Processing Industries in a promotional 
Ministry in respect of food, it should not be the regulatory Ministry as well.  They suggested 
that the Ministry of Health may more appropriately administer the proposed Act. 
35.2 In this regard, the position in respect of sim ilar laws in some of the foreign countries is 
as under:- 
(1) USA :-    The Organisation which is responsible for public health in the USA is 
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  Th e FDA falls within th e executive branch of 
the US government under the Department of Hea lth and Human Services.  The FDA is headed 
by a Commissioner of Food and Drugs, who is appoi nted by the President of the United States, 
confirmed by the US Senate,  and serves at the President’s discretion.  The Office of the 
Commissioner (OC) oversees all the Agency’s co mponents and is responsi ble for the efficient 
and effective implementation of FDA’s mission. 
 “The FDA is responsible for protecting th e public health by assuring the safety, 
efficacy and security of human and veterinary drugs, biological products, medical devices, our 
nation’s food supply, cosmetics and products that emit radiation.  The FDA is also responsible 
for advancing the public health by helping to speed innovations that make medicines and foods 
more effective, safer and more affordable, and helping the public get the accurate, scientific 
based information they need to use medicines and foods to improve their health”. 
 The Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA) is th e lead office of FDA’s filed activities.   
The ORA strives to achieve effective and effi cient compliance of regulated products through 
high-quality, science-based work that maximizes consumer protection. 
(2) UK :-  In UK the Food Standards Agency (FSA) is an independent Government 
department set up by an Act of Parliament in 2000 to protect the public’s health and consumer 
interests in relation to food.   The Agency is led by a Board appoi nted to act in public interest 

 43
and not to represent particular sectors.  The FSA provides advice and information to the public 
and Government on food safety from farm to fork, nutrition a nd diet.   It also protects 
consumers through effective food enforcement and monitoring. 
 Although the FSA is a Government agency, it works at arm’s length from Government 
because it does not report to a specific minister and is free to publish any advice it issues. 
35.3 During the course of presentation by vari ous organizations, it was suggested that the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MFPI) being the promotional Ministry, should not 
perform the duties and responsibil ities of a regulatory Ministr y.  The prevailing Prevention of 
Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (PFA) is being admi nistered by the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare.  According to the Annual Re port of the MFPI, the Codex contact point in 
India is presently the Director-General of Health Services in the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare.   Moreover, the MFPI do es not have the necessary infrastructure like testing labs, etc. 
to enforce the provisions of the Act.  It was therefore, suggested th at it would be more 
appropriate if the Ministry of Health administers the proposed Act. 
35.4 The Committee tends to agree with the views expressed by these organizations and 
recommend that the Act may be administered by the Ministry of Health as they have lot 
of experience in the field with fully equipped labs for testing of food samples. 
Revised 
35.4 Several organizations who appeared  before the Committee suggested that the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries, which is a promotional Ministry in so far as food 
products are concerned, should not be the regulatory Ministry as well.  Morever, as 
informed by the representatives of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, at present 
there are not enough laboratories for sampling a nd analysis of food articles and the same 
would be established in due course.  The existing few laboratories are under the control 
of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 

 44
 Since the analysis of food article is cru cial for food safety and health of the 
consumers, the Committee recommend that the Food Safety and Standards Act should be 
administered by the Ministry of Health as they  have a lot of experience in the field with 
fully equipped labs for testing of food samples. 

 45
FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See Section 5(1)(e)] 
Zone I 
1. Andhra Pradesh 
2. Assam 
3. Bihar 
4. Gujarat 
5. Kerala 
6. Madhya Pradesh 
7. Tamil Nadu 
 
Zone II 
 
1. Maharashtra 
2. Karnataka 
3. Orissa 
4. Punjab 
5. Rajasthan 
6. Uttar Pradesh 
7. West Bengal 
 
Zone III 
 
1. Jammu and Kashmir 
2. Nagaland 
3. Haryana 
4. Himachal Pradesh 
5. Manipur 
6. Tripura 
7. Meghalaya 
 
Zone IV 
 
1. Sikkim 
2. Mizoram 
3. Arunachal Pradesh 
4. Goa 
5. Chattisgarh 
6. Uttaranchal 
7. Jharkhand 
 
Zone V 
 
1. Delhi 
2. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
3. Lakshadweep 
4. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
5. Daman and Diu 
6. Pondicherry 

 46
7. Chandigarh 
 
36 The Committee recommend that the zones shou ld be classified as under so that 
people in States with similar food habits are, as far as possible, included in the same 
zone: 
 
Zone I 
 
1. Andhra Pradesh 
2. Tamil Nadu 
3. Kerala 
4. Karnataka 
5. Maharashtra 
6. Goa 
7. Orissa 
 
 
Zone II 
 
1.      Jammu and Kashmir 
2. Punjab 
3. Haryana 
4. Himachal Pradesh 
5. Uttaranchal 
6. Uttar Pradesh 
 
Zone III 
 
1. Rajasthan 
2. Gujarat 
3. Madhya Pradesh 
4. Bihar 
5. West Bengal 
6. Jharkhand 
7. Chattisgarh  
 
 
Zone IV 
 
1. Assam 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 
3. Meghalaya 
4. Mizoram 
5. Nagaland 
6.  Manipur 
7. Sikkim 
8. Tripura 
 
 

 47
 
 
 
Zone V 
 
1.  Delhi 
2.  Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
3. Lakshadweep 
4. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
5. Daman and Diu 
6. Pondicherry 
7. Chandigarh 

 48
APPENDIX -I 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, TH E 21 SEPTEMBER, 2005 AT 1110 HRS. IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, BASEMENT, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1110 hrs. to 1302 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
3. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
4. Shri Lalchand Kol 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri A. Ravichandran 
7. Shri Mehboob Zahedi 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
9. Shri Harish Rawat 
10. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
11. Shri Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
12. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
13. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
14. Dr.M.S.Gill 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri  John  Joseph   -  Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh   -  Director 
3. Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
4. Smt. Ratna Bhagwani   -  Assistant Director 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
1. Shri D.P.Singh   -  Secretary 
2. Shri A.N.P.Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
3. Dr.Sanjay Singh    -  Joint Secretary  
4. Shri Gautam Sanyal   -  Director 

 49
  At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture welcomed the 
Members of the Committee and representatives of  the Ministry of Food Processing Industries  
and thereafter, requested the Secretary to introduce his colleagues. 
2. After introduction of the officials, the S ecretary gave a brief overview, objectives and 
salient features of ‘the  Food Safety and Standards Bill, 2005’  and also of the role of the 
Ministry in this regard.   
3.  The Chairman and the Members raised various queries regarding facilities of Testing 
Laboratories, States’ representation in Food auth ority, danger of ‘inspector raj’, protection of 
interests of small scale entrepreneurs, role of KVK’s in ensuring implementation of the 
provisions of the Bill etc.  Some member sugge sted one more meeting on this Bill to have 
more information of various aspects of the Bill.   .   The representatives of the Ministry replied 
to the queries one by one and assured to send re plies to some questions which could not be 
answered during the sitting. 
2. A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept. 
The witnesses then withdrew 
 
The Committee then adjourned with a vote of thanks to the Chair. 

 50
APPENDIX -II 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 14 OCTOBER, 2005 AT 1100 HRS. IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW 
DELHI 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to  1240 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Shri Hiten Barman 
3.   Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4.     Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5.  Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
6. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
7. Shri A. Ravichandran 
8. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
9. Shri Mehboob Zahedi 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
11. Shri Harish Rawat 
12. Shri Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
13. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
14. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri  A. K. Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
4. Shri D.S. Malha    -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

 51
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
 
1. Shri D.P. Singh, Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
2. Shri A.N.P. Sinha, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing Industries
3. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary, Le gislative Department, Ministry of 
 Law 
4. Shri P.K. Agarwal, Joint Secretary, D/o Agri. & Co-operation, Ministry of 
 Agriculture 
5. Smt. Jayshree Gupta, Joint Secretary, D/o Consumer Affairs, Ministry of 
 Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
6. Shri Chaman Kumar, Joint Secretary, D/o Women & Child Development, 
 Ministry of Human Resource Development 
7. Shri Rahul Khullar, Join t Secretary, D/o Commerce 
8. Shri Sanjay Kaul, Joint Secretary,  D/o Food & Public Distribution, 
 Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
9. Shri Praveer Kumar, Joint Secretar y (SSI), Ministry of Small Scale 
 Industries 
10. Smt. Neerja Rajkumar, Joint Secret ary, D/o Animal Husbandry, Dairying 
 & Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and representatives of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries and other 
Ministries/Departments, and thereafter, requested th e Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
to introduce his colleagues.  
2.  After introduction of the officials, the S ecretary briefly stated that during the last 
sitting of the Committee held on 21.09.2005 some points were raised by the Members and the 
Ministry has already provided relevant material to the Committee and the representatives of the 
Ministries present there could answer various points of the members of the Committee would 
like to ask. 
3. The Chairman and some members raised several queries and gave some suggestions 
regarding the need for self-contained/self-explanatory written replies to the points raised by the 
Committee related to “The Food Safety and Standards Bill, 2005”; the need for making the Bill 
more suitable for ground level/village/District  level implementation in order to avoid any 
possible misuse by the implementing officers; need for proper representati on of States/regions 
in the proposed Food Safety and Standards Au thority to avoid over/ under representation of 

 52
some States; need to develop infrastructure/netwo rk of standard laboratories; need to include 
the provisions relating to mandatory declarat ion and detection of traceability factor of 
Genetically Engineered/Modified food in the Bill;  need to reduce the over-bureaucratic 
structure of National Food Safety and Standards Au thority; need to make provisions in the Bill 
to minimize the danger of spreading ‘Inspector Ra j’ in the name of Food Safety in the country; 
need to make enough provisions in the Bill to safeguard the interest/livelihood of small 
business, petty manufacturers, retailers, hawk ers, itinerant vendors, te mporary stall holders; 
etc.  Some members suggested that some more  meetings on the Bill should be held to have 
clause by clause consideration and obtain more information on various aspects of the Bill. 
4. The representatives of the Ministry replie d to the queries one by one and assured that 
they will come before the Committee with the valuable points as suggested during the meeting 
held on 14.10.2005 along with the replies to some  questions which could not be answered 
during the sitting. 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the meeting has been kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned with a vote of thanks to the Chair. 
 

 53
APPENDIX -III 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 7 TH NOVEMBER, 2005 AT 1100 HRS. IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’, GROUND FLOOR , PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1308 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Lalchandra Kol 
6. Shri Khagen Das 
7. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
8. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
9. Shri Sippiparai Ravichandran 
10. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
11. Shri Mehboob Zahedi 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
12. Dr.M.S.Gill 
13. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
14. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
15. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
16. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
4. Shri D.S. Malha    -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 

 54
 NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES 
1. Shri Gokul Patnaik - Past Presid ent, All India Food  Processor’s  
Association (AIFPA), New Delhi 
2. Shri C.K.Basu  - Chairman Advisory Committee, AIFPA, New Delhi 
3. Ms. Sunita Narayan - Director, Ce ntre for Science and Environment  
(CSE), New Delhi 
4. Ms. Saroj Kashikar - President, Shetkari Sanghathan, Maharashtra 
5. Shri Madan Diwan - Represen tative, Shetkari Sanghathan 
At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture welcomed the 
Members of the Committee and representatives of the organisations invited to give their views 
before the Committee.   After introduction of th e non-officials experts, Shri Gokul Patnaik, 
Past President of the All India Food Processo rs’ Association (AIFPA) spoke at length about 
various aspects/shortcomings of ‘The Food Safety and Standards Bill, 2005’ and suggested that 
the law should be simplified and made flexible.   After the presentation by Shri Patnaik,  Ms. 
Sunita Narayan of the Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi and Ms. Saroj Kashikar 
of Shetkari Sanghathan expressed their views on the Bill. 
2. The Chairman and some members raised quest ions on some issues related to the said 
Bill and sought suggestions from the Experts. 
3. The representatives of the NGOs replied to  queries one by one and assured that the 
relevant  reference and backgr ound material which could not be  provided during the sitting,  
would be sent to the Committee.  
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the meeting has been kept.    
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned with a vote of thanks to the Chair. 
 
 
 

 55
APPENDIX-IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 8TH NOVEMBER, 2005 AT 1100 HRS. IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, BASEMENT, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW 
DELHI 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to  1250 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
4. Shri Lalchandra Kol 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7. Smt. Rupatai D.Patil Nilangekar 
8. Shri Sippiparai Ravichandran 
9. Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
10. Shri Harish Rawat 
11. Dr.M.S.Gill 
12. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
13. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
14. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
15. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
16. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
3. Shri D.S. Malha    -  Under Secretary 

 56
 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
1. Shri D.P. Singh  -  Secretary, M/o Food Processing Industries 
2. Shri Satyanand Mishra -  Additiona l Secretary, M/o. Small Scale Industries 
3. Shri A.N. P. Sinha  - Additional S ecretary, M/o Food Processing Industries 
4. Dr. Sanjay Singh  - Joint Secretary, Legislative Department 
5. Mrs. Rita Teaotia  - Joint Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
6. Shri P.K. Agarwal  -Joint Secr etary, D/o Agriculture & Co-operation 
7. Mrs. Alka Sirohi  -Additional Secretary, D/o Consumer Affairs 
8. Mrs. Shashi Prabha Gupta  -Technical Advisor, D/o Women & Child Development 
9. Shri Rahul Khullar  -Joi nt Secretary, D/o Commerce 
10. Shri Sanjay Kaul  -Joint Secr etary, D/o Food & Public Distribution 
11. Shri Praveer Kumar  -Joint  Secretary, Ministry of SSI 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture welcomed the 
Members of the Committee and representatives of  the Ministry of Food Processing Industries.  
After introduction of the officials, the Secretary Ministry of Food Proc essing Industries briefly 
stated the role of Food Safety Officers, the ro le and powers of Central and State Government, 
etc, under the proposed Bill. 
2. The Chairman and some members raised quest ions regarding number of laboratories for 
testing food articles, protecting the interest of small hawkers, fixing of responsibility, fixing 
standards, whether State infrastructure is sufficient to enforce the above mentioned laws etc. 
3. The representatives of the Ministry replie d to the queries one by one and assured that 
the replies will be sent to the questions which could not be answered during the sitting. 
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the meeting has been kept. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned with a vote of thanks to the Chair. 
 

 57
APPENDIX-V 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 13 TH DECEMBER, 2005 AT 1500 HRS. 
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, GROUND FL OOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2.  Smt. Rupatai D.Patil Nilangekar 
3.  Shri Sippiparai Ravichandran 
4.    Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
5.    Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy 
6.    Shri M.P. Veerendra  Kumar 
7.    Shri Mehboob Zahedi 
8.    Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9.     Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
10.     Dr.M.S.Gill 
11.   Shri Bhagwati Singh 
12.   Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
3. Shri D.S. Malha    -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 58
LIST OF WITNESSES 
Confederation of Indian Industry 
 
1.  Shri Abhiram Seth  -  Chairman, CII Food Regulatory Affairs Expert  
Group 
 
2. Shri Sanjay Khajuria  - Head Legal – Nestle India Ltd. 
 
3. Shri R.K.Gupta   - Head, Qualit y Assurance and System, – Mother  
Dairy  Food Processing Ltd. 
 
4. Shri Ketan Joshi  - General Manage r – Legal and Administration, Rasna  
International Ltd. 
 
5. Shri S.K.Verma   - General Mana ger –Haldirams Marketing Pvt. Ltd. 
 
6. Shri Surinder Kumar  - General Manger-Legal& Company  Secretary  Glaxo  
             Smithkline 
 
7. Ms. Indrani Kar   - Senior Dir ector and Head-Agriculture and Food  
             Processing-CII 
 
8. Shri D.S. Chadha  - Technical Advisor, Food  Regulatory Affairs - CII 
 
The Gandhi Peace Foundation 
 
1. Shri George Isaac  - Chairman 
 
2. Shri K.P.Sareen   - Advisor, Food Processing 
 
All India Retailers Federation 
 
1. Shri Yashpal Gupta  - President 
 
2.  Sardar Tirlok Singh Jaggi - Senior Joint Secretary 
 
3. Shri Het Ram Aggarwal  - Senior Vice-President 
 
4. Shri Onkar Goyal  - Vice-President 
 
5. Shri Krishan Singla  - Executive Member 
 
Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Co nsumer Education (VOICE) And Consumer 
Coordination Council 
 
1. Shri Bejon Misra   - C.E.O., VOICE 
 
2. Ms. Debi Mukherjee  - Advisor, VOICE 
 

 59
At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture informed the members 
of the Committee about the sad demise of Shri Pr akash V. Patil, MP who was a member of the 
Committee.  All members of the Committee stood in silence for a while as a mark of respect to 
the departed soul.  Thereafter the representative s of the organisations were called inside the 
Committee Room to give their views before th e Committee.   After introduction of  the non-
official experts, Shri Abhiram Seth, Chairm an, Confederation of Indian Industries Food 
Regulatory Affairs Expe rt Group; Shri George Issac Chai rman,  Gandhi Peace Foundation, 
Kottayam; Shri Yashpal Gupta, President of A ll India Retailers Federation; and Shri Bejon 
Misra, CEO, VOICE were called one by one to give the views of their respective Organisations 
on ‘The Food Safety and Standards Bill’, 2005’. Th e representatives of the organizations gave 
their views/suggestions on the Bill, like competitiv eness of the food sector , taxation and fiscal 
issues, poor infrastructure, licensing, laboratory testing, proportional representation on the food 
authority, etc. 
2. The Chairman and some members raised quest ions on some issues related to the said 
Bill and sought suggestions from the Experts. 
3. The representatives of the various organisatio ns replied to queries and assured that the 
relevant reference and background  material which could not be provided during the sitting, 
would be sent to the Committee.  
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the meeting has been kept.    
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

 60
APPENDIX –VI 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 18 TH JANUARY, 2006 AT 1100 HRS. 
IN  ROOM, ‘139’, FIRST FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri Raghunath Jha 
7. Smt. Rupatai D.Patil Nilangekar 
8. Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy 
9. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
10. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
11. Shri Harish Rawat 
12. Dr.M.S.Gill 
13. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
14. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
15. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
16. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
4. Shri D.S. Malha    -  Under Secretary 

 61
 
 
 
 
 
 At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman, welcomed  the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
and requested them to deliberate on the first item of the agenda of that day, i.e., the consideration of the 
statement prepared by the Committee Secretariat comprising the comments/suggestions received from 
various organisations on ‘The F ood Safety and Standards Bill, 2005 ’ and after some deliberation 
decided that the draft report on the said  Bill may be pr epared by the Secretariat and be circulated to the 
Committee for their consideration by the first week of February, 2006.   
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up Memoranda No. 2 containing draft 13 th Action Taken 
Report on the 9 th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation) for consideration and adoption. 
[Smt. Mohsina Kidwai, MP in the chair.] 
 The Committee also took up Memoranda Nos. 3, 4 and 5 containing draft 14 th, 15th and 16 th 
Action Taken Reports on the 10 th, 11th and 12th Reports on Demands for Grants relating to the Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Resear ch and Education); Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Animal Husbandry Dairying and Fish eries); and Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
for consideration and adoption. 
3. The Committee then adopted the draf t Action Taken Reports with certain 
additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee. 
4. The Committee thereafter au thorized the Chairman to present the above-mentioned 
Reports to the House on a date and time convenient to him. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 62
 
APPENDIX-VII 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 10 TH FEBRUARY, 2006 AT 1100 HRS. IN  
ROOM, ‘D’, GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1235 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
4. Shri Khagen Das 
5. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
6. Shri Mehboob Zahedi 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
7. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
8. Shri Harish Rawat 
9. Dr.M.S.Gill 
10. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
11. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
12. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
13. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
4. Shri D.S. Malha    -  Under Secretary 
 
 

 63
 At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman, welcomed the Members.   Thereafter, the Committee took 
up for consideration the Draft Report on “The Food Safety and Standards Bill, 2005 ”. 
2. The Committee adopted the Draft Report w ith minor additions and modifications, as 
suggested by members of the Committee. 
3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman  to finalise the above-mentioned Report on “The 
Food Safety and Standards Bill, 2005” and present it to the House on a date and time convenient to him. 
4. The Chairman thanked the Members for thei r cooperation and giving valuable suggestions 
during the consideration of the aforesaid bill. 
 
The Committee then adjourned with a vote of thanks to the chair. 
 
 
 
 