STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty Eighth Report of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2007-2008)}
FORTY THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
43
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

FORTY THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
 (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Eighth Report
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2007-2008)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2008.
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on  18.12.2008.
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COA No.219
Price:  Rs.
© 2008 By Lok Sabha Secretariat
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha
(Eleventh Edition) and Printed by
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

<CONTENTS>
                   PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………………………. (iii)
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………… (v)
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have
   been accepted by the Government ……………    37
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view
   of the Government’s replies …………………..    51
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect
   of  which replies of the Government have
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….    52
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of
   which final replies of the Government are
   still awaited …………………………………….    63
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee
held on 16 December, 2008.        72
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Thirty Eighth
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2007-2008) (14th Lok Sabha)       74
(i)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMPOSITION OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2008-2009)
@ Shri Mohan Singh ± Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2.  Shri Ranen Barman
3.  Shri Anil Basu
4.  Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
5.  Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
6.  Shri Khagen Das
7.  Shri Dharmendra
8.  Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
10. Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire
11.  Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
12.  Shri Prabodh Panda
13.  Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil
14.  Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Nilangekar Patil
15.  Shri K.J.S.P.Reddy
16.  Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy
17.  Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh
18.  Shri M.P.Veerendra kumar
19.  Shri Baleshwar Yadav
*20.  Vacant
#21.  Vacant
RAJYA SABHA
22.  Shri Ishwar Singh
23.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
24.  Shri Vikram Verma
25.  Shri Vinay Katiyar
26.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
27.  Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
28.  Prof. M.S.Swaminathan
29.  Shri M.Rajasekara Murthy
$30.  Shri Kore Prabhakara%31.  Vacant
@ Shri Mohan Singh has been appointed Chairman of the Committee by Hon’ble Speaker, w.e.f. 5 December, 2008  vice Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav
    elected to the Rajya Sabha, w.e.f. 14.11.2008.*   Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi ceased to be the Member of this Committee owing to disqualification under 10th Schedule by Hon’ble Speaker w.e.f. 10th
    September, 2008.#
   Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah ceased to be the Member of the Committee owing to his Resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 6 November, 2008.
$   Shri Kore Prabhakara was nominated by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 1st September, 2008.%  Shri Harish Rawat ceased to be the Member of the Committee due to retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008.
                                                                             (iii)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

                                                      SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K.Sharma   - Secretary
2. Shri A.K.Singh    - Joint Secretary
3. Smt.Veena Sharma   - Director
4.  Shri N.S.Hooda    - Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Anil Kumar   - Senior Executive Assistant
          (iv)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2008-2009) having been authorized
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Forty Third Report on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Eighth
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2007-2008) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and
Education) for the year 2008-2009.
2. The Thirty Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2007-2008) on
Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural
Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha on 16.04.2008 and laid in Rajya Sabha on
the same day.  The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
was requested to furnish action taken replies of the Government to the recommendations
contained in the Thirty Eighth Report.  The replies of the Government to all the
recommendations contained in the Report were received.
3. The Committee considered the action taken replies furnished by the Government at their
sitting held on 16.12.2008, approved the draft comments and adopted the Forty Third Report.
Minutes of the sitting are placed at Appendix I.
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Eighth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the
Committee is given in Appendix-II.
NEW DELHI;                                   MOHAN SINGH
16 December, 2008 Chairman,
25 Agrahayana, 1930(Saka)                 Standing Committee on Agriculture.
                                                     (v)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER I
Report
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2007-2008) on Demands for Grants (2008-
2009) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research & Education) which
was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 16.04.2008.
1.2 The Action taken replies have been received from the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education) in respect of all the 21
recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorised as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government
(Chapter II of the Report)
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 8, 9, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19 and 20 (Total-09);
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Government ¶s action taken reply (Chapter III of the Report)
Recommendation Sl. No. 10 (Total-01);
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV of the
Report)
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 13 and 18 (Total-08);
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited (Chapter V of the Report)
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 7, 11 and 21 (Total-3).
1.3 The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of recommendations for
which only interim replies have been given by the Government, should be furnished to
the Committee expeditiously.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.
(Recommendation No. 1)
Need for increasing DARE¶s allocation equivalent to 1 to 2 percent of AGDP
1.5 The Committee had noted that the Department of Agricultural Research and Education
had been allocated Rs.12,023 crore as the total XI Plan outlay against the proposed XI Plan
outlay of Rs.12,176.40 crore.  The proposed outlay for the XI Plan is even Rs.3,823.60 crore
less than the outlay proposed by them for the X Plan which was Rs.16,000 crore. The Planning
Commissionµs constituted XI Plan Working Group on Agricultural Research and Education had
proposed an outlay of Rs.31,672 crore for DARE/ICAR.
The Committee had always been requesting year after year for an increase in the
allocation equivalent to 1 to 2 per cent of agricultural GDP for the conduct of research in this
most important sector but the request seems to have fallen on deaf ears.  The Committee were
pained to observe that the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance have not so far
given any proper attention to the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Agriculture in this regard.
The Committee, therefore, strongly and in unequivocal terms recommended that the
Planning Commission must provide higher allocation equivalent to 1 to 2 percent of AGDP as
recommended by them in their earlier Reports.  However, this must be accompanied by
accountability in terms of practical results of value to overcome the prevailing technology
fatigue.  Additional Funds may be earmarked for the suggestions made by the Committee in this
Report.
1.6 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The Department had restricted its XI Plan proposal to Rs.12176.40 crore in the
background of the various guidelines circulated by Planning Commission which were to
be observed while formulating XI Plan proposals of DARE/ICAR.  The Department was
asked to formulate three scenarios in respect of the proposals of XI Plan outlays i.e.
 reflecting an increase of 5% per annum with respect to the terminal year of X
Plan; and similarly other two scenario with an increase of 10% per annum and 15% per
annum, respectively.  Accordingly the Department did not project higher financial
requirement.  The XI Plan working group constituted by Planning Commission itself had
recommended Rs.31,672 crore as XIth Plan outlay for DARE/ICAR but the Planning
Commission provided only Rs.12,023 crore only.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The recommendation of the Committee that the Department should be provided
higher allocation equivalent to 1 to 2 percent of AGDP was forwarded to Planning
Commission, which responded that ³For the 11th Five Year Plan an amount of Rs.12,023
crore has been allocated to the ICAR.  The allocation was entirely made on the
recommendation of DARE/ICAR.  In this regard, as mentioned earlier, DARE/ICAR was
asked by the Planning Commission to make projections within the parameters set by
them.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.7 The Committee strongly deplore the tendency and the working style of the
DARE/ICAR that instead of projecting their actual budgetary requirements, DARE
succumb to the arm twisting method of Planning Commission in which first it impose
arbitrary restrictions through their guidelines asking the Department to make projections
within the parameters set by them, and later on when the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Agriculture point out every year in their scrutiny of DFG Reports
pertaining to the Department that the Planning Commission has always been ignoring
the recommendations of the Committee to provide 1 to 2 percent of AGDP to the
Department and actually has given very less allocations, then, it responds that the
allocation was made on the recommendation of DARE/ICAR.
 The reply of the Department also does not mention the exact amount of each of
the three scenarios under reference and which scenario out of the three scenarios, viz. XI
Plan outlays proposals reflecting an increase of 5%, 10% and 15% per annum,
respectively, has been finally approved by the Planning Commission.
 The Committee, therefore, are not satisfied with the reply of the Department and
the routine game being played by the Planning Commission as mentioned above and
advice the Department to always insist on the actually needed budgetary outlay
projections rather than accepting the lowest scenario projections.
(Recommendation No. 2)
Insufficient allocation to DARE in 2008-09
1.8 The Committee had noted that the Department was given Rs.1,760 crore during
2008±09 against the proposal of Rs.2646.79 crore. The outlay of this Department during
2007-08 was Rs.1,620 crore against the proposal of Rs.1,945.50 crore. The percentage of
increase in Plan allocation made for 2008-09 over the year 2007-08 was 8.64 per cent.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Committee also noted note that the increase in the cost of inputs-machinery, raw-
material, maintenance and other running research expenses - had been generally more than the
annual inflation. In real sense, the Budgetary Allocation may not allow the Department to
address all research issues adequately as had been confirmed by the Department.
In Committee ¶s opinion, the required real break-through for increasing the agricultural
production and productivity to achieve the set targets of agro-socio-economic development
during the XI Plan could only be achieved by actual agrarian research work and by the quickest
possible dissemination of relevant information to the people engaged in agriculture and allied
activities.  Therefore, the proposed targets of agro-socio-economic development should be
directly proportionate to the plan outlay for research and educational activities of DARE/ICAR.
But, unfortunately, the right proportion between these two factors was not visible in the funds
allocated to DARE/ICAR and the Committee strongly felt that positively upward investment in
agrarian R&D of ICAR was most essential requirement, if the proposed growth target was to be
achieved in time.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the DARE/ICAR should be
provided with Rs.2646.79 crore by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for the
year 2008-09 as per their original proposal.
1.9 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The Department had forwarded this recommendation to Planning Commission /
Ministry of Finance.  The Planning Commission responded that ³Regarding insufficient
allocation in 2008 ± 09, it is pertinent to mention that the resources were
allocated keeping in view of the other sectors ¶ requirements.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.10  The Committee are not satisfied with the response of the Planning Commission
that insufficient allocation to DARE/ICAR in 2008-09, were allocated keeping in view of
other sectors’ requirement.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the DARE/ICAR should be provided with
Rs.2646.79 crore by the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for the year
2008-09 as per their original proposal as they are responsible for R&D in agriculture
and allied sectors and R&D require more funds as compared to the normal schemes of
the Government.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 3)
Urgent need to provide the status of Non-lapsable Funds to Budgetary Allocations of
DARE/ICAR
1.11 The Committee noted that the Central Non-lapsable Fund Pool was created by the
Government for the welfare of the North-Eastern States.  All the Ministries/Departments were
directed to earmark 10% of their respective allocation under the Major Head 2552 ± lump sum
provision for projects/schemes in NE & Sikkim, every year and the unspent amount under this
Major Head does not lapse at the end of the financial year and remains available for its usage
for the same cause.
The Committee were of the considered view that this special treatment/privilege given to
North-Eastern States & Sikkim should be extended to all the schemes/projects of DARE/ICAR
being implemented in other States/UTs as the similar agro-socio-economic and climatic
conditions and topography of agricultural land existing in North-Eastern States, also existed in
most of the other States/UTs.
The Committee strongly recommended that since 70% of our country ¶s population is
directly engaged in agricultural & allied activities and produce the food for themselves and for
other 30% population, therefore, the Government and their appraisal agencies should
implement the non-lapsable fund strategy for DARE/ICAR from this year onward, for anything
can wait but agriculture cannot wait for want of adequate funds and extending this provision to
DARE/ICAR is going to be a real breakthrough in finding a remedy for a perennial vicious
imbalance of demand and supply of funds in which every year more funds required/demanded
by the Department but lesser funds are allocated by the Planning  Commission/Ministry of
Finance.
1.12 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The Department had forwarded this recommendation to Planning Commission/
Ministry of Finance.  The Planning Commission responded that ³On the status of non-
lapsable funds to budgetary allocation to DARE / ICAR on the ground that 70% of
our country ¶s population is directly engaged in agriculture and allied activities and
produce the food for themselves and also rest of the 30% population.  In this context, it
is to be mentioned that irrigation, road connectivity and transport, energy, land reforms
and other basic infrastructure have a lion share in enhancing foodgrain production.
Whereas, the ICAR ¶s role is limited to technology innovations. ´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.13  The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Government/Planning
Commission that irrigation, road connectivity and transport, energy, land reforms and
other basic infrastructure have a lion share in enhancing fooodgrain production.
Whereas, the ICAR’s role is limited to technology innovations.
The Committee are of the clear view that since irrigation, energy, road
connectivity and transport, land reforms and other basic infrastrucure are a must for
enhancing agrarian and allied sectors activities and growth and should be reasonably
funded by the Government/Planning Commission but cannot be compared with ICAR ‘s
role in agricultural R&D and cannot be the reason for less/under funding of ICAR merely
on the reasoning the ICAR’s role is limited to technology innovations for the reasons that
without technological innovations/breakthrough the real agrarian growth to feed the
ever-growing human-animal population in the country cannot be achieved.  Hence,
funding of irrigation, energy, other basic infrastructure, etc. should be treated as
complementary to agricultural growth but at no point of time their development should
be at the cost of ignoring the much needed developing of R&D activities of DARE/ICAR.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that anything can
wait but agriculture cannot wait for want of adequate funds and extending the provision
of non-lapsable funds to DARE/ICAR is going to be a real breakthrough in finding a
remedy for a perennial vicious imbalance of demand and supply of funds in which every
year more funds required/demanded by the Department but less funds are allocated by
the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.
(Recommendation No. 4)
Delays in releasing of RE/BE by the Department to their respective Institutes/NRCs/PDs
1.14 The Committee noted that RE Plan & Non-Plan (2007-08) was reported to have been
received from MoF on 4.1.2008.  ESM (SMD) was communicated RE (Plan) on 8.2.2008 by the
Department, i.e., after 34 days of receiving the same from MoF.  Similarly, Education and
Extension (SMDs) had been communicated RE(Plan) after 18 and 21 days, respectively, from
the date of receiving from MoF, viz., 4.1.2008, while 4 SMDs out of 9, have been communicated
only after 6 days of receiving from MoF.
The Committee noted that during Evidence of the Representatives of MoA(DARE), MoF
and Planning Commission before this Committee, held on 22.11.2001, the then,
Secretary(DARE) had categorically pointed out about the procedural delays in receiving RE
from MoF which did not allow the Department to utilize the scarce financial resources optimally
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and huge unspent amounts/balances remain.  Similar views/suggestions were extended by the
Department in a written reply to the specific points raised by the Committee about the entire
budgetary procedure and practices being followed by the Department and if any meaningful
change/remedies required to be in place.  But ironically, now the Department in reply to similar
points about the procedural budgetary delays stated that µthere has been no procedural delay
and the present procedure is working well. ¶
The Committee were of the view that the above volte-face regarding budgetary
procedural delays and meaningful changes required, was an actual turnaround engineered by
the Department in a vain attempt to deviate the Committees ¶ attention from the actual problem
of late releasing of funds from MoF or the Department to the actual end-users, i.e., concerned
institutes/NRCs/PDs of ICAR.
The Committee, therefore, deplored the tendency of the Department to give hollow
assurances every year that they have been making best efforts to make the RE/BE funds
available to the concerned institutes within a week, rather they are taking about 34 days time to
make the RE available to the respective institutes.
The Committee strongly recommended that the Department should take less than a
week¶s time to release the funds to all the concerned institutes/NRCs/PDs from the date of
receipt of funds from MoF for optimal utilisation of the scarce funds by the concerned institutes.
1.15 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The concerns of the Committee have been brought to the notice of all the
Subject Matter Divisions of DARE / ICAR.  It may further be highlighted that after
receiving BE / RE communications from Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance
respectively, the Department has to undertake a number of processes before finalizing
the institutes / NRCs / PDs wise allocations.  This involves first distributing the total
outlay sector-wise and subsequently after getting it approved from Competent Authority,
it is informed to concerned Subject Matter Divisions.  Thereafter, depending upon the
total budget at their respective disposal, the each Subject Matter Division distribute it for
each of the concerned institute / NRC / PD, etc. after prioritising and assessing
the realistic requirement of each constituent unit.  This distribution also needs approval
of Competent Authority and even after this, the SMDs further  distribute the institute /
NRC / PD wise fund into various heads of expenditure ( pay & allowances, TA,
contingencies, HRD, equipment, works, library, etc.).  This final list of institute-wise /
head-wise allocations is subsequently forwarded to the Finance Division for
releasing the funds  (BE / RE). ´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.16 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Department as the reply is
hardly convincing and seems to be exaggerating the reasoning/justification for taking
about 34 days’ time to release the funds to all the concerned institutes/NRCs/PDs from
the date of receipt of funds from MoF for optimal utilisation of scarce funds by the
concerned institutes.
The Committee are of the view that when 4 SMDs of the 9 SMDs could have been
communicating funds to concerned institutes only after 6 days of receiving
communication in this regard from MoF, why cannot the other SMDs, namely, Education,
Extension and ESM do follow the same healthy and desirable practice which is in tune
with recommendation of the Committee that the Department should take less than a
week’s time to do so rather than taking 18, 21 and 34 days’ time, respectively.  Morever,
the steps of the process involved before actually releasing the funds to institutes which
the Department has enumerated in their reply are as old as the Department itself and
taking the decision regarding prioritising and assessing the realistic requirement of each
constituent unit needed to be done before final funds are released from MoF, i.e., at the
time of budgetary proposals being finalised as the actual increase in funds being
provided by Planning Commission/MoF, seeing the past trends, is ranging from 8% to
20% and it should not take more than a week’s time to decide Plan and Non-Plan
allocations to each of the constituent units by the respective SMDs as rigorous exercise
of deciding the budgetary requirement of each institute/head-wise allocations already
have been done since August of every year and after the final allocations are received
from MoF should be a mere formality which should be done expeditiously.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the
Department should take less than a week’s time to release the funds to all the constituent
units.
(Recommendation No. 5)
Denial of necessary wherewithal for setting up state-of-the-art facilities to meet the
emerging new challenges
1.17 The Committee had been informed that the DARE/ICAR had a number of
institutions/laboratories, which were more than thirty years old.  It was felt necessary that a one
time catch-up grant may be sought from the Planning Commission so that the requirement of
renovation of old infrastructure and up-gradation/replacement of obsolete equipment could be
met.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Department projected a requirement of Rs.1000 crore as One Time Catch up
Grant for the entire Tenth Plan Period. The Planning Commission did not indicate any provision
for the same while communicating the Tenth Plan outlay of the Department, which was pegged
at Rs. 5368 crore. Thereafter, the Department consistently proposed a requirement of Rs.200
crore as Catch up Grant in each year i.e. 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05. The response of the
Planning Commission to these proposals was µthe catch up grant which was meant for
upgrading the research facility of ICAR ¶s institutions had already been taken care of while
approving the proposals during Tenth Five Year Plan ¶. Due to the clear-cut stand taken by
Planning Commission on this issue, the Department did not pursue the matter further.
The Planning Commission in their guidelines for formulation of XI Five Year Plan had
indicated that in the Plan budget critical repair and maintenance upto 15% of the plan budgetary
support could be included.
The Committee noted that the Department ¶s fund requirements, based on activities and
programmes, were said to be projected in totality, thus need for catch up grant were also
addressed in their projection, however, there was a pronounced gap of Rs.886.79 crore
between the projected/proposed amount by DARE/ICAR and the amount allocated to them by
the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.  The Department had proposed/projected an
amount of Rs.2646.79 crore and they got Rs.1760.00 crore as BE 2008-09.
The Committee were of the considered view that denial of long-felt and essentially
needed One-Time Catch up grant to DARE had hamstrung our agricultural research institutes
and their R&D activities as the output could have been much better in case their projected
requirement of Rs.1000 crore during Xth Plan was provided to them for replacement of old
machinery and equipment and for setting up state-of-the-art facilities to meet the emerging new
challenges.
The Committee had strongly deplored the tendency of the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance for imposing drastic cuts as high as upto 35 to 40 per cent on the amount
projected/demanded by the Department as per their pressing needs as in the instant case, the
denial of Rs.886.79 crore during 2008-09 would not allow the Department to address the needs
to be fulfilled from one time catch-up grant out of Rs.1760.00 crore allocated to them as BE
2008-09.
The Committee desired a clarification from the Planning Commission as to how they can
expect the Department to follow the Guidelines of the Planning Commission that in the Plan
Budget critical repair and maintenance upto 15% of the Plan budgetary support could be
included by the Government and on the other hand, they themselves had imposed a cut of
about 35% or so on the projected/proposed amount of the Department year after year.
The Committee strongly recommended that the Planning Commission and the Ministry
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

of Finance should provide much needed one time catch up grant as per the latest requirement
during the XIth Plan or at least provide Rs.886.79 crore more to the Department during 2008-09
so that the projected need for catch up grant which was addressed in their projected amount of
Rs.2646.79 crore, was granted to them.   Immediately, in the Budget of 2008-09 itself, an
additional sum of Rs.100.00 crore may be provided to IARI, New Delhi, particularly for improving
farm infrastructure with reference to irrigation.
1.18 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The Department had forwarded this recommendation to Planning Commission /
Ministry of Finance.  The Planning Commission responded that ³ For providing one time
catch up grant i.e. Rs. 886.79 crore for renovation of infrastructure; the Planning
Commission is in support of creation / renovation of ICAR institutes as per laid down
procedure´
The guidelines of Planning Commission circulated in October 2006 indicated that
in the Plan budget, critical repair and maintenance upto 15% of the plan budgetary
support can be included. The Department has been able to address the modernization of
infrastructure and replacement of obsolete equipment / research facilities to the extent
possible through its Annual Plan allocation. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.19 The Committee deplore the tendency of the Planning Commission once again, by
which they pretended to support the genuine financial requirements of one time catch up
grant to the tune of Rs.886.79 crore as per recommendation of the Committee to
DARE/ICAR in theory but with the condition of laid down procedure and themselves had
put a restriction of 15% amount to be included in the total Plan outlay for modernization
of infrastructure and replacement of obsolete equipment/research facilities through its
Annual Plan allocation.  And, in order to fit in this condition of 15% of total Annual Plan
Allocation, Annual Plan Allocation has to be about Rs.5906.66 crore rather than what the
Department was given, i.e., Rs.1760.00 crore as BE(2008-09) against a demand of
Rs.2646.79 crore.  Therefore, it is obvious that Planning Commission only theoretically
support the schemes of the ICAR but practically provides too less an amount than the
actually demanded every year.
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Department may be provided at least
Rs.886.79 crore during 2008-09 at RE stage.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 6)
The Planning Commission disagreed to provide Rs.1130 crore to DARE/ICAR under the
National Food Security Mission (NFSM)
1.20 The Committee had noted that the National Food Security Mission a centrally sponsored
scheme has been launched from 2007-08 with an objective to enhance the production of rice,
wheat and pulses by 10, 8 and 2 million tones respectively during the 11 th Plan period.
ICAR is involved in providing technical backstopping in this project in terms of providing
details about the newly released varieties/hybrids along with the production and protection
technologies in implementation of this scheme.  Further, ICAR is also involved in the production
of breeder seed as per requirement. The Council has also been involved in various monitoring
implementation Committees of the project.
Although DARE/ICAR has allotted sufficient funds to address various researchable
issues related to rice, wheat and pulses during XI Plan, as a compliment to further augment the
research infrastructure and programme, they have submitted a scheme under the National Food
Security Mission entitled Mini Mission I ± Wheat, Rice and Pulses for Rs.1130 crore to the
Planning Commission. However, no additional allocation under this component was agreed to.
The Planning Commission ¶s reasoning for not agreeing to the Department ¶s demand
was that more than Rs. 385 crores had already been provided for components related to ICAR
and  ICAR/DARE¶s regular allocation which itself should be able to take care of the requirement
of National Food Security Mission (NFSM).
The Committee again strongly deplored the tendency of the Planning Commission to
give hollow promises year after year that the proposals/initiatives of the Department in the form
of SFC/EFC/CCEA would be considered favourable to provide need based allocation.  As in the
instant case, the DARE/ICAR had submitted a scheme under the NFSM entitled Mini Mission I ±
Wheat, Rice and Pulses for Rs.1130 crore to the Planning Commission and in turn, rather than
favourably considering the scheme, the Planning Commission had extended the reason for not
agreeing to it.
The Committee were unable to comprehend as to why the Planning Commission was
determined to deter the desired and required better pace of agrarian R&D for which the ICAR
has been entrusted with the responsibility.  Moreover, expectations of the millions  of people
from DARE/ICAR to usher India into a Second Green Revolution by providing total food, feed
and fodder security for the present and future times will continue to lurk in the dark for want of
favourable consideration by the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance of the
schemes/initiatives submitted by DARE/ICAR.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that ICAR should be provided the
additional amount of Rs.1130 crore for
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

their scheme entitled Mini Mission I ± Wheat, Rice and Pulses under NFSM in the overall
interest of the nation ¶s food security.
1.21 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The Department had forwarded this recommendation to Planning Commission /
Ministry of Finance.  The Planning Commission in its reply stressed that the NFSM was
being implemented in the potential area by utilizing existing technology. However, the
department of Agriculture & Cooperation, (DAC) which is implementing this scheme,
asked for the incorporation of researchable issues in the revised EFC document of
NFSM. In pursuance thereof, the department has submitted a projection of Rs 1130
crore to DAC.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.22 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Government, as nothing
concrete has been mentioned in their reply as to whether Planning Commission is going
to provide Rs.1130 crore to DARE through DAC as submitted by DARE or they will not
provide anything against this projection.
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Department should be provided by the
Planning Commission/MoF an additional amount of Rs.1130.00 crore for their scheme
entitled Mini-Mission I – Wheat, Rice and Pulses under NFSM in the overall interest of
nation’s food security.
(Recommendation No. 7)
Urgent need to set up a high-level committee of scientists and practising farmers
1.23 The Committee were of the opinion that technology had been and would be the prime
mover of change not only in our country, but everywhere in the world.
The Committee noted that the nation was passing through technology fatigue, stagnation
and decline in productivity/yield and a number of related issues were bracketing India into
agrarian crisis which the nation can ill-afford to neglect merely for want of adequate timely
action from DARE/ICAR.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Prime Minister as head of Agriculture
Coordination Committee and Union Minister of Agriculture being President of ICAR should set
up a High-level Committee of Scientists and practising farmers from different parts of the
country to suggest methods of overcoming their problems, technology fatigue, to bridge the gap
between potential and actual yield and agrarian crisis the country is facing.  The Committee
further recommended that Special Cadre
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

of Agriculture Scientists for Agricultural Research in North Eastern States including Sikkim may
be created so that the Research Institute of ICAR in that area do not suffer from the malady of
shortage of scientists.
1.24 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³ICAR has an All India cadre of scientists called Agriculture Research Service
(ARS).  Posts at entry level are filled on the basis of All India competitive examination
conducted by the Agricultural Scientists Recruitment Board (ASRB).  Vacancies in
higher grades of scientists i.e. Senior Scientist and Principal Scientist at different
institutes are advertised by the ASRB indicating the name of the institute in the
advertisement and selection is made on the basis of interview.  ICAR has
following institutions in the NE Region:
1) ICAR Research Complex for NEH Region, Barapani with a centre in each state
of NEH Region
2) National Research Centre (NRC) on Mithun
3) NRC on Pig
4) NRC on Orchid
5) NRC on Yak
Candidates selected on the basis of Agricultural Research Services examination
are posted to the institutes including those situated in NE region.  According to in-built
provision in the policy, the scientists who have spent a specified period in this region are
eligible for transfer to institutes outside the NE region.
In addition to regular batches of ARS, ICAR has conducted a special recruitment
drive to fill up vacant posts in NE Region as a result of which 53 scientists have been
posted.
 ICAR scientists posted in NE Region are also eligible for financial incentives for
working in this region in accordance with Govt. of India policy on the subject.  These
incentives coupled with the provision under which they can seek transfer to outside the
region after a specified period, gives an impetus to the newly recruited scientists to work
in this region.
 Interaction for new ideas, capitalizing on innovations from a wider canvas and
development of first rate human resource is already in progress.  The research
capabilities of the institutes in the NE region have progressed considerably and the
ICAR has consistently provided all possible technologies and resources to fulfil the
needs of these institutes.  The scientists at the beginning of their career are attracted to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

work at such institutions in the interest of their own professional career.
 As regards the perception that incidence of scientific posts lying vacant in NE
region is higher than in rest of the country, the fact is that the proportion of scientific
posts lying vacant in NE region is nearly same as in rest of the country.
As regards the suggestion to create a special cadre of Agricultural scientists for
NE states including Sikkim, it is stated that an isolated cadre for NE region may not be
viable due to following reasons :
(i) A person can be motivated to serve in difficult areas for some time provided he
knows that after a specified period he would be eligible for a posting outside the
region.  Among those who qualify the ARS examination there may be few takers
for an isolated cadre for NE region;
(ii) Mobility of scientists is good for scientists as well as the organisation.  An
isolated cadre will be deprived of the benefit of mobility on all India basis; and
(iii) Such a cadre would distort the ARS system.
In view of above, it is felt that no useful purpose is likely to be served by creating
a separate cadre for NE region rather such a move may prove to the counter productive.
  The relevant recommendation is forwarded to Department of Agriculture and Co-
operation (DAC) for further necessary action as that department is co-ordinating the
work of Agriculture Coordination Committee. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.25 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Department as it does not
mention anything/ any action being taken other than merely forwarding it to DAC and
what action DAC has taken/initiated on the main recommendation of the Committee that
the Prime Minister as head of Agriculture Coordination Committee and Union Minister of
Agriculture being President of ICAR should set up a High-level Committee of Scientists
and practising farmers from different parts of the country to suggest methods of
overcoming their problems, technology fatigue, to bridge the gap between potential and
actual yield and agrarian crisis the country is facing.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Department should expedite the
setting up a High-level Committee at the earliest and apprise the Committee about the
actual action taken in this regard within three months from the date of presentation of
this Report to the Parliament.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 8)
Need to undertake an effective Programme on Rural System Research (RSR) by ICAR
1.26 The Committee noted that the National Farmers Policy has a number of commitments as
far as agricultural research and education is concerned and the first one is to make the farming
income oriented.
The Committee desired that DARE/ICAR should seriously ponder upon the ways and
means to maximise the income per units of labour, water, land and capital, the four pillars of
agriculture.  ICAR should also develop the right strategy to help improve the farm productivity
income of the small farmers for the reason that over 80 per cent of our 105 million operational
holdings are, one hectare and below.
The Committee further recommended that apart from cropping system research and
farming system research, ICAR should also undertake an effective programme on the Rural
System Research (RSR) which looks at the on-farm and non-farm employment in its totality as
the Chinese have done in a very effective way.  The RSR programme   should concentrate at
post harvest technology, agro-processing and value addition at the village level itself and not
sending the raw materials to the city, but making jobs available in the village itself in order to
provide additional sources of income to both, landless labourers as well as small farmers and
their family to bring them out of vicious circle of poverty.
1.27 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
 ³ Research Institutes/All India Coordinated Research Projects (AICRP) of ICAR
have focused their research in the cropping system and farming system. The proposed
Rural System Research (RSR) for the holistic on-farm and non-farm employment of the
farming community would be implemented through the relevant cropping system. The
ICAR participates in the network project on farming systems in order to generate
relevant technologies in this regard. Under AICRP on Post Harvest Technology, efforts
have been made to establishing Agro Processing Centres (APC) by in villages for
primary processing of farm produce and value addition to the farm produce resulting in
employment and enhanced income to the farmer. This shall be more vigorously pursued
as suggested.
 The equipment & technologies are developed by various Engineering Institutes
keeping in mind the small, medium and large farmers. The equipment developed have
resulted in timely and precise application of various inputs thereby resulting in increase
in yield and enhanced income to the farmers.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Natural Resource Management (NRM) caters to the farming needs of small and
marginal farmers, Council has developed several location specific and cost effective
techniques like water harvesting, micro irrigation, in situ  water conservation, vermin-
composting, bio-fertilizers, bio-pesticides and simple farm tools and implements for small
land holdings. A publication on ³System based low cost production technologies for
small farmers´ has also been released.
  The Fisheries Research Institutes also developed technologies to enhance
production and productivity in fisheries and aquaculture sector through judicious
utilization of the available resources and inputs to help the fishers and fish farmers in
maximizing the returns. Further, the Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT), as
the mandate to address the issues of post harvest technology, fish processing and value
addition. Necessary technology demonstration and training programmes have
been conducted leading to several entrepreneurs taking to these technologies at
industrial level as well as at cottage level through formation of women SHGs in the area.
 As far as Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) is concerned, proposal has been included
in the EFC of XI Plan for establishment of demonstration units on Minimal Agro-
Processing Facilities in the selected KVKs with technological backstopping from relevant
AICRP Centres on Post Harvest technology.
National Agricultural Innovation Project launched with funding through World
Bank aims at holistic development of Agriculture and allied sector. The projects under
this Component would be implemented in 150 most underprivileged districts of the
country and is aimed at enhancing the income of farmers and rural employment. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.28 The Committee note from the reply that one of the action taken on the
recommendation in that the Department has brought out a publication on “System based
Low Cost Production Technologies for Small Farmers”.
The Committee feel that the Department should invariably bring out all their
publications meant for farmers also in Hindi and local languages of the areas/regions a
particular publication is meant for.  The Department should also undertake an initiative
with immediate effect, for getting all their publications translated which are meant to
benefit the farming communities in any manner across the country from English to Hindi
and also in local languages of the area/region.  The Committee also stress that Rural
System need multiple livelihood opportunities and Government should explore avenues
to create and enhance non-farm income of farmers and other people dependent on
agriculture and allied sectors.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 9)
Need to develop low cost and good quality Feed and Fodder for the Livestock through
R&D
1.29 The Committee noted that livestock has the most important contribution in the country ¶s
economy as well as in the livelihood of million of Indian farmers and their families.  The most
important input for the existence of the livestock is feed and fodder.  The poultry industry is
sufferings due to high cost of maize.  Similarly, low availability of good quality feed and fodder
and its high cost have been noticed throughout the country.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that ICAR should pay due attention to this
issue and do the needful R&D to bring out good quality and low cost feed and fodder for all
kinds of the livestock of the nation including animal, poultry and fisheries.
1.30 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
 ³ ICAR has already given attention on improving the nutritive value of feed and
fodder resources and have already come out with technological means to enhance bio-
availability of nutrients through incorporation of productivity supportive nutrients as in the
case of substitution of area specific deficient minerals. Similarly, efforts are on to detoxify
non-conventional feed resources like caster oil cake. Further, to support productivity
enhancement through resource based feeding, the concept of total mixed ration and
complete feed blocks area being promoted.
Keeping in view the recommendations of the Committee, ICAR has identified the
aspect of developing low cost but good quality feed supplements in their XIth Plan
Programmes particularly by the institutes dealing with this aspect of livestock feeding.
The Department has also developed several location specific silvi-pastoral agro
forestry models, particularly for degraded/ wastelands to augment the production of feed
and fodder for livestock including animal poultry and fisheries.
A feed block making machine which makes rectangular feed blocks of 2 square
feet has been developed by ICAR without any binding material. These feed blocks are
easy to handle and can be easily transported and stored. The Govt. should establish
³Fodder Banks ´ to store fodder for supplying fodder to fodder deficit areas.
Efforts have also been made to enrich feed blocks with ammonia to increase its
nutritional quality.
Fish feed being identified as one of the thematic area for research, the ICAR has
already initiated an Outreach activity on Fish Feed during the XI Plan with objectives to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

develop cost effective live and formulated feeds for improved larval survival and growth;
suitable feeds and feed management strategies for grow out culture systems; possible
biotechnological interventions to improve the feed quality and its utilization in terms of
digestibility and efficiency; and setting up pilot scale fish feed mills for scaling up of feed
technology to support the aquaculture activities in freshwater, coldwater, coastal and
marine ecosystems.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.31 The Committee note from the reply that the Department has been taking/about to
take many measures with regard to implementation of the recommendation of the
Committee regarding need to develop low cost and good quality feed and fodder for the
livestock through R&D and has also mentioned that the Government should establish
“Fodder Banks” to store fodder for supplying fodder to fodder deficient areas and setting
up fish feed mills for scaling up of feed technology to support the aquaculture activities
in freshwater, coldwater, coastal and marine ecosystems.
 The Committee would like to be apprised as to what initiative/steps the
Department has taken/propose to be taken with regard to getting establish “Fodder
Banks” and setting up pilot scale “Fish Feed Mills”, including the details of the role of
the Department and other Departments, if any, involved; requirement of budgetary
provisions; physical and financial targets set and the likely time period to be taken to
convert both of these ideas into practical reality/making it operational, within three
months time from the presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
(Recommendation No. 11)
National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources (NBAGR) to maintain and preserve fastly
disappearing pure material and pedigrees/local breeds
1.32 The Committee noted that ICAR has been pioneer in genetic resources, conservation
and management.  But in the area of animal genetic resources, a lot of very good materials
were being lost.  Unlike National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources (NBPGR), the National
Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources (NBAGR) did not maintain animals; they only had a
database on animals as the maintenance of the pure materials and the pedigrees, etc. were left
to individual farmers or sometimes to the State Governments.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that NBAGR should be provided about 100
hectares of land and facilities in every State to allow them to maintain and preserve the fastly
disappearing pure materials such as Rathi breed in Suratgarh (Rajasthan), Badavari buffalo
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

breed, Ongole and Nellore breed and maintain local breeds, etc. which are important for the
future and are adapted to local conditions.  NBAGR may accordingly enlarge their mandate to
incorporate maintenance and preservation of the pure material/local breeds.
1.33 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The NBAGR/ ICAR has taken the needed initiative to preserve threatened/
endangered and vastly disappearing animal breeds not only through NABGR but also
through its species specific institutes in the form of Network / AICRPs programmes. This
issue of conservation of animal genetic resources falls under the area domain of
DAH&F operation. Based on the recommendation of the Parliament Standing Committee
on Agriculture, ICAR has written to Secretary, DAH&F, Government of India to explore
the possibility of accessing 100 hectare of land under Animal Husbandry Departments of
various states of the country. Once a provision is made by the different states to allocate
the land, NBAGR would be providing needed technical backstopping the related advice
to ensure the conservation of the Animal Genetic Resource. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.34 The Committee would like to be apprised of the final action taken for actual
implementation of this recommendation at the earliest and advice the department to
pursue this matter vigorously with the Secretary, DAH&F, Government of India and Chief
Secretaries of all the States to get the needful done expeditiously and till some
favourable outcome is achieved.
(Recommendation No. 12)
ICAR to have Authoritative Estimates of Agrarian Post Harvest Losses and develop
better Post Harvest Technologies and Varieties for Processing and Value-addition
1.35 The Committee noted that India ¶s agricultural production base is quite strong but at the
same time wastage of agricultural produce is massive.  Processing level is very low i.e. around
2% for fruits & vegetables, 26% for marine, 6% for poultry and 20% for buffalo meat, as against
60-70% in developed countries.
The Committee also noted with heavy heart that at present, no authoritative estimates of
post harvest losses in various agricultural livestock and fisheries sectors are available.
However, on the basis of the general post harvest loss estimates available   with the ICAR, the
extent of annual post harvest losses in various commodities alongwith their estimates in rupees
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

are as follows:
a.    For grains the losses are about 10% value at Rs 16500 crore
b.    For pulses the losses are about 15% values at  Rs 2000 core
c.    For fruits the losses are about 30% valued at Rs 13600 crore
d.    For vegetables the losses are about 30% valued at Rs 14100 crore
e.    For floriculture the losses are about 40% valued at Rs 400 crore
f.     For livestock and fisheries produce the losses are valued at Rs 8400
      crore.
The Committee were deeply perturbed to note that even after existence of many
decades, DARE/ICAR had no authoritative estimates of Post Harvest losses till date.  The
Committee had no choice but to remind the DARE to go through the Appendix I of their Annual
Report 2007-08 at page 147 regarding the GoI (Allocation of Business) Rules, the Second
Schedule (Rule 3), and especially refer to item at Sl.No.14 under Part III which states,
³Enquiries and Statistics for the purpose of any subjects allotted to this Department ´.  Having no
authoritative estimates/statistics of Post Harvest Losses of agrarian and allied sector produces
even after more than 50 years of existence in case of DARE/ICAR, speaks volumes about the
irresponsible manner the DARE/ICAR are fulfilling their mandatory responsibilities.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the DARE/ICAR should not allow
any lackadaisical tendencies to undermine their nodal and apex stature at national level and
should take immediate steps to collect, compile and analyse data at the earliest at national
level, state-wise/UT-wise, in order to have better Planning and R&D to stop wastage of about
Rs.55000 crore per annum.  The Committee opine that this would also help the concerned
Ministries/Departments/Agencies entrusted to develop appropriate  technologies and modern
storage facilities, area-wise, to prevent the available/avoidable waste. Unless this is done, and
the desired post harvest technologies developed and implemented to plug the gaping hole in the
basket of agrarian and allied sector produces, all the efforts made by the ICAR to increase
productivity and production of agrarian and allied produces will not bear the desired result. The
Committee also recommended that ICAR should pay due attention in addressing the problem of
non-availability of varieties which are good for processing and value addition as it is high time to
have more and more food, fruits and vegetables processed to curb the severe post harvest
losses of agrarian produces.  To end the prevailing mismatch between production and post
harvest technology, the Committee recommended the large number of lab to land
demonstrations to familiarise the farming community to agro-processing and value addition, etc.
1.36 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³The ICAR is seized of the matter of post harvest losses of grains pulses and other
commodities. Research related to the mitigation and prevention of losses through better
storage facilities and commodity treatment with appropriate techniques have been
developed as technologies and communicated to the user agencies for preserving the
commodities without at minimised loss.  So far as processing varieties is concerned,
earlier there was no focus on this. Now focus is there for developing varieties suitable for
processing e.g., potato., mango,grapes which have already gone to the users. These
technologies have been passed on to KVKs for field demonstrations.
Post harvest losses in livestock sector particularly for milk has been assessed at
3.05% at rural farms, 1.87% at rural (commercial) dairies and at 4.31% at urban dairies.
Losses in egg sector has been assessed at 8,87% in some pockets of Uttar Pradesh
and that of poultry meat at 3.83%. However, as per the recommendation of the
Committee, nation wide data collection initiative shall be taken involving Department of
Animal Husbandry Dairying & Fisheries and State Agricultural Universities / State
Veterinary Universities during XIth Plan. Similarly, initiative shall also be taken on
demonstrating the evolved post harvest processing technologies of milk for the benefit of
the farming community involving the KVKs, wherever feasible technically.
The issues on harvest and post harvest losses in the fisheries sector are being
addressed through the Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT). The CIFT has
already carried out a study to assess the harvest and post harvest losses in marine and
inland fisheries in collaboration with the Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute
(IASRI) under a mission mode project with funding through the National Agricultural
Technology Project (NATP).  To estimate such losses in Marine Sector, the study was
undertaken at the Ernakulam District of Kerala covering thereby the traditional,
motorized and mechanized sectors for assessing losses during harvest and for post
harvest losses, the processing centres, the wholesale and retail markets, transportation
centres and consumers were covered. To assess the losses in Inland Sector, the study
was carried out in selected districts of Andhra Pradesh & Orissa covering thereby the
aquaculture ponds, the landing centres, the processing units, the markets, transportation
centres and the consumers.  Further studies to estimate the harvest and post harvest
losses at National level are in progress.
The CIFT has developed a number of technologies for minimizing the harvest
and post harvest losses through designing resources specific fishing techniques and
development of value added products from by-catches, discards and low-value fish and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

shellfish species.  Necessary technology demonstration and training programmes have been
conducted leading to several entrepreneurs taking to these technologies at industrial
level as well as at cottage level through formation of women SHGs in the area.
As far as the issue related to familiarize the farming community to agro-
processing and value addition is concerned, during the last year, a number of
technologies suitable for small scale income generation, value addition and storage were
taken up for assessment and refinement on location specific basis.  During the same
period, 61480 farmers were trained on different aspects of production, processing and
value addition.  In addition, as indicated earlier, demonstration units on Minimal Agro-
Processing Facilities have been proposed during XI Plan. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.37 The Committee would like to be apprised of the time schedule of the Department
to complete the implementation of all the issues raised in this Recommendation of the
Committee and further progress under various issues involved until the final outcome is
achieved, every three months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament.
(Recommendation No. 13)
Need for operationalization of the concept of every Agriculture Scholar becoming an
Entrepreneur
1.38 The Committee noted that the main aim of Agricultural Universities was to impart
education and ensure that every scholar and entrepreneur had the ability to go into
entrepreneurship.  Self-employment opportunities for an agricultural graduate are minimal as
these days many of them have to appear for the IAS or IPS examination or study MBA
afterwards to get job in Banks/Administration.  The Agriculture and Animal Husbandry subjects
should be restarted teaching at schools and colleges.  In Punjab and Haryana, these subjects
used to be taught till late 70s.
The Committee opined that young people would join the agriculture and allied sector
only if it becomes economically rewarding and diversified.  Home Science colleges should be
involved in much more intensive way in this area apart from veterinary and fishery science.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that ICAR should appoint a technical
group to look into the ways and methods of operationalisation of the concept of every agriculture
scholar becoming an entrepreneur.  This technical group may consider revamping the syllabus
of agriculture, restructuring the agri. clinics and agri. business centres meant for providing self-
employment opportunities for agricultural graduates, integrating MBA ingredients in the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Agricultural University itself so that business and agriculture technology can go together.
Every State Agricultural University should set up a Placement Cell for self-employment (Agri-
Clinic/Agri-Business) of their agricultural graduates/scholars for familiarising them with
opportunities for gainful remunerations.
1.39 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³In the ICAR curriculum review has been made and it is in utilitarian mode.
National Academy of Agricultural Research Management (NAARM) will also be
undertaking efforts to develop special course in agri-business.
The Placement cells are in operation in most of SAU ¶s and ICAR is extending
financial aid to these cells to meet out recurring contingent expenditure. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.40 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Department as it do not
mention anything about the issues that teaching the Agriculture and Animal husbandry
subjects should be restarted at schools and colleges as was being done in Punjab and
Haryana till late 1970s, as well as involving home Science Colleges in much more
intensive way in this area apart from veterinary and fishery science and integrating MBA
ingredients in the Agricultural Universities itself.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the final action the Department would
like to take on all the issues raised and recommended by the Committee in this
Recommendation within three months time from the date of presentation of this Report
to the Parliament.
(Recommendation No. 14)
Horticulture Department of ICAR should initiate a Programme on Micro-
Nutrients/Vitamins Demonstrations.
1.41 The Committee noted that in developing nation like India there was large amount of
micro-nutrient deficiencies in human beings, known in technical parlance as µhidden hunger¶.  In
the opinion of the Committee, one of the best methods of removing µhidden hunger¶ is through
the horticulture approach as consumption of horticulture produces has the triple advantage of
getting micro-nutrients, vitamins as well as calories.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that there should be a well qualified
nutritional expert in the horticulture Division of ICAR who could attend to these issues.  The
Committee also recommended that
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Horticulture Department of ICAR should take up a programme on micro-nutrients/vitamins
demonstration, particularly, in malnutrition hotspots/areas to have horticulture remedy for a
nutritional malady.
1.42 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The ICAR is well aware about the growing micro and secondary nutrients
deficiencies in soils vis-à-vis malnutrition in human and animals health through food
chain. The Department has developed soil test based balanced and integrated nutrient
management packages for major cropping systems in different agro-ecological regions
of the country to overcome such situations. The ICAR also imparts trainings and frontline
demonstrations to the farmers in this regard.
Out of two posts of Principal Scientists in the ICAR Headquarters, New Delhi,
one will be converted as Principal Scientist, (Nutrition) and the same will be advertised
and filled through Agricultural Scientist Recruitment Board (ASRB).
Likewise two more posts would be converted as Scientists (Nutrition) one each
at Indian Institute of Horticultural Research (IIHR) and Central Institute Subtropical
Horticulture (CISH) where the work under this recommendation will be implemented. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.43 The Committee wish to point out that very little has been done by ICAR so far with
regard to taking up a programme on micro-nutrients/vitamins demonstrations,
particularly, in malnutrition hotspots/areas to have horticulture remedy for a nutritional
malady.
The Committee would like the Department to take up an exclusive programme as
mentioned in the recommendation and apprise the Committee of the further positive
action taken by the Department with regard to taking up an exclusive programme and
appointing a well qualified nutritional expert in the horticulture Division of ICAR within
three months from the date of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
(Recommendation No. 16)
Incorporation of yield /income per hectare columns in all the publications of ICAR and
their Institutes/Universities
1.44 The Committee noted that usually a farmer is able to tell the total quantity of his produce
but he may not be able to tell at what cost or whether the crop was viable for him or not because
he does not have much knowledge of costing/cropping system.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Committee felt that this kind of ignorance put the small and marginal farmers into a
series of debts and depths of poverty and jeopardise his very existence.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that there is a need for ICAR to instruct all
their Institutes and Universities that in their publications, when an Agronomist publishes a paper
or when a variety is going to be released or approved, there should invariably be a double
column, namely, yield per hectare and income per hectare to enable all the farmers to be aware
of the economy of their crops.
1.45 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³All the SMDs have been made aware of this recommendation of the Committee
for necessary follow-up action. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.46 The Committee would like to be apprised of the final outcome/implementation of
this recommendation and expect the Department to fix norms/guidelines for all the
scientists of the ICAR to follow this recommendation in letter and spirit without any
exception.
(Recommendation No. 18)
Need to do research on developing smaller size of Potato Seeds
1.47 The Committee noted that farmers of other States who bring potatoes from Himachal
Pradesh used the potatoes for sowing by cutting it into half and planting germinating portion.
This traditional way of sowing half of the potato, increase the quantum and weight of the seeds
required.  The Committee felt that if the needful research could be undertaken by ICAR to
reduce the size of the potato seeds and any success in this project would certainly reduce the
seed cost owing to increase in the number of smaller potato seeds per quintal.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that ICAR should undertake this project on
developing smaller size of potato seeds and they should be informed of the action taken at the
earliest. In addition, research and development of True Potato Seed (TPS) technology should
be intensified.
1.48 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³About 40-60% cost of potato cultivation is incurred on potato seed.   This is
due to high seed rate (2.5 to 3.5 t/ha) in potato.   Cutting of seed tubers is not advised
because this may spread tuber
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

borne diseased to healthy tubers.   The recommended seed size in  potato is 40g.
However, at a recommended spacing (row to row 60 cm and tuber to tuber 20 cm, the
proportion of seed size tubers is less.   Seed size can be manipulated by reducing
planting distance and also giving shorter bulking time by cutting haulms between 70 to
90  DAP depending upon maturity of the variety. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.49 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Department as the reply has
totally side-lined the main crux of the recommendation, namely, ICAR should undertake
the project on developing smaller size of Potato seeds and intensifying the R&D of True
Potato Seeds (TPS) technology.
The Committee are of the view that ICAR has furnished perfunctory reply and
should give serious consideration to the recommendations of the Committee.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the action taken/propose
to be taken at the earliest for both the issues reiterated above which still remains
unattended and un-replied.
 (Recommendation No. 19)
Need for Greater Inter- Ministerial Coordination for uplifting Indian Agriculture
1.50 The Committee were well aware that the overall welfare, prosperity and growth of
Farmers and Agriculture & allied sectors was dependent on many factors put together such as,
water, power (electricity) for irrigation, financial credit, good quality seeds, good quality fertilizers
and pesticides, efficient tools and machinery, availability of latest technology, roads and
transportation facilities, storage and marketing facilities, etc.
The Committee were of unanimous view and recommended that since all these factors
were directly related to the jurisdiction of many Ministries/Departments of Government of India,
it would be more than essential for all these Ministries/Departments to have the best of ever
growing inter-ministerial coordination among themselves with a single-minded zeal to achieve
the same objective/goal of agrarian growth and prosperity of Indian farming community.
1.51 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
  ³The Inter-Ministerial Coordination aspect is being ensured by holding Rabi &
Kharif ICAR-DAC interface regularly in which issues pertaining to research and inter-
ministerial coordination are discussed in length and final outcomes of previous issues
are circulated to the States for adoption.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

 The research output of the various schemes in the ICAR have been collated and
brought out as technical bulletins for being communicated to user agencies, line
departments and Krishi Vigyan Kendras. Frontline demonstrations of these technologies
are taken up in farmers ¶ fields by the respective state Agricultural Universities and ICAR
Institutes every year.  These results are collated and shared with Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation. The goal of agrarian growth and prosperity of Indian Farming
Community is the major objective of the outlook and practice of research in the various
schemes of the Department.
 The KVKs have been established at the district level.  Each KVK has a provision
of Scientific Advisory Committee to facilitate inter-departmental coordination involving
the representations of line departments, financial institution, and media, besides the
representatives of research and extension agencies.
In order to have better inter-ministerial co-ordination, ICAR has already taken
initiative to have collaborative approach with Rural Development Ministry to take the
identified technologies to the farming community. Similarly, intra ministerial co-ordination
has also been initiated for livestock sector with DAHD&F separately for the first time. Co-
ordination with other ministries, as suggested by the Committee shall be further
strengthened.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.52 The Committee would appreciate further if ICAR-DAC interface regularly at Rabi &
Kharif, invite at appropriate time and frequency other concerned Ministries/Departments
such as Ministry of Water Resources, Power, New & Renewable Energy Sources,
Chemical & Fertilizers, Rural Development, Consumer Affairs, Food & Public
Distribution; Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, Finance, DAHD&F, etc. and hold
regular interfaces with them rather than merely discussing inter-ministerial coordination
related issues between DARE-DAC, thus, expending the horizon of their regular
interfaces.
(Recommendation No. 20)
In-action of DARE/ICAR to produce self-help, smaller version of Synthetic/Adulterated
Milk Detection Kit for use of the Common Man
1.53  The Committee in their Recommendation No. 11 of Second Report & Sixth Action Taken
Report (2004-05) on DFG (2004-05) of MoA (DARE) had noted with anguish that no action
worthwhile seems to have been taken on their specific recommendation to promote and
popularise the research in detecting synthetic/adulterated milk and to produce a self-help/low
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

cost diagnostic kit affordable by the common man/consumers of milk.
While examining the DFG(2008-09) of the Department, the Committee enquired that the
latest status of the issue regarding development of the self-help/low cost diagnostic kit for the
use of the common man and were apprised that NDRI- Karnal has developed simple Platform
test for detection of synthetic milk since 15-06-2005. This is a colour based test and detects
presence of detergent, which is used as one of the ingredient in preparation of synthetic milk.
The test results are available in 5-10 minutes. The adulteration of milk with 2-3% µsynthetic milk¶
can be detected. This single test is sufficient to detect presence of synthetic milk. The test uses
cheap chemicals and cost of chemical per test will be around Rs.2/-. Since, a patent for the
process has been applied, names of the solvent and the dye are not mentioned. Transfer of
Technology of this test is assigned to National Research and Development Corporation (a Govt.
of India Enterprise), New Delhi and is under consideration to be purchased by Mother Dairy.
In response to a point as to what DARE/ICAR has done till date to promote and
popularize their research in detecting synthetic/adulterated milk, the Committee were informed
that NDRI- Karnal has developed kit for detection of 12 different adulterants and is on sale. Kit is
available for Rs.5000/- for any six adulterants. Each reagent for individual adulterants is
sufficient for 50 to 100 milk samples. Popularization of kit is done through exhibits in
conferences and Kisan Mela.
The Committee strongly deplored and took a serious view of the tendency of the
Department in totally sidelining and deliberately ignoring the crux of the recommendation of the
Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture,  As a matter of fact the Department has been giving
incomplete, vague and false assurances year after year, especially w.r.t. producing self-help
smaller and economy version of the diagnostic kit presently costing Rs.8600/- for identifying 12
common adulterants in milk and make all out efforts to popularise their low priced smaller
version of the Diagnostic Kits which can be gainfully used by the common man.
The Committee were dissatisfied with the in-action of the Department in this regard as it
is evident from their statements of action so far that neither the Department had produced a
self-help, smaller and economy version of the already produced kit for gainful use of a common
man nor they had made all out efforts to popularise the same till date.  The Kit they had been
popularising through exhibits in conferences and Kisan Mela was the older/original version of
the Kit and not the smaller and economic version of the original Kit recommended by the
Committee.  Moreover, the common man does not go to conferences and Kisan Mela.  Thus,
the Department has failed to fulfil their own hollow promise that they were making efforts to
develop low-cost technology kit affordable for the common man.
Similarly, the action of transfer of technology of simple platform test for detection
adulterated milk with 2-3% of synthetic milk has been assigned to NRDC and said to be under
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

consideration for purchase by µMother Dairy¶, Delhi, is going to benefit Mother Dairy and other
such bulk producers/sellers of milk only and not the common man as he will not be able to make
use of the Platform Test himself in order to know whether the milk he and his beloved family
members are consuming is good or bad to drink.
The Committee were of the view that the Department is deliberately avoiding to produce
the smaller and economy version of the diagnostic kit for the use of the common man for the
reason that they are not ready to face the truth about the evil of synthetic/adulterated milk that
has grown to enormous proportion. In case the actual data regarding availability of pure milk
and synthetic/adulterated milk are researched and made available to public, then, the number
one position in milk production, India is enjoying and DARE/ICAR claims to bag the credit for the
same, will prove to be nothing but a tragic unhealthy illusion/eye-wash.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the DARE/ICAR should
immediately take action in this regard and come out with a self-help, smaller and economic
versions of the diagnostic kits for all the 12 common milk adulterants with a test carrying
capacity ranging from 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10 tests per reagent/solvent for the use of the common
man and the same kits should be made available for sale at all the Mother Dairy Milk/Vegetable
Booths as well as Delhi Milk Scheme Booths/Chemist shops and also in other States/UTs.
Unless, this is done, the problem of synthetic/adulterated milk will continue to grow further and
ruin the health of every milk and milk products consumer in India and the dream of healthy India
will never become a reality.
1.54 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³As per the recommendation of the Committee, immediate steps would be taken,
depending on the feasibility and safety issues, to come out with self-help, smaller and
economic version of diagnostic kits to diagnose milk adulterants. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.55 The Committee would appreciate if the Department stops furnishing diplomatic
replies time and again as in the instant case, this issue was brought to the cognizance of
the Department in the year 2004 and the Committee are pursuing this matter with the
Department again and again for the last four years and the Department has been
befooling by giving indifferent replies and ignoring the gravity of the complex issue
which if continued to be avoided/ignored as it has been done so till date, will jeopardize
the health of every milk & milk products’ consumer in India, from little children, grown
ups, young and old alike.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

 The Committee would really appreciate, if as per the recommendation of the
Committee, self-help, smaller and economic versions of the diagnostic kits for all the 12
common milk adulterants with a test carrying capacity ranging from 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10
tests per reagent/solvent for the use of the common man and the same kits should be
made available for sale at all the Mother Dairy Milk/Vegetable Booths as well as Delhi Milk
Scheme Booths/Chemists Shops and also in other States/UTs, within a stipulated time
schedule of three months from the date of presentation of this Report to the Parliament
as the Department has already wasted four years without giving any positive outcome in
this regard except once they have given an assurance that they are doing the needful in
their further action taken replies as they have given this time, that too was more than two
years ago.
 The Committee would also recall their on the spot study visit to NDRI, Karnal in
the month of May, 2008 during which the Committee had discussed all the pros and cons
including feasibility and safety issues at length/ in detail, related to bringing out the
recommended kit for the use of the common man with the representative of NDRI, Karnal.
The Committee are sanguine that the Department would actually do the needful in this
regard at the earliest without further loss of time as promised by them on many
occasions in the past.
(Recommendation No. 21)
Some other issues related to ICAR
1.56 The Committee felt (a) that there was need to organize frequent Krishi Vigyan Melas at
District level; (b) that there was need to find remedies for diseases of Honeybees in HP &
Uttrakhand; (c) that there was need to train farmers of disaster-prone areas; (d) that there was a
dire need to restart teaching agriculture and animal husbandry as subjects in schools and
colleges from class VIII onwards to attract the youth towards these sectors of economy; (e) that
there was need to take research to small farmers through extension programmes, such as
Seminars/Workshop/Orientation programmes to be conducted by agricultural
universities/colleges at regular intervals;(f) that there was need to have exclusive KVKs on
Fisheries for imparting the latest technical training skills on the basis of learning by doing, to the
local fishermen from capture to consumption and processing; (g) that water scarcity in the
country was going to be the biggest challenge in near future and there is need to develop biotic
and abiotic (heat-resistant) seeds requiring less water to germinate in wake of Global Climate
Change; (h) with regard to bio-security, either Bhopal or some other institute should become the
National Centre for Agricultural Bio-security and it should be strengthened.  We should have a
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

network of institutes, a single institution will not be enough.  We should have them in all the
major agro-climatic regions in the hub and spoke model; (i) the other facility badly required was
an off-shore quarantine Islands such as in Lakshadweep Islands or Andaman & Nicobar Islands
where no human being reside, where we can have absolutely safe testing facility; (j) we should
take care the financial and technical needs of mother institutions such as IARI and Agricultural
Universities.  The Department should immediately provide Rs.100.00 crore to IARI, New Delhi
during 2008-09 for improving farm infrastructure with reference to irrigation. As research and
education are expensive, the Government should develop a corpus of Rs.1000 crore or more
from which a need based investment can be done; (k) the State Agricultural Universities should
not be fragmented into agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries and horticulture, etc. rather they
should work for the farming system as a whole.  ICAR should also coordinate with other
Departments of the Government of India to collect and disseminate knowledge of its research in
different agricultural fields to them for holistic development of agriculture and allied sectors, so
as to focus on more jobs, income security and work security and people¶s livelihood in rural agri-
system; (l) as water table is going down and irrigation facilities are dwindling, ICAR should focus
their research on developing seeds which are water-resistant, weed resistant and of high yield
variety; (m) the climate change should be taken up as a challenge to develop new varieties of
wheat, rice, pulses, oilseeds and horticulture crops. The Agricultural universities should be given
more financial help to do research in this direction; (n) KVK should work as mini research cum
extension institute which may directly be connected with the farmers of the area; (o) KVKs and
Agricultural Technology Management Agency should coordinate to disseminate knowledge
about latest agricultural technology and research to the farmers of that area; and (p) that there
is need to establish a Central/Regional Research Institute of Temperate Horticulture, in addition
to the already existing Institute at Srinagar (J&K), to cater to the problems of the farmers
cultivating horticultural crops at the height of 3000 feet to 5000 feet in Uttrakhand/HP and other
hilly areas as 12% of the total crop area is lying in Himalayan Region and not more than 2% of
the same has been tapped so far.
1.57 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³As this Recommendation is multi-disciplinary and also involves Planning
Commission etc., the response/ implementation status for each is as follows:
Planning Commission: The Department had forwarded this recommendation to
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.  The Planning Commission responded
that ³The other issues which are related to Administrative and Coordination. The
Planning
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Commission has always supported coordination and managerial for effective delivery of
technology for its realization in the field. ´
Crop Science:
(a) All the ICAR Institutes are organizing Krishi Vigyan Melas every year during
the crop season at their campuses and on farms.  The concerned line
departments of the State, progressive farmers and farmers from the respective
States are brought together for exchange of information on new technologies
including recently released crop varieties and also for mitigation of their various
problems
(b) The technologies developed to prevent various diseases including mites in
honeybee colonies have been developed. These technologies for commercial
apiculture are transferred to the bee keepers of Himachal Pradesh and
Uttarakhand through the respective States Agricultural Universities.  The bee
keepers are also invited for training to these campuses every month for
familiarizing the practical approaches to practice these technologies. Further
fortification of research in this regard is also proposed in this XIth Five Year Plan
period.
(g & l)  Research efforts to develop crop varieties having resistance to various
key biotic stresses and abiotic stresses such as heat resistance, submergence
etc. are intensified in the 11 th Five Year Plan period.
  Horticulture:
(p) CITH, Srinagar has already a station in Mukteswar which will further be
strengthened to cater to the needs of hilly areas.
  Natural Resource Management:
(c, g & m) Keeping in view the growing water scarcity in the country, the Council
has already given emphasis on developing drought/ heat resistant varieties.
Besides, a Network project on Impact of climate change on agriculture
including vulnerability, adaptability and mitigation measures is already in
operation. The council has also formulated contingency crop planning to cater
natural disaster like cold/ drought/ flood etc.
Department is concerned with global climate change for which in the recent
ICAR-DAC interface it has
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

been decided that outcome of the National Network Project on ³Climate Change Adoption´ may
be summarized and provided to ICAR so that same could be circulated.
The Council is actively considering to establish a National Institute on abiotic
Stress Management in Agriculture during the current plan.
Fisheries:
The Fisheries Research Institutes have initiated programmes on water budgeting
in aquaculture and also on impact of climate change on the fishery resources and
ecosystem stress management. The Institutes have taken up programme to
develop bio-security and bio-safety protocols & food- safety guidelines for
hatcheries & grow out culture systems and post harvest sector.
  Animal Science:
(a) KVKs attached to Animal Science Institute are arranging such melas
periodically in addition to organizing µhands on ¶ training program. Livestock
shows/ melas are also arranged from time to time with Kisan Gosthi programme
where scientist- farmer interacts. However, steps will be taken, as suggested by
the Committee, to increase the frequency of such melas.
(e) Most of Animal Science Institutes are doing this in the form of Kissan Mela,
Kissan Sanmelan, Scientist-Farmer interface, Doordarshan programmes,
documentary films. However, periodically of such programme shall be increased
as advised by the Hon ¶ble Committee.
(h) High Security laboratory at Bhopal is being strengthened to act as referral
institution to undertake investigations of bio-safety and bio-security. Further, BSL
2,3 and 4 laboratories are being proposed at different locations like IVRI,
Izantnagar, (UP) IVRI, Mukteshwar (Uttrakhand), IVRI Bangalore (Karnataka) PD
ADMAS, Bangalore (Karnataka), PD FMD (Bhubaneshwar),  NDRI, Karnal
(Haryana), NRC Equines & Vety. Type culture, Hisar (Haryana) during the XI
Plan. In addition to this, DAHD&F is also learnt to have proposed such
laboratories at regional level.
(i) DAHD&F, is attending to this issue. The need to identify off shore islands for
quarantine measures shall be taken up with them during the interface meeting
proposed shortly.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Education:
(d) DARE/ ICAR endorses the recommendations of Committee and it will be
discussed at appropriate for a.
(k) ICAR also holds this view. However, this being a state subject, the issue
would perhaps need in depth deliberation at appropriate level.
(j) The Government on Economic Affairs approved Rs. 60.25 Crores for IARI
during Xth Plan, of which Rs. 48.75 Crores were actually utilised. For XIth Plan
Rs. 171.00 Crores have been earmarked for this premier institution, which is an
increase of 184 percent.
Extension:
(a) A number of kisan melas and exhibitions are organized by KVKs for creating
awareness on improved agricultural technology among the farmers at district
level. During the last year, 30.18 lakh farmers benefited from such programmes.
(c) During last year 10.94 lakh farmers   benefited from training programmes
including .disaster prone areas.
(e) Similarly KVKs organized a number of sammelan/seminar /worshop, kisan
goshti, group discussion, field day, exposure visit and such other extension
programmes are organized by the KVKs.  During last year 19.45 lakh farmers
were benefited from such programmes.
(f) As far as establishment of exclusive KVKs on fisheries is concerned, it is
submitted that Government has approved for establishment of one KVK in each
of the rural districts in the country with a multi-disciplinary team of
scientific/technical personnel which are identified depending upon the thrust
areas of a district and to work on farming system perspectives. There is no
provision for establishment of specialized KVK. During XI Plan proposal has
been included for strengthening fishery activity in selected KVKs with the
provision of demonstration units on Portable Carp Hatchery.
(n) As far as the recommendation of the committee that   KVK should work as
mini research cum
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

extension institute is concerned, it is submitted that the activities of the KVK on-farm trials to
identify the location specificity of the technology under various farming systems,
front-line demonstrations to demonstrate the production potential of improved
agricultural technologies on the farmers field, training of farmers to upgrade their
knowledge and skill and training of extension personnel to orient them in  frontier
areas of technology development. A large number of extension programmes are
also organized by the KVKs to create awareness on improved agricultural
technology among farmers. Seed and planting material produced in the KVKs are
made available to the farmers.
(o) As indicated earlier, there are a number of mechanisms of linkage between
KVK and ATMA.  The Programme Coordinator of KVK is a member of  both
ATMA Governing Board and ATMA Management Committee.  Similarly, the
Project Director, ATMA   is also a member of the Scientific Advisory Committee
of KVK along with the heads of the Line Development Departments at the district
level.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
1.58 The Committee would like to point out that the Department has ignored the
recommendation of the Committee under Recommendation No. 21(J) of their 38 th Report,
particularly the matter, namely, “As research and education are expensive, the
Government should develop a corpus of Rs.1000 crore or more from which a need based
investment can be done”.
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the fate of the recommendation
mentioned above which remained unreplied along with the implementation status of all
the parts of the Recommendation No. 21(a) to (p) of the 38 th Report of the Committee
which the Department has accepted in principle but Committee are interested in practical
outcome/implementation of all of their recommendations and, therefore, would advise
the Department to re-furnish the status (progressive or otherwise) of actual
implementation of all these recommendations/issues after every six months from the
date of presentation of this Report of the Committee to the Parliament as most of the
replies are basically of interim nature and final outcome is still to be achieved and the
Committee yet to be apprised of the same.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
(Recommendation No. 8)
Need to undertake an effective Programme on Rural System Research (RSR) by ICAR
2.1 The Committee noted that the National Farmers Policy has a number of commitments as
far as agricultural research and education is concerned and the first one is to make the farming
income oriented.
The Committee desired that DARE/ICAR should seriously ponder upon the ways and
means to maximise the income per units of labour, water, land and capital, the four pillars of
agriculture.  ICAR should also develop the right strategy to help improve the farm productivity
income of the small farmers for the reason that over 80 per cent of our 105 million operational
holdings are, one hectare and below.
The Committee further recommended that apart from cropping system research and
farming system research, ICAR should also undertake an effective programme on the Rural
System Research (RSR) which looks at the on-farm and non-farm employment in its totality as
the Chinese have done in a very effective way.  The RSR programme   should concentrate at
post harvest technology, agro-processing and value addition at the village level itself and not
sending the raw materials to the city, but making jobs available in the village itself in order to
provide additional sources of income to both, landless labourers as well as small farmers and
their family to bring them out of vicious circle of poverty.
2.2 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
 ³ Research Institutes/All India Coordinated Research Projects (AICRP) of ICAR
have focused their research in the cropping system and farming system. The proposed
Rural System Research (RSR) for the holistic on-farm and non-farm employment of the
farming community would be implemented through the relevant cropping system. The
ICAR participates in the network project on farming systems in order to generate
relevant technologies in this regard. Under AICRP on Post Harvest Technology, efforts
have been made to establishing Agro Processing Centres (APC) by in villages for
primary processing of farm produce and value addition to the farm produce resulting in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

employment and enhanced income to the farmer. This shall be more vigorously pursued
as suggested.
 The equipment & technologies are developed by various Engineering Institutes
keeping in mind the small, medium and large farmers. The equipment developed have
resulted in timely and precise application of various inputs thereby resulting in increase
in yield and enhanced income to the farmers.
Natural Resource Management (NRM) caters to the farming needs of small and
marginal farmers, Council has developed several location specific and cost effective
techniques like water harvesting, micro irrigation, in situ  water conservation, vermin-
composting, bio-fertilizers, bio-pesticides and simple farm tools and implements for small
land holdings. A publication on ³System based low cost production technologies for
small farmers´ has also been released.
  The Fisheries Research Institutes also developed technologies to enhance
production and productivity in fisheries and aquaculture sector through judicious
utilization of the available resources and inputs to help the fishers and fish farmers in
maximizing the returns. Further, the Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT), as
the mandate to address the issues of post harvest technology, fish processing and value
addition. Necessary technology demonstration and training programmes have
been conducted leading to several entrepreneurs taking to these technologies at
industrial level as well as at cottage level through formation of women SHGs in the area.
 As far as Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) is concerned, proposal has been included
in the EFC of XI Plan for establishment of demonstration units on Minimal Agro-
Processing Facilities in the selected KVKs with technological backstopping from relevant
AICRP Centres on Post Harvest technology.
National Agricultural Innovation Project launched with funding through World
Bank aims at holistic development of Agriculture and allied sector. The projects under
this Component would be implemented in 150 most underprivileged districts of the
country and is aimed at enhancing the income of farmers and rural employment. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
2.3 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.28 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 9)
Need to develop low cost and good quality Feed and Fodder for the Livestock through
R&D
2.4 The Committee noted that livestock has the most important contribution in the country ¶s
economy as well as in the livelihood of million of Indian farmers and their families.  The most
important input for the existence of the livestock is feed and fodder.  The poultry industry is
sufferings due to high cost of maize.  Similarly, low availability of good quality feed and fodder
and its high cost have been noticed throughout the country.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that ICAR should pay due attention to this
issue and do the needful R&D to bring out good quality and low cost feed and fodder for all
kinds of the livestock of the nation including animal, poultry and fisheries.
2.5 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
 ³ ICAR has already given attention on improving the nutritive value of feed and
fodder resources and have already come out with technological means to enhance bio-
availability of nutrients through incorporation of productivity supportive nutrients as in the
case of substitution of area specific deficient minerals. Similarly, efforts are on to detoxify
non-conventional feed resources like caster oil cake. Further, to support productivity
enhancement through resource based feeding, the concept of total mixed ration and
complete feed blocks area being promoted.
Keeping in view the recommendations of the Committee, ICAR has identified the
aspect of developing low cost but good quality feed supplements in their XIth Plan
Programmes particularly by the institutes dealing with this aspect of livestock feeding.
The Department has also developed several location specific silvi-pastoral agro
forestry models, particularly for degraded/ wastelands to augment the production of feed
and fodder for livestock including animal poultry and fisheries.
A feed block making machine which makes rectangular feed blocks of 2 square
feet has been developed by ICAR without any binding material. These feed blocks are
easy to handle and can be easily transported and stored. The Govt. should establish
³Fodder Banks´ to store fodder for supplying fodder to fodder deficit areas. Efforts have
also been made to enrich feed blocks with ammonia to increase its nutritional quality.
Fish feed being identified as one of the thematic area for research, the ICAR has
already initiated an Outreach activity on Fish Feed during the XI Plan with objectives to
develop cost effective live and formulated feeds for improved larval survival and growth;
suitable feeds and feed management strategies for grow out culture systems; possible
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

biotechnological interventions to improve the feed quality and its utilization in terms of
digestibility and efficiency; and setting up pilot scale fish feed mills for scaling up of feed
technology to support the aquaculture activities in freshwater, coldwater, coastal and
marine ecosystems.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
2.6 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.31 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
(Recommendation No. 11)
National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources (NBAGR) to maintain and preserve fastly
disappearing pure material and pedigrees/local breeds
2.7 The Committee noted that ICAR has been pioneer in genetic resources, conservation
and management.  But in the area of animal genetic resources, a lot of very good materials
were being lost.  Unlike National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources (NBPGR), the National
Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources (NBAGR) did not maintain animals; they only had a
database on animals as the maintenance of the pure materials and the pedigrees, etc. were left
to individual farmers or sometimes to the State Governments.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that NBAGR should be provided about 100
hectares of land and facilities in every State to allow them to maintain and preserve the fastly
disappearing pure materials such as Rathi breed in Suratgarh (Rajasthan), Badavari buffalo
breed, Ongole and Nellore breed and maintain local breeds, etc. which are important for the
future and are adapted to local conditions.  NBAGR may accordingly enlarge their mandate to
incorporate maintenance and preservation of the pure material/local breeds.
2.8 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The NBAGR/ ICAR has taken the needed initiative to preserve threatened/
endangered and vastly disappearing animal breeds not only through NABGR but also
through its species specific institutes in the form of Network / AICRPs programmes. This
issue of conservation of animal genetic resources falls under the area domain of
DAH&F operation. Based on the recommendation of the Parliament Standing Committee
on Agriculture, ICAR has written to Secretary, DAH&F, Government of India to explore
the possibility of accessing 100 hectare of land under Animal Husbandry Departments of
various states of the country. Once a provision is made by the different states to allocate
the land, NBAGR would be providing needed technical backstopping the related
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

advice to ensure the conservation of the Animal Genetic Resource. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
2.9 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.34 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
(Recommendation No. 12)
ICAR to have Authoritative Estimates of Agrarian Post Harvest Losses and develop
better Post Harvest Technologies and Varieties for Processing and Value-addition
2.10 The Committee noted that India ¶s agricultural production base is quite strong but at the
same time wastage of agricultural produce is massive.  Processing level is very low i.e. around
2% for fruits & vegetables, 26% for marine, 6% for poultry and 20% for buffalo meat, as against
60-70% in developed countries.
The Committee also noted with heavy heart that at present, no authoritative estimates of
post harvest losses in various agricultural livestock and fisheries sectors are available.
However, on the basis of the general post harvest loss estimates available   with the ICAR, the
extent of annual post harvest losses in various commodities alongwith their estimates in rupees
are as follows:
a.    For grains the losses are about 10% value at Rs 16500 crore
b.    For pulses the losses are about 15% values at  Rs 2000 core
c.    For fruits the losses are about 30% valued at Rs 13600 crore
d.    For vegetables the losses are about 30% valued at Rs 14100 crore
e.    For floriculture the losses are about 40% valued at Rs 400 crore
f.     For livestock and fisheries produce the losses are valued at Rs 8400
      crore.
The Committee were deeply perturbed to note that even after existence of many
decades, DARE/ICAR had no authoritative estimates of Post Harvest losses till date.  The
Committee had no choice but to remind the DARE to go through the Appendix I of their Annual
Report 2007-08 at page 147 regarding the GoI (Allocation of Business) Rules, the Second
Schedule (Rule 3), and especially refer to item at Sl.No.14 under Part III which states,
³Enquiries and Statistics for the purpose of any subjects allotted to this Department ´.  Having no
authoritative estimates/statistics of Post Harvest Losses of agrarian and allied sector produces
even after more than 50 years of existence in case of DARE/ICAR, speaks volumes about the
irresponsible manner the DARE/ICAR are fulfilling their mandatory responsibilities.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the DARE/ICAR should not
allow any lackadaisical tendencies to undermine their nodal and apex stature at national level
and should take immediate steps to collect, compile and analyse data at the earliest at national
level, state-wise/UT-wise, in order to have better Planning and R&D to stop wastage of about
Rs.55000 crore per annum.  The Committee opine that this would also help the concerned
Ministries/Departments/Agencies entrusted to develop appropriate  technologies and modern
storage facilities, area-wise, to prevent the available/avoidable waste. Unless this is done, and
the desired post harvest technologies developed and implemented to plug the gaping hole in the
basket of agrarian and allied sector produces, all the efforts made by the ICAR to increase
productivity and production of agrarian and allied produces will not bear the desired result. The
Committee also recommended that ICAR should pay due attention in addressing the problem of
non-availability of varieties which are good for processing and value addition as it is high time to
have more and more food, fruits and vegetables processed to curb the severe post harvest
losses of agrarian produces.  To end the prevailing mismatch between production and post
harvest technology, the Committee recommended the large number of lab to land
demonstrations to familiarise the farming community to agro-processing and value addition, etc.
2.11 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The ICAR is seized of the matter of post harvest losses of grains pulses and
other commodities. Research related to the mitigation and prevention of losses through
better storage facilities and commodity treatment with appropriate techniques have been
developed as technologies and communicated to the user agencies for preserving the
commodities without at minimised loss.  So far as processing varieties is concerned,
earlier there was no focus on this. Now focus is there for developing varieties
suitable for processing e.g., potato., mango,grapes which have already gone to the
users. These technologies have been passed on to KVKs for field demonstrations.
Post harvest losses in livestock sector particularly for milk has been assessed at
3.05% at rural farms, 1.87% at rural (commercial) dairies and at 4.31% at urban dairies.
Losses in egg sector has been assessed at 8,87% in some pockets of Uttar Pradesh
and that of poultry meat at 3.83%. However, as per the recommendation of the
Committee, nation wide data collection initiative shall be taken involving Department of
Animal Husbandry Dairying & Fisheries and State Agricultural Universities / State
Veterinary Universities during XIth Plan. Similarly, initiative shall also be taken on
demonstrating the evolved post harvest processing technologies of milk for the
benefit of the farming community involving the KVKs, wherever feasible technically.
The issues on harvest and post harvest losses in the fisheries sector are being
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

addressed through the Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT). The CIFT has already
carried out a study to assess the harvest and post harvest losses in marine and inland
fisheries in collaboration with the Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute (IASRI)
under a mission mode project with funding through the National Agricultural Technology
Project (NATP).  To estimate such losses in Marine Sector, the study was undertaken at
the Ernakulam District of Kerala covering thereby the traditional, motorized and
mechanized sectors for assessing losses during harvest and for post harvest losses, the
processing centres, the wholesale and retail markets, transportation centres and
consumers were covered. To assess the losses in Inland Sector, the study was carried
out in selected districts of Andhra Pradesh & Orissa covering thereby the aquaculture
ponds, the landing centres, the processing units, the markets, transportation
centres and the consumers.  Further studies to estimate the harvest and post harvest
losses at National level are in progress.
The CIFT has developed a number of technologies for minimizing the harvest
and post harvest losses through designing resources specific fishing techniques and
development of value added products from by-catches, discards and low-value fish and
shellfish species.  Necessary technology demonstration and training programmes have
been conducted leading to several entrepreneurs taking to these technologies at
industrial level as well as at cottage level through formation of women SHGs in the area.
As far as the issue related to familiarize the farming community to agro-
processing and value addition is concerned, during the last year, a number of
technologies suitable for small scale income generation, value addition and storage were
taken up for assessment and refinement on location specific basis.  During the same
period, 61480 farmers were trained on different aspects of production, processing and
value addition.  In addition, as indicated earlier, demonstration units on Minimal Agro-
Processing Facilities have been proposed during XI Plan. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
2.12 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.37 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 14)
Horticulture Department of ICAR should initiate a Programme on Micro-
Nutrients/Vitamins Demonstrations
2.13 The Committee noted that in developing nation like India there was large amount of
micro-nutrient deficiencies in human beings, known in technical parlance as µhidden hunger¶.  In
the opinion of the Committee, one of the best methods of removing µhidden hunger ¶ is through
the horticulture approach as consumption of horticulture produces has the triple advantage of
getting micro-nutrients, vitamins as well as calories.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that there should be a well qualified
nutritional expert in the horticulture Division of ICAR who could attend to these issues.  The
Committee also recommended that Horticulture Department of ICAR should take up a
programme on micro-nutrients/vitamins demonstration, particularly, in malnutrition
hotspots/areas to have horticulture remedy for a nutritional malady.
2.14 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The ICAR is well aware about the growing micro and secondary nutrients
deficiencies in soils vis-à-vis malnutrition in human and animals health through food
chain. The Department has developed soil test based balanced and integrated nutrient
management packages for major cropping systems in different agro-ecological regions
of the country to overcome such situations. The ICAR also imparts trainings and frontline
demonstrations to the farmers in this regard.
Out of two posts of Principal Scientists in the ICAR Headquarters, New Delhi,
one will be converted as Principal Scientist, (Nutrition) and the same will be advertised
and filled through Agricultural Scientist Recruitment Board (ASRB).
Likewise two more posts would be converted as Scientists (Nutrition) one each
at Indian Institute of Horticultural Research (IIHR) and Central Institute Subtropical
Horticulture (CISH) where the work under this recommendation will be implemented. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
2.15 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.43 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 15)
Need to fill the vast gap between Research and Extension Activities of ICAR
2.16 The Committee noted that there has always been a huge gap between the research of
ICAR and transfer of researched technology to the farmers/ stakeholders resulting in low
productivity and production and consequent low income of the farmers.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that DARE/ICAR must look into the ways to
establish the strong linkage between Research and Extension by integrating Agriculture
Technology Management Agency (ATMA ± under DAC) with Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) so
that there is no gap in time and space in relation to transfer of technology and to give the
desired boost to productivity and improvement in the income of farmers.
2.17 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The main extension system is operated by State Government. The scheme on
Support to State Extension Programmes for Extension Reforms is implemented by DAC
through an autonomous district level institution established by the states in the form of
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA).  There are a number of
mechanisms developed for linkage between KVK and ATMA.  The Programme
Coordinator of KVK is a member of both ATMA Governing Board and also ATMA
Management Committee.  Similarly, the Project Director, ATMA is also member of
Scientific Advisory Committee of KVK, along with the heads of the Line Development
Departments at the district level. ´.
(Recommendation No. 16)
Incorporation of yield /income per hectare columns in all the publications of ICAR and
their Institutes/Universities.
2.18 The Committee noted that usually a farmer is able to tell the total quantity of his produce
but he may not be able to tell at what cost or whether the crop was viable for him or not because
he does not have much knowledge of costing/cropping system.
The Committee felt that this kind of ignorance put the small and marginal farmers into a
series of debts and depths of poverty and jeopardise his very existence.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that there is a need for ICAR to instruct all
their Institutes and Universities that in their publications, when an Agronomist publishes a paper
or when a variety is going to be released or approved, there should invariably be a double
column, namely, yield per hectare and income per hectare to enable all the farmers to be aware
of the economy of their crops.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2.19 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³All the SMDs have been made aware of this recommendation of the Committee
for necessary follow-up action. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
2.20 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.46 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
(Recommendation No. 17)
Need to do Research to check White Flies Disease in Sugarcane
2.21 The Committee noted that the farmers in Uttar Pradesh, especially of Lucknow and
nearby areas who have been growing sugarcane have experienced stagnation in sugarcane
production and productivity for the last so many years and all their efforts to increase the
production leads to generation/outbreak of White Flies disease in sugarcane.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that ICAR should examine the issue and do
the needful research to eliminate White Flies disease in sugarcane in a time bound manner and
the Committee may be informed about the action taken at their earliest.
2.22 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
 ³ Sugarcane farms in Uttar Pradesh are damaged by Pyrilla insect. Suitable
technologies incorporating its release of predator have been recommended by the Indian
Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow of ICAR.  These predators are made
available by Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow and from some of the
progressive sugar mills.  The damage due to these insects can be effectively checked in
sugarcane by constant monitoring and release of predators at appropriate doses as well
as by avoiding insecticides spraying. ´.
 (Recommendation No. 19)
Need for Greater Inter- Ministerial Coordination for uplifting Indian Agriculture.
2.23 The Committee were well aware that the overall welfare, prosperity and growth of
Farmers and Agriculture & allied sectors was dependent on many factors put together such as,
water, power (electricity) for irrigation, financial credit, good quality seeds, good quality fertilizers
and pesticides, efficient tools and machinery, availability of latest technology, roads and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

transportation facilities, storage and marketing facilities, etc.
The Committee were of unanimous view and recommended that since all these factors
were directly related to the jurisdiction of many Ministries/Departments of Government of India,
it would be more than essential for all these Ministries/Departments to have the best of ever
growing inter-ministerial coordination among themselves with a single-minded zeal to achieve
the same objective/goal of agrarian growth and prosperity of Indian farming community.
2.24 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
  ³The Inter-Ministerial Coordination aspect is being ensured by holding Rabi &
Kharif ICAR-DAC interface regularly in which issues pertaining to research and inter-
ministerial coordination are discussed in length and final outcomes of previous issues
are circulated to the States for adoption.
 The research output of the various schemes in the ICAR have been collated and
brought out as technical bulletins for being communicated to user agencies, line
departments and Krishi Vigyan Kendras. Frontline demonstrations of these technologies
are taken up in farmers ¶ fields by the respective state Agricultural Universities and ICAR
Institutes every year.  These results are collated and shared with Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation. The goal of agrarian growth and prosperity of Indian Farming
Community is the major objective of the outlook and practice of research in the various
schemes of the Department.
 The KVKs have been established at the district level.  Each KVK has a provision
of Scientific Advisory Committee to facilitate inter-departmental coordination involving
the representations of line departments, financial institution, and media, besides the
representatives of research and extension agencies.
In order to have better inter-ministerial co-ordination, ICAR has already taken
initiative to have collaborative approach with Rural Development Ministry to take the
identified technologies to the farming community. Similarly, intra ministerial co-ordination
has also been initiated for livestock sector with DAHD&F separately for the first time. Co-
ordination with other ministries, as suggested by the Committee shall be further
strengthened.´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
2.25 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.52 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
(Recommendation No. 20)
In-action of DARE/ICAR to produce self-help, smaller version of Synthetic/Adulterated
Milk Detection Kit for use of the Common Man
2.26  The Committee in their Recommendation No. 11 of Second Report & Sixth Action Taken
Report (2004-05) on DFG (2004-05) of MoA (DARE) had noted with anguish that no action
worthwhile seems to have been taken on their specific recommendation to promote and
popularise the research in detecting synthetic/adulterated milk and to produce a self-help/low
cost diagnostic kit affordable by the common man/consumers of milk.
While examining the DFG(2008-09) of the Department, the Committee enquired that the
latest status of the issue regarding development of the self-help/low cost diagnostic kit for the
use of the common man and were apprised that NDRI- Karnal has developed simple Platform
test for detection of synthetic milk since 15-06-2005. This is a colour based test and detects
presence of detergent, which is used as one of the ingredient in preparation of synthetic milk.
The test results are available in 5-10 minutes. The adulteration of milk with 2-3% µsynthetic milk¶
can be detected. This single test is sufficient to detect presence of synthetic milk. The test uses
cheap chemicals and cost of chemical per test will be around Rs.2/-. Since, a patent for the
process has been applied, names of the solvent and the dye are not mentioned. Transfer of
Technology of this test is assigned to National Research and Development Corporation (a Govt.
of India Enterprise), New Delhi and is under consideration to be purchased by Mother Dairy.
In response to a point as to what DARE/ICAR has done till date to promote and
popularize their research in detecting synthetic/adulterated milk, the Committee were informed
that NDRI- Karnal has developed kit for detection of 12 different adulterants and is on sale. Kit is
available for Rs.5000/- for any six adulterants. Each reagent for individual adulterants is
sufficient for 50 to 100 milk samples. Popularization of kit is done through exhibits in
conferences and Kisan Mela.
The Committee strongly deplored and took a serious view of the tendency of the
Department in totally sidelining and deliberately ignoring the crux of the recommendation of the
Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture,  As a matter of fact the Department has been giving
incomplete, vague and false assurances year after year, especially w.r.t. producing self-help
smaller and economy version of the diagnostic kit presently costing Rs.8600/- for identifying 12
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

common adulterants in milk and make all out efforts to popularise their low priced smaller
version of the Diagnostic Kits which can be gainfully used by the common man.
The Committee were dissatisfied with the in-action of the Department in this regard as it
is evident from their statements of action so far that neither the Department had produced a
self-help, smaller and economy version of the already produced kit for gainful use of a common
man nor they had made all out efforts to popularise the same till date.  The Kit they had been
popularising through exhibits in conferences and Kisan Mela was the older/original version of
the Kit and not the smaller and economic version of the original Kit recommended by the
Committee.  Moreover, the common man does not go to conferences and Kisan Mela.  Thus,
the Department has failed to fulfil their own hollow promise that they were making efforts to
develop low-cost technology kit affordable for the common man.
Similarly, the action of transfer of technology of simple platform test for detection
adulterated milk with 2-3% of synthetic milk has been assigned to NRDC and said to be under
consideration for purchase by µMother Dairy¶, Delhi, is going to benefit Mother Dairy and other
such bulk producers/sellers of milk only and not the common man as he will not be able to make
use of the Platform Test himself in order to know whether the milk he and his beloved family
members are consuming is good or bad to drink.
The Committee were of the view that the Department is deliberately avoiding to produce
the smaller and economy version of the diagnostic kit for the use of the common man for the
reason that they are not ready to face the truth about the evil of synthetic/adulterated milk that
has grown to enormous proportion. In case the actual data regarding availability of pure milk
and synthetic/adulterated milk are researched and made available to public, then, the number
one position in milk production, India is enjoying and DARE/ICAR claims to bag the credit for the
same, will prove to be nothing but a tragic unhealthy illusion/eye-wash.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the DARE/ICAR should
immediately take action in this regard and come out with a self-help, smaller and economic
versions of the diagnostic kits for all the 12 common milk adulterants with a test carrying
capacity ranging from 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10 tests per reagent/solvent for the use of the common
man and the same kits should be made available for sale at all the Mother Dairy Milk/Vegetable
Booths as well as Delhi Milk Scheme Booths/Chemist shops and also in other States/UTs.
Unless, this is done, the problem of synthetic/adulterated milk will continue to grow further and
ruin the health of every milk and milk products consumer in India and the dream of healthy India
will never become a reality.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2.27 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³As per the recommendation of the Committee, immediate steps would be taken,
depending on the feasibility and safety issues, to come out with self-help, smaller and
economic version of diagnostic kits to diagnose milk adulterants. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
2.28 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.55 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
(Recommendation No. 10)
Need for conversion of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) into Krishi and Udyog Vigyan
Kendras (KUVKs)
3.1 The Committee noted that there is growing mismatch between agrarian production and
post harvest technologies.  Although ICAR has some post harvest technology institutes, the
weakness that is felt in villages is the post harvest operation, that is, to provide complete range
of threshing, processing and value addition to primary products implements and techniques at
the village level.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that ICAR should have a post harvest
technology wing in every Krishi Vigyan Kendra and KVKs should become a model Krishi Udyog
Vigyan Kendras in the country and National Agriculture Innovative Project should be
implemented through KVKs and Agriculture Technology Management Agencies at district levels.
3.2 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³Technologies are available for processing of farm produce. Recently to promote
post harvest technologies Department of Agriculture & Cooperation has started a
scheme in this regard. Few post harvest equipment have been identified for conducting
Front Line demonstrations by the cooperating centres of All India coordinated Research
Project(AICRP) on Post Harvest Technology(PHT) at farmers ¶ field for adoption by the
farmers.
The KVK aims at assessment, refinement and demonstration of technology /
products. Keeping in view the very basic objective of establishment of KVKs in the
country, the recommendation of the Committee to redesignate the Krishi Vigyan Kendra
as Krishi Udyog Vigyan Kendra is not feasible with the present available resources
including manpower. As indicated in the reply to Recommendation No. 8 above,
proposal has been included in the EFC of XI Plan for establishment of demonstration
units on Minimal Agro-Processing Facilities in the selected KVKs with
technological backstopping from relevant AICRP Centers on Post Harvest technology.
 As far as involvement of KVKs in implementing National Agricultural Innovation
Project is concerned, a number of projects under Research on Sustainable Rural
Livelihood Security are being implemented involving KVKs. ´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
(Recommendation No. 1)
Need for increasing DARE¶s allocation equivalent to 1 to 2 percent of AGDP.
4.1 The Committee had noted that the Department of Agricultural Research and Education
had been allocated Rs.12,023 crore as the total XI Plan outlay against the proposed XI Plan
outlay of Rs.12,176.40 crore.  The proposed outlay for the XI Plan is even Rs.3,823.60 crore
less than the outlay proposed by them for the X Plan which was Rs.16,000 crore. The Planning
Commissionµs constituted XI Plan Working Group on Agricultural Research and Education had
proposed an outlay of Rs.31,672 crore for DARE/ICAR.
The Committee had always been requesting year after year for an increase in the
allocation equivalent to 1 to 2 per cent of agricultural GDP for the conduct of research in this
most important sector but the request seems to have fallen on deaf ears.  The Committee were
pained to observe that the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance have not so far
given any proper attention to the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Agriculture in this regard.
The Committee, therefore, strongly and in unequivocal terms recommended that the
Planning Commission must provide higher allocation equivalent to 1 to 2 percent of AGDP as
recommended by them in their earlier Reports.  However, this must be accompanied by
accountability in terms of practical results of value to overcome the prevailing technology
fatigue.  Additional Funds may be earmarked for the suggestions made by the Committee in this
Report.
4.2 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The Department had restricted its XI Plan proposal to Rs.12176.40 crore in the
background of the various guidelines circulated by Planning Commission which were to
be observed while formulating XI Plan proposals of DARE/ICAR.  The Department was
asked to formulate three scenarios in respect of the proposals of XI Plan outlays i.e.
 reflecting an increase of 5% per annum with respect to the terminal year of X
Plan; and similarly other two scenario with an increase of 10% per annum and 15% per
annum, respectively.  Accordingly the Department did not project higher financial
requirement.  The XI Plan working
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

group constituted by Planning Commission itself had recommended Rs.31,672 crore as XIth
Plan outlay for DARE/ICAR but the Planning Commission provided only Rs.12,023 crore
only.
The recommendation of the Committee that the Department should be provided
higher allocation equivalent to 1 to 2 percent of AGDP was forwarded to Planning
Commission, which responded that ³For the 11th Five Year Plan an amount of Rs.12,023
crore has been allocated to the ICAR.  The allocation was entirely made on the
recommendation of DARE/ICAR.  In this regard, as mentioned earlier, DARE/ICAR was
asked by the Planning Commission to make projections within the parameters set by
them.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
4.3  For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.7 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
(Recommendation No. 2)
Insufficient allocation to DARE in 2008-09
4.4 The Committee had noted that the Department was given Rs.1,760 crore during
2008±09 against the proposal of Rs.2646.79 crore. The outlay of this Department during
2007-08 was Rs.1,620 crore against the proposal of Rs.1,945.50 crore. The percentage of
increase in Plan allocation made for 2008-09 over the year 2007-08 was 8.64 per cent.
The Committee also noted note that the increase in the cost of inputs-machinery, raw-
material, maintenance and other running research expenses - had been generally more than the
annual inflation. In real sense, the Budgetary Allocation may not allow the Department to
address all research issues adequately as had been confirmed by the Department.
In Committee ¶s opinion, the required real break-through for increasing the agricultural
production and productivity to achieve the set targets of agro-socio-economic development
during the XI Plan could only be achieved by actual agrarian research work and by the quickest
possible dissemination of relevant information to the people engaged in agriculture and allied
activities.  Therefore, the proposed targets of agro-socio-economic development should be
directly proportionate to the plan outlay for research and educational activities of DARE/ICAR.
But, unfortunately, the right proportion between these two factors was not visible in the funds
allocated to DARE/ICAR and the Committee strongly felt that positively upward investment in
agrarian R&D of ICAR was most essential requirement, if the proposed growth target was to be
achieved in time.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the DARE/ICAR should be
provided with Rs.2646.79 crore by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for the
year 2008-09 as per their original proposal.
4.5 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The Department had forwarded this recommendation to Planning Commission /
Ministry of Finance.  The Planning Commission responded that ³Regarding insufficient
allocation in 2008 ± 09, it is pertinent to mention that the resources were
allocated keeping in view of the other sectors ¶ requirements.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
4.6  For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.10 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
(Recommendation No. 3)
Urgent need to provide the status of Non-lapsable Funds to Budgetary Allocations of
DARE/ICAR
4.7 The Committee noted that the Central Non-lapsable Fund Pool was created by the
Government for the welfare of the North-Eastern States.  All the Ministries/Departments were
directed to earmark 10% of their respective allocation under the Major Head 2552 ± lump sum
provision for projects/schemes in NE & Sikkim, every year and the unspent amount under this
Major Head does not lapse at the end of the financial year and remains available for its usage
for the same cause.
The Committee were of the considered view that this special treatment/privilege given to
North-Eastern States & Sikkim should be extended to all the schemes/projects of DARE/ICAR
being implemented in other States/UTs as the similar agro-socio-economic and climatic
conditions and topography of agricultural land existing in North-Eastern States, also existed in
most of the other States/UTs.
The Committee strongly recommended that since 70% of our country ¶s population is
directly engaged in agricultural & allied activities and produce the food for themselves and for
other 30% population, therefore, the Government and their appraisal agencies should
implement the non-lapsable fund strategy for DARE/ICAR from this year onward, for anything
can wait but agriculture cannot wait for want of adequate funds and extending this provision to
DARE/ICAR is going to be a real breakthrough in finding a remedy for a perennial vicious
imbalance of demand and supply of funds
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

in which every year more funds required/demanded by the Department but lesser funds are
allocated by the Planning  Commission/Ministry of Finance.
4.8 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The Department had forwarded this recommendation to Planning Commission/
Ministry of Finance.  The Planning Commission responded that ³On the status of non-
lapsable funds to budgetary allocation to DARE / ICAR on the ground that 70% of
our country ¶s population is directly engaged in agriculture and allied activities and
produce the food for themselves and also rest of the 30% population.  In this context, it
is to be mentioned that irrigation, road connectivity and transport, energy, land reforms
and other basic infrastructure have a lion share in enhancing foodgrain production.
Whereas, the ICAR ¶s role is limited to technology innovations. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
4.9 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.13 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
(Recommendation No. 4)
Delays in releasing of RE/BE by the Department to their respective Institutes/NRCs/PDs.
4.10 The Committee noted that RE Plan & Non-Plan (2007-08) was reported to have been
received from MoF on 4.1.2008.  ESM (SMD) was communicated RE (Plan) on 8.2.2008 by the
Department, i.e., after 34 days of receiving the same from MoF.  Similarly, Education and
Extension (SMDs) had been communicated RE(Plan) after 18 and 21 days, respectively, from
the date of receiving from MoF, viz., 4.1.2008, while 4 SMDs out of 9, have been communicated
only after 6 days of receiving from MoF.
The Committee noted that during Evidence of the Representatives of MoA(DARE), MoF
and Planning Commission before this Committee, held on 22.11.2001, the then,
Secretary(DARE) had categorically pointed out about the procedural delays in receiving RE
from MoF which did not allow the Department to utilize the scarce financial resources optimally
and huge unspent amounts/balances remain.  Similar views/suggestions were extended by the
Department in a written reply to the specific points raised by the Committee about the entire
budgetary procedure and practices being followed by the Department and if any meaningful
change/remedies required to be in place.  But ironically, now the Department in reply to similar
points about the procedural budgetary delays stated that µthere has been no procedural delay
and the present procedure is working well. ¶
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Committee were of the view that the above volte-face regarding budgetary
procedural delays and meaningful changes required, was an actual turnaround engineered by
the Department in a vain attempt to deviate the Committees ¶ attention from the actual problem
of late releasing of funds from MoF or the Department to the actual end-users, i.e., concerned
institutes/NRCs/PDs of ICAR.
The Committee, therefore, deplored the tendency of the Department to give hollow
assurances every year that they have been making best efforts to make the RE/BE funds
available to the concerned institutes within a week, rather they are taking about 34 days time to
make the RE available to the respective institutes.
The Committee strongly recommended that the Department should take less than a
week¶s time to release the funds to all the concerned institutes/NRCs/PDs from the date of
receipt of funds from MoF for optimal utilisation of the scarce funds by the concerned institutes.
4.11 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The concerns of the Committee have been brought to the notice of all the
Subject Matter Divisions of DARE / ICAR.  It may further be highlighted that after
receiving BE / RE communications from Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance
respectively, the Department has to undertake a number of processes before finalizing
the institutes / NRCs / PDs wise allocations.  This involves first distributing the total
outlay sector-wise and subsequently after getting it approved from Competent Authority,
it is informed to concerned Subject Matter Divisions.  Thereafter, depending upon the
total budget at their respective disposal, the each Subject Matter Division distribute it for
each of the concerned institute / NRC / PD, etc. after prioritising and assessing the
realistic requirement of each constituent unit.  This distribution also needs approval of
Competent Authority and even after this, the SMDs further  distribute the institute/NRC/
PD wise fund into various heads of expenditure ( pay & allowances, TA, contingencies,
HRD, equipment, works, library, etc.).  This final list of institute-wise/head-wise
allocations is subsequently forwarded to the Finance Division for releasing the funds
(BE / RE).´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
4.12  For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.16 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(Recommendation No. 5)
Denial of necessary wherewithal for setting up state-of-the-art facilities to meet the
emerging new challenges
4.13 The Committee had been informed that the DARE/ICAR had a number of
institutions/laboratories, which were more than thirty years old.  It was felt necessary that a one
time catch-up grant may be sought from the Planning Commission so that the requirement of
renovation of old infrastructure and up-gradation/replacement of obsolete equipment could be
met.
The Department projected a requirement of Rs.1000 crore as One Time Catch up Grant
for the entire Tenth Plan Period. The Planning Commission did not indicate any provision for the
same while communicating the Tenth Plan outlay of the Department, which was pegged at Rs.
5368 crore. Thereafter, the Department consistently proposed a requirement of Rs.200 crore as
Catch up Grant in each year i.e. 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05. The response of the Planning
Commission to these proposals was µthe catch up grant which was meant for upgrading the
research facility of ICAR ¶s institutions had already been taken care of while approving the
proposals during Tenth Five Year Plan ¶. Due to the clear-cut stand taken by Planning
Commission on this issue, the Department did not pursue the matter further.
The Planning Commission in their guidelines for formulation of XI Five Year Plan had
indicated that in the Plan budget critical repair and maintenance upto 15% of the plan budgetary
support could be included.
The Committee noted that the Department ¶s fund requirements, based on activities and
programmes, were said to be projected in totality, thus need for catch up grant were also
addressed in their projection, however, there was a pronounced gap of Rs.886.79 crore
between the projected/proposed amount by DARE/ICAR and the amount allocated to them by
the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.  The Department had proposed/projected an
amount of Rs.2646.79 crore and they got Rs.1760.00 crore as BE 2008-09.
The Committee were of the considered view that denial of long-felt and essentially
needed One-Time Catch up grant to DARE had hamstrung our agricultural research institutes
and their R&D activities as the output could have been much better in case their projected
requirement of Rs.1000 crore during Xth Plan was provided to them for replacement of old
machinery and equipment and for setting up state-of-the-art facilities to meet the emerging new
challenges.
The Committee had strongly deplored the tendency of the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance for imposing drastic cuts as high as upto 35 to 40 per cent on the amount
projected/demanded by the Department as per their pressing needs as in the instant case, the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

denial of Rs.886.79 crore during 2008-09 would not allow the Department to address the
needs to be fulfilled from one time catch-up grant out of Rs.1760.00 crore allocated to them as
BE 2008-09.
The Committee desired a clarification from the Planning Commission as to how they can
expect the Department to follow the Guidelines of the Planning Commission that in the Plan
Budget critical repair and maintenance upto 15% of the Plan budgetary support could be
included by the Government and on the other hand, they themselves had imposed a cut of
about 35% or so on the projected/proposed amount of the Department year after year.
The Committee strongly recommended that the Planning Commission and the Ministry
of Finance should provide much needed one time catch up grant as per the latest requirement
during the XIth Plan or at least provide Rs.886.79 crore more to the Department during 2008-09
so that the projected need for catch up grant which was addressed in their projected amount of
Rs.2646.79 crore, was granted to them.   Immediately, in the Budget of 2008-09 itself, an
additional sum of Rs.100.00 crore may be provided to IARI, New Delhi, particularly for improving
farm infrastructure with reference to irrigation.
4.14 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The Department had forwarded this recommendation to Planning Commission /
Ministry of Finance.  The Planning Commission responded that ³ For providing one time
catch up grant i.e. Rs. 886.79 crore for renovation of infrastructure; the Planning
Commission is in support of creation / renovation of ICAR institutes as per laid down
procedure´
The guidelines of Planning Commission circulated in October 2006 indicated that
in the Plan budget, critical repair and maintenance upto 15% of the plan budgetary
support can be included. The Department has been able to address the modernization of
infrastructure and replacement of obsolete equipment / research facilities to the extent
possible through its Annual Plan allocation. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
4.15 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.19 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
(
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 6)
The Planning Commission disagreed to provide Rs.1130 crore to DARE/ICAR under the
National Food Security Mission (NFSM)
4.16 The Committee had noted that the National Food Security Mission a centrally sponsored
scheme has been launched from 2007-08 with an objective to enhance the production of rice,
wheat and pulses by 10, 8 and 2 million tones respectively during the 11 th Plan period.
ICAR is involved in providing technical backstopping in this project in terms of providing
details about the newly released varieties/hybrids along with the production and protection
technologies in implementation of this scheme.  Further, ICAR is also involved in the production
of breeder seed as per requirement. The Council has also been involved in various monitoring
implementation Committees of the project.
Although DARE/ICAR has allotted sufficient funds to address various researchable
issues related to rice, wheat and pulses during XI Plan, as a compliment to further augment the
research infrastructure and programme, they have submitted a scheme under the National Food
Security Mission entitled Mini Mission I ± Wheat, Rice and Pulses for Rs.1130 crore to the
Planning Commission. However, no additional allocation under this component was agreed to.
The Planning Commission ¶s reasoning for not agreeing to the Department ¶s demand
was that more than Rs. 385 crores had already been provided for components related to ICAR
and  ICAR/DARE¶s regular allocation which itself should be able to take care of the requirement
of National Food Security Mission (NFSM).
The Committee again strongly deplored the tendency of the Planning Commission to
give hollow promises year after year that the proposals/initiatives of the Department in the form
of SFC/EFC/CCEA would be considered favourable to provide need based allocation.  As in the
instant case, the DARE/ICAR had submitted a scheme under the NFSM entitled Mini Mission I ±
Wheat, Rice and Pulses for Rs.1130 crore to the Planning Commission and in turn, rather than
favourably considering the scheme, the Planning Commission had extended the reason for not
agreeing to it.
The Committee were unable to comprehend as to why the Planning Commission was
determined to deter the desired and required better pace of agrarian R&D for which the ICAR
has been entrusted with the responsibility.  Moreover, expectations of the millions  of people
from DARE/ICAR to usher India into a Second Green Revolution by providing total food, feed
and fodder security for the present and future times will continue to lurk in the dark for want of
favourable consideration by the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance of the
schemes/initiatives submitted by DARE/ICAR.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that ICAR should be provided the
additional amount of Rs.1130 crore for
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

their scheme entitled Mini Mission I ± Wheat, Rice and Pulses under NFSM in the overall
interest of the nation ¶s food security.
4.17 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The Department had forwarded this recommendation to Planning Commission /
Ministry of Finance.  The Planning Commission in its reply stressed that the NFSM was
being implemented in the potential area by utilizing existing technology. However, the
department of Agriculture & Cooperation, (DAC) which is implementing this scheme,
asked for the incorporation of researchable issues in the revised EFC document of
NFSM. In pursuance thereof, the department has submitted a projection of Rs 1130
crore to DAC.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
4.18 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.22 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
(Recommendation No. 13)
Need for operationalization of the concept of every Agriculture Scholar becoming an
Entrepreneur
4.19 The Committee noted that the main aim of Agricultural Universities was to impart
education and ensure that every scholar and entrepreneur had the ability to go into
entrepreneurship.  Self-employment opportunities for an agricultural graduate are minimal as
these days many of them have to appear for the IAS or IPS examination or study MBA
afterwards to get job in Banks/Administration.  The Agriculture and Animal Husbandry subjects
should be restarted teaching at schools and colleges.  In Punjab and Haryana, these subjects
used to be taught till late 70s.
The Committee opined that young people would join the agriculture and allied sector
only if it becomes economically rewarding and diversified.  Home Science colleges should be
involved in much more intensive way in this area apart from veterinary and fishery science.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that ICAR should appoint a technical
group to look into the ways and methods of operationalisation of the concept of every agriculture
scholar becoming an entrepreneur.  This technical group may consider revamping the syllabus
of agriculture, restructuring the agri. clinics and agri. business centres meant for providing self-
employment opportunities for agricultural graduates, integrating MBA ingredients in the
Agricultural University itself so that business and agriculture technology can go together.  Every
State Agricultural University should set up a Placement Cell for self-employment (Agri-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Clinic/Agri-Business) of their agricultural graduates/scholars for familiarising them with
opportunities for gainful remunerations.
4.20 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³In the ICAR curriculum review has been made and it is in utilitarian mode.
National Academy of Agricultural Research Management (NAARM) will also be
undertaking efforts to develop special course in agri-business.
The Placement cells are in operation in most of SAU ¶s and ICAR is extending
financial aid to these cells to meet out recurring contingent expenditure. ´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
4.21 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.40 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
(Recommendation No. 18)
Need to do research on developing smaller size of Potato Seeds
4.22 The Committee noted that farmers of other States who bring potatoes from Himachal
Pradesh used the potatoes for sowing by cutting it into half and planting germinating portion.
This traditional way of sowing half of the potato, increase the  quantum and weight of the
seeds required.  The Committee felt that if the needful research could be undertaken by ICAR to
reduce the size of the potato seeds and any success in this project would certainly reduce the
seed cost owing to increase in the number of smaller potato seeds per quintal.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that ICAR should undertake this project on
developing smaller size of potato seeds and they should be informed of the action taken at the
earliest. In addition, research and development of True Potato Seed (TPS) technology should
be intensified.
4.23 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³About 40-60% cost of potato cultivation is incurred on potato seed.   This is
due to high seed rate (2.5 to 3.5 t/ha) in potato.   Cutting of seed tubers is not advised
because this may spread tuber borne diseased to healthy tubers.  The
recommended seed size in  potato is 40g.   However, at a recommended spacing (row
to row 60 cm and tuber to tuber 20 cm, the proportion of seed size tubers is less.
Seed size can be manipulated by reducing planting distance and also giving shorter
bulking time by cutting haulms between 70 to 90  DAP depending upon maturity of the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

variety.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
4.24 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.49 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
(Recommendation No. 7)
Urgent need to set up a high-level committee of scientists and practising farmers
5.1 The Committee were of the opinion that technology had been and would be the prime
mover of change not only in our country, but everywhere in the world.
The Committee noted that the nation was passing through technology fatigue, stagnation
and decline in productivity/yield and a number of related issues were bracketing India into
agrarian crisis which the nation can ill-afford to neglect merely for want of adequate timely
action from DARE/ICAR.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Prime Minister as head of Agriculture
Coordination Committee and Union Minister of Agriculture being President of ICAR should set
up a High-level Committee of Scientists and practising farmers from different parts of the
country to suggest methods of overcoming their problems, technology fatigue, to bridge the gap
between potential and actual yield and agrarian crisis the country is facing.  The Committee
further recommended that Special Cadre of Agriculture Scientists for Agricultural Research in
North Eastern States including Sikkim may be created so that the Research Institute of ICAR in
that area do not suffer from the malady of shortage of scientists.
5.2 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³ICAR has an All India cadre of scientists called Agriculture Research Service
(ARS).  Posts at entry level are filled on the basis of All India competitive examination
conducted by the Agricultural Scientists Recruitment Board (ASRB).  Vacancies in
higher grades of scientists i.e. Senior Scientist and Principal Scientist at different
institutes are advertised by the ASRB indicating the name of the institute in the
advertisement and selection is made on the basis of interview.  ICAR has following
institutions in the NE Region:
1) ICAR Research Complex for NEH Region, Barapani with a centre in each state
of NEH Region
2) National Research Centre (NRC) on Mithun
3) NRC on Pig
4) NRC on Orchid
5) NRC on Yak
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Candidates selected on the basis of Agricultural Research Services examination
are posted to the institutes including those situated in NE region.  According to in-built
provision in the policy, the scientists who have spent a specified period in this region are
eligible for transfer to institutes outside the NE region.
In addition to regular batches of ARS, ICAR has conducted a special recruitment
drive to fill up vacant posts in NE Region as a result of which 53 scientists have been
posted.
 ICAR scientists posted in NE Region are also eligible for financial incentives for
working in this region in accordance with Govt. of India policy on the subject.  These
incentives coupled with the provision under which they can seek transfer to outside the
region after a specified period, gives an impetus to the newly recruited scientists to work
in this region.
 Interaction for new ideas, capitalizing on innovations from a wider canvas and
development of first rate human resource is already in progress.  The research
capabilities of the institutes in the NE region have progressed considerably and the
ICAR has consistently provided all possible technologies and resources to fulfil the
needs of these institutes.  The scientists at the beginning of their career are attracted to
work at such institutions in the interest of their own professional career.
 As regards the perception that incidence of scientific posts lying vacant in NE
region is higher than in rest of the country, the fact is that the proportion of scientific
posts lying vacant in NE region is nearly same as in rest of the country.
As regards the suggestion to create a special cadre of Agricultural scientists for
NE states including Sikkim, it is stated that an isolated cadre for NE region may not be
viable due to following reasons :
(i) A person can be motivated to serve in difficult areas for some time provided he
knows that after a specified period he would be eligible for a posting outside the
region.  Among those who qualify the ARS examination there may be few takers
for an isolated cadre for NE region;
(ii) Mobility of scientists is good for scientists as well as the organisation.  An
isolated cadre will be deprived of the benefit of mobility on all India basis; and
(iii) Such a cadre would distort the ARS system.
In view of above, it is felt that no useful purpose is likely to be served by creating
a separate cadre for NE region rather such a move may prove to the counter productive.
  The relevant recommendation is forwarded to Department of Agriculture and Co-
operation (DAC) for further
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

necessary action as that department is co-ordinating the work of Agriculture Coordination
Committee.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
5.3 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.25 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
(Recommendation No. 11)
National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources (NBAGR) to maintain and preserve fastly
disappearing pure material and pedigrees/local breeds.
5.4 The Committee noted that ICAR has been pioneer in genetic resources, conservation
and management.  But in the area of animal genetic resources, a lot of very good materials
were being lost.  Unlike National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources (NBPGR), the National
Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources (NBAGR) did not maintain animals; they only had a
database on animals as the maintenance of the pure materials and the pedigrees, etc. were left
to individual farmers or sometimes to the State Governments.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that NBAGR should be provided about 100
hectares of land and facilities in every State to allow them to maintain and preserve the fastly
disappearing pure materials such as Rathi breed in Suratgarh (Rajasthan), Badavari buffalo
breed, Ongole and Nellore breed and maintain local breeds, etc. which are important for the
future and are adapted to local conditions.  NBAGR may accordingly enlarge their mandate to
incorporate maintenance and preservation of the pure material/local breeds.
5.5 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³The NBAGR/ ICAR has taken the needed initiative to preserve threatened/
endangered and vastly disappearing animal breeds not only through NABGR but also
through its species specific institutes in the form of Network / AICRPs programmes. This
issue of conservation of animal genetic resources falls under the area domain of
DAH&F operation. Based on the recommendation of the Parliament Standing Committee
on Agriculture, ICAR has written to Secretary, DAH&F, Government of India to explore
the possibility of accessing 100 hectare of land under Animal Husbandry Departments of
various states of the country. Once a provision is made by the different states to allocate
the land, NBAGR would be providing needed technical backstopping the related advice
to ensure the conservation of the Animal Genetic Resource. ´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
5.6 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.34 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
(Recommendation No. 21)
Some other issues related to ICAR
5.7 The Committee felt (a) that there was need to organize frequent Krishi Vigyan Melas at
District level; (b) that there was need to find remedies for diseases of Honeybees in HP &
Uttrakhand; (c) that there was need to train farmers of disaster-prone areas; (d) that there was a
dire need to restart teaching agriculture and animal husbandry as subjects in schools and
colleges from class VIII onwards to attract the youth towards these sectors of economy; (e) that
there was need to take research to small farmers through extension programmes, such as
Seminars/Workshop/Orientation programmes to be conducted by agricultural
universities/colleges at regular intervals;(f) that there was need to have exclusive KVKs on
Fisheries for imparting the latest technical training skills on the basis of learning by doing, to the
local fishermen from capture to consumption and processing; (g) that water scarcity in the
country was going to be the biggest challenge in near future and there is need to develop biotic
and abiotic (heat-resistant) seeds requiring less water to germinate in wake of Global Climate
Change; (h) with regard to bio-security, either Bhopal or some other institute should become the
National Centre for Agricultural Bio-security and it should be strengthened.  We should have a
network of institutes, a single institution will not be enough.  We should have them in all the
major agro-climatic regions in the hub and spoke model; (i) the other facility badly required was
an off-shore quarantine Islands such as in Lakshadweep Islands or Andaman & Nicobar Islands
where no human being reside, where we can have absolutely safe testing facility; (j) we should
take care the financial and technical needs of mother institutions such as IARI and Agricultural
Universities.  The Department should immediately provide Rs.100.00 crore to IARI, New Delhi
during 2008-09 for improving farm infrastructure with reference to irrigation. As research and
education are expensive, the Government should develop a corpus of Rs.1000 crore or more
from which a need based investment can be done; (k) the State Agricultural Universities should
not be fragmented into agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries and horticulture, etc. rather they
should work for the farming system as a whole.  ICAR should also coordinate with other
Departments of the Government of India to collect and disseminate knowledge of its research in
different agricultural fields to them for holistic development of agriculture and allied sectors, so
as to focus on more jobs, income security
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and work security and people ¶s livelihood in rural agri-system; (l) as water table is going down
and irrigation facilities are dwindling, ICAR should focus their research on developing seeds
which are water-resistant, weed resistant and of high yield variety; (m) the climate change
should be taken up as a challenge to develop new varieties of wheat, rice, pulses, oilseeds and
horticulture crops. The Agricultural universities should be given more financial help to do
research in this direction; (n) KVK should work as mini research cum extension institute which
may directly be connected with the farmers of the area; (o) KVKs and Agricultural Technology
Management Agency should coordinate to disseminate knowledge about latest agricultural
technology and research to the farmers of that area; and (p) that there is need to establish a
Central/Regional Research Institute of Temperate Horticulture, in addition to the already existing
Institute at Srinagar (J&K), to cater to the problems of the farmers cultivating horticultural crops
at the height of 3000 feet to 5000 feet in Uttrakhand/HP and other hilly areas as 12% of the total
crop area is lying in Himalayan Region and not more than 2% of the same has been tapped so
far.
5.8 The Government, in their Action Taken reply have stated as follows:-
³As this Recommendation is multi-disciplinary and also involves Planning
Commission etc., the response/ implementation status for each is as follows:
Planning Commission: The Department had forwarded this recommendation to
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.  The Planning Commission responded
that ³The other issues which are related to Administrative and Coordination. The
Planning
Commission has always supported coordination and managerial for effective
delivery of technology for its realization in the field. ´
Crop Science:
(a) All the ICAR Institutes are organizing Krishi Vigyan Melas every year during
the crop season at their campuses and on farms.  The concerned line
departments of the State, progressive farmers and farmers from the respective
States are brought together for exchange of information on new technologies
including recently released crop varieties and also for mitigation of their various
problems
(b) The technologies developed to prevent various diseases including mites in
honeybee colonies have been developed. These technologies for
commercial
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(c) apiculture are transferred to the bee keepers of Himachal Pradesh and
Uttarakhand through the respective States Agricultural Universities.  The bee
keepers are also invited for training to these campuses every month for
familiarizing the practical approaches to practice these technologies. Further
fortification of research in this regard is also proposed in this XIth Five Year
Plan period.
(g & l)  Research efforts to develop crop varieties having resistance to various
key biotic stresses and abiotic stresses such as heat resistance, submergence
etc. are intensified in the 11 th Five Year Plan period.
  Horticulture:
(p) CITH, Srinagar has already a station in Mukteswar which will further be
strengthened to cater to the needs of hilly areas.
  Natural Resource Management:
(c, g & m) Keeping in view the growing water scarcity in the country, the Council
has already given emphasis on developing drought/ heat resistant varieties.
Besides, a Network project on Impact of climate change on agriculture
including vulnerability, adaptability and mitigation measures is already in
operation. The council has also formulated contingency crop planning to cater
natural disaster like cold/ drought/ flood etc.
Department is concerned with global climate change for which in the recent
ICAR-DAC interface it has been decided that outcome of the National Network
Project on ³Climate Change Adoption´ may be summarized and provided to ICAR
so that same could be circulated.
The Council is actively considering to establish a National Institute on abiotic
Stress Management in Agriculture during the current plan.
Fisheries:
The Fisheries Research Institutes have initiated programmes on water budgeting
in aquaculture and also on impact of climate change on the fishery resources and
ecosystem stress management. The Institutes have taken up programme to
develop bio-security and bio-safety protocols & food- safety guidelines for
hatcheries & grow out culture systems and post harvest sector.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

  Animal Science:
(j) KVKs attached to Animal Science Institute are arranging such melas
periodically in addition to organizing µhands on ¶ training program. Livestock
shows/ melas are also arranged from time to time with Kisan Gosthi programme
where scientist- farmer interacts. However, steps will be taken, as suggested by
the Committee, to increase the frequency of such melas.
(e) Most of Animal Science Institutes are doing this in the form of Kissan Mela,
Kissan Sanmelan, Scientist-Farmer interface, Doordarshan programmes,
documentary films. However, periodically of such programme shall be increased
as advised by the Hon ¶ble Committee.
(h) High Security laboratory at Bhopal is being strengthened to act as referral
institution to undertake investigations of bio-safety and bio-security. Further, BSL
2,3 and 4 laboratories are being proposed at different locations like IVRI,
Izantnagar, (UP) IVRI, Mukteshwar (Uttrakhand), IVRI Bangalore (Karnataka) PD
ADMAS, Bangalore (Karnataka), PD FMD (Bhubaneshwar),  NDRI, Karnal
(Haryana), NRC Equines & Vety. Type culture, Hisar (Haryana) during the XI
Plan. In addition to this, DAHD&F is also learnt to have proposed such
laboratories at regional level.
(i) DAHD&F, is attending to this issue. The need to identify off shore islands for
quarantine measures shall be taken up with them during the interface meeting
proposed shortly.
Education:
(d) DARE/ ICAR endorses the recommendations of Committee and it will be
discussed at appropriate for a.
(k) ICAR also holds this view. However, this being a state subject, the issue
would perhaps need in depth deliberation at appropriate level.
(j) The Government on Economic Affairs approved Rs. 60.25 Crores for IARI
during Xth Plan, of which Rs. 48.75 Crores were actually utilised. For XIth Plan
Rs. 171.00 Crores have been earmarked for this premier institution, which is an
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

increase of 184 percent.
Extension:
(a) A number of kisan melas and exhibitions are organized by KVKs for creating
awareness on improved agricultural technology among the farmers at district
level. During the last year, 30.18 lakh farmers benefited from such programmes.
(c) During last year 10.94 lakh farmers   benefited from training programmes
including .disaster prone areas.
(e) Similarly KVKs organized a number of sammelan/seminar /worshop, kisan
goshti, group discussion, field day, exposure visit and such other extension
programmes are organized by the KVKs.  During last year 19.45 lakh farmers
were benefited from such programmes.
(f) As far as establishment of exclusive KVKs on fisheries is concerned, it is
submitted that Government has approved for establishment of one KVK in each
of the rural districts in the country with a multi-disciplinary team of
scientific/technical personnel which are identified depending upon the thrust
areas of a district and to work on farming system perspectives. There is no
provision for establishment of specialized KVK. During XI Plan proposal has
been included for strengthening fishery activity in selected KVKs with the
provision of demonstration units on Portable Carp Hatchery.
(n) As far as the recommendation of the committee that   KVK should work as
mini research cum extension institute is concerned, it is submitted that the
activities of the KVK on-farm trials to identify the location specificity of the
technology under various farming systems, front-line demonstrations to
demonstrate the production potential of improved agricultural technologies on the
farmers field, training of farmers to upgrade their knowledge and skill and training
of extension personnel to orient them in  frontier areas of technology
development. A large number of extension programmes are also organized by
the KVKs to create awareness on improved agricultural technology among
farmers. Seed and planting material produced in the KVKs are made available to
the farmers.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(o) As indicated earlier, there are a number of mechanisms of linkage between
KVK and ATMA.  The Programme Coordinator of KVK is a member of  both
ATMA Governing Board and ATMA Management Committee.  Similarly, the
Project Director, ATMA   is also a member of the Scientific Advisory Committee
of KVK along with the heads of the Line Development Departments at the district
level.´.
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
5.9 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No. 1.58 of Chapter-I of the
Report.
NEW DELHI;                                            MOHAN SINGH
16 December, 2008 Chairman,
25 Agrahayana, 1930(Saka)                           Standing Committee on Agriculture.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX-I
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 16 TH DECEMBER, 2008 AT 1000 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM
NO. ‘139’, FIRST FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
    The Committee sat from 1000 HRS TO 1100 HRS
PRESENT
Shri Mohan Singh  - Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
5. Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire
6. Shri Prabodh Panda
7. Smt. Rupatai D.Patil Nilangekar
8. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
RAJYA SABHA
9. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
10. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
11. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
12. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. K. Singh    -  Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma   -  Director
3. Shri Raj Kumar    -  Deputy Secretary
4. Shri N. S. Hooda   -  Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Amita Walia   -  Under Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

At the outset, the members welcomed Shri Mohan Singh, the new Chairman of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture appointed in place of Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav who has been elected to the
Rajya Sabha.  The Hon ¶ble Chairman then welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and
requested them to take up the following draft Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Food Processing Industries for consideration and adoption:
(1) 43th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in the 38th Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) in respect of Ministry of Agriculture (Deptt. of Agricultural Research and
Education)
xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx
2 The Committee then considered and adopted the draft Action Taken Reports with minor
additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee.
3. The Committee, thereafter, authorized the Chairman to finalise and present the above-mentioned
Reports to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON
THE THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA)
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     21
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
Accepted by the Government
Serial Nos. 8, 9, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, and 20
T o t a l         9
Percentage        42.86%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ¶s replies
Serial No. 10
T o t a l         1
Percentage         4.76%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
 of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee
Serial No.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 13 and 18
T o t a l         8
Percentage        38.10%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited
Serial Nos.  7, 11 and 21
T o t a l         3
Percentage        14.28%
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages