 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2007-08) 
                 
         
 36 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
                    
                 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008) 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007)} 
         
 
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
  
                                                  
          
         
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
           NOVEMBER, 2007/AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (Saka) 
  

THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2007-08) 
          
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations  contained in the Thirtieth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007] 
         
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.11.2007 
      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.11.2007  
  
                                                     
   
        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
NOVEMBER, 2007/ AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (Saka) 
  

COA No. 201 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price:  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
        © 2007 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha  (Eleventh Edition).  
 
  

<CONTENTS> 
                   P AGE 
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….   (iii) 
         
 
  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………   (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………   
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies ………………….. 
  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
held on 27.11.2007 .      
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh  
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2006-2007) on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of  
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation   
  

COMPOSITION OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2007-2008) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Ranen Barman 
3.  Shri Anil Basu 
4.  Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
5.  Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava  
6.  Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
7.  Shri Khagen Das 
8.  Shri Dharmendra 
9.  Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar 
10.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
11.  Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
12.  Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire 
13.  Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
14.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
15.  Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
16.  Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Nilangekar Patil 
17.  Shri K.J.S.P.Reddy 
18.  Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy 
19.  Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
20.  Shri M.P.Veerendrakumar 
21.  Shri Baleshwar Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Harish Rawat 
23.  Dr. M.S.Gill 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Vikram Verma 
26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28.  Shri Datta Meghe 
29.  Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
30.  Shri M.Rajasekara Murthy 
31.  Prof. M.S.Swaminathan 
 
 
  

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K.Sharma   -  Additional Secretary 
2.         Shri A.K.Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Raj Kumar   -  Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri N.S.Hooda   -  Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms. Amita Walia   -  Under Secretary   
6. Shri M.D. Tuteja   -  Executive Officer   
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
         
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture, [2007-2008] having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty 
Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries for the year 2007-2008. 
 
2. The Thirtieth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007) on 
Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 27.04.2007 and laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day.  The 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries was requested to furnish action taken replies of 
the Government to the recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report.  The replies 
of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received. 
 
3. The Committee considered the action taken replies furnished by the Government 
at their sitting held on 27.11.2007, approved the draft comments and adopted the Thirty 
Sixth Report.  Minutes of the sitting are placed at Appendix I.  
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirtieth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
      
                    
                                         
                                         
NEW DELHI;                            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
27 November, 2007                                                   Chairman, 
6 Agrahayana, 1929(Saka)                        Standing Committee on Agriculture. 
  
  
  

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standi ng Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007) 
on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries which was presented to the Lok  Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 
27.4.2007. 
1.2 The Action Taken replies have been re ceived from the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries in respect of a ll the 8 recommendations contained in the 
Report.  These have been categorized as under:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 5 (Total – 4) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do   not   
desire to   pursue   in view of   the Government’s   action taken 
reply  (Chapter III of the Report)  
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 8 (Total – 1) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which action taken 
replies of the Government hav e not been accepted by the 
Committee  (Chapter IV of the Report)  
 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 3, 6 and 7 (Total – 3) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited (Chapter V) - NIL 
 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the ac tion taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Scheme for Infrastructure Development for Mega Food 
Parks, Abattoirs etc. 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
1.4 The Committee have recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee have been informed that the component of the 
Scheme for Infrastructure Deve lopment has been modified. The 
Committee also note that the budgetary provisions of Rs. 100.00 crore at 
BE (2007-08) have been increased manifold s in comparison to Rs. 12.30 
crore RE during 2006-07. 
 
Mega Food Parks 
 The Committee are perturbed to not e that under the existing Food 
Parks Scheme, out of 54 Food Parks approved by the Ministry so far for 
assistance, only 29 Food Parks are operational.  The Committee 
recommend that immediate steps should be taken for making the 
remaining Food Parks operational within a reasonable timeframe. 
 
 The Committee have been informed that  the working of the existing 
Food Parks scheme is proposed to be restructured on t he basis of the 
review undertaken by the Ministry through reputed external agencies and 
also by the Working Group on Food Proce ssing Sector of the XI Five year 
Plan. The review pointed out that the existing Scheme lacked focused 
approach for management / implement ation and weak backward and 
forward linkages, due to which it was not very effective. Based on the 
findings of the review, the Mini stry has launched a substantially 
restructured scheme of food parks, viz., ‘Mega Food Parks’ which would 
address the shortcomings of the exis ting scheme and is expected to give 
a boost to availability of integrated food processing industry in the country. 
The modified Scheme would be im plemented on Public Private 
Participation (PPP) mode through Project Management Agency which will 
be responsible from conception to completion of projects.  
  
 

  The Committee feel that the c oncept of ‘Mega Food Parks’ is a 
good one provided it is implemented properly and effectively. The 
Committee recommend that the places  where such Mega Food Parks are 
proposed to be established should be selected very carefully after a 
proper and comprehensive survey of t he area where the Food Park is 
proposed to be established. Various fa ctors like state of connectivity, 
availability of raw material in the vici nity, location of markets, etc. should 
be taken into consideration before taking a final decision regarding  
location of the Park. A number of co ld storages of appropriate capacity 
should be established in the ‘feed area’ of the Mega Food Parks where the 
farmers can keep their fruits, v egetables and other perishable goods 
within 3 to 4 hours of harvesting to prevent the decay. The produce can 
later be brought to the Food parks for further processing. For the Scheme 
to be successful, the farmers, proce ssors, retailers, etc. should come 
together to form a supply chain for the Mega Food Park.   
 
 The Committee would like to be appr ised about the details of the 
agencies which agree to invest on the PPP mode and the time frame 
within which these Mega Food Parks will become operational.” 
 
1.5 The Ministry in its Action Taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“The Ministry has approved 56 Food Pa rks for assistance so far (till 
31st March, 2007) under the Food Park Scheme, out of which 29 Food 
Parks are considered as operational  based on establishment of common 
facilities/ commissioning of units in t he food parks. Once the park facilities 
start attracting investors, the park is considered operational, however the 
complete implementation may spread ov er several years as the linkages 
and networking of units, facilities and ra w material takes place over time. 
The implementation of Food Parks is linked to a wide range of internal and 
external factors and linkages such  as development of external 
infrastructure in tandem, getting a su fficient number of entrepreneurs to 
set up units in the park before certain facilities can come up, policy issues 
  

etc. As such the various activities related to setting up of Food Parks need 
to go in tandem which requires invo lvement of various other state 
agencies apart from the primary impl ementing agency. Further, most of 
the Food Parks have been sanctioned in  the State sector, which get 
affected by the resource constrai nts and other problems affecting the 
State Governments, resulting in delays.  
 
 Keeping in view the performanc e of food park scheme during 10 th 
Plan, Ministry of Food Proc essing Industries had engaged reputed 
external agencies to carry out evaluat ion of the Food Park Scheme. As 
most of these Food Parks have been promoted by State Industrial 
Development Agencies, they hav e been conceptualized in traditional 
industrial estate mode with no forwar d and backward linkages. This has 
resulted in valuable real estate being acquired but utilized at low levels of 
efficiency. Major reasons for the poor  functioning of parks are mentioned 
below. 
 
• Poor site selection 
• Delay in providing basic infrastructure facilities like power, water, road etc. 
• Absence of strong backward linkages 
• Weak linkages with the market 
• Delay in release of financial assistance 
• Poor management and implementation capabilities 
• Lack of funding for components such  as internal roads, drainage, 
environmental control facilities and solid waste management facilities etc., 
which are also important infrastructure needed in the park.  
 
 The study concluded suggesting that the Food Park will be 
successful only if infrastructure for (1) on farm Storage (2) Primary 
Processing (3) Minimal Processing (4) linkages with Retail (5) Mobile 
Processing Unit (6) Mobile Pre-coo ling Unit (7) Packaging Centre (8) 
  

Palletisation is provided in the Park. Production area remained under 
developed and not integrated with the requirements of the market. There 
was no assurance of steady supply of raw materials. Value addition rarely 
benefitted the farming community.  
 
 These Studies thus recomm ended providing higher scale of 
assistance for building infrastructure items in the pattern  of schemes like 
Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme (IIUS) under the Department 
of Industrial Promotion and Policy, Ministry of Commerce and Industry and 
Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks (S ITP) under the Ministry of Textiles 
and Scheme for Pack Houses, Cold Storages and Mobile Processing 
Units under National Horticulture De velopment Board, Ministry of 
Agriculture. These schemes carry higher  rates of subsidy as compared to 
MFPI’s Infrastructure Schemes.  
 
 In view of the experience gained in  the implementation of the Food 
Park Scheme and taking the recommendat ions of the evaluation studies 
into consideration, it has been pr oposed to revise and restructure the 
Food Park Scheme into Mega food Park to address the concerns raised 
above. Salient features of the Mega Food Park would be:  
 
• It would provide state of the art infr astructure for food processing in the 
country on a pre identified cluster basis. A cluster-based approach would 
be adopted taking into considerati on existing NHM Cluster and AEZ’x 
promoted by APEDA. A detailed tec hno feasibility study and DPR would 
be undertaken to map the supply chai n, identify potential investors, 
estimate project cost and its potential to exploit economies of scale 
• The techno feasibility study and detail ed project report would analyze raw 
material availability, seasonality, existing supply chain, infrastructure need 
and gap assessment etc. It would be ai med at ensuring value addition of 
agricultural commodities including poul try, meat, dairy, fisheries etc. 
Appropriate product mix would be c hosen based on availability of raw 
  

material in the identified clusters  to ensure minimum of 200 days of 
working of Mega Food Park 
• The scheme proposes to establish an efficient and sustainable supply 
chain. Based on techno feasibility study , potential locations for collection 
centers and primary processing cent ers would be mapped, which would 
be supported by cold chain infrastructure to reduce wastages and check 
quality deterioration. Strong backward linkages would be established by 
involving farmer groups/traders/commission agents and attempts would be 
made to federate them in to an appropriate structure, including possibility 
of a producer company 
• Scheme of Mega Food Park would be pre-marketed after a detailed 
techno feasibility study of clusters ei ther identified by MOFPI or on the 
basis of proposal submitted by potential investors 
• The ownership and management of the Mega Food Park would vest with 
an SPV in which organized retailers, pr ocessors, service providers etc. 
may be the equity holders or there may be an anchor investor along with 
its ancillaries. SPV will be structured to  ensure control of the SPV by 
industry stakeholders. The farmer organizations will be encouraged to 
participate in the SPV. The gover nment agencies may also be 
shareholders in SPV upto a maximum of 49%  
• The project also envisages providing power, water, road,  ETP etc. and it 
would be part of the responsibility of the management of the park 
• The scheme proposes to engage a prof essionally managed organization, 
which has intensive experience in project management and development 
as PMA (Project Management Agen cy). PMA appointed by MFPI would 
assist in carrying out feasibility st udies, appraisal of project proposals 
submitted under the Scheme by SPVs and monitoring of the projects 
 MFPI intends to prepare 5 feasib ility reports from 5 geographical 
regions of the country. This requi res appointment of agencies with the 
required technical and managerial expertise in implementing cluster based 
development initiatives, the requir ed financial capability and previous 
experience to be appointed as a Proj ect Management Agency (PMA). The 
  

feasibility report would have tentatively identified the nature of investments 
required, products to be available form Mega Food Park, the surpluses 
likely and the potential for value additi on based on criteria to be laid down 
by the Ministry.  
 The Mega Food Park scheme is under  finalization in consultation 
with Planning Commission and upon approv al & notification of the 
scheme, formal proposals would be invited and investors identified.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.6 The Committee are unhappy  to note that all the actions to be taken 
for setting up Mega Food Parks are in conclusive.  The Mega Food Park 
Scheme is still at the consultation stage w ith the Planning Commission.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend th at the scheme should be finalized 
expeditiously and Mega Food Parks be set up w ithin a fixed time frame 
assuring proper forward and backward linkages. 
 
Dairy Processing 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
1.7  The Committee have recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee are happy to note that India is the number one milk 
producing country in the world mainta ining the top position since 1988.  
Despite a higher growth rate, the per c apita availability of milk in India 
(229 grams per day) is lower than the world average (285 grams per day).  
The Committee observe that the per c apita consumption of milk has not 
increased in accordance with the incr ease in production which gives the 
Dairy Processing Industry a fair chance to convert the extra available milk 
into processed items.  The Committee also note that only about 35% of 
milk produced in India is processed.  There are differences between the 
  

organized and the unorganized sector wit h respect to investments in 
preserving the quality of milk and technology used for its processing. 
 
 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries is promoting organized 
dairy processing sector to accomp lish upcoming demands of processed 
dairy products and helping to identify vari ous areas of research for future 
product development and quality improvem ent to revamp the Indian dairy 
export by way of providing financial a ssistance to dairy processing units.  
Upto December 2006, the Ministry has sanctioned financial assistance of 
Rs. 5.91 crore under the Plan scheme,  but the market size of the 
processed products in the organiz ed and unorganized sector (at 2003-04 
prices) is estimated at Rs. 255 billi on and Rs. 906 billion, respectively.  
The Committee are of the firm opinion t hat with such a meager allotment 
of assistance to dairy units, the Go vernment will not be able to reach the 
world level of dairy processing even in the next 20 years.  They, therefore, 
recommend that since milk is produced all over India and is the backbone 
of rural household income of landless people and small and marginal 
farmers of the rural areas, the budget for dairy assistance should be 
increased in commensuration with t he people engaged in dairy activities 
and/ or rearing cattle and buffalo for their livelihood.” 
 
1.8 The Ministry in its Action Taken reply has stated as follows:- 
 
“Financial assistance for setting up, modernization and technology 
upgradation of dairy sector projects is covered under the budget allocation 
for the scheme for Technology Upgr adation/Establishment/Modernization 
of Food Processing Industries.  Under this scheme projects in respect of 
all sub-sectors of the food processing sector including the dairy sector are 
covered.  During the year 2006- 07, there was a total budgetary 
expenditure of Rs.82.19 crores under  the Scheme and grant released to 
dairy sector projects was to the ex tent of Rs.7.01 cr ores. There is no 
separate budgetary allocation for the dai ry sector.  The expenditure in 
respect of projects assisted in the sector depends on the number of 
  

applications received from entrepreneurs claiming grant for viable projects 
in the sector.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.9 Dairy Processing Sector being part of Scheme for Technology  
Upgradation for Food Processing Industr ies, the Committee are dismay ed 
to note the casual treatment given to this sector by  granting only  Rs.7.01 
crore during 2006-07.   India being number one milk producing nation in the 
world, no separate budgetary  allocati on for the dairy  sector w as made. 
They, therefore, recommend that in orde r to tap the full pot ential, separate 
budgetary allocations should be made for dairy  processing sector rather 
than clubbing it w ith other schemes so that more and more entrepreneurs 
are encouraged to invest in this sector. 
Fruits and Vegetable Processing 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
1.10 The Committee have recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee have been informed that  the installed capacity of 
fruits and vegetable processing industr y has increased from 11.08 lakh 
tons on 1.1.1993 to 24.74 lakh tons as on 1.1.2007.  However, for the 
utilization of fruits and vegetables, processing is estimated to be around 
2.20% of the total production.  Ther e has been a positive growth towards 
processing of varied food products, yet the domestic consumption of value 
added fruits and vegetable products is  low compared to the primary 
processed food in general and fresh fruits and vegetables in particular.  
The reasons attributed are higher ta x and duties and also high cost of 
production.  The financial assistance of 25% in general and 33.33% in 
difficult areas, of the cost of plant  and machinery and technical civil work, 
is given.    But the Co mmittee are of the opinion that in rural and far flung 
areas, this assistance is too less and people can’t afford to pay 75% of the 
  

cost of these services.  The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that the 
assistance should be raised to 50% fo r general areas and 75% for difficult 
areas, so that the fruits and veget able that go waste can be processed 
and the farmers could get remunerat ive price for their produce and the 
consumer may get the processed products at the cheaper rate”. 
 
1.11 The Ministry in its Action Taken reply has stated as follows:- 
“The Committee has stated that in  rural and far flung areas, the 
present level of assistance is too less and people can’t afford to pay 75% 
of the cost of these services  and hence have suggested for enhancement 
of grant to 50% in general  areas and 75% in difficult areas for fruit and 
vegetables sector has been considered by this Ministry.  In the existing 
pattern of assistance under the sc heme for Technology Upgradation / 
Establishment / Modernization, financia l assistance of 25% of the total 
cost of Plant & Machinery and Techni cal Civil Work in general areas and 
33.33% in difficult areas such as Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, Sikkim and North East ern States, Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands, Lakshadweep and ITDP areas is provided.  In addition, under the 
Technology Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture in far flung 
areas, namely in North Eastern St ates, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand, higher level of assistance @ 50% upto Rs.4.00 
crore for a setting up and Rs. 1.00 cr ore for upgradation of fruit and 
vegetables processing is allowed. T he Government of India has also 
launched the National Horticulture Mission (NHM) for holistic development 
of Horticulture in the country.  
 
It has felt that the demand for grant from the food processing sector 
has been quite overwhelming under  this scheme and in the 10 th Plan 
around 1000 units were provided grant.  In the 11 th Plan, the demand for 
grant under the scheme is likely to be much higher.  Further, the grain 
milling sector  which was not eligible  for grant under t he scheme for most 
part of the 10 th Plan period, has been made e ligible for grant under the 
scheme.  This will also result in ve ry substantial increase in demand from 
  

this sector.  The overall demand is therefore expected to be more than 2 
to 3 times that of the 10th Plan.  If the rate of subsidy is increased, the total 
available Plan fund under t he scheme which is likely to be around Rs.600 
crores will not be able to  meet the growing dem ands of the sector.  
However, as indicated above, higher le vel of assistance @ 50%  is being 
provided in respect of units in far flung areas such as North eastern region 
and under other Difficult Areas such as hilly region, etc.  
 
Further, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MFPI) has 
proposed for implementation of  Mega Food Park during 11 th Five year 
Plan which aims to provide a mec hanism to bring together farmers, 
processors and retailers and link agricul ture production to the market so 
as to maximize value addition, mi nimize wastages, increase farmer’s 
income and create employm ent opportunities in rural sector. Mega Food 
Park envisages a well-defined agri / horticultural-processing zone 
containing state of art processing fa cilities with support infrastructure and 
well established supply chain.   
 
Besides, establishment of Mega F ood Parks in identified clusters 
with appropriate backward and forward linkages, among the other thrust 
areas identified by the Mi nistry are creation of integrated cold chains / 
value addition and preservation infrastructure, upgradation of hygienic and 
quality street food and f ood streets, establishm ent and upgradation of 
quality control laboratories, rationalizi ng tax structure, incentivising FDI 
and private investment in  infrastructure, undertaking capacity building of 
small and unorganized sector, launching a major promotional campaign 
for the food processing sector and need for larger public investment for 
creation of critical rural infrastruc ture in food processing sector. The 
cluster-based demand driven approach will provide linkages from farm to 
market with linkages from local to regional level through Primary 
Processing Centres, Collection Centre s, Strategic Distribution Centre-
cum-Cold Chain at critical loca tions- having Controlled Atmosphere 
storage and distribution centres wher e a large quantities can be stored 
  

and supplied to distribution centres for fresh sale and to processing 
industries for processing”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.12 The Committee are not convinced w ith the reply  of the Government.  
The assistance for setting up food pro cessing units in the North East 
Region and hilly areas has been incr eased from 33.33% to 50% whereas no 
increase in the assistance for setting up of  these units in other parts of the 
country has been increased w hich remains at 25%  of the cost of plant 
machinery and technical civil works. They, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the assistance for setting up of Fruits & Vegetable 
Processing units in general and diffi cult areas be increased to 50%  and 
75% respectively, so as to achieve th e targeted processing of these items 
from 2.2% to 20% by the year 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
Overview 
 
2.1 The Committee have been informed that the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries have been operating several Plan schemes for development of 
processed food industry. The Ministry al so provides vital linkages and synergies 
between Industry and Agricult ure. Food Processing involves any type of value 
addition which includes processes such as grading, sorting, packing which 
enhances shelf life of food products. 
 For the growth of the Food Proc essing Sector, the Committee have been 
informed that the Ministry covers produc ts of fruits and vegetables, dairy, meat, 
poultry, fisheries, consumer food grai ns, non-molasses based alcoholic drinks, 
aerated water and soft drink. The country  produces annually 90 million tones of 
milk (highest in the world), 150 million tones of Fruits and Vegetables (second 
largest), 485 million livestock (largest), 204 million tones food grains (third 
largest), and 6.3 million tones fish (third  largest), 489 million poultry and 45200 
million eggs.  The Committee ar e perturbed to note that the processing level of 
fruits and vegetables, marine products, poultr y and buffalo meat are very low in 
comparison to developed countries. The shar e of the Governm ent in the export 
of processed food in the World Trade is only 1.5%. 
 The Committee appreciate the positive thinking in the Government for 
increasing the Plan funds to Rs.250 cr ore in 2007-08 as compared to Rs.150 
crore sanctioned for 2006-07. 
  

 The Committee have also been informed that the Ministry has reviewed 
the performance of the T enth Plan Schemes and in the proposals submitted for 
Eleventh Plan to the Planning Commission,  some of the schemes under Tenth 
Plan have been continued and some sc hemes have been restructured with 
appropriate management/ implementation a rrangement in the Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) mode. The Commi ttee are not convinced at the 
discontinuation of schemes fr om the Eleventh Five year  Plan, particularly, the 
scheme for Backward and Forward Integration,  which is very im portant from the 
point of view of the availability of raw material and value additions . Though Mega 
Food Park Scheme will have links of backw ard and forward integration however, 
the other schemes such as Moderniz ed abattoirs, value added centres, cold 
chain facilities also need to be popularized among the affected persons and other 
beneficiaries. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 A Vision Document 2015 on Food Processing Industries has been 
finalized by the  Ministry of Food Proc essing Industries (MFPI), which envisages 
trebling  the size of the processed f ood sector by increas ing the level of 
processing of perishables from 6% to 20%, value addition from 20% to 35% and 
share in global food trade from  1.5% to 3% by 2015. 
The Cabinet has approved the integr ated strategy for promotion of 
agribusiness-Vision, Strategy and Action Plan for the Food Processing Sector, 
based on the recommendations made by the Group of Ministers (GOM) for 
growth of Food Processing Sector. The following strategies and thrust areas 
have been approved by the Cabinet:  
  
 

(i) Detailed mapping of the food clusters. 
(ii) Clusterization of farming in the shape of contract framing. 
(iii) Strengthening backward & forw ard linkages and developing supply 
chain with cold chain mechanism. 
(iv) Establishment of M ega Food Parks in identified 
SSI/Horticulture/Meat/Dairy/Marine sectors. 
(v) Modernisation of Abattoirs. 
(vi) Upgrading quality of street foods and food stre ets in association with 
local bodies and NGOs. 
(vii) Enhancing capacity building in HRD/R&D/Quality Control Laboratories. 
(viii) Developing infrastructure for organized food retail market.   
(ix) Adopting uniform and rationalized tax/duty structure for the entire Food 
processing Industry.  
(x) Liberal wine and beer policy. 
(xi) Strengthening and restructuring of MFPI. 
(xii) Need for larger public investment in rural infrastructure. 
(xiii) Role of State/UTs to synergise their efforts with those of Central 
Government. 
(xiv) Fiscal concessions. 
The strategic interventions required for t he growth of the f ood processing sector 
on the above basis of the Cabinet approval have been included in the 11 th Plan 
proposals.   
While the Scheme for Backward and Forward Integration was 
discontinued on the basis of evaluation report of the 10 th Plan Schemes, the 
Ministry has nevertheless given emphas is on the need for providing backward 
  

and forward linkages between the farm sector and the processing industries in its  
revised 11th Plan Scheme on Mega Food Park. The Mega Food Park Scheme 
will provide backward and forward linkages  as well as reliable and sustainable 
supply chain. The Cluster based dem and driven approach will provide linkages 
from farm to market with linkages from local to regional level through Primary 
Processing Centres, Collection Centres, Strategic Distribution Centre-cum-Cold 
Chain at critical locations – hav ing Controlled Atmosphere storage and 
distribution centres where large quant ities can be stored and supplied to 
distribution centres for fresh sale and to  processing industries for processing.  
The emphasis will be on building strong linkages with agriculture and horticulture, 
enhancing project implementat ion capabilities, increased involvement of private 
sector investments and support for creation of rural infrastructure to ensure a 
steady supply of good quality agri horticulture produce.   
The modernization of abattoirs, value added centers and cold chain 
facilities are components of the re vamped Scheme for Infrastructure 
Development apart from Mega Food Parks.   All these components are being 
given greater emphasis during the 11th Plan.  The implementation of the Scheme 
will be on PPP model through Project Managem ent Agencies. All these schemes 
will be intensively popularized by a series of meetings/seminars with the stake 
holders/experts and also through the audio-visual media. 
Subsidy on procurement of agri-horticu ltural produce on a stand-alone basis has 
been found to be amenable to misuse and does not result in creation of 
sustainable supply chain.  Hence they  have now been integr ated in the Scheme 
of Mega Food Parks and Cold Chains. 
 
  

 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
Vision 2015 
 
2.3 The Committee have been informed that the Ministry has finalized a Vision 
2015 on Food Processing Industries for givi ng boost to the growth of the food 
processing sector. The achievements of the Vision 2015 will affect thrust areas 
like Mega Food Parks, Moderni zation of Abattoirs, Cold Chain/ Value Addition 
and preservation infrasture, upgrading sa fety and quality of Street Food and 
Establishment of Quality Control Laboratories. The Co mmittee have also been 
informed that a Group of Mi nisters under the chairmanshi p of the Minister of 
Agriculture, etc. set up to consider an “Integrated strat egy for Promotion of Agri-
Business-Vision, Strategy and Action Pl an for Food Processing Sector”, has 
since given its recommendations. The Committee recommend that the Vision 
Document should be cleared for impl ementation at the earliest and the 
Committee may be apprised of the progre ss made in this regard within two 
months of the presentation of this report. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.4 A vision strategy and action plan has  been finalized for giving boost to the 
growth of food processing sector. A Group of Minister s (GOM), constituted for 
this purpose on ‘ Integrated Strategy for Promotion of Busine ss-Vision Strategy 
and Action Plan for Food Processing Sector ’ under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble 
Agriculture Minster, Shri Sharad Pawar had been set up to consider an 
integrated strategy for Prom otion of Agri-Business – Vision, Strategy and Action 
Plan for Food Processing Sector.  T he GOM considered the proposals and 
recommended that the matter may be placed before the Cabinet.   
  

  
 The Cabinet in its meeting held on 21.06.07 has approved the proposal of 
MFPI on ‘Integrated Strategy for Promotion of Agri-Business – Vision, Strategy 
and Action Plan for Food Processing Sector’.  The following strategies and thrust 
areas have been approved by the Cabinet:  
(i) Detailed mapping of the food clusters. 
(ii) Clusterization of farming in the shape of contract framing. 
(iii) Strengthening backward & forw ard linkages and developing supply 
chain with cold chain mechanism. 
(iv) Establishment of Mega Food Parks in identified 
SSI/Horticulture/Meat/Dairy/Marine sectors. 
(v) Modernisation of Abattoirs. 
(vi) Upgrading quality of street foods and food stre ets in association with 
local bodies and NGOs. 
(vii) Enhancing capacity building in HRD/R&D/Quality Control Laboratories. 
(viii) Developing infrastructure for organized food retail market.   
(ix) Adopting uniform and rationalized tax/duty structure for the entire Food 
processing Industry.  
(x) Liberal wine and beer policy. 
(xi) Strengthening and restructuring of MFPI. 
(xii) Need for larger public investment in rural infrastructure. 
(xiii) Role of State/UTs to synergise their efforts with those of Central 
Government. 
(xiv) Fiscal concessions. 
 
  

Further action on the above is being taken by the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries.  A number of strategic init iatives have accordingly been prepared and 
included in the Ministry’s 11th Plan proposals. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
Modernised Abattoirs 
 
2.5 The proposed scheme aims at moder nization of abattoirs by providing 
facilities for scientific and less painful  slaughtering, chilling, rendering plant, 
effluent treatment plant, and drainage, by  product utlisation, water and power 
with required sanitary/phytosanitary conditions. It will augment essential supply 
base of hygienic raw material to the meat processing industry. 
 The Committee note that there are w eaknesses in the modernization of 
Abattoirs scheme 50 Abattoirs will be a ssisted under the Modernization of 
Abattoirs scheme   during the Eleventh Plan period. Assistance to Abattoirs is 
available @ 25% / 33.33% of  the cost of pant and machinery/TCW in general 
areas/difficult areas respectively with ce iling of Rs. 4 crore. The Ministry has 
been able to approve only one proposal of modernization of abattoirs during 
Tenth Plan. 
 Keeping in view the Tenth Plan ex perience wherein only one abattoir 
could be modernized, the Committee re commend that the modernization of 
abattoirs should be taken up on top prio rity basis so as to discourage 
unauthorized slaughtering and make essential supply of hygienic raw material to 
the meat processing industry, both for domestic consumption and exports. 
   As the experience has shown that local bodies are cash starved and are 
not in a position to avail assistance of  the Government on proportional payment 
basis, the Committee recommend that the share of municipalities should be 
  

taken care of by the State Government instead of these bodies so that the central 
funds earmarked for modernization of abattoirs is fully utilized and hygienic 
products are available in the market even in small cities also. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.6 During 11th plan, this Ministry int ends to launch a comprehensive 
scheme for modernization of abattoirs acro ss the country in urban as well rural 
areas. Based on detailed discussion wit h stakeholders, industries and State 
Governments, the scheme has now been modified to induct private capital, better 
technology and backward and forward linkages.  
 The proposed scheme will preferably  be implemented under PPP mode 
with the involvement of local bodies (M unicipal Corporations and Panchayats) 
and will have flexibility for invo lvement of private invest ors/ Exporters/ FDI on a 
BOO/ BOT/JV basis. Regulatory functions  will continue to be discharged through 
local bodies. This will enable the local bodi es to participate in the venture and 
also be assured of a stream of income. 
In order to ensure successful impl ementation of the proposed scheme a 
professional and technically competent agency who could assume the role of 
Project Implementing Agency (PIA) would be suggested by the Mi nistry to State 
Governments  for developing and implementing the projects under the scheme. 
 In order to identify abattoirs, det ailed feasibility studies are  being 
conducted to provide insights into various  institutional, technical/ engineering, 
commercial, financial and operational details of proposed intervention. 
  

The volumes of assistance is propos ed to be increased to 50% and 75% 
of the cost of plant and machinery/ TCW in general areas and difficult areas 
respectively with ceiling of Rs. 15.00 Crore per abattoir.  
Export and commercial processing of m eat could also be included to 
enhance the viability of the scheme. W herever feasible, a separate and 
additional poultry line and value added processing could be included in the 
project. It is proposed to link the moderniz ed abattoirs to cold chain and retails 
outlets so that the benefits of hygienic slaughter of animals are available to 
consumers.  
The projects and investors will be selected though competitive bidding and 
transparent selection process. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
Scheme for Technology Upgradation for Food Processing Industries 
 
2.7 The Committee note that the Governm ent have allotted Rs. 87.30 crore at 
BE stage in 2006-07 for Upgradat ion of Technology Scheme. However, it was 
reduced to Rs. 71.50 crore at RE stage.  Again for 2007-08, only  Rs.72 crore 
have been earmarked. It is not understood as to how with this meager stagnated 
sum of Rs. Rs. 72 crore, the Govern ment is going to help in upgrading 
technology for Food Processing Industrie s which the Government have decided 
to modernize during 2007-08. The technology  is getting costlier day by day  and 
more and more  modernized plants for food processing and meat processing  are 
projected  to be set up. The promoti onal activities component of backward and 
forward linkage is also to be transferred to  this scheme, which requires to reach 
every nook and corner of the country. In the Committee’s view the reduced 
  

budgetary provisions will restrict the impl ementation of the scheme and also the 
objectives of the scheme which include the increase in the level of processing 
reduction of wastages, value additions and enhancing the income of farmers and 
increase in export, which can’t be fu lfilled by this budgeted amount. They, 
therefore, recommend that k eeping in view   the objectives set for this scheme, 
the budgetary allocation should be increased to at least Rs. 200 crore as the 
upgradation of technology is the need of the hour for Food Processing Industry 
all over the country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.8 The budgetary allocation for the Scheme for Technology Upgradation, 
Establishment and Modernization of Food Processing Industries in BE 2006-07 
was Rs.97 crores and RE 2006-07 was Rs. 79.70 crores.  However, the actual 
expenditure under the Scheme during 2006- 07 was Rs.82.19 crores.  In the 
Annual Plan 2007-08, the Planning Commissi on has provided an allocation of 
Rs.80 crores for the Scheme against the to tal Plan Allocation of Rs.250 crores 
for the Ministry.  However, consideri ng the requirement fo r meeting the higher 
demand on account of clearance of pendi ng proposals and the current year’s 
higher demand on account of decentralizat ion through banks, the Ministry has 
requested the Planning Commission for an additional budgetary requirement of 
Rs.350 crores. 
 With the discontinuation of the Backward and Forward Linkage Scheme, 
the promotional activities component of  the Scheme has been transferred to the 
Scheme for Quality Assurance, Codex  Standards and R&D on the suggestion of 
the Planning Commission. 
 
  

CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
Upgrading Safety and Quality of Street Food 
 
3.1 It is known a fact that the quality of street food in India is far from 
satisfactory in terms of hygiene and safety  and is highly contaminated although it 
is popular because of its a ffordability and convenience.  The vending of this kind 
of food is completely unregulated.  The Committee have been informed that a 
new scheme namely “Quality Upgradation of Street Food and Food Street” has 
been proposed to be implemented during the Eleventh Plan as a Central Sector 
Scheme.  It is the first such effort to  upgrade the quality of st reet food, but the 
implementation would need cooper ation from other Minist ries such as Health, 
Urban Development, Tourism, and also  State Governments and Municipal 
bodies. 
 The Government propose to implement this scheme in 50 cities by 
introducing 1000 modern food carts in each identified city leading to upgrading of 
at least 50,000 food vending uni ts in the country during the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan.  The ‘Food Street’ component will implemented by setting up one street, 
designated as ‘food street’, in each of the 25 select cities. 
 The Committee note that to prov ide project expenses including 
installation/upgradation of modern food stalls, water-s upply and drainage, waste 
disposal schemes, public utilities etc. the amount of Rs. 38 crore for ‘Street Food’ 
and Rs. 138 crore for ‘Food Street’ sanctioned for the whole of Eleventh Plan is 
  

too less, rather a token amount, keepi ng in view the task involved and the 
facilities to be provided in 50 cities during this period. 
 The Committee recommend that t he Scheme should be implemented at 
the earliest, so that besi des benefiting thousands of v endors, the public at large 
is weaned away from the fa st food culture of the We st and once again revert to 
ethnic and healthy Indian food. 
 The Committee has also recommend that the States should also be 
involved in this huge talk as they will be better able to help in finalisation of the 
new initiatives of this scheme as to which of the cities need these kind of facilities 
and also the quality of f ood and requirement of food carts.  The local 
Municipalities of the selected cities, if  involved, will help in a better way in 
implementation of this scheme and t he State Government/Municipal bodies 
should be encouraged to provide the basic in frastructure to set up ‘Food Streets’ 
in the designated cities. 
 The Committee further recommend that the High Level Advisory Body to 
be set up to oversee the im plementation of the Scheme,  should draw up a clear 
cut blueprint for implementation of t he Scheme and all the stakeholders should 
meet frequently, especially in the initial stages, to clear the obstacles, if any, in 
the smooth implementat ion of the Scheme.  Special attention should be paid to 
the quality of street f ood and making the surroundings of the Food Street 
hygienic and clean by providing public utilities, waste disposal system, etc. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
3.2 The Scheme is in the process of  being implemented after due approval is 
received from the Planning Commission. 
  

 Currently, Baseline Studies have already been conducted in the nine cities 
of Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai, B angalore, Guwahati, Agartala, Agra and 
Jaipur, covering a total of 4300 street f ood vendors.  The Study  comprised of a 
survey of these vendors for assessing t heir knowledge, attitude and practices of 
food preparation, handling, storage and presentation.   The results are under 
compilation. 
 The States are being involved in this Scheme in the sense that they would 
be responsible in identifying the cities / areas of implementation and also the 
urban local bodies/ municipalities th rough whom this Scheme is to be 
implemented. They will also be responsib le for sensitizing the concerned 
departments of health, police, urban affair s etc. and instruct these concerned 
departments to provide due assistance for the successful implementation of the 
Scheme.  The urban local bodies sele cted for implementing these schemes 
would be advised to select a competent Project Implementation Agency (PIA) for 
implementing these schemes successfully.  
 One Model Food Cart is being developed by the Ministry in consultation 
with Indraprastha Institute of Technology with inputs from IIT (Delhi) and Delhi 
College of Engineering. However, the food carts shall have adequate scope of 
customization depending upon local needs viz. the raw material availability vis-à-
vis the cost involved and the type of food that would be vended. The Local 
Municipalities (directly or through t he Town Vending Committees) would be the 
final agency for the implementation of t he Scheme. They would provide for the 
basic infrastructural needs of these str eet food vendors as also be responsible 
for the overall upkeep and maintenance of t he projects. They are also entrusted 
with the tasks of installa tion/upgradation of modern f ood-stalls, benches, lighting 
  

equipments, fountains, water-supply and dr ainage facilities, waste disposal 
systems, electrical appliances, public utilities etc. in the ‘Food-Streets’. 
 A 3-Tier Core Committee at the National, State and t he Implementation 
Level has been proposed for overseeing the implementation of the projects and 
for periodic monitoring. The National Level Core Committee has also been 
entrusted with the overall supervision and m onitoring of the project alongwith the 
monitoring of the implementation of t he certification and accreditation standards. 
They will also play a pivotal role in providing a redressal mechanism for non-
conformance of standards. Apart from above,  it will also work as the Advisory 
Body to suggest mid-term course correction of the projects, if necessary. 
 A Project Management Agency is being  appointed by the Ministry whose 
main activity would be to coordinate the various activities to be undertaken by the 
Project Implementation Agencies and other  stakeholders, apprai se the project 
proposals, advise the Ministry regarding the suitability & feasibility of the projects; 
inspect and monitor the projects on a per iodical basis, and do MIS reporting of 
progress of the projects. 
 A series of meetings with the vari ous stakeholders and Ministries have 
been held in the initial stages of the formula tion of the Scheme. The Ministries of 
Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation, Heal th & Family Welfare, Tourism, Legal 
Affairs as well as the municipalities in  Delhi viz. MCD and NDMC a as well as  
many NGOs have been consulted for thei r inputs during the drafting of the 
Scheme. Special attention will be paid to the quality of street food and making 
the surroundings of the F ood Streets hygienic and clean by providing public 
utilities, waste disposal system, etc. 
  
  

 The total Estimated Cost of the  Project is Rs. 396.75 crores  and the 
Budgetary Support sought for by the Minist ry for the scheme to meet the grant 
element of the project cost is Rs. 178 crores. Out of th is Rs.53 crores has been 
earmarked for Safe Food Towns and Rs.125 crores for Food Street.  
 As regards the budget, the Scheme is intended to be a pilot initiative of the 
Ministry. The Ministry intends to hand hold the beneficiaries and make it a mass 
movement and not make them solely dependent  on the grant of the Ministry. On 
successful implementation of  the Scheme during the XIth Five Year Plan, this 
would be escalated to cover all the ur ban as well as rural areas across the 
country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Scheme for Infrastructure Development for Mega Food Parks, Abattoirs etc. 
4.1 The Committee have been informed that the component of the Scheme for 
Infrastructure Development has been modified. The Committee also note that the 
budgetary provisions of Rs. 100.00 cror e at BE (2007-08) have been increased 
manifolds in comparison to Rs. 12.30 crore RE during 2006-07. 
Mega Food Parks 
 The Committee are perturbed to note that under the exis ting Food Parks 
Scheme, out of 54 Food Parks approved by the Ministry so far for assistance, 
only 29 Food Parks are operational.  The Committee recommend that immediate 
steps should be taken for making the rema ining Food Parks operational within a 
reasonable timeframe. 
 The Committee have been informed that the working of the existing Food 
Parks scheme is proposed to be restru ctured on the basis of the review 
undertaken by the Ministry through reput ed external agencies and also by the 
Working Group on Food Processing Sector of the XI Five year Plan. The review 
pointed out that the existing Scheme lacked focused approach for management / 
implementation and weak backward and fo rward linkages, due to which it was 
not very effective. Based on the findings of  the review, the Ministry has launched 
a substantially restructured scheme of food parks, viz., ‘Mega Food Parks’ which 
would address the shortcomings of the existing scheme and is expected to give a 
boost to availability of in tegrated food processing indus try in the country. The 
modified Scheme would be im plemented on Public Privat e Participation (PPP) 
  

mode through Project M anagement Agency which will be responsible from 
conception to completion of projects.  
  The Committee feel that the conc ept of ‘Mega Food Parks’ is a good one 
provided it is implement ed properly and effectively. The Committee recommend 
that the places where such Mega Food Parks are proposed to be established 
should be selected very carefully after a proper and comprehensive survey of the 
area where the Food Park is proposed to  be established. Various factors like 
state of connectivity, availability of raw material in the vicinity, location of 
markets, etc. should be taken into consi deration before taking a final decision 
regarding  location of the Park. A number of cold storages of appropriate capacity 
should be established in the ‘feed area’  of the Mega Food Parks where the 
farmers can keep their fruits, vegetables and other perishable goods within 3 to 4 
hours of harvesting to prevent the decay. The produce can later be brought to the 
Food parks for further processing. For the Scheme to be successful, the farmers, 
processors, retailers, etc. should come together to form a supply chain for the 
Mega Food Park.   
 The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of the agencies 
which agree to invest on the PPP mode and the time frame within which these 
Mega Food Parks will become operational. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.2 The Ministry has approved 56 Food Parks for assistance so far (till 31 st 
March, 2007) under the Food Park Scheme,  out of which 29 Food Parks are 
considered as operational based on est ablishment of common facilities/ 
commissioning of units in the food parks. Once the park facilities start attracting 
investors, the park is considered operational, however the complete 
  

implementation may spread over several years as the linkages and networking of 
units, facilities and raw material takes pl ace over time. The implementation of 
Food Parks is linked to a wide range of in ternal and external factors and linkages 
such as development of external infras tructure in tandem, getting a sufficient 
number of entrepreneurs to set up units in the park before certain facilities can 
come up, policy issues etc. As such the va rious activities related to setting up of 
Food Parks need to go in tandem which r equires involvement of various other 
state agencies apart from the primary implementing agency. Further, most of the 
Food Parks have been sanctioned in the Stat e sector, which get affected by the 
resource constraints and other problem s affecting the State Governments, 
resulting in delays.  
 Keeping in view the performanc e of food park scheme during 10 th Plan, 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries had engaged reputed external agencies to 
carry out evaluation of the Food Park Scheme. As most of these Food Parks 
have been promoted by State Industrial Development Agencies, they have been 
conceptualized in traditional industrial estate mode with no forward and backward 
linkages. This has resulted in valuable r eal estate being acquired but utilized at 
low levels of efficiency. Major reas ons for the poor functioning of parks are 
mentioned below. 
• Poor site selection 
• Delay in providing basic infrastructure facilities like power, water, road etc. 
• Absence of strong backward linkages 
• Weak linkages with the market 
• Delay in release of financial assistance 
  

• Poor management and implementation capabilities 
• Lack of funding for components such  as internal roads, drainage, 
environmental control facilities and solid waste management facilities etc., 
which are also important infrastructure needed in the park.  
 The study concluded suggesting that the Food Park will be successful only 
if infrastructure for (1) on farm Stor age (2) Primary Processing (3) Minimal 
Processing (4) linkages with Retail (5) M obile Processing Unit (6) Mobile Pre-
cooling Unit (7) Packaging Centre (8) Palletisation is provided in the Park. 
Production area remained under devel oped and not integr ated with the 
requirements of the market. There was no assurance of steady supply of raw 
materials. Value addition rarely benefitted the farming community.  
 These Studies thus recommended providing higher scale of assistance for 
building infrastructure items in the pattern of schemes like Industrial 
Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme (IIU S) under the Department of Industrial 
Promotion and  Policy, Ministry of Commerce and Industry and Scheme for 
Integrated Textile Parks (S ITP) under the Ministry of Textiles and Scheme for 
Pack Houses, Cold Storages and Mobile Processing Units under National 
Horticulture Development Board, Ministry  of Agriculture. These schemes carry 
higher rates of subsidy as compared to MFPI’s Infrastructure Schemes.  
 In view of the experience gained in the implementation of the Food Park 
Scheme and taking the recommendations of the evaluation studies into 
consideration, it has been proposed to revise and restructure the Food Park 
Scheme into Mega food Park to address the concerns raised above. Salient 
features of the Mega Food Park would be:  
  

• It would provide state of the art infr astructure for food processing in the 
country on a pre identified cluster basis. A cluster-based approach would 
be adopted taking into considerati on existing NHM Cluster and AEZ’x 
promoted by APEDA. A detailed tec hno feasibility study and DPR would 
be undertaken to map the supply chain,  identify potential investors, 
estimate project cost and its potential to exploit economies of scale 
• The techno feasibility study and detail ed project report would analyze raw 
material availability, seasonality, existing supply chain, infrastructure need 
and gap assessment etc. It would be ai med at ensuring value addition of 
agricultural commodities including poul try, meat, dairy, fisheries etc. 
Appropriate product mix would be c hosen based on availability of raw 
material in the identified clusters  to ensure minimum of 200 days of 
working of Mega Food Park 
• The scheme proposes to establish an efficient and sustainable supply 
chain. Based on techno feasibility study , potential locations for collection 
centers and primary processing cent ers would be mapped, which would 
be supported by cold chain infrastructure to reduce wastages and check 
quality deterioration. Strong backward linkages would be established by 
involving farmer groups/traders/commission agents and attempts would be 
made to federate them in to an appropriate structure, including possibility 
of a producer company 
• Scheme of Mega Food Park would be pre-marketed after a detailed 
techno feasibility study of clusters ei ther identified by MOFPI or on the 
basis of proposal submitted by potential investors 
  

• The ownership and management of the Mega Food Park would vest with 
an SPV in which organized retailers, pr ocessors, service providers etc. 
may be the equity holders or there may be an anchor investor along with 
its ancillaries. SPV will be structured to  ensure control of the SPV by 
industry stakeholders. The farmer organizations will be encouraged to 
participate in the SPV. The gover nment agencies may also be 
shareholders in SPV upto a maximum of 49%  
• The project also envisages providing power, water, road,  ETP etc. and it 
would be part of the responsibility of the management of the park 
• The scheme proposes to engage a prof essionally managed organization, 
which has intensive experience in project management and development 
as PMA (Project Management Agency) . PMA appointed by MFPI would 
assist in carrying out feasibility st udies, appraisal of project proposals 
submitted under the Scheme by SPVs and monitoring of the projects 
 MFPI intends to prepare 5 feasibilit y reports from 5 geographical regions 
of the country. This requires appointment  of agencies with the required technical 
and managerial expertise in implementing cluster based development initiatives, 
the required financial capability and prev ious experience to be appointed as a 
Project Management Agency (PMA). The feasibility report would have tentatively 
identified the nature of investments required, products to be available form Mega 
Food Park, the surpluses likely and the potential for value addition based on 
criteria to be laid down by the Ministry.  
  

 The Mega Food Park scheme is under finalization in consultation with 
Planning Commission and upon approval & notif ication of the scheme, formal 
proposals would be invited and investors identified. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.3 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.6 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Dairy Processing 
4.4 The Committee are happy to note t hat India is the number one milk 
producing country in the world maintaining the top position since 1988.  Despite a 
higher growth rate, the per capita availab ility of milk in India (229 grams per day) 
is lower than the world average (285 gr ams per day).  The Committee observe 
that the per capita consum ption of milk has not incr eased in accordance with the 
increase in production which gives the Dair y Processing Industry a fair chance to 
convert the extra available milk into pr ocessed items.  T he Committee also note 
that only about 35% of milk produced in  India is processed.  There are 
differences between the organized and t he unorganized sector with respect to 
investments in preserving the quality of milk and technology used for its 
processing. 
 The Ministry of Food Processing I ndustries is promoting organized dairy 
processing sector to accomplish upcoming demands of processed dairy products 
and helping to identify various areas of re search for future product development 
and quality improvement to revamp the I ndian dairy export by way of providing 
financial assistance to dairy processing units.  Upto December 2006, the Ministry 
  

has sanctioned financial assistance of Rs. 5.91 crore under the Plan scheme, but 
the market size of the processed products in the organized and unorganized 
sector (at 2003-04 prices) is estimated at Rs. 255 billion and Rs. 906 billion, 
respectively.  The Committee are of t he firm opinion that with such a meager 
allotment of assistance to dairy units, the Government will not be able to reach 
the world level of dairy processing even in  the next 20 years.  They, therefore, 
recommend that since milk is produced all over India and is the backbone of rural 
household income of landless people and small and marginal farmers of the rural 
areas, the budget for dairy assistance should be increased in commensuration 
with the people engaged in dairy activities and/  or rearing cattle and buffalo for 
their livelihood. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.5 Financial assistance for setti ng up, modernization and technology 
upgradation of dairy sector projects is covered under the budget allocation for the 
scheme for Technology Upgradation/Es tablishment/Modernization of Food 
Processing Industries.  Under this scheme projects in respect of all sub-sectors 
of the food processing sector including the dairy sector are covered.  During the 
year 2006-07, there was a total budgetary expenditure of Rs.82.19 crores under 
the Scheme and grant released to dairy sector projects was to the extent of 
Rs.7.01 crores. There is no separate budget ary allocation for the dairy sector.  
The expenditure in respect of projects  assisted in the sector depends on the 
number of applications received from entrepreneurs claiming grant for viable 
projects in the sector. 
 
 
  

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.6 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.9 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Fruits and Vegetable Processing 
4.7 The Committee have been informed that the installed capacity of fruits and 
vegetable processing industry has increased from 11.08 lakh tons on 1.1.1993 to 
24.74 lakh tons as on 1.1.2007.  Howeve r, for the utilization of fruits and 
vegetables, processing is estimated to be around 2.20% of the total production.  
There has been a positive growth toward s processing of varied food products, 
yet the domestic consumption of value added fruits and vegetable products is low 
compared to the primary processed food in general and fresh fruits and 
vegetables in particular.  The reasons  attributed are higher  tax and duties and 
also high cost of production.  The fi nancial assistance of 25% in general and 
33.33% in difficult areas, of  the cost of plant and machinery and technical civil 
work, is given.    But the Committee are of the opinion that in rural and far flung 
areas, this assistance is too less and people can’t afford to pay 75% of the cost 
of these services.  The Committee, ther efore, recommend that the assistance 
should be raised to 50% for general areas and 75% for difficult areas, so that the 
fruits and vegetable that go waste can be processed and the farmers could get 
remunerative price for their produce and the consumer may get the processed 
products at the cheaper rate. 
 
 
  

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.8 The Committee has stated that in rural and far flung areas, the present 
level of assistance is too less and people can’ t afford to pay 75% of the cost of 
these services and hence have suggested for enhancement of grant to 50% in 
general areas and 75% in difficult areas fo r fruit and vegetables sector has been 
considered by this Ministry.  In the existing pattern of assistance under the 
scheme for Technology Upgradation / Estab lishment / Modernization, financial 
assistance of 25% of the total cost of Plant & Machinery and Technical Civil Work 
in general areas and 33.33% in difficult areas such as Jammu & Kashmir, 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim and North Eastern States, Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep and ITDP areas  is provided.  In addition, under 
the Technology Mission for Integrated Devel opment of Horticulture in far flung 
areas, namely in North Eastern States , Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh 
and Uttarakhand, higher level of assist ance @ 50% upto Rs.4.00 crore for a 
setting up and Rs. 1.00 crore for upgradation of fruit and vegetables processing 
is allowed. The Government of India has  also launched the National Horticulture 
Mission (NHM) for holistic development of Horticulture in the country.  
It has felt that the demand for grant from the food proc essing sector has 
been quite overwhelming under this scheme and in the 10 th Plan around 1000 
units were provided grant.  In the 11 th Plan, the demand fo r grant under the 
scheme is likely to be much higher.  Furt her, the grain milling sector  which was 
not eligible for grant under the scheme for most part of the 10 th Plan period, has 
been made eligible for grant under the scheme.  This will also result in very 
substantial increase in demand from this sector.  The overall demand is therefore 
expected to be more than 2 to  3 times that of the 10th Plan.  If the rate of subsidy 
  

is increased, the total available Plan f und under the scheme which is likely to be 
around Rs.600 crores will not be able to meet the growing demands of the 
sector.  However, as indi cated above, higher level of assistance @ 50% is being 
provided in respect of units in far flung areas such as North eastern region and 
under other Difficult Areas such as hilly region, etc.  
Further, the Ministry of Food Proce ssing Industries (MFPI) has proposed 
for implementation of Mega Food Park during 11 th Five year Plan which aims to 
provide a mechanism to bring together farmers, processors and retailers and link 
agriculture production to the market so as  to maximize value addition, minimize 
wastages, increase farmer’s income and create employment opportunities in 
rural sector. Mega Food Park envisages  a well-defined agri / horticultural-
processing zone containing state of art processing facilities with support 
infrastructure and well established supply chain.   
Besides, establishment of Mega Food Parks in identified clusters with 
appropriate backward and forward link ages, among the other thrust areas 
identified by the Ministry are creation of  integrated cold chains / value addition 
and preservation infrastructure, upgradati on of hygienic and qua lity street food 
and food streets, establis hment and upgradation of qualit y control laboratories, 
rationalizing tax structure, incentiv ising FDI and private investment in 
infrastructure, undertaking capacity build ing of small and unorganized sector, 
launching a major promotional campaign for the food processing sector and need 
for larger public investment for creation of  critical rural infrastructure in food 
processing sector. The cluster-bas ed demand driven approach will provide 
linkages from farm to market with linkages  from local to regional level through 
Primary Processing Centres,  Collection Centres, Stra tegic Distribution Centre-
  

cum-Cold Chain at critical locations- having Controlled Atmosphere storage and 
distribution centres where a large quantities can be stored and supplied to 
distribution centres for fresh sale and to processing industries for processing. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.9 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.12 of Chapter I 
of this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-- Nil -- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
27 November, 2007                                                   Chairman, 
6 Agrahayana, 1929(Saka)               Standing Committee on Agriculture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

APPENDIX- I 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 27 TH NOVEMBER, 2007 AT 1500 
HRS. IN  COMMITTEE ROOM, ‘B’, GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1620 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Anil Basu 
 
3.  Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
 
4.  Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
 
5.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 
6.  Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
 
7.  Shri Prabodh Panda 
 
8.  Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
 
9.  Shri M.P.Veerendra Kumar 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.  Shri Harish Rawat 
 
11.  Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
12.  Prof. M.S.Swaminathan 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.          Shri A.K.Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Raj Kumar   -  Deputy  Secretary 
3. Shri N.S.Hooda   -  Deputy  Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary 
5. Shri M.D. Tuteja  -  Executive Officer 
  

 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairm an, welcomed the Members to the sitting of  the 
Committee and requested them  to take up the following Mem oranda on draft Action 
Taken Reports on Dem ands for Grants(2006-07)  of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries for consideration and adoption:- 
 
(1) Memorandum No. 2 regarding draft Action Taken Report on the 
recommendations contained in the 27 th Report on Dem ands for Grants (2007-
08) in respect of Ministry of Agricu lture (Deptt. of  Agriculture and Co-
operation) 
 
(2) Memorandum No. 3 regarding draft Action Taken Report on the 
recommendations contained in the 28 th Report on Dem ands for Grants (2007-
08) in respect of Ministry of Agricultu re (Deptt. of Agricultural Research and 
Education) 
 
(3) Memorandum No. 4 regarding draft Action Taken Report on the 
recommendations contained in the 29 th Report on Dem ands for Grants (2007-
08) in respect of Ministry of Agri culture (Deptt. of  Anim al Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries); and  
 
(4) Memorandum No. 5 regarding draft Action Taken Report on the 
recommendations contained in the 30 th Report on Dem ands for Grants (2007-
08) in respect of Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Com mittee considered and adopted the draft action Taken Reports with 
minor modifications. 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chai rman to finalize and present the above-
mentioned Reports to both Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

  
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA) 
  
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     8 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 5 
 
T o t a l           4  
 
P e r c e n t a g e         5 0 %    
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
Serial No. 8 
 
T o t a l           1   
      
Percentage          12.5% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the 
           Committee 
 
Serial Nos. 3, 6 and 7 
 
T o t a l           3    
 
Percentage        37.5% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Serial Nos.  Nil 
 
T o t a l          0    
 
P e r c e n t a g e         0 %  
 
 