 
          STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 16
(2005-2006) 
                 
         
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
              
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006) 
[Action Taken by the Government on the  
Recommendations/Observations  contained in the Twelfth Report  
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005] 
         
        
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2006/Magha, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

 2
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2005-2006) 
          
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
         
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006) 
  
         
[Action Taken by the Government on the  
Recommendations/Observations  contained in the Twelfth Report  
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.02.2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.02.2006  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
February, 2006/Magha, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
COA No.181  
         

 3
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
            © 2006 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha  (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  
 

 4
 
 
<CONTENTS> 
                   P A G E  
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ………………………………………… 1 -7 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations /Observations which have  
   been accepted by the Government …………… 8-15 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendati ons/Observations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies ………………….. Nil 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations /Observations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee …………. Nil 
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Obs ervations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited ……………………………………. 16-26 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
held on 18.1.2006 .      
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by  the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twelfth  
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2004-2005) (14th Lok Sabha)      
 
 
 

 5
Composition of  the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
6. Smt. Anuradha Choudhary 
7. Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan 
8. Shri Khagen Das 
9. Shri Dharmendra 
10. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
11. Shri Raghunath Jha 
12. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan  
13. Smt. Rupatai D iliprao Patil Nilangekar 
14. Shri Sippiparai Ravichandran  
15. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
16. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
17. Shri Harihar Swain 
18. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
19. Shri Mahboob Zahedi 
20   *   Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
21   #   Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
23.    Shri Harish Rawat 
24.   Dr. M.S.Gill 
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
26. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
27. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
29. Shri Datta Meghe 
30. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
31. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
____________________________________________________________________ 
 
* Shri Prakash V.Patil ceased to be the member of this Committee owing to his demise on 
21 October, 2005 and the vacancy thus created was filled by nomination of Shri 
Deepender Singh Hooda, to this Committee vide L.S. Bulletin Part-II, Para No.1905, 
dated 9th December, 2005 
# Shri Lal Chandra Kol ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his 
expulsion from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 23 December, 2005. vide L.S. Bulletin Part-II, Para 
No.1982  dated 23rd  December, 2005 

 6
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   -  Secretary 
2.          Shri  A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri  Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
4 Shri D.S. Malha    -  Under Secretary 
5 Smt.P.Jyoti    -  Sr. Executive Assistant  
     
 
 
    
 
         
 

 7
INTRODUCTION 
 
         
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture, [2005-2006] having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Repo rt on their behalf, present this Sixteenth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government  on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Twelfth Report of the St anding Committee on Ag riculture (2004-2005) 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Gran ts of the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries for the year 2005-2006. 
 
2. The Twelfth Report of the Standing  Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005) on 
Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Mini stry of Food Processing Industries was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 20.4.2005 and laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day.  The 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries was requested to furnish action taken replies of 
the Government to the recommendations contai ned in the Twelfth Report.  The replies of 
the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received. 
 
3. The Committee considered the action ta ken replies furnished by the Government 
at their sitting held on 18.1.2006, approved the draft comments and adopted the Sixteenth 
Report.  Minutes of the sitting are placed at Appendices I.  
 
4. An analysis of the Action Take n by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Twelfth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
      
                    
                                          
                                                     
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
18, January, 2006                                        Chairman, 
28 Pausa, 1927 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Agriculture  
  

 8
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations containe d in the Twelfth Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agricu lture (2005-2006) on Demands for Grants 
(2005-2006) of the Ministry of Food Processi ng Industries which was presented to the 
Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 20.4.2005. 
 
1.2 The Action Taken Replies have been r eceived from the Mi nistry of Food 
Processing Industries and have been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II of the Report) Recommendation Sl.Nos.1,5,7,8,9 
and 11(Total –6) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s ac tion taken reply (Chapter III of the 
Report)  (Total –NIL) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which action taken replies of  
the Government have not been accept ed by the Committee (Chapter IV of 
the Report)  (Total-Nil) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited. (Cha pter V) Recommendation Sl.Nos. 
2,3,4,6,10,12 (Total –6) 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
 
Food Parks 
1.4 The Committee note that the Ministry have been pursuing proactively, the task of 
setting up of Food Parks in di fferent parts of the country depending upon the local needs.  
The representative of the Ministry conceded in his oral testimony that as against 49 Food 

 9
Parks sanctioned, only 14 Food Parks are in oper ation partly but assured that vigorous 
monitoring and periodic review would expedi te their operation.  The Committee further 
note that in some cases  the State Governme nts or promoters have opened Food Parks in 
wrong places for example Food Parks which exis t at a far away distance from the place 
where raw materials are available.  The Committee further note that since the year 1999-
2000 to 2004-2005, an expenditure of Rs.100 crore has been incurred on establishment of 
Food Parks.  The Government has extended fi nancial assistance of Rs. 53.85 crore.  The 
Committee are distressed that despite an inve stment of Rs.100 crore in Food Parks, only 
14 Food Parks are functioning, that too par tially.  The Ministry   can not escape 
responsibility for tardy pace of the scheme as the grant of Rs.4 crore is no mean amount.  
The role of SNA also needs to be strengthened so as to facilitate constant monitoring of 
the Food Parks in their resp ective areas.  The Committee r ecommend that the Ministry 
should, without delay, commission a study by so me eminent expert body to go into the 
working/malfunctioning/nonfunctioning of all the Food Parks and  suggest  measures for 
fruitful operation of the Food Parks. 
1.5 The Government in its Action Taken Reply stated that the Ministry had recently 
asked the EDI, Ahmedabad to make a study of  problems of 10 food parks in the country.  
In their report, financial constr aints of promoters is stated to be one of the reasons for 
slow progress of food parks.  Other factors for slow progress of food parks is due to long 
gestation period involved, slowness in bringing in 75% of promoter, lack of interest 
among entrepreneurs to set up units in f ood parks, law and order problem, power 
shortages, water problems etc.  Progress of food park is being regularly monitored 
through periodical meetings with implemen ting agencies.  A conference of State 

 10
Ministers of Food Processing was held on 5 th November 2004.   The Conference 
discussed inter alia the problems faced by the food parks.  State Governments were 
requested to coordinate and  cooperate with  implementing agencies of the food parks so 
as to overcome the constraints being faced  by food parks.  For attracting potential 
entrepreneurs, State Governments/SNAs were also requested to consider organizing EDP 
programmes focused on food parks.  Conferen ces/seminars are also being organized for 
publicity of advantages to set up FPI units in food parks. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.6 The Committee are happy to note that the Government had appointed 
Entrepreneurship Development Institute (EDI), Ahmedabad to look into the 
problems faced by the 10 Food Parks in the country, as recommended by the 
Committee.  The Committee expect that the pr oblems faced by the rest of the Food 
Parks may also be looked into and the cons traints removed at the earliest to make 
all the Food Parks fully functional.  There should be proper and effective 
coordination between the State Governme nts and other implem enting agencies for 
removal of constraints like power and water shortages, law and order problems, etc.  
Dissemination of information regarding  Food Parks by organizing Seminars, 
Workshops, etc. for attracting entrepreneu rs and through the media may also be 
undertaken.  The Ministry should submit pe riodical reports on the progress of the 
Food Parks. 

 11
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
 
Submission of Utilization Certificates 
 
1.7 The Committee are astonished to note that  the Ministry have not been successful 
in getting utilization certificates from all th e grant receiving Food Processing Units.  In 
order to ensure effective monitoring and to  safeguard the use of public money, it is 
essential that the Ministry evolve a mech anism for receipt of Utilization Certificate 
within the stipulated time frame.  Proper and comprehensive guidelines may be evolved 
in this regard so that scarce public money is not wasted/misutilised.  The Government 
may also consider recovery of the misutilised grant from the defaulting units.  The 
Committee may also be furnished a list of such  defaulters within a period of one month 
from the day of presentation of this report to Parliament. 
1.8 The Government in its Action Taken Repl y stated that the grant of MFPI is 
released in two installments.  Before rele ase of the second instal lment, the Ministry 
obtains CA certificate of actual expenditure duly endorsed by State N odal Agency.   The 
SNA is also required to rende r a certificate that  the unit has physically come up and is 
ready for commencement of commercial produc tion.  Accordingly, second installment is 
released only after receipt of a proper utilization certificate prescribed under the General 
Financial  Rules.  None of the units is made eligible for further assistance unless they 
submit the utilization certificate of the previo us grants.  State Nodal Agencies have also 
been  asked to pursue vigorously with these units to get the utilization certificate.  A list 
of units, which have not furnished UCs is be ing prepared and will be submitted to the 
Committee shortly. 

 12
Comments of the Committee 
1.9 The Committee note that the second instal ment of financial assistance to the 
Units is  released only when the Ministry  /SNA receives the Utilisation Certificate of 
the previous grants.   The Committee are dismayed to note that till date no 
information about the list of defaulters  has been submitted to the Committee 
although more than six months have elap sed.  The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should look into the matter immediately and initiate action for recovery of 
misutilised / unutlised grant fr om the defaulting units, so that public money is not 
wasted. 

 13
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
Food Testing Laboratories 
1.10 The Committee, while taking note of the present status of Food Testing 
Laboratories in the country, feel that a strong network of food testing laboratories at least 
one in each State/Region, must be set up across the country under the direct control of the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries to ensure  food safety so as to maintain the quality 
control standards stringently.  A list of existing food testing labs may also be furnished to 
the Committee in due course. Similarly, the imported processed food items, including the 
processed food articles entering our markets cla ndestinely, must be subjected to rigorous 
quality checks so as to provide level pl aying field to indige nous Food Processing 
Industry. 
1.11 The Government in its Action Taken Reply stated that the recommendation 
relating to setting up of one food testing labor atory in each State/ region under the MFPI 
has been noted.  However, MFPI has written to all State/UT for submitting proposals for 
setting up/upgradation of  food testing laboratory.  So far,  17 food testing laboratory (in 
both public and private sector) have been assisted by MFPI.  The information about 
existing food testing laboratories is bei ng collected.  As regards putting imported 
processed food items to quality checks, the ma tter has been referred to the Department of 
Commerce and Ministry of Health for taking necessary action. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.12 The Ministry may indicate the positi on regarding setting up/upgradation of 
food testing laboratories in each Stat e/region.  The information regarding the 

 14
existing laboratories is also aw aited and may be sent immediately .  The Committee 
hardly need to emphasize that food is of  great concern and utmost importance for 
the health of the people and hence stri ct norms and quality standards should be 
fixed for which a strong network of food  testing labs needs to be established 
urgently. The Committee feel that there sh ould  be at least one Food Testing 
Laboratory in each State so that provision s of the Food Safety and Standards Bill, 
2005 are properly implemented.   The replie s of the Ministries of Health and 
Commece regarding checks on imported proce ssed food items may also be obtained 
urgently.  
 
 
  
 

 15
CHAPTER –II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation 1 
Inadequate allocation for Ministry of Food Processing Industries  
2.1 The Committee find that against a projec ted demand of Rs.2,800 crore outlay for 
the 10th Plan, the Ministry was allocated a meagre amount of Rs.650 crore.  During the 
year    2004-2005, the BE was Rs.110 crore which has been further reduced to Rs.85 
crore at RE stage. Food Proce ssing Sector is a hi gh priority sector an d has a potential to 
transform the economy of any country like  ours where agricult ural produce is in 
abundance.  Further, out of Rs.650 crore, Ministry could spend only Rs.225 crore during 
the first three years of the 10 th Plan.  Unfortunately, the Ministry has not been able to 
absorb the allocated funds over the years.   Apparently many of the Schemes for 
infrastructure development could not take o ff mainly due to defective Schemes.  The 
Committee were assured by the representatives of the Ministry that with renewed and 
vigorous monitoring, they will be able to fully  utilize the allocated funds by the terminal 
year of the 10 th Five Year Plan and overcome the constraints and difficulties of the 
Ministry due to multiplicity of agencies /organizations scattered under different 
Ministries.  
 The Committee desire the Ministry to ma ke firm steps in the right direction as 
envisaged and report back periodically of the progress made. 
 
 

 16
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The Government in its Action Taken Re ply stated that necessary amendment 
proposals have been formulated for removal of bottlenecks in implementation of the 
infrastructure schemes and submitted to the Planning Commission.  Their approval is still 
awaited.  Meanwhile, Planning Commission ha s made enhanced allocation of Rs.180 
crore for 2005-06 which represents an incr ease of 153% over the allocation of Rs.85 
crore provided in RE 2004-05.  Besides, a de tailed proposal asking additional fund under 
different schemes is also being submitted to the Planning Commissi on.   As regards the 
problem of multiplicity of agencies/organizations scattered under different Ministries, the 
matter is under consideration in consultation with the Cabinet Secretariat. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
Food Parks 
2.3 The Committee note that the Ministry have been pursuing proactively, the task of 
setting up of Food Parks in di fferent parts of the country depending upon the local needs.  
The representative of the Ministry conceded in his oral testimony that as against 49 Food 
Parks sanctioned, only 14 Food Parks are in oper ation partly but assured that vigorous 
monitoring and periodic review would expedi te their operation.  The Committee further 
note that in some cases  the State Governme nts or promoters have opened Food Parks in 
wrong places for example Food Parks which exis t at a far away distance from the place 
where raw materials are available.  The Committee further note that since the year 1999-
2000 to 2004-2005, an expenditure of Rs.100 crore has been incurred on establishment of 
Food Parks.  The Government has extended fi nancial assistance of Rs. 53.85 crore.  The 
Committee are distressed that despite an inve stment of Rs.100 crore in Food Parks, only 

 17
14 Food Parks are functioning, that too par tially.  The Ministry   can not escape 
responsibility for tardy pace of the scheme as the grant of Rs.4 crore is no mean amount.  
The role of SNA also needs to be strengthened so as to facilitate constant monitoring of 
the Food Parks in their resp ective areas.  The Committee r ecommend that the Ministry 
should, without delay, commission a study by so me eminent expert body to go into the 
working/malfunctioning/nonfunctioning of all the Food Parks and  suggest  measures for 
fruitful operation of the Food Parks. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The Government in its Action Taken Reply stated that the Ministry had recently 
asked the EDI, Ahmedabad to make a study of  problems of 10 food parks in the country.  
In their report, financial constr aints of promoters is stated to be one of the reasons for 
slow progress of food parks.  Other factors for slow progress of food parks is due to long 
gestation period involved, slowness in bringing in 75% of promoter, lack of interest 
among entrepreneurs to set up units in f ood parks, law and order problem, power 
shortages, water problems etc.  Progress of food park is being regularly monitored 
through periodical meetings with implemen ting agencies.  A conference of State 
Ministers of Food Processing was held on 5 th November 2004.   The Conference 
discussed inter alia the problems faced by the food parks.  State Governments were 
requested to coordinate and  cooperate with  implementing agencies of the food parks so 
as to overcome the constraints being faced  by food parks.  For attracting potential 
entrepreneurs, State Governments/SNAs were also requested to consider organizing EDP 
programmes focused on food parks.  Conferen ces/seminars are also being organized for 
publicity of advantages to set up FPI units in food parks. 

 18
Comments of the Committee 
2.5  For comments of the Committee please re fer to Paragraph No.1.6 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
Integrated Food Laws 
2.6 The Committee note that pursuant to th eir earlier recommendation, the Ministry 
has taken definitive steps to bring about unifo rmity of standards, quality and  regulation 
in the food processing sector whose grow th was hindered due to multiplicity of 
legislations.   An  integrated food law is under preparation under the guidance of group of 
Ministers constituted for the purpose.  While appreciating the all out and concerted 
efforts being made by the Government to have opinions of various State 
Government/Agencies on the proposed legislation, the Committee desire the Ministry to 
expedite the formulation of this much-needed legislation for the accelerated growth of the 
food processing sector.  
 The need for such an integrated food  law now assumes greater significance in 
view of the new WTO regime.  The Committee, therefore, hardly need to emphasise that 
such a legislation must be progressive and comprehensive enough to replace the 
multiplicity of laws, address the problems be ing faced by our entrepreneurs in the food 
processing sector and ensure uniformity of  standards and quality of processed goods 
whether imported ones or indigenously produced.   
 
 

 19
Reply of the Government 
2.7 The Government in its Action Taken Reply stated that Draft (‘Food Safety & 
Standards Bill 2005’) Integrated Food Law has been approved by the Cabinet in its 
meeting held on 4 th August, 2005.  The draft Bill s eeks inter alia to rationalize 
multiplicity of food laws, provide a single reference point in relation to regulation of food 
products, fixation of standards on scientific ba sis etc.   The efforts are being made to 
introduce the Bill in Parliament in its Current Session. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.8 
 
Human Resource Development  
 
2.8 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries have been implementing a Scheme 
for Human Resource Development with a BE of Rs.37 crore for 2005-2006.  The 
Committee note that out of the BE of Rs.37 crore, Rs.30 cror e have been earmarked for 
setting up of a National In stitute of Food Technology and Entrepreneurship and 
Management.  The estimated cost of the projec t is reported to be Rs.166 crore.  Due to 
limited resources available for the plan pur poses, RE for HRD in respect of 2002-2003, 
2003-2004 and 2004-2005 were restricted to Rs.2.70 crore, Rs.3.00 crore and Rs.6.00 
crore respectively.  Considering the prevailing scenario in the F ood Processing Sector, 
which is far from encouraging, and the dire need to help, develop and adopt world class 
food technology and entrepreneurs, the Comm ittee strongly feel th at the proposal for 
setting up such a national institute is quite  significant and contextual and therefore the 
same needs to be set up early without time and cost over run. 
 
 

 20
Reply of the Government 
2.9 The Government in its Action Taken Reply stated that Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries to set up a “ National Institute of Food Technology, 
Entrepreneurship and Management  (NEFTEM )”.  The roles envisaged for NIFTEM are 
aimed at development of world-class food t echnologists, entrepreneurs and managers in 
the food industry, providing business incuba tor services; undertake research, provide 
training etc.  The project cost as per the Detailed Project report is about Rs.245 crore.  
The Planning Commission agrees to the pro posal for in principle approval.  Draft 
Expenditure Finance Committee memorandum on the proposal has been circulated to 
Ministries/Department concerned for inviting their comments, for further action. 
2.10 The Government in its Action Taken Repl y stated that the subjects relating to 
food fortification, National Nutrition Policy/ Programmes, nutrition feeding, nutrition 
education of women etc., are handled by the Department of Women and Child 
Development.  Accordingly, a copy of the  recommendation has been forwarded to them 
for taking necessary action.  However, in orde r to control malnutrition and enrich  food, 
the Ministry  of Food Processing Industries assists FPI units upto Rs.3 lakh for 
fortification equipment, to adopt suitable measures for fortification 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.9 
 
Food Fortification 
 
2.11 The Committee note the efforts made by th e Ministry for food fortification in 
order to control malnutrition and to enrich common man’s food.  To start with, a Scheme 
for fortification of wheat flour has been launched under which 50 per cent of the cost of 
capital equipment of dosing machine subject to a maximum of Rs.3 lakh, is provided.   

 21
Surprisingly, despite the Scheme has been circulated to all the State 
Governments/Industries, none of  the entrepreneur has come  forward to avail of the 
benefit of the Scheme for fortification of  wheat flour. The Comm ittee further note that 
the Government have also discussed the Sc heme in the conference of SNAs held on 13 
October 2004. 
 The Committee are saddened to note that a Scheme like fortification of wheat 
flour, started with the laudabl e objective of enri ching common man’s food, continues to 
languish for want of zeal on the part of implementing agencies.   Obviously, while the 
Scheme requires to be made more attractive to facilitate its implementation, stringent 
penal provisions also need to be made by the Government for food fortification on the 
lines of the provision made for compulsory manufacture of idolised salt. 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 The Government in its Action Taken Repl y stated that the subjects relating to 
food fortification, National Nutrition Policy/ Programmes, nutrition feeding, nutrition 
education of women etc, are handled by the Department of Women and Child  
Development.  Accordingly,  a copy of the recommendation has been forwarded to them 
for taking necessary action.  However, in orde r to control malnutri tion and enrich food, 
the Ministry of Food Processing Industr ies assists, FPI Units upto Rs.3 lakh for  
fortification equipment, to adopt suitable meas ures for fortification of processed Food.   
The Ministry is also extending financial assistance to different organizations from time to 
time for organizing seminars/workshops on food  fortification.  
 
 

 22
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
Taxation 
2.13 The Food Processing Sector, with a global trade of $460 billion, is being hailed as 
the ‘Sun-rise’ sector.   For the Indian Fo od Processing Sector with a miniscule 
contribution of just 1% to th e global trade in food processi ng sector, the sun is yet to 
shine.  The Committee note that one of th e reasons for sluggish growth of Food 
Processing Sector is the presence of a host of levies except that excise duty on fruits and 
vegetables has been reduced to zero besi des certain income tax concessions to 
entrepreneurs engaged in the processing of fruits and vegetables.  According to a 
deposition of the witness, at present vari ous taxes, ranging between 20% and 40% are 
being levied on the food pro cessing sector by the Central as  well as State Governments 
which make processed food items more costl y. The Committee strongly recommend that 
the Government ought to reconsider the present tax structure on food processing sector so 
that the processed food items may become affordable for the common man in the country 
and our entrepreneurs are able to compete globally.  If necessar y, the Ministry should 
commission an exhaustive study of the entire gamut of taxation and its adverse impact on 
the growth of food processing sector and place the same before Parliament.  The 
Committee may be kept apprised of the respons e of Ministry of Finance in the matter for 
sustained and conclusive follow up.  
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The Government in its Action Taken Repl y stated that Excise duty on fruits &  
vegetable products, ice cream etc, is  alrea dy nil.  Recently, in order to give boost to 
development of food processing industries in  the country, the Government has allowed 

 23
under Income Tax Act, a deductio n of 100% of profit for five  years and 25% of profits 
for the next five years in case of new agro processing industries set up to process, 
preserve and package fruits and  vegetables .  The excise duty of 16% on dairy machinery 
has been fully waived.  Excise duty on meat, poultry and fish products has been reduced 
from  16% to 8%.  Excise duty on food grade he xane used in edible oil has been reduced 
from 32% to 16%.  The Ministry had recently  commissioned a study by M/s. TCS so as 
to look into the impact of taxes on growth of  FPI sector.  A draft report on M/s. TCS has 
been received and the same is under examination. 

 24
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 

 25
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL

 26
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation 2 
Overlapping in demarcation of responsibilities. 
5.1 The Committee note the Ministry of Food Processing In dustries was created in 
1988 to give impetus to the development of Food Processing Industries in the country.  
The role of the Ministry assumes greater significance as Food Processing is being held as 
‘Sun-rise’ sector globally.  The changing food hab its across the globe  and the mounting 
global trade in the food processing sector holds immense potential for the rise and growth 
of food processing sector in India.  Accordi ng to the deposition of the Representative of 
the Ministry of Food Processing  Industries, the Ministry is 16 years old with a paltry 
allocation of Rs.650 crore for the Tenth Five  Year Plan. Unfortunately, the Ministry 
could barely spend Rs.225 crore during the first three years of the Tenth Five Year Plan.  
Apparently, Ministry has not come out of its teething troubles or the teen’s syndrome.  
The Ministry is bedeviled with many problems which are inherent in the very nature of 
food processing sector characterized by seasonability, high perishability, low margins and 
high risk profile for the entrepreneurs.  Fu rther, there is sheer overlapping in the 
demarcation of responsibilities between various promotional bodies/structures which are 
fragmented and scattered unde r various Ministries/Departm ents as borne out by the 
following analysis. 
(i) 75% of APEDA’s Plan B udget of Rs. 53.00 crore overlaps 
with MFPI’s schematic assistance; 
(ii) Product profile of exports  is 70% of processed food; 

 27
(iii) 79% Of MPEDA’s Plan Budge t of Rs.41 crore overlaps with 
MFPI schematic assistance having a budget of Rs.110.00 
crore; 
(iv) 99% of marine exports are in processed form (frozen, dried 
or chilled); 
(v) Packaging is most crucial to food processing industry which 
contributes from 20% to 60% of the processed product cost 
and, thus holds the key to affordability solution with focused 
R&D; 
(vi) Packaging is enlisted in Allocation of Business Rules of  
MFPI; and  
     (vii) 70% of National Hort iculture Boards Plan Budget of  
Rs.105 crore overlaps with MFPI’s schematic assistance. 
The Committee are constrained to note that due to multiplicity of agencies and 
gross overlapping of roles between them, lead  to thin spread of resources, dilutes 
accountability and as such, hinders the outre ach and optimum growth of food processing 
sector. The Committee, therefor e, strongly recommend that in order to stimulate the 
growth of the food processing sector all th e aforesaid bodies must be brought under the 
unified command/umbrella of the Ministry of Food Processing. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The government in its action taken reply have stated that a proposal to bring 
APEDA, MPEDA, NHB etc., under the unified umbrella of MFPI was considered by the 

 28
Committee of Secretaries and found not accep table.  However, the matter has been 
referred to the Cabinet Secretariat for reconsideration. 

 29
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
 
Funds for Infrastructural Development Facilities 
5.3 The Committee note that the infrastructura l facilities for food processing sector in 
India are extremely poor as we are able to process only about 2% of the food produced in 
the country vis-à-vis  30% in Thailand, 80% in Brazil and 60%-70% in countries like UK 
and USA.   According to an estimate, for want of post-har vest technologies/non-
availability of food processi ng facilities, the country in curs a whopping annual wastage 
of food worth over Rs.51,000 cror e. Some of the objectives  of Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries are to minimize wastage at  all stages, transportation and processing 
of agro food produce. 
 For the development of infrastructure , the Ministry proposed a provision of 
Rs.1,351 crore for the 10 th Plan period but it was allotted only Rs.180 crore for the Plan 
period.  The utilization of  funds has also been poor at Rs.28.28 crore in 2002-2003, 
Rs.13.70 crore in 2003-2004 and Rs.10.00 crore in 2004-2005 (up to March 2005).  The 
Committee observe that the actual expenditure  for infrastructure development is just 
Rs.51.98 crore which comes to 28.88 per cent of the allotted outlay.  In the first three 
years the actual expenditure was only Rs .51.98 crore which is about 30% of the funds 
allocated for the Infrastructure development.  In their considered view, the inability to 
absorb the funds allocated is a sad reflection on the perfor mance of the Department at 
every state, i.e. of conception, formula tion, implementation and monitoring of the 
Scheme. 
 

 30
Reply of the Government 
5.4 The Government in its action taken reply ha ve stated that the infrastructure schem 
like food park is cost intensive and i nvolves long gestation period.  Under 10 th Plan the 
revised scheme provides for grant of assistance limited to 25 % of the project cost.  The 
same is low and therefore not attractive for i nvestors.  As such, there is shortage of 
proposals under the food park scheme.  Earlier in the 9 th Plan the food park scheme was 
liberal and provided for grant up to Rs.4.00 cror e and there was no such restrictions in 
terms of percentage of the project cost.  As  a result, 41 food parks were sanctioned under 
the 9th Plan scheme and so far only 10 under 10 th Plan.  Besides being limited to local 
bodies, the scheme for modernization of ab attoirs is facing similar constraints.  
Assistance for  cold storage, packaging cen ter etc., is also not attractive.  Hence, 
necessary amendment proposals have been form ulated for  removal of these bottlenecks 
in implementation of the infrastructure scheme and submitted to the Planning 
Commission.  Pace of expenditure under the scheme will improve only after the proposed 
amendments are agreed to by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. 

 31
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
 
Review of Infrastructure Development Scheme 
 
5.5 A close scrutiny of the pattern of assi stance provided under the Infrastructure 
Development Scheme for development of F ood Parks setting up of Food Chains, Value 
Added Centres/ Packaging Cent res, Modernization of Abatto irs, Strengthening of Nodal 
Agencies and Financial Assistance for North- Eastern States under the Plan Scheme show 
many  gaping loopholes and insufficiencies.  The Committee observe that the present 
assistance level is far from adequate to create quality infrastructure with the result that no 
significant headway has been made in the de velopment of desired infrastructure.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly  feel that the Mi nistry should revi se the following 
infrastructure development schemes.  
(i) Assistance level for setting up of  Food Parks must be enhanced from 
the current level of 25% of the pr oject’s cost in general areas and 
33.33% in special category States  to 75% and 90% respectively 
subject to a maximum of Rs.10 crore. 
(ii) The Scheme providing for setting-up of Food Chain, Value Added 
Centers and Packaging Centers should be integrated by enhancing the 
level of financial assistance from 25% to 50% and 33.33% to 75% in 
the general and special category areas respectively subject to a 
maximum ceiling of Rs.5 crore. 
(iii) The Scheme for Modernization of Abattoirs also needs to be 
drastically revised so that the local bodies come forward with 
proposals for financial assistance for modernization of abattoirs.  The 

 32
level of assistance, therefore, n eeds to be enhanced from 25% and 
33.33% to 50% and 75% in genera l and special category States 
respectively subject to a maximum ceiling of Rs.10 crore. 
(iv) The Scheme for strengthening of  State Nodal Agencies provides for 
lump sum grant of 5 lakhs for purch ase of basic equipments including 
computer, internet facilities, etc. after every five years. Since the States 
Nodal Agencies are not well staffed/ equipped to process the cases for 
obtaining grants from the Ministry  of Food Processing Industries, 
Government of India, the Scheme needs to be amended making the 
SNAs eligible to receive recurring annual grant from Rs.1 lakh to Rs.5 
lakh. 
(v) The financial assistance under the planned Schemes for North Eastern 
States also needs to be retailored so that the North-Eastern States 
receive enhanced assistance at the rate of 50% of the project cost 
subject to a maximum ceiling of Rs.1 crore. 
Reply of the Government 
5.6 The Government in its action taken repl y have stated that under the food park 
scheme, it is proposed  to enhance the rate of  assistance from 25% to  75% of the project 
cost in general areas and from 33.33% to  90% in special category States and the 
maximum from Rs.4.00 crore to Rs.10.00 crore. 
Rate of assistance for modernization of ab attoirs is proposed to be increase from 
25% to 50% of the project co st in general areas  and fr om 33.33% to 75% in special 

 33
category states and the maximum from Rs .4.00 crore to Rs.10.00 crore.  Proposal also 
envisages expansion of implementation agencies from local bodies to all legal entities. 
At present, the schemes of cold storage,  packaging center, value added center and 
irradiation facilities are ope rating independently on stand-al one basis.  Functionally, in 
food processing sector these activ ities are interlinked and inte r dependent.  Present rate 
of assistance i.e. @ 25% for infrastructure like cold storage, etc, is insufficient.  Hence, 
for flexibility in project planning and for a ttracting integrated proposals, it is proposed 
to restructure these schemes and provide for common rate of assistance for the full 
gamut of activities.  Accordingly, it is proposed to increase the rate of assistance for all 
components from 25% to 50% of the projec t cost in general areas and from 33.33% to 
75% in special category States subject to  maximum of Rs.5.00 crore.  It is also 
proposed to extend assistance for cold chain for horticultural produce as well.  These 
proposals are under consideration of the Planning Commission. 
Rate of assistance  for establishment/mode rnization and expansion of FPI units in 
difficult areas like North East  is proposed to be increased  from 33.33% of the project 
cost to 50% of the project cost subject  to a maximum of Rs.75.00 lakh.  Planning 
Commission has not agreed to the proposal.  As proposal is for promotion of FPI units 
in North East and is based on recomm endation of the St anding Committee of 
Parliament, Planning Commission is being requested to reconsider it. 
As regards increase in grant for SNAs  from 1.00 lakh to Rs.5.00 lakh per annum, 
the proposal has been approved by the SFC a nd necessary action to amend the scheme 
is in final stage. 

 34
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
 
Dairy Processing 
 
5.7 The Committee note that organized dairy industry accounts for less than 15% of 
the milk produced in India.  The rest of the milk is either consumed at the farm level or is 
sold as fresh, non-pasteurised milk thr ough unorganised channels.  The share of 
organized dairy industry is expected to rise rapidly – especially in the urban regions.  The 
per capita availability of milk, which was  just 124  gms per day per person in 1950-51, 
has not still crossed the limit of 232 gm s per day in 2004-2005.  The Committee observe 
that the per capita consumption of milk has not increased in  accordance with the increase 
in milk production over the years which gives the Dairy Processing Industry a fair chance 
to convert the extra available milk in to processed items.  The Committee are anguished 
to note that for want of pr ocessing facilities, the milk producers/unions/cooperatives are 
facing extreme hardships in many parts of the country where milk producers have to 
resort to distress sale so much so that milk is being sold at rates cheaper than the mineral 
water. 
   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should 
formulate suitable schemes for the organise d growth of Cooperatives engaged in the 
Dairy Sector. 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 The Government in its action taken re ply have stated that Government has 
implemented a scheme for technology upgradat ion/establishment/modernization of food 
processing industries including dairy industry.  The rate of assistance for establishment/ 
modernization of food processing units is 25 % of the cost of plant & machinery and 

 35
technical civil works subject to maximum of Rs.50 lakh in general areas and 33.33% of 
the project cost subject to a maximum of Rs.75 lakh in difficult areas.   Assistance upto 
Rs.10.00 in general areas and Rs.15.00 lakh in difficult areas is  provided to food 
processing industries incl uding dairy industry for adoption and implementing 
ISO/HACCP/GMP and other quality standards.  In addition, assistance is also provided 
for organizing workshops/ seminars/ conferen ces to create awareness among processors 
and consumers about safety and quality of food products.  As regards organized growth 
of cooperatives in dairy sector, the matter has been referred to Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying for taking necessary action. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
 
Submission of Utilization Certificates 
 
5.9 The Committee are astonished to note that  the Ministry have not been successful 
in getting utilization certificates from all th e grant receiving Food Processing Units.  In 
order to ensure effective monitoring and to  safeguard the use of public money, it is 
essential that the Ministry evolve a mech anism for receipt of Utilization Certificate 
within the stipulated time frame.  Proper and comprehensive guidelines may be evolved 
in this regard so that scarce public money is not wasted/misutilised.  The Government 
may also consider recovery of the misutilised grant from the defaulting units.  The 
Committee may also be furnished a list of such  defaulters within a period of one month 
from the day of presentation of this report to Parliament. 

 36
Reply of the Government 
5.10 The Government in its Action Taken Repl y stated that the grant of MFPI is 
released in two installments.  Before rele ase of the second instal lment, the Ministry 
obtains CA certificate of actual expenditure duly endorsed by State N odal Agency.   The 
SNA is also required to rende r a certificate that  the unit has physically come up and is 
ready for commencement of commercial produc tion.  Accordingly, second installment is 
released only after receipt of a proper utilization certificate prescribed under the General 
Financial  Rules.  None of the units is made eligible for further assistance unless they 
submit the utilization certificate of the previo us grants.  State Nodal Agencies have also 
been  asked to pursue vigorously with these units to get the utilization certificate.  A list 
of units, which have not furnished UCs is be ing prepared and will be submitted to the 
Committee shortly. 
Comments of the Committee 
5.11  For comments of the Committee please refe r to Paragraph No.1.9 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
 
 

 37
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
 
Food Testing Laboratories 
 
5.12 The Committee, while taking note of the present status of Food Testing 
Laboratories in the country, feel that a strong network of food testing laboratories at least 
one in each State/Region, must be set up across the country under the direct control of the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries to ensure  food safety so as to maintain the quality 
control standards stringently.  A list of existing food testing labs may also be furnished to 
the Committee in due course. Similarly, the imported processed food items, including the 
processed food articles entering our markets cla ndestinely, must be subjected to rigorous 
quality checks so as to provide level pl aying field to indige nous Food Processing 
Industry. 
Reply of the Government 
5.13 The Government in its Action Taken Reply stated that the recommendation 
relating to setting up of one food testing labor atory in each State/ region under the MFPI 
has been noted.  However, MFPI has written to all State/UT for submitting proposals for 
setting up/upgradation of  food testing laboratory.  So far,  17 food testing laboratory (in 
both public and private sector) have been assisted by MFPI.  The information about 
existing food testing laboratories is bei ng collected.  As regards putting imported 
processed food items to quality checks, the ma tter has been referred to the Department of 
Commerce and Ministry of Health for taking necessary action. 

 38
Comments of the Committee 
5.14  For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No.1.12 of Chapter-I of 
the Report.  
 
 
                                          
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
18  January, 2006                                                   Chairman, 
 28 Pausa, 1927 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Agriculture  

 39
APPENDIX- I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 18TH JANUARY, 2006 AT 1100 HRS. IN  
ROOM, ‘139’, FIRST FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri Raghunath Jha 
7. Smt. Rupatai D.Patil Nilangekar 
8. Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy 
9. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
10. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
11. Shri Harish Rawat 
12. Dr.M.S.Gill 
13. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
14. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
15. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
16. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
4. Shri D.S. Malha    -  Under Secretary 

 40
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman, welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and requested them to deliberate on the first item of the agenda of that day, 
i.e., the consideration of the statement pr epared by the Committee Secretariat comprising 
the comments/suggestions received from vari ous organisations on ‘The Food Safety and 
Standards Bill, 2005’ and after some deliberation decided that the draft report on the said  
Bill may be prepared by the Secretariat and be circulated to the Committee for their 
consideration by the first week of February, 2006.   
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up Memoranda No. 2 containing draft 13 th 
Action Taken Report on the 9 th Report on Demands for Grants  (2005-06) of the Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture  and Cooperation) for consideration and 
adoption. 
[Smt. Mohsina Kidwai, MP in the chair.] 
 The Committee also took up Memora ndum Nos. 3, 4 and 5 containing 
draft 14 th, 15 th and 16 th Action Taken Reports on the 10 th, 11 th and 12 th Reports on 
Demands for Grants relating to the Ministry of Agriculture (Departm ent of Agricultural 
Research and Education); Ministry of Agri culture (Department of Animal Husbandry 
Dairying and Fisheries); and Ministry of F ood Processing Industries for consideration 
and adoption. 
3. The Committee then adopted the draf t Action Taken Reports with certain 
additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee. 
4. The Committee thereafter authorized the Chairman to present the above-
mentioned Reports to the House on a date and time convenient to him. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 41
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE TWELVETH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA) 
  
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     12 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Obser vations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Serial Nos. 1,5,7,8,9 and 11 
 
T o t a l          6  
 
P e r c e n t a g e         5 0 %    
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Serial No.  Nil 
 
T o t a l          N i l   
      
P e r c e n t a g e          N i l  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies 
Of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
Serial Nos.  Nil 
 
T o t a l          N i l    
 
P e r c e n t a g e         N i l  
 
(v) Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which  
Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Serial No.  2,3,4,6,10 and 12 
 
T o t a l          6    
 
P e r c e n t a g e         5 0 %  
 