STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION)
PRICING POLICY OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE
FORTY-FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JUNE, 2008/ASHADHA, 1930 (Saka)
41
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

FORTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2007-08)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION)
PRICING POLICY OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE
    Presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha on  27.06.2008
     Presented to Lok Sabha on   22.07.2008
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on     _________
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JUNE, 2008/ASHADHA, 1930 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COA No  206
Price:  Rs.
© 2008 By Lok Sabha Secretariat
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha
(Twelfth Edition) and printed by
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

<CONTENTS>
     PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08)……………………… (iii)
INTRODUCTION (v)
      R E P O R T
PART I  Analysis of Pricing Policy of Agricultural Produce…… 1
PART II           Recommendations/Observations ………………………. 35
APPENDICES
APPENDIX  I Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee
    held on 4 th October, 2007…………………    62
 APPENDIX  II Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee
    held on 30 th October, 2007…………………     65
APPENDIX  III Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee
    held on 12 th June, 2008…………………     68
APPENDIX  IV Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee
    held on 19 th June, 2008…………………    70
(i)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2007-2008)
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
      2.  Shri Ranen Barman
      3.  Shri Anil Basu
      4.  Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
      5.  Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
      6.  Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi
      7.  Shri Khagen Das
      8.  Shri Dharmendra
      9.  Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar
    10.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
    11.  Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah
    12.  Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire
    13.  Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
    14.  Shri Prabodh Panda
    15.  Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil
    16.  Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Nilangekar Patil
    17.  Shri K.J.S.P.Reddy
    18.  Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy
    19.  Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh
    20.  Shri M.P.Veerendrakumar
    21.  Shri Baleshwar Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
    22.  Shri Harish Rawat
#  23.  Dr. M.S. Gill
    24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
    25.  Shri Vikram Verma
    26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar
@ 27.  Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed
@ 28.  Shri Datta Meghe
    29.  Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
    30.  Shri M.Rajasekara Murthy
    31.  Prof. M.S.Swaminathan
 * 32.     Shri Ishwar Singh
# Ceased to be the member of this Committee due to his appointment as Minister of State
(Independent charge) in the Council of Ministers on 6.04.2008
@ Ceased to be the members of this Committee due to retirement from Rajya Sabha on
2.04.2008
* Joined the Committee on 14th May, 2008.
(iii)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   -   Addl. Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh   -   Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Veena Sharma   -   Director
4. Shri Raj Kumar   -   Deputy Secretary
5. Shri N.S. Hooda   -   Deputy Secretary
(iv)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by
the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this Forty-First Report on
Pricing Policy of Agricultural Produce of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation).
2. The Committee took a briefing on the subject from the representatives of the
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) on 4th October, 2007
and their oral evidence was taken on 30th October, 2007.
3. The Committee considered and discussed the Report at their sitting held on
12th June, 2008 and adopted it at their sitting held on 19th June, 2008.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) for giving evidence and for
placing before the Committee the study material and information desired in connection
with the examination of the subject.
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha
Secretariat attached to the Committee.
6. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in bold letters and placed at Part II of the report.
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV
 24 June, 2008 Chairman,
 3 Ashadha, 1930 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on Agriculture
(v)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

REPORT
PART I
(A) INTRODUCTORY
 In India, the agriculture price policies and allied instruments were evolved
in the pre-Independence era.  The procurement and distribution of major food
grains were started and statutory maximum prices were fixed, but were not
strictly enforced.  In the post-Independence era, the objective of achieving food
security has been combined with environment sustainability.  The objective of the
Government¶s price policy for agri-produce is to set remunerative prices with a
view to encourage higher investment and production.  Though the Government
decided to purchase food grains at fixed prices, if market prices fell precipitously,
but till 1954 there was not sharp decline in food prices.
2. The demand for food grains particularly rice and wheat, was on the
increase from year to year.  This is because population was growing and
incomes were rising and a trend was developing towards increased level of
consumption as well as substitution of coarse grains like maize, jawar, etc. by
wheat and rice.  In the circumstances shortages even of a marginal nature were
likely to persist and there was a steady upward trend in price levels to bring
demand and supply into balance.
(B) COMMISSION FOR AGRICULTURAL COSTS AND PRICES (CACP)
3. Till 1964, procurement was confined to surplus States.  It was extended to
deficit States as well during the drought years and thereafter.  In a situation of
shortage or scarcity, unregulated purchase and movement of food grains by
private trade led to indiscriminate and speculative rise in prices by movement of
surpluses of the producing regions to areas of high purchasing power.  To deal
with that situation, the Government of India took a number of decisions.  On 1 st
August, 1964, the Government of India appointed a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Shri L.K. Jha, Secretary to the then Prime Minister on the
determination of the prices of rice and wheat for the 1964-65 season.  The
Committee was asked to advise on:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(a) the determination of producers ¶ prices in respect of the 1964-65
season, first for rice and then for wheat on an all-India basis with such
quality-wise and region-wise variations as might be necessary, which
are fair and economical and also the reasonable wholesalers ¶ margins,
retailers¶ margins and consumer prices;
(b) the terms of reference which would be suitable for an agency to
provide such advice on a continuous basis in respect of future
seasons, the suitable form of such agency, and the kind of personnel it
should have; and
(c) the best manner in which the work of such an agency could be fitted in
with arrangements being made for advice on policy in regard to wages,
incomes and savings.
Later on, the Committee was also asked to suggest prices of coarse food
grains for the 1964-65 season.
4. The Committee submitted its report related to prices on 24 th September,
1964 and in respect of the agency to advise on price policy and price structure on
24th December, 1964.  Based on the recommendations of the Committee, the
Agricultural Prices Commission (APC) was set up on 1 st January 1965 with the
basic objective of assuring fair prices for farm produce and to advise the
Government on price policy of major agricultural commodities.  The thrust of the
policy in 1965 was to meet the overall needs of the economy and with due regard
to the interest of the producer and the consumer.  At that point of time, the
highest priority was to maximize production since the country was passing
through a critical shortage of food grains.  Perhaps the most significant aspect of
the price support mechanism has been the insulation of farmers against a decline
in prices. When an overall balance between demand and supply was in sight in
1980, the APC ¶s terms of reference, apart from other issues, also included for
taking into account the changes in the Terms of Trade between agricultural and
non-agricultural sectors.  The Commission was renamed in 1985 as the
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP).
5. The Commission is composed of a Chairman, a Member-Secretary, two
official members and three non-official members.  The non-official members are
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the representatives of the farming community.  They are usually persons with
long field experience and active association with the farming community.
6. Asked as to why the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices
(CACP) to be a Central body and why such a body should not be there for each
State, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under:-
³A mechanism for recommendations for support prices by a technical body
i.e., the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) to fix the
MSP for various agricultural commodities already exists.  If such a body is
set up in each State, that will lead to duplication of the existing
mechanism.
Different MSPs by the State Governments for the same crop say, wheat or
paddy, would encourage inefficient production and would go against the
principle of comparative advantage in producing specific crops.  Such a
system would also distort the market.  If all the State Governments start
doing similar job through such commissions, it would also entail financial
burden on them without much gain.´
7. Elucidating further on the issue, the Secretary during the evidence stated:
³We cannot have a separate price, one price for µ;¶ State and another
price for µ<¶ State.  It will not be operational. If we assume that the States
can have their own Commissions, they may not have the resources to
operate their MSP.  At least, at the Central level, the Central Government
resources are available to them.  Depending on the quality of say, wheat
or paddy or the location or the area and depending on the market, the
farmers will get the best possible prices. ´
8. Enquired as to why CACP cannot be made a statutory body, the Ministry
in a written reply stated that it is already an independent body and provides
professional advice to the Government on agricultural price policy and related
matters.  As such, it is autonomous in its functioning and the Government fixes
the MSP based on its advice.  In view of this, there may not be any additional
advantage by giving statutory status to CACP.
(C) AGRICULTURAL PRICE POLICY, 1986
9. There are three basic pillars of a sound agricultural economy: (i)
productive technology package, (ii) efficient deliveries of inputs and services, and
(iii) remunerative and stable market prices for agricultural produces.  Keeping this
in view, the Government announced in 1986 ³Agricultural Price Policy: A Long
Term Perspective ´ with a twin objectives of ensuring a remunerative price to
growers for their produce with a view to encouraging higher investment and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

production, and to protect the interest of consumers by making available
supplies, particularly of essential commodities, at reasonable prices.  It
addresses the issues relating to the role of the price policy, price support
mechanism, seasonality in prices, farm input price policy, terms of trades,
relevance of international prices and poverty alleviation aspects of price policy.
With the advent of Green Revolution, the agricultural scenario changed
dramatically.  Agricultural Price Policy of the Government of India stipulates that
a uniform support price for the whole country would lead to efficient utilization of
resources so that low cost States may benefit more than others.  A uniform price
encourages crop specialization and optimum use of nation ¶s land, water and
other productive resources on the basis of comparative advantage.
10. During evidence, the representative of the Ministry further elaborated that
µmany years ago, when there were some restrictions on the movement of
commodities, probably a price could work in a State.  Presently, it will be
impossible to operate by giving separate price in different States.
(D) FACTORS CONSIDERED BY CACP FOR RECOMMENDING MSP
11. The Committee have been informed that at present 24 agricultural
produce are covered under the Minimum Support Prices (MSPs).  These are
Paddy, Jowar, Bajra, Maize, Ragi, Arhar (Tur), Moong, Urad, Cotton, Groundnut
in Shell, Sunflower seed, Soyabeen, Sesamum, Nigerseed, Tobacco, Wheat,
Barley, Gram, Masur (Lentil), Rapeseed / Mustard, Safflower, Copra, Jute, and
Sugarcane.  In addition, for plantation crops such as tea, coffee and rubber, the
Deptt. of Commerce is implementing a Price Stabilization Fund Scheme.
12. In formulating the recommendations in respect of the level of minimum
support prices, the Commission takes into account, apart from a comprehensive
view of the entire structure of the economy of a particular commodity or group of
commodities, the following factors:
 i) Cost of production
           ii) Demand and supply
          iii) Trends in market prices ²both domestic and international
          iv)        Changes in input prices
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

           v) Parity between prices paid and prices received by the farmers.
 vi)        Inter-crop price parity
           vii)  Effect on industrial cost structure
          viii)  Effect on cost of living
         ix)  Effect on general price level/inflation
  x)     Assessment of objective needs of the economy at a particular
   point of time, including food security, agricultural diversification,
   etc.
13. The Comprehensive Scheme for Studying the Cost of Cultivation of
Principal Crops in India was initiated in 1970-71 on the recommendations of a
Technical Committee on Indices of Input Costs appointed by the Government.
The Special Experts Committee on Cost of Production Estimates, constituted in
1979 under the Chairmanship of Dr. S.R. Sen had recommended for the
adoption of a crop complex approach to replace the single crop approach
followed till that time.  A modified cost classification was also suggested.  These
recommendations of the Special Expert Committee were implemented from
1981-82.  In 1990, another Expert Committee for Review of Methodology of Cost
of Production of Crops was constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr. C.H.
Hanumantha Rao.  Partially modifying the recommendation of this Committee
relating to valuation of labour, the Government decided that the basis of valuation
of labour should be statutory wage rate or the actual market rate, whichever is
higher.  The Government also accepted the Committee ¶s recommendation
relating to computation of a separate Cost in order to account for managerial
input of the farmers.
14. The estimates of cost of cultivation/cost of production which is an
important input for forming the recommendation of MSP, are made available to
the Commission through the Comprehensive Scheme for Studying the Cost of
Cultivation of Principal Crops. These data are collected through State Agricultural
Universities and Agro-Economic Research Centres located in various states. The
sample size is 8,400 holdings. The estimates take into account real factors of
production and include all actual expenses in cash and kind incurred in
production by a farmer, rent paid for leased in land, imputed value of family
labour, interest value of owned capital assets (excluding land), rental value of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

owned land (net of land revenue), depreciation on farm implements and buildings
and other miscellaneous expenses.
15. With a view to interacting with various interest groups and stake holders
in connection with the preparation of Price Policy Reports, the Commission
follows the sequence of steps indicated below:
(i) Identification of the main issues of relevance for the ensuing
season (short, medium or long term).
(ii) Issuing questionnaire to Central Ministries, State Governments and
other organisations related to trade, industry, processors, and
farmers both in the cooperative and the private sector and seeks
their views on relevant issues and factual information on related
variables.
(iii) Subsequent to step (ii), holding separate discussions with the State
Governments, Central Ministries/Departments and other
organisations. The Commission also interacts with research and
academic institutions like ICAR and keeps track of relevant studies
and takes them into account.
(iv) Undertaking visits to areas/mandis for on-the-spot observations and
getting feedback from local level organisations and farmers.
16. The Commission also obtains extensive feedback from the State
Governments and other agencies which, inter alia, provide valuable information
with regard to movements in the State specific input prices as also estimates of
cost of cultivation obtained through surveys conducted by the respective State
Governments themselves. In addition, the Commission makes use of the
wholesale price indices of the relevant inputs as are available from the Office of
Economic Adviser, Ministry of Industry & Commerce. These indices are used for
tracking the movements of prices of certain inputs for which reliable and direct
price data are not available.
17. Under the sampling design of the Comprehensive Scheme for Studying
the Cost of Cultivation of Principal crops, each State is demarcated into a
homogenous agro-climatic zone based on cropping pattern, soil type, rainfall, etc.
The primary sampling units (Tehsils) are allocated to different zones in proportion
to total area of all the crops covered in the study.  The sampling design of the
scheme continues to be three-stage stratified random sampling design with tehsil
as the first stage unit, village/cluster of villages as the second stage unit and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

holding as the third and ultimate stage unit.  Based on this cost of production per
quintal is worked out for the major growing states, for specific crops, and their
weighted average is estimated and considered by CACP, among other factors,
for recommending MSP.
18. The cost of cultivation/production taken into account includes all paid out
costs, such as, those incurred on account of hired human labour, bullock
labour/machine labour(both hired and owned) and rent paid for leased in land
besides cash and kind expenses on use of material inputs like seeds, fertilizers,
manures, irrigation charges including cost of diesel/electricity for operation of
pump sets, etc, the details of which are given below:
(I) COST ITEM:
The items of cost of cultivation cover both paid out cost (out of pocket
expenses) and the imputed costs.  The items covered under these costs are:
Paid out costs:
(i) Hired labour (human, animal and machinery).
(ii) Maintenance expenses on owned animals and machinery
(iii) Expenses on material inputs such as seed (home grown and
purchased), fertilizer, Manure (owned & purchased), Pesticides and
Irrigation.
(iv) Depreciation on implements and farm buildings (such as cattle
sheds, machine sheds, storage sheds)
(v) Land revenue.
(vi) Rend paid for leased-in-land.
Imputed costs
 Value of family labour/managerial input of the farmer, rent of owner land
and interest on owned fixed capital for which the farmer does not incur any cash
expenses.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

II. IMPUTATION PROCEDURES:
 Some of the inputs used in production process come from family sources.
The procedure adopted for deriving imputed values of these inputs is as under:
Items Procedure
i) Family Labour On the basis of statutory wage rate or actual
market rate whichever is higher.
ii) Owned animal labour On the basis of cost of maintenance which includes
the following:
(a) Cost of green and fry fodder.
(b) Cost of concentrates.
(c) Depreciation on animals & cattle sheds.
(d) Upkeep labour charges.
(e) Other expenses, if any.
iii) Owned machinery
     charges
On the basis of cost of maintenance of farm
machinery which includes diesel, electricity,
lubricants, depreciation, repairs and other
expenses, if any.
iv) Implements Depreciation & charges on account of minor
repairs.
v) Farm produced manure Evaluation at rates prevailing in the village.
vi) Rent of owned land Estimated on the basis of prevailing rents in the
village for identical type of land or as reported by
the sample farmers, subject to the ceiling of fair
rents given in the land legislation of the concerned
State.
vii) Interest on owned Fixed
     capital
Interest on present value of fixed assets charged at
the rate of 10% per annum.
viii) Interest on working
      capital
Interest is charged at the rate of 12.5% per annum
on the working capital for half the period of crop.
ix) Kind payments The kind payments are evaluated at prices
prevalent in the village at the time such payments
are made.
x) Main product & by-
    product
Imputed on the basis of post-harvest prices
prevailing in the selected villages.
III. COST CONCEPTS:
 Costs are generated following certain cost concepts.  These cost concepts
and the items of costs included under each concept are given below:
Cost A1:   (i) Value of hired human labour.
       (ii) Value of hired bullock labour.
       (iii) Value of owned bullock labour.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

         (iv) Value of owned machinery labour.
       (v) Hired machinery charges.
       (vi) Value of seed (both farm produced and purchases).
       (vii) Value of insecticides and pesticides.
       (viii) Value of manure (owned and purchased).
       (ix) Value of fertilizer
       (x) Depreciation on implements and farm buildings.
        (xi) Irrigation charges.
        (xii) land revenue, cesses and other taxes.
       (xiii) Interest on working capital.
       (xiv) Miscellaneous expenses.
Cost A2 : Cost A 1+ rent paid for leased -in land.
Cost B1 : Cost A 1+ interest on value of owned fixed capital assets (excluding land)
Cost B2  Cost B 1+ rental value of owned land(net of land revenue) and rent paid for
leased-in land.
Cost C1 : Cost B 1+ imputed value of family labour
Cost C2 : Cost B 2+ imputed value of family labour
Cost C2* : Cost C 2+Additional value of human labour based on use of higher rate. i.e.
Statutory Wage rate or the actual market rate.  This is an intermediate Concept.
Cost C3 : Cost C 2* +10 percent of Cost C 2* to account for managerial input of the farmer.
IV. ALLOCATION OF JOINT COSTS
 The expenditure incurred on, or imputed for, some of the cost items relate
to the farm as a whole.  Such joint costs are allocated to individual enterprises,
among different categories of livestock and so on.  Depreciation on farm
buildings implements, land rents, land revenue, cesses and taxes, interest on
owned fixed capital are such costs which are allocated to individual crop
enterprises in proportion to their areas.  The cost on livestock is allocated to each
category of animals in proportion of its numbers to the total number of animals
owned by the farmer.
V. APPORTIONMENT OF JOINT COSTS
 The apportionment of total cost incurred jointly for different crops grown in
crop mixtures is done in proportion to the total value of output contributed by
individual crops in the crop mixtures.  The apportionment of total cost of
cultivation between the main product and the by-product is done in the proportion
to their contribution to the total value of output.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

VI. EVALUATION OF FARM ASSETS
 The following procedure is adopted for the evaluation of farm assets:-
Item Procedure
Owned & self-cultivated land Evaluated at rates prevalent in the
village taking into account the
differences in type of soil, distance
from source of irrigation, etc.
Farm building (cattle sheds, Storage
sheds, etc.)
Evaluated at rates prevailing in the
village.
Implements and other Farm
Machinery
Evaluated at market prices.
Livestock Evaluated at market prices.
19. The details of cost of various inputs, for wheat and paddy are given in the
Table µ$¶ below:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

20. When asked to explain how the farmers of the State with higher cost of
production are compensated for their cost of production of a crop when the
Government decides single MSP without taking into account the regional
differences, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as follows:-
³The variation in cost of production appears wide, i.e., in the case of wheat
total cost of Rs. 24,197 per hectare in Haryana and Punjab for 2004-05,
while in Chhattisgarh, it was about Rs.11,443 per hectare. In the case of
paddy, cost of cultivation per hectare in Karnataka was Rs.31,360 in 2003-
04, and in Tamil Nadu it was Rs.29,632 whereas in Chhattisgarh, Bihar
and, Himachal Pradesh Rs.13604, Jharkhand it was around Rs. 13,000.
However, the Cost of production per quintal is influenced by
productivity/yield level of crops. As per the cost of production projected by
CACP for 2007-08 for wheat it was Rs.556 per quintal in Punjab, Rs.590
in Haryana, Rs.817 in Himachal Pradesh, and Rs.921 in Chhattisgarh.
Wherever the productivity levels of wheat are low, their cost of production
is comparatively high.  The weighted average cost of production worked
out by CACP was Rs.624 per quintal for 2007-08. The Government had
already announced Rs.1000 per quintal as MSP for 2007-08, which is
higher than the projected cost of production for 2007-08 for various States.
The cost of production tends to vary from State to State and also within the
same State from region to region. Since MSP is recommended by CACP for
the country as a whole, the weighted average cost method has been
followed for arriving at the cost of cultivation/production of the concerned
agricultural produce. While recommending MSP, an effort is made to cover
at least the paid out expenses (A2) of farmers in high cost regions plus the
imputed cost (FL) of family labour. (i.e., A2+FL cost) and C2 cost (i.e., full
cost of production including the imputed rental value of owned land and
capital) in relatively efficient states, keeping some margin for the benefit of
farmers.´
21. The price of agricultural products generally decline at the time of
harvesting, due to heavy arrivals in the market.  In such a situation, MSP is
implemented through designated Central and State agencies to prevent undue
decline in prices.
22. Enquired about the reasons for not announcing bonus at the beginning
along with MSP, the Committee have been informed that MSP is announced
before the sowing season begins. It may not be feasible to announce bonus with
MSP since the actual crop production situation, price level and demand-supply
scenario becomes clearer just before the harvesting season.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

23. On seeking the opinion of the Government, that while fixing the MSP, if
cost of production is taken as the cost of production incurred by the agriculture
farms in the Agricultural Universities, the Ministry responded as under:-
³The cost of production involved under experimental farms/demonstration
farms of the universities, may not represent ground reality since the crops
on those farms are grown under ideal conditions such as optimal use of
various inputs and scientific methods of cultivation. In fact the cost of
production incurred by the farmers and collected from a sample size of
8,400 holdings located in various parts of the country through various
agricultural universities, are more representative, and currently being used
by CACP.´
24. When enquired about the reasons for using Average Cost Method instead
of Synthetic Modeling Method, the Ministry in a written reply stated as follows:-
³Synthetic Modeling Method of cost estimation basically involves having
actual series of cost data, and randomly selected sample from it to create
a synthetic cost series by generating cost changes. This requires
collection of huge data.  In Indian conditions, where there are over 120.82
million farm holdings (as per 2000-01 Agriculture Census), of which 63 per
cent are marginal and 18.88 per cent are small, the collection of data for
all of them is not feasible.  Added to this, is the diverse agro-climatic
conditions in which a particular crop is grown would also affect this type of
cost calculation.
In the existing methodology used for estimating the cost of production of
various crops in the country with the help of State Agricultural
Universities/select centres, the cost on account of fixed assets is taken as
10% of the value of such assets and included in the cost of production.
Apart from this, imputed rental value is also taken into account as one of
the components of cost of production. Further, variable costs on account
of labour, seed, fertilizer, interest on working capital and other inputs are
also considered. As such, a mechanism for an objective estimate of cost
of production is already in position. ´
25. During the evidence, Committee were informed that CACP at present
takes into account C2 cost for recommending MSP. When enquired, whether
MSP was being increased by 50% over C2 cost, the Ministry in a written reply
informed that considering the terms of reference of CACP and the long term price
policy, a mechanical linkage of cost of production with MSP would not be
desirable.
26. Elaborating further, the Secretary during the evidence stated:-
³It is because we have to look at the market price; we have to look at other
cases.  In some cases it can be less than 50 per cent; in some cases it
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

can be more also depending on the need.  So there cannot be a very
simple mechanical formula for just adding 50 per cent.  If you look at it, the
last three years¶ increase can be more than 50 per cent also ´.
27. The Committee have been informed that around 60 per cent of the gross
cropped area in the country being under rainfed condition, the risk element
involved in farming becomes crucial.  The Price risk is covered by MSP.  The
productivity/production loss due to weather aberrations and other reasons are
covered by the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme(NAIS) which was
introduced in the country from Rabi 1999-2000 season. A comprehensive risk
insurance provided to cover yield loss due to non-preventable risks viz. natural
fire and lightening; Storm, Hailstorm, Cyclone, Typhoon, Tempest, Hurricane,
Tornado, Flood, Inundation and Landslide; Drought, Dry Spells; Pests/Diseases
etc.  Losses arising out of war and nuclear risks, malicious damage and other
preventable risks are excluded.  The scheme is operating on the basis of µArea
Approach¶ and defined area of insurance may be tehsil, block, mandal, gram
panchayat etc.  The scheme is voluntary for States/UTs and the States/UTs are
free to opt in favour of the scheme. Presently, 23 States and 2 UTs are
implementing NAIS in the country.  However, within the unit area, farmers
availing seasonal agricultural operations loans from financial institutions for
growing notified crops are compulsorily covered under the scheme while non-
loanee farmers are covered on optional basis.
28. With regard to inclusion of weather aberrations in cost calculations and to
give options to the farmers/State Government, an alternative product which is not
based on crop cutting experiments and with less moral hazard and early
settlement of claims, an alternative product in the form of Weather Based Crop
Insurance Scheme(WBCIS) has been introduced by Government as announced
in the Union Budget 2007-08.  The said Scheme has been implemented in
selected areas of Karnataka State during Kharif 2007 season.  WBCIS intended
to provide insurance protection to the farmers against adverse incidence, such as
deficit and excess rainfall which are deemed to impact adversely the crop
production.  The scheme was implemented as an alternative to NAIS.  The
WBCIS is based on actuarial regime but to make the scheme competitive,
premium actually charged from farmers have been restricted to at par with NAIS.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

In Kharif 2007, Pilot WBCIS was implemented in 70 hoblies of Karnataka and
about 40,000 farmers have been covered under the scheme.
29. Pilot WBCIS is proposed to be implemented in Rabi 2007-08 on a larger
scale in terms of coverage of area (12 States) and crops.   In addition to
Agriculture Insurance Company of India Ltd. (AIC) participation of private
insurers i.e. ICICI-LOMBARD General Insurance Company and IFFCO-TOKIO
General Insurance Company has also been proposed for selected areas.
Administrative Approval for implementation of Pilot WBCIS in Rabi 2007-08 has
already been issued.
30. Clarifying the position further on the issue of risk factors and crop
insurance, the Secretary during evidence stated:
³So far as agriculture is concerned, there is no mortality table.  But when
the insurance companies determine the insurance, they do calculate the
actual rate of premium based on the risk profile.  That is being done for
both, for crop insurance and otherwise.  We have introduced a system
which varies across different States for different crops.  In some States,
particularly, the drought prone States and risky crops like groundnut, the
risk can go up as high as 35 per cent.  They also consider risk based on
the coefficient variation and what is the minimum. There are different
criteria.  There is a mechanism.  Crop insurance is more difficult than life
or general insurance.  In the case of general insurance, like motorcar, we
deal with an asset which already exists.  Similarly, life insurance, we deal
with somebody who already exists.  But in the case of crop, we are trying
to ensure something which is yet to exist.  So, there are complexities.
Recently, it has been recommended by the Alagh Committee that crop
insurance will also be included as a part of cost.  The premium may
appear to be low because it is highly subsidised.  It may be six per cent,
seven per cent or eight per cent or even more.  But to help the farmer, it
varies from 1.5 per cent to 3 per cent.  But whatever the cost is incurred,
will be included as a part of the cost ´.
31. Asked whether CACP take into account the cost of living of farmers, their
nourishment and income parity with the lowest paid government employees, the
Ministry replied:
³The CACP recommends only the minimum support prices, the main
objective of which is to provide the farmers a reasonable and
remunerative price of a commodity.  At present, the cost of nourishment of
farmers, their income parity with Government employees are not taken
into account.  However, among other factors, effect on general cost of
living, which includes that of farmers, is kept in view while recommending
MSP.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

32. About treating farmers as skilled labour, the Secretary during the evidence
stated:-
³Farmers are not considered to be unskilled because they have different
types of minimum wage for ploughing, for different activities.  These are
considered actually to be the different types of skills.  So, it is not purely
an unskilled type of wage rate but it is a different question whether a wage
rate is low or high.  But the skill is certainly taken into consideration ´
33. In a post-evidence reply, the Ministry has further clarified that as per the
presently followed methodology, the value of family labour is already imputed at
actual market rate paid to the hired labour or statutory wage rate.  However,
considering the skill and experience of majority of the farmers in various
agricultural activities, there is a case for treating them as skilled workers.
34. Asked whether there is any mechanism for post-procurement adjustment
under the existing scheme, the Ministry replied as under:
³In addition to the MSP, the Government also provides bonus as and
when considered necessary after assessing the market trend and crop
prospects and considering the interest of both the producers and the
consumers.  To implement the scheme, the designated central and state
agencies purchase/procure the commodities of which the market prices
tend to fall below the MSP fixed by the Government.  In the existing
mechanism, there is no post-procurement adjustment in these prices´
35. On a suggestion made by the Committee that while recommending the
MSP, the CACP should take into account actual cost and not notional cost,
insurance premia and other costs, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated:-
³The CACP takes into account actual cost as assessed for various crops
based on studies conducted by the State Agricultural Universities, on a
regular basis.  For some inputs when farmer does not pay out of his
pocket, certain imputed value is taken into account to arrive at a cost of
production which is closer to the actual cost.  Based on this and other
factors, including terms of trade between agriculture and non-agriculture,
MSP of various crops are worked out by CACP.  A table containing index
of prices paid and prices received by farmers is enclosed (Table µ%¶).´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

36. About the subsidized bank loan, the Ministry informed that farmers may
avail short-term credit from the commercial banks, cooperative credit structure
and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs). From Kharif 2006-07, farmers are being
provided crop loan upto Rs.3.00 lakh at 7 per cent rate of interest.
37. During evidence, when the Committee suggested that rate of interest on
farm credit should be reduced from the prevailing rate 7% to 5%.  On this, the
representative of the Ministry in a positive node informed that ³Certainly, we will
bring it to the notice of the Finance Ministry ´
38. A comprehensive credit policy for agriculture was announced by the
Government on 18 th June 2004, wherein it was targeted to double the credit
availability to the sector in the next three years. This target has already been
achieved. As against the credit flow of Rs. 86,981 crore during 2003-04, it has
increased to Rs. 2.03 lakh crore during 2006-07.
39. Enquired as to how CACP take into account loan taken by the farmer from
landlord, the Ministry in a written reply stated:-
³For estimating the cost of cultivation / production,  interest on fixed capital
as well as on the  working capital @12.5 per cent per annum is taken into
account.´
40. When enquired about the reasons for not fixing higher MSP for cotton so
as to give some respite to the cotton growers, the Ministry in a post-evidence
reply stated as follows:-
³While recommending the MSPs price policy seeks to ensure  that the
support price covers atleast  the A2+FL cost of production of the various
States. It may also be mentioned  that as productivity improves and the
cost of production declines, the margin available for the farmers would
improve. The domestic prices of cotton were ruling high in various parts of
the country. Due to considerable growth in export demand, prices continue
to rule high. The CACP, an expert body, is expected to take these factors
into account while recommending MSP for cotton in the coming season /
year.´
41. On being enquired, when suicide rate is high in cotton growing areas, why
MSP for cotton (F-414/H-777/J 34) has been raised only by 1.7 per cent during
2006-07 over the previous year, the Ministry replied:-
³CACP takes into account all relevant factors while recommending MSP of
cotton. However, in view of the relatively high cost of production of cotton,
price support alone cannot solve the problem of suicides. The main
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

reasons for suicides are high level of indebtedness, lack of credit, crop
failure and lack of irrigation facility, etc. ´
42. Elucidating further on the issue, the Secretary during evidence stated:-
³In case of cotton, the increase has been 1.9 per cent to two per cent.  It
depends on the variety.  I have some interesting figures, which I would like
to mention here.  In the case of F41H and F777, the latest increase has
been 1.69 per cent or 1.7 per cent.  In the case of H4 variety, it is 2 per
cent this year.  If you look at the cost of production, the cost of production
of C2 cotton between 2001 and 2002 was Rs.2358, then it declined to Rs.
2100.  Now, it is Rs.2000.  Having gone into the calculation of CACP and
based on the cost of cultivation studies, there has not been any increase
in the case of cotton or there is partly some decline in the product cost for
the last 4 to 6 years because the input price has gone down and
productivity has gone up.  So, the average cost has almost declined or
remained the same.´
43. About the implementation of Rehabilitation Package in the suicide prone
areas, the Ministry in a written reply furnished the following information:-
³Rehabilitation package for 31 suicide prone districts in four States,
namely, Andhra Pradesh, Karataka, Kerala and Maharashtra has been
approved with an outlay of Rs.16,978.69 crore for implementation over
three years starting from 2006-07.  The package aims at establishing a
sustainable and viable farming and livelihood support system through debt
relief to farmers, improved supply of institutional credit, crop centric
approach to agriculture, assured irrigation facilities, watershed
management, better extension and farming support services, subsidiary
income opportunities through horticulture, livestock, dairying, fisheries,
etc.
The outlay for the rehabilitation package for suicide prone districts for the
year 2006-07 was Rs.7,461.63 crore. A similar amount was provided in
the current year under this package.  For the said rehabilitation package,
as against a total allocation of Rs.14,923.26 crore for 2006-07 and 2007-
08, an amount of Rs.10,107.60 crore has been released already for the
implementation of different components. Details regarding releases  (upto
31st October, 2007) under the Rehabilitation Package are given in
Table µ&¶ below:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

44. It was pointed out by the Committee that MSP for jute varies from district
to district as jute cost varies from district to district, why this cannot be done for
other crops, the Ministry in a written reply stated:-
³MSPs of jute vary from place to place, mainly because of quality
considerations and consequent price differentials.  Such a system does
exist for cotton also. However, these MSPs are in the form of derived
prices from the basic MSP fixed by the Government mainly to ensure that
the farmers are paid better prices for their better varieties. ´
45. Asked whether the Government has conducted any study to know the
percentage of farmers, who know or understand the concept of Minimum Support
Price (MSP), the Ministry replied:-
³The National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) in their Situation
Assessment Survey of Farmers- Some Aspects of Farming (NSS 59 th
Round January-December 2003  Report No. 496) had reported that at the
all ±India level, 29 per cent of the farmer households knew or understood
the concept of minimum support price (MSP). Of the farmers, 19 per cent
not only understood the idea of MSP but also knew the agency (if not its
name, its location) to which they could sell their crop if its market price fell
below the minimum support price. Again, 10 per cent of farmers were
aware of the concept of MSP but not of the procurement agency.´
46. About the steps taken to create awareness about MSP operations among
farmers, the Ministry has informed that the Government provide support to the
States through schemes like support to State Extension Programmes, Mass
Media Support to Agriculture, Kisan Call Centres and Establishment of Agri-Clinic
and Agri-Business Centres. Further, these are displayed in the Department ¶s
website, Doordarshan, Mass Media programmes and exhibitions/Kisan melas.
47. The Committee have been informed that the Government had set up an
Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Prof. Y.K. Alagh in May 2003 to
examine the methodological issues in fixation of MSP.  Recommendations of the
Expert Committee are under consideration of the Government.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(E) ANNOUNCEMENT OF MSPs
48. In a vast country like India with different agro climatic regions and
cropping pattern, sowing season is not uniform across states/crops.  Efforts are,
therefore, made to bridge the gap between the sowing season and the
announcement of MSPs so as to give necessary price signal to farmers, which
helps them in the choice of crops.  The dates of announcement of MSPs for
kharif crops and rabi crops in recent years are given below.
Year Kharif Rabi
2001-2002 07.09.2001 02.04.2002
2002-2003 26.09.2002 13.02.2003
2003-2004 30.07.2003 18.12.2003
2004-2005 10.08.2004 03.11.2004
2005-2006 20.04.2005 29.09.2005
2006-2007 20.07.2006 27 & 30.10.2006
2007-2008 17.05.2007 09.10.2007
Since the MSPs are announced earlier and the procurement season starts
much later (after harvest of crops), decision on bonus is taken just before the
start of the procurement season depending on prevailing market situation and
assessment of market prices.  Moreover, incentive bonus announced over and
above the MSP is exempted from State taxes and levies and thus it helps to
contain food subsidy.
49. A statement indicating the MSPs announced for different crops in recent
years is given in Table µ'¶.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(F) MARKET INTERVENTION SCHEME (MIS)
50. Under the Market Intervention Scheme (MIS), horticultural commodities
and other agricultural commodities which are perishable in nature and which are
not covered under the minimum support price scheme are included. In order to
protect the growers of these horticulture / agricultural commodities from low
prices in an event of bumper crop during the peak arrival period, the Government
implements MIS for a particular commodity on the request of the State
Government concerned. Losses suffered are shared on 50:50 basis between
Central and the State Government. In the case of north-eastern States, losses
shared are on 75:25 basis between Central and the State Government.  The
main crops covered under MIS during 1999-2000 to 20007-08 are oilpalm, onion,
kinno / malta, galgal, apple, potato, red chillies, arecanut, ginger, orange,
coriander seed, hatkora, black pepper, garlic and passion fruits.  The loss is,
however, restricted to 25 per cent of the value of the produce so purchased for
MIS, including warehousing and other costs.
51. On a suggestion made by the Committee that MIS should be implemented
at the Central level instead of at State level, the Ministry in a written reply stated:-
³Generally the MIS is relevant for area/State specific perishable crops,
about which the concerned State Governments are in a better position to
assess the situation and take corrective measures. MIS for a particular
commodity is operationalised on consideration of the request of the State
Government concerned.´
52. During the evidence, the Secretary (DAC) further elaborated:-
³Of course MIS is particularly used for perishable crops and crops which
are not covered by MSP.  For example, during the last four to five years,
MIS operation has been there in the case of apple in Mizoram, Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir; black pepper in Kerala; chillies in Andhra
Pradesh; garlic and onion in Rajasthan; apple µ&¶ grade in Himachal
Pradesh; malta in Uttranchal; chillies in Mizoram; apple µ&¶ grade in
Uttaranchal etc.  From time to time, depending on the proposals received
from the State Governments, we have undertaken the MIS for different
types of crops particularly perishable crops.  Whenever the State
Government proposals come, there is not a single case to my knowledge
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

at least during the last two or three years where we have not agreed to
that.´
53. When enquired about the reasons for not including tomato, potato, banana
crop, green copra, red variety of rice (Kerala), arecanut, coffee, rubber, spices
and other such crops, etc under MSP, the Ministry replied as under:-
³There have been demands for inclusion of banana crop, green coconut,
red variety of rice (common in Kerala), arecanut, tea, coffee, spices,
tomato, potato and other cash crops for fixation of MSP.   However, in
view of the subsidy involved, their perishable nature and existence of MIS,
the system of minimum support price was not introduced.´
(G) FOOD SECURITY
54. To ensure food security, the Government has launched a Centrally
Sponsored Scheme namely the µNational Food Security Mission (NFSM) ¶. It has
three components - (i) National Food Security Mission ± Rice (NFSM-Rice); (ii)
National Food Security Mission ± Wheat (NFSM-Wheat); and (iii) National Food
Security Mission ± Pulses (NFSM-Pulses). The Mission aims at increasing
production of rice, wheat and pulses through a set of measures such as area
expansion, productivity enhancement; restoring soil fertility; creating employment
opportunities; and enhancing farm level economy to restore the confidence of the
farmers of the targeted districts.  The NFSM-Rice would be implemented in 133
Districts, NFSM-wheat in 138 districts and NFSM-Pulses in 168 Districts. The
outlay for the National Food Security Mission is Rs. 4,882.48 crore during
Eleventh Plan. It aims to add 10 million tonnes (MT) of Rice, 8 MT of Wheat and
2 MT of Pulse production by the end of the Eleventh Plan i.e. by 2011-12.
55. Enquired about the reasons for lower agricultural growth rate when
compared to the industrial growth rate and its impact on food security, the
Ministry replied:-
³This is a fact that the agriculture growth has been much lower than the
industrial growth. The growth has been low due to unfavourable weather
conditions, stagnating yield levels of various crops, low investment level,
etc. However, several programmes have been taken up to deal with the
problems. These include, Macro Management of agriculture providing
flexibility to the respective states to take up suitable projects, National
Horticultural Mission, marketing reforms, strengthening of extension
services, setting up of Bamboo Mission and National Rainfed Area
Authority. In addition, the National Food Security Mission has been taken
up to increase foodgrains production by 20 million tonnes by the end of the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Eleventh Plan. Rashtria Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) has also been
launched to incentivise the states to invest more in agriculture sector to
improve the growth rate.´
56. According to the information furnished by the Government, the RKVY will
be a State Plan Scheme.  It aims to achieve 4% annual growth in the agriculture
sector during the XIth Plan period by ensuring holistic development of Agriculture
and allied sectors.  The funds under RKVY would be provided to the States as
100% grant by the Central Government.  An outlay of Rs.1500 crore for 2007-08,
along with an allocation of Rs.25,000 crore for five years has also been
approved.  It would result in quantifiable increase in agriculture and allied sector
production, productivity and farm incomes and reduction in yield gaps.  It would
also help in incentivising the producers for adopting improved technologies and
for developing production patterns as per national requirements, ensure rational
utilization of land, water and other resources and improve Terms of Trade
between agriculture and non-agricultural sector.
(H) AGRICULTURAL SUBSIDIES
57. Agricultural Subsidies are given by both the Central and State
Governments.  Central Government gives subsidies on Fertilizers, Seeds,
Machinery, etc. under various schemes while State Governments give subsidies
for Irrigation, Power, etc.  The Government of India is also providing subsidies to
the agricultural sector in the forms of financial incentive/grants/concession under
various on-going Central Sector/Centrally Sponsored Schemes.  Besides the
interest of small and marginal farmers and weaker sections of the farming
community is also being protected in the form of various incentives.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Details of the subsidies provided to the agriculture sector in India during 2002-03
to 2006-07 are given as under:
(Rs. in Crore)
 S. No. Item 2002-
03
2003-
04
2004-
05
2005-
06
2006-
07
1. Fertilizer
1.1 Indigenous
fertilizer
1.2 Imported
fertilizer
1.3 Sale of
decontrolled
fertilizer with
concession to
farmers
7790
-
3225
8521
-
3326
10243
494
5142
10653
1211
6596
11400
2704
8348
 Total fertilizer 11015 11847 16127 18460 22452
2. Electricity, Gas,
Steam and
other sources
of Energy**
8524 10558 NA
3. Irrigation## 15012 11142 12990
4. Other subsidies
given to
marginal
farmers and
Farmer¶s
Cooperative
societies in the
form of seeds,
development of
oil seeds,
pulses etc.
3098 4017 NA
Total 37649 37564 NA
Source: CSO
Source: 1. Fertilizer and other subsidies given to marginal farmers: Expenditure Budget 2006-07,
Vol. I of Central Govt. 2. Electricity & Irrigation: CSO
NA: Not available
**: Includes all subsidies to Electricity Boards and Corporations, Separate estimates of Electricity
subsidy accountable exclusively to agricultural sector are not available.
## : The rates for supply of water to farmers are kept low as a matter of policy, resulting in losses
to the Government irrigation system, The excess of operating costs over the gross revenue is
treated as imputed irrigation subsidy.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

58. The Department has informed that the amount of subsidy paid on
fertilizers from 2004-05 to 2007-08 is as under:
Subsidy on Fertilizers (Rs. In crores)
Years Urea P&K Fertilizers Total Subsidy
disbursed
2004-05 10637 5142 15779
2005-06 11749 6550 18299
2006-07 15924 10298 26122
2007-08 25654 20005 45659
 The Department of Fertilisers has estimated a subsidy requirement of
Rs.60,649.36 crores for 2008-09.
(I) CONTRACT FARMING
59. Contract Farming is considered to be one of the most promising avenues
for the improvement of the condition of the small farmers in India, as well as, one
of the major challenges in the Agricultural Marketing System.  Over the past
decades, there has been a tremendous increase in the interest of corporate
India, specially with the liberalization in the Agricultural Marketing System
brought about by the amendment of the APMC Act in several States.  Contract
Farming has the potential of combining small farmers efficiency with economies
of scale, utilizing corporate management skills, providing assured markets and
reducing transaction costs in the value chain thereby ensuring better price
realization by the farmers. Under contract farming, transfer of land to big
companies is not envisaged.
60. Several national and multinational processors or fast food chains are
increasingly entering into contract with the farmers to encourage them to cultivate
farm products (fruit, vegetables, etc.) of the desired quality by providing them not
only seeds and other inputs but also assured procurement of the produce at pre-
decided prices. Contract farming is particularly useful for high value crops
because it enables the corporates to associate with the farmers and helps in
imparting the latest technological know how to them.
61. Asked about the safeguards being taken to protect the farmers from
transfer of their land to big companies/corporations through contract farming, the
Ministry in a written reply stated as under:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

"Much criticism of contract farming in India is mainly based on the stories of
systemic failures or exploitation of farmers in the case of crop failures or
based on the disputes relating to the quality or quantity of the produce in
some parts of the country.  These problems can be overcome by proper
designing of the contracts along with correct choice of commodities and
locations and by detailing suitable terms and conditions in a written
agreement to be executed between the sponsors and the producers. ´
(J) FORWARD MARKET TRADING
62. Forward markets in commodities enable the stake- holders/market
participants to hedge their price risk in an open market environment.  Such
markets also help in price discovery based on which the producers can take
informed decisions. However, to keep a check on undue speculative tendencies,
there is a need to have a Regulatory Authority for forward markets.
63. Currently, the Forward Markets Commission regulates the commodity
futures market. The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2006 was
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 21.03.2006. The Bill was referred to the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs &Public
Distribution. The Parliamentary Standing Committee has submitted its Report on
19.12.2006. The recommendations of the Committee have been examined and
further action is being taken by the Department of Consumer Affairs.
64. Commenting further on the issue, the Secretary during the evidence stated:
³Of course, futures trade, certainly is useful for price discovery, and
farmers should be involved.  There is also a scheme by the Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, who is the nodal Ministry for the futures market.  They
have initiated a scheme to put up electronic ticker boards in the market
yards.  In the first phase, they have shortlisted about 500 market yards so
that farmers are aware of the futures.  Futures of course is a part of the
marketing reforms.  As all the hon. Members know, efforts are being
made to liberalise the agricultural market.  Of course, all of us know about
the APMC Act amendment.  Some States have done; some States are in
the process.   This is a dilemma that on the one hand we are talking
about MSP and also we are reforming the market.  So, this is a period of
transition.  It is because of that that some issues have arisen.  Finally the
dependence on the market will grow but at the same time, at least for
some time to come, we have to depend on some sort of an MSP.  It is
because of the market imperfections, we cannot entirely depend on the
market.  There are certain problems.  Sometimes, small farmers, poorer
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

farmers, resource-poor farmers may not be able to take advantage of the
market.  So we have to have a mix of policies.´
65. During evidence, when it was pointed out by the Committee that the
primary function of CACP was to give farmers an indication as to the minimum
price that they can expect at the time of harvest when the crop is ready, now this
facility is available and can be made available by way of the futures markets and
we get not only an indication of MSP that will be available to the farmers but also
the price which the farmers can lock and actually get, when this facility is
available, do we still need CACP at all, to this the representative of the Ministry
replied that:
³We do need CACP even for Future Market.  I entirely agree with the
Committee that Future Market can help us in discovering the prices that
can be there in the future.  The various types of markets can also help the
farmers in knowing the prices.  A large number of small and marginal
farmers, i.e. about 82% of them need to be protected against any fall in
the prices given the condition that we have here in India. ´
66. When it was further pointed out that the procurement price at Rs.1000/-
per quintal of wheat fixed by CACP is also artificially fixed and the market
indications are that it should be Rs.1150 to Rs.1200 per quintal.  Even the
tendered price for import of wheat were even quoted @ Rs.1500/-qtl. and above
(Table E). On this, the representative of the Ministry clarified the position as
under:
³I am not saying that markets should be ignored or we should not look at
the markets.  Everybody knows that the markets are not always perfect
and market failures and market imperfections are well established.  We
cannot entirely depend on the market, particularly in a developing country
like ours with large number of small farmers and where there is a lot of
non-availability of even market infrastructure, communication facilities, etc.
CACP is also supposed to look at the market conditions, market prices
etc.  We need to have some sort of an assurance given to farmers that he
will get the minimum support price (MSP).  But, it does not mean that the
farmer should get only that much price; if the market allows, he must get a
higher price.  There should be a minimum floor price below which farmers
cannot sell their produce, and the State has to assure the farmer that he is
assured of this much of price which he should know before he sows the
crop so that he can take a good decision and for that we need some
mechanism which presently is in the form of CACP.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

PART II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Recommendation No. 1
Pricing Policy
The Committee note that agriculture price policies were evolved in the pre-
Independence era but were not strictly enforced.  The focus of agriculture
production during British rule was to grow more cash crops, which could be
exported, resulting in a big shift against the growth of food grains.  This
phenomenon continued even during early years of Independence. Thereafter, the
Government focussed on promoting organized marketing of agricultural
commodities through a network of regulated markets to ensure reasonable gain
to the farmers.  However, the infrastructural facilities remained highly inadequate
in most of the States and with the increase in population, the demand for food
grains particularly rice and wheat was on the increase from year to year.  Another
reason for increase in demand of rice and wheat was the increase in income
level of the consumers and substitution of coarse grains like maize, jawar, bajra,
etc. by wheat and rice.  Over a period, the shortage or scarcity, unregulated
purchase and movement of food grains by private traders lead to indiscriminate
and speculative rise in prices by movement of food grains from surplus producing
areas to high purchasing areas.  To deal with this situation, the Government of
India appointed L.K.Jha Committee in August, 1964 to determine prices of rice
and wheat for the 1964-65 season and to suggest terms of reference for an
agency which could provide an advice on a continuous basis in respect of future
seasons.  Based on this Committee report, the Agriculture Prices Commission
(APC) was set up on 1st January, 1965 to advise the Government on price policy
of major agriculture commodities.  With certain changes in its terms of reference,
such as, terms of trade between agricultural and non-agricultural sectors, the
Commission was renamed as the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices
(CACP) in 1985, which presently consists of a Chairman, a Member Secretary,
two official members and three non-official members from the farming
community.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

  The Committee have been apprised that the Government announces
minimum support prices after considering the recommendations of the CACP, the
views of Central Ministries and State Governments and such other factors, which
are considered important for fixation of MSPs.
 The Committee observe that in recent times, there have been far-reaching
changes in the agricultural scenario and the MSPs suggested by CACP and
announced by the Government have not addressed the problems faced by the
farmers in running their household-activities, family and social responsibilities
such as Roti, Kapada and Makan and education of their children and family
marriages, etc. and other social functions.   Even the Agricultural Price Policy
and the credit policy of the Government have not been able to stop the spate of
suicides by the farmers which is spreading from one State to another and the
Government has admitted that it has already spread to 31 districts in Andhra,
Karnataka, Maharashtra and Kerala.  There are also reports of suicides by the
Punjab & U.P. farmers. It has come to the notice of the Committee that even the
samples study for assessing cost incurred for raising a crop, supposed to be
done at fields, is carried out, at times falsely even by sitting in office.
 The Committee are unable to understand the relevance of factors
considered by CACP such as (i) effect on industrial cost structure and
(ii) assessment of objective needs of economy at a particular point of time.  They
have never come across a situation in which the industry produced goods are
ever related/compared to the agricultural crop prices.
The agriculture of industrialized nations is energy intensive, while the
agriculture in developing countries like India is labour intensive and their animal
wealth is part of their agriculture activities.  Since India is having 20% of the
world¶s cattle, buffalo, sheep and goat population and 82% of the landholdings
are very small, so it is imperative to promote crop-livestock integrated farming
system rather than monoculture of the same crop and variety as in contract
farming.  There is a need to promote conservation farming and sustainable rural
livelihoods, that can lead to evergreen revolution and improve productivity in
perpetuity without associated ecological harm.
 The Committee urge upon the Government, agricultural research institutes
and agriculture universities to take the responsibility for providing necessary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

inputs, particularly seeds of appropriate varieties and the nutrients essential for
balanced fertilization, at the right time and place and at affordable price.  The
research and development effort should focus on the adoption of risk-minimizing
and soil enriching technologies.
 The Committee observe that climate change through global warming may
bring changes in temperature, rainy days and sea level and dependency on
wheat and rice will enhance vulnerability to climatic factors.  So the Government
should frame such policies that can revitalize the earlier food traditions of rural
and tribal area people, who in the past depended for their daily food on a wide
range of millets, grain legumes, tubers and vegetables.  The Public Distribution
System, should include, wherever appropriate, ragi, minor millets and other wide
range of nutritious cereals such as Jawar, Bajra, Maize, etc. and tubers such as
potatoes, onions, etc.  These crops should be included under MSP Scheme to
generate remunerative income to the farmers and can be grown as alternatives
to wheat and rice which presently are over-subscribed crops eating into our fast
depleting irrigation water resources.  As per Food & Agriculture Organization
Report, the food production needs to be increased by 50% by 2030 to meet the
rising demand.  To save the hungry from eating only promises and platitudes,
this is the opportune time for the Government to declare µRight to Food ¶ as
fundamental human right and enforce it legally and socially.  ³Food for all´ should
be effectively provided in this hour of grave energy and food crises or else, we
may confront widespread hunger and the consequent food riots.
 The Government should launch a µBridge the yield gap movement¶ in order
to close the gap between potential and actual yields in major food and fodder
crops and to achieve this objective, the technologies, services and public policies
will have to be reinforced.  The post-harvest technology including processing,
storage, value-addition and marketing should be strengthened.
 The Committee are of the considered view that the Government should
give highest priority to provide the small and marginal farmers opportunities for
assured and remunerative marketing of their produce at the time of harvesting.
 The Committee also recommend that in addition to 24 food crops covered
under MSP fixed by CACP, the minor millets, the horticulture crops such as
potatoes and onions; should also be covered under food crops and CACP should
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

be asked to fix the MSP for these crops also, however, for other horticulture
crops which are covered and also others that are not covered under Market
Intervention Scheme, Government should explore the possibility of setting up of a
separate Central Horticulture Price Commission for major horticulture crops on
the lines of the Central Agriculture Price Commission.  To encourage the farmers
to go for horticulture crops, the Government needs to develop infrastructure
facilities such as good roads, cold chain facilities including cold storages,
warehouses and marketing facilities near the farmers fields in a big way.
 The recommendations of the Expert Committee set up under the
Chairmanship of Prof. Y.K.Alagh to examine Methodological Issues in the
Fixation of Minimum Support Prices are under consideration of the Government.
The Committee recommend that the decision on the recommendations of Expert
Committee should be expedited and they may be apprised of the same.
The Committee also deprecate the apprehension that the inflation is being
led by food crop rising prices, as there is only 20% contribution of food grain
prices in over all calculation of inflation rates.
The Committee note that since the time of liberalization of economic
development started in early 90s, till date, the focus of our development is more
towards raising industrial production and recently on the service sector and
agriculture development has been ignored to the extent that fertile lands are
being acquired from farmers at throw away prices to develop  Special Economic
Zones (SEZs) and Government are giving them tax holidays for years together.
The Committee are of the opinion that instead of developing SEZ on agricultural
land, the Government should develop Special Agricultural Zones for intensive
production of food grains, pulses and oilseeds etc.   The agriculture sector is
being ignored and neglected in favour of industrial sector, as if, the poor man in a
remote village will be able to earn his livelihood and food from these industrial
islands in his area.  The prices of agricultural produce received by the farmers
are lower than the prices of the same prevailing in a free market and are often
less than the cost of cultivation. The ever growing population of our country
cannot be fed regularly only by importing food grains and that too at the twice or
at least one and half rate more than the domestic MSP rate fixed by the
Government as was done in 2007 by importing wheat up to $393 per tonne
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

through different international supplier companies. It seems that farmer centric
policies which can only solve our food security and unemployment problem are
not on the agenda of the successive governments leading to pressure on the
cities to generate employment for the poor farmers and labourers of rural India,
who are flooding the big cities, in a big way.  If the farmers are provided with
easily affordably new technologies and trained to use it, clubbed with
remunerative prices for their produce, more than 50% of the unemployment
problem can be solved and the city governments could also be saved from
spending extra money in providing employment, shelter & food and civic
amenities to the ever increasing population of the big cities. This lop-sided
growth of our economy is increasing the gap between the rich of the cities & poor
farmers of the villages, which is not being given the required attention, though
both these groups are contributing towards the progress and development of our
country.  There is a need of a policy for farmers whose roots are embedded to
the ground for developing Indian economy first and world economy later.
 The food security means a situation where all the people of this country
could buy enough nutritious food of their choice to live an active and healthy life
in all circumstances. It has been noted that this year the Government have
imposed a ban on export of non-Basmati varieties and a heavy tax burden on
export of Basmati varieties of rice, which is directly against the interests of
farmers, resulting in loss of their income and will also discourage them to grow
these crops. The Committee, therefore, are of firm opinion that the food security
can be achieved only by making farmer and agriculture centric policies through
which farmers are encouraged to grow more food crops which earn them enough
income to smoothly run their household activities and perform their social
responsibilities.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 2
Factors considered for fixation of MSP
The Committee note that CACP covers only 24 crops under the MSP.
These crops are Wheat, Paddy, Barley, Gram, Jawar, Bajra, Maize, Ragi, Arhar,
Moong, Urad, Cotton, Groundnut in shell, Sunflower seed, Soybean, Sesames,
Niger seed, Tobacco, Masur, Rapeseed/Mustard, Safflower, Copra, Jute and
sugarcane.  These are important food crops which are grown and consumed in a
vast area of the country.  For recommendation of MSP, the CACP takes into
account, the entire structure of economy of a particular commodity or group of
inter-related commodities and considers a number of factors such as (i) cost of
production/cultivation; (ii) Demand & Supply; (iii) Trends in market prices-both
domestic and international; (iv) changes in import prices; (v) parity between
prices paid and prices received by the farmers, (vi) inter-crop price parity; (vii)
effect on industrial cost structure (viii) effect on cost of living; (ix) effect on
general price level/inflation; (x) assessment of objective needs of the economy at
a particular point of time, including food security, agricultural diversification, etc.
 The Committee have been informed that the CACP also issue
questionnaire to the Central Ministries, State Governments and other
organizations related to trade, industry, processors and farmers both in
cooperative and private sector and seeks their views on relevant issues and
factual information on related variables.  The Commission also obtains extensive
feedback from the State Governments and other agencies as also estimates of
cost of cultivation obtained through surveys conducted by the respective State
Governments themselves.  The Commission also makes use of the wholesale
price indices of the relevant inputs as are available from the office of Economic
Advisor, Ministry of Industry and Commerce.
 The Committee are unable to understand the relevancy of factors ± viz; (i)
effect on industrial cost structure; (ii) effect on cost of living; and (iii) assessment
of objective needs of the economy at a particular point of time.  The total
economic growth during 2007-08 was 9% whereas agriculture growth was just
2.7%.  It has nowhere been mentioned that the targets fixed or achieved by the
industrial growth are ever calculated in the light of agriculture growth or
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

production. The profit margin on the industrial products, even in case of
medicines is sometimes more than 300% and it has generally never been below
100%, whereas agriculture produce are never sold at these profit margins.  The
factor µeffect on cost of living ¶ is not directly related to agriculture, it is the general
cost of living of people of the country and production categories, other than
agriculture, do not consider this factor while calculating their sale price.  Cost of
living is very high in cities and in rural areas, where the farmers live, is very low
compared to cities.  Both can¶t be compared.
 The CACP also does not take into account the µrisk factors ¶ and their
consequences.  Natural risk factors which include weather aberrations, rains,
floods, famine conditions, pest, temperature fluctuations, hail-storm etc. are not
given due weightage in calculating the cost factors.  There are other risk factors
which are man created viz., Government intervention and market forces including
national and international both, which try to control the prices of agricultural
produce to their advantage.  The risk factors mentioned above are not addressed
by CACP/Government, the way they need to be handled for fixing MSP of a
particular crop.  In 1980s, then the Union Agriculture Minister had admitted in
Parliament that the risk factor was not taken into account by Agriculture Price
Commission now Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices while calculating
MSP.  The Committee have observed that the physical crop is only 20-30% of
the crop that can be expected on the basis of applied levels of technology,
management and inputs and if one adds the market risks involved in the Indian
situation, the risk factor is unlikely to be lower than 50%. The majority of farmers
do not have access to Government machinery that could provide information on
how to control pests and stem declining productivity of land.  Soil tests,
information on pests, weather forecasts, field demonstrations, advisory services
for use of seeds, information on use of fertilizers and pesticides are not made
available to the farmers on demand.  They need to be provided with the high-
yield variety seeds, fertilizers, farm implements and machinery etc. at a
subsidized rate.   There is a saying µwhere hunger rules, peace can not prevail ¶.
If India does not produce 100 million tones of wheat a year by 2020, the
Government will be forced to shell out Rs.40,000 crore to import 20 to 25 million
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

tones of food grains to fill the gap.  The huge gap between the supply and
demand may lead to rampant hunger and malnutrition throughout the country.
 The Committee note that there is a problem in food grain production.
Around 2004-05, the per capital food grain production was back to 1970s level,
from 476.5 gram per day per person in 1979 to 422 gram per day per person in
2005.  Pulses per capita availability has declined from 60.7 gram per day in 1951
to 32.5 gram per day in 2006.  Between 1996 and 2004 there was almost zero
growth in foodgrains.
 The Committee are of the opinion that if farm ecology and economics go
wrong, nothing else will go right in agriculture.  Everything can wait but not
agriculture, as 65% of the population in one way or other is employed in
agriculture and allied activities to grow food and fodder for its 100% human and
animal population.  If agriculture production does not remain above population
growth rate, then there is every likelihood of a situation of recurrent famines.  The
threat of famines and food scarcity becomes all the more serious on account of
the Climate Change. The grain-stocks are disappearing and today we are in the
era of diminishing grain reserves, escalating price and persistence of widespread
under-nutrition.
 The Committee are of the firm view that these aforesaid conditions can be
changed only if we can make the agriculture a profitable avocation.  We have to
improve the conditions of soil, its nutrient contents, water management and grow
alternative crops, organize research and development of small farm technologies
which are useful and affordable.  The factors such as µeffect on industrial cost
structure¶ is not even indirectly related to agriculture production and effect on cost
of living is related to all sectors, be it economic growth, industrial growth, service
sector growth or agricultural growth.  The Committee consider that effect on cost
of living if related to farmers, then its relation with other factors and to population
other than farming community, do not auger well to keep the food crop prices low
and discourage the farmers from growing more food crops.  The factor relating to
µthe assessment of objective needs of the economy at a particular point of time ¶,
if only related to food security and agricultural diversification, then it is
understandable, but if it related to other objectives of economy e.g. industrial
growth, then the CACP has to do away with it as industrial growth or its product ¶s
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

price structure never takes into account the prices of food grains and living
standard of farmers or whole of the rural population.
 The Committee strongly recommend that while fixing MSP, the CACP
should stop counting the factors, such as (i) effect on industrial cost structure; (ii)
µeffect on cost of living ¶ and (iii) assessment of objective needs of the economy
relating to industrial development etc.; and reassess the factor relating to µeffect
on general price level/inflation ¶ by including wholesale price index and not the
market rate.  The risk factors mentioned above should invariable be considered
while calculating the level of minimum support price of an agriculture commodity.
Besides, 50% risk co-efficient and so also the self-insurance premium of the
farmers and premiums of MNAIS and WBCIS should form part of costing factors
considered by CACP for fixing MSP.
 The Committee are of the view that where States have their own
Agriculture Price Committee for giving inputs to CACP, while calculating the cost
of a crop in their States, they should include per unit cost of electricity charges
and should also consider the comparative advantages of cropping pattern in their
States and suggest to the farmers as to which crop would fetch them more
remunerative prices on comparative scale.
  The CACP ¶s role is restricted to the announcement of MSP, however, the
Committee are of the view that it should take into account all the minor and major
cost factors including risk factors natural as well as man-made and must take into
account the profit margin of at least 50% of the cost price, that a farmer should
get to run his household, perform his social & family responsibilities and rear his
animals etc.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 3
Cost Factors for fixing MSP
 The Committee have been apprised that under the sampling design of the
comprehensive scheme for studying the cost of cultivation of principal crops,
each State is demarcated into a homogenous agro-climatic zones based on
cropping pattern, soil type, rainfall, etc.  The sampling design of the scheme
continues to be three-stage stratified random sampling design with Tehsil as the
first stage unit, village/cluster of villages as the second stage unit and holding as
the third and ultimate stage unit.  Based on this, the cost of production per quintal
is worked out for major growing State for specific crops, and their weighted
average is estimated and considered by CACP, among other factors, for
recommending MSP.  The cost of cultivation/production taken into account
includes all paid out costs, such as, those incurred on account of hired human
labour, bullock labour/machinery labour (both hired & owned) and rent paid for
leased in land. In addition, cash and kind expenses on use of material inputs like
seeds, fertilizers, manures, irrigation charges including actual cost of
diesel/electricity for operation of pump-sets, etc. should also count towards
production cost.
 The Committee observe that while calculating the Cost of production,
CACP takes into account the rent for leased land and not the cost incurred
towards owned land. Many a farmers enter this avocation by purchasing land on
payment of agreed price.  It is, therefore, necessary that interest foregone on
owned land should also be counted towards calculation of cost of production.
The Committee further note that in addition to paid out costs, some
imputed costs are also incurred and are counted by CACP towards fixing of
MSP. The imputed costs include family labour, owned animal labour, own
machinery charges, implements, farm produced manure, rent of own land,
interest on owned fixed capital, interest on working capital, kind payments and
main products and by-products.  The family labour is counted on the basis of
statutory wage rate or actual market rate, whichever is higher.  The Committee
recommend that the farmer and his family should be considered as skilled labour
as they are, in a sense, a technical managerial group who knows better about the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

land formation, irrigation requirements of a particular crop, seed quality, farm
implements needed, weather conditions and when and how the crop is to be
sown, grown and harvested, how to control the pests, when to use insecticides
etc. and   when to sell the crops in the market.  So far the owned animal labour
cost which include cost of green and dry fodder, depreciation on animals and
cattle sheds etc., are concerned, the Committee desire that the expenses
incurred on cow or buffalo calves for first three years, till they are grown up for
use in agriculture or for milking, and also the expenses incurred on the old
animals, cow, buffalo or oxen when they are grown old and are not good for
agriculture or other productive use, should also be considered by CACP towards
calculating the costs of family labour and owned animal labour for fixing up of
MSP.
 The Committee further recommend that house ladies labour used for
processing of crops for domestic use, domiciliary labour, attending to babies in
the family should also count towards family labour costs as there are crèches for
industrial labour and none exists in rural areas.
 The Committee also recommend that the interest charged on short and
long term farm loan should also form part of cost factors and include the amount
charged from the date of loan taken, till the farmer gets the money in hand from
the sale of his crops as sometimes, even after selling his crops, he gets money
even a year after selling his crops, this has particularly been seen in case of
sugarcane in some of the States, where the sugar-mill owners sometimes do not
pay the farmers even after one year of buying of his sugarcane crop.  Though the
Government has justified the use of average cost method for fixing of MSP by
CACP, however, the Committee are of the opinion that though synthetic model is
time consuming for collecting the cost data of the raising certain crops, however,
when completed, it will be more useful from the farmers point of view for fixing up
of MSP of his crops.
 The Committee are of the considered view that if it is not desired to take
into account the State wise expenditure of per hectare crop, then the cost of
production of food grains incurred on Government and Agricultural University
farms should be counted as per hectare cost of the farmers in that region.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

 The averaging of the costs incurred in different States, is loss to the
farmers of the States like Haryana, Punjab for wheat & rice and Karnataka for
rice, as the per hectare expenditure in raising the wheat/rice crops in these
States is almost twice the cost in other States such as Chhatisgarh and
Jharkhand.
 The Tubewell irrigation cost in the rainfed areas where water table has
gone down to 400 ft. or more as in Rajasthan, is several times more than
Western UP and Northern Haryana and Punjab where water-table, is around
60-80 ft. below surface level.  The farmers of those areas should be encouraged
to grow water-resistant varieties of food grains such as Jawar, Bajra, Gram,
Mustard, minor millets and remunerative MSP should be fixed to give extra-
income to the farmers of these rainfed/dryland areas.
 The Committee are in agreement with Alagh Committee on its
recommendation that crop insurance premium should be included as a part of
cost of a crop.
 The Committee also recommend that
(i)  higher labour charges, actual or minimum, of human, animal and
machinery; whichever is higher, should be counted.
 (ii) maintenance expenses for owned animals, machinery and land
should also be included.
(iii)  The micro-nutrients used in agricultural production and cost of
depletion of these micro and macro nutrients should also form part of the paid out
costs. The computation should include both pre and post harvest operational
data.
 (iv) expenses on material inputs such as seed (home grown and
purchased), fertilizer, manure (owned & purchased), pesticides, insecticides and
irrigation facilities should be counted as if these have been purchased at market
rates.
 (v) depreciation of farm buildings such as cattle sheds, machine sheds,
storage sheds, etc. should be 10% or more per year on pucca sheds; and
depreciation on wooden farm implements should be @ 20% and on metal
implements @ 10% per year.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

 (vi) For land revenue, the paid out cost should include, income loss on
account of investment in land plus the tax paid to the Government on purchase
price or stamped value of agricultural land.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 4
Fixing of MSP
The Committee observe that the minimum support price is being treated
as procurement price even by the Government, though it is fixed at the time of
sowing of the crops and in between, till the time, the crop is ripe for harvesting
and taken out for marketing, the national and international rates of the crops may
have undergone sea-change depending on the scarcity/availability and demand
for a particular crop.  However, the farmers are given the price fixed five months
back, say for example in case of wheat, the Government fixed the MSP @
Rs.1000/ per quintal in October, 2007 and it procured it at the same rate in
April/May, 2008, and the private traders were discouraged to enter the field till
the Government¶s quota of procurement was fulfilled.  The day the private traders
were allowed to purchase, the wheat price went up by Rs.100/ per quintal.
The Committee do not see any parity between prices paid for inputs such
as seeds, insecticides, pesticides and fertilizers and prices received by the
farmers for their produce. Even the subsidy provided for fertilizers, go to the
manufacturers of the fertilizers and not to the farmers in whose name, the
subsidy is given and many of fertilizer manufacturing industries are run because
they get lot of money in the name of agriculture/fertilizer subsidy in the absence
of which they would have closed long back.
The Committee observe that without giving remunerative prices to the
farmers for their produce, they cannot produce more per unit of land and water,
under conditions of diminishing per capital arable land and irrigation water
availability and expanding biotic and abiotic stresses.  Assured and remunerative
prices of the agricultural produces, hold the key to stimulate and sustain farmers ¶
interest in producing more than their own household requirements. The
Committee recommend that the MSP should be announced well before the
sowing season of the crops covered under this scheme and should include Cost
C2 + 50 per cent.
The Committee also note that in the case of jute, a single MSP is
recommended by the CACP and approved by the Government.  Based on this
basic MSP, different MSPs for jute are announced subsequently, keeping in view
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the quality considerations and consequent input price differentials, which vary
from place to place.  These MSPs are in fact derived prices from the basic MSP
fixed by the Government, mainly to ensure that the farmers are paid better prices
for their better varieties.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that this system
of calculating MSP should be adopted for other crops also for which Government
announces MSP to give better price for better varieties and to compensate
regional imbalances in cost-inputs and risk factors of different crops as is being
done for Jute and Cotton crops.
The Committee are also of the opinion that whenever, there is bumper
crop and every likelihood of its surpluses in the market or even otherwise, at the
time of procurement, the farmer should be issued a smart-card in his name giving
the information about the crop and the quantity procured from him by the
Government or by the private traders, as the case may be, thereby giving him
post-procurement recognition for selling his produce for public good.  Whenever,
the Government or private traders export that food crop, at a much higher rate at
a later date, the post-procurement adjustment should get him a certain profit out
of his share of export.  For example, if the wheat is procured for Rs.1000/- per
quintal from the farmer is exported at a later date @ Rs.2000/- per quintal, then
the farmer must be recognized for the contribution he made in that export.  The
aim of this smart-card issuance is that we must insulate our farmers from the
exploitative trade.  The New APMC Act must recognize the purchasers of
essential commodities as to whether they are buying for public good, e.g. FCI,
NAFED or whether they are buying for commercial profit e.g., Kargil, ITC, etc.
Since a large majority of the farmers are unable to hold their produce for a long
time, they deserve to have a smart card and a share in profit, if their produce is
exported for a profit, in future.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 5
Inclusion of more crops under MSP
 The Committee have been informed that presently 24 agricultural produce
viz. Paddy, Jowar, Bajra, Maize, Ragi, Arhar (Tur), Moong, Urad, Cotton,
Groundnut in Shell, Sunflower seed, Soyabeen, Sesamum, Nigerseed, Tobacco,
Wheat, Barley, Gram, Masur (Lentil), Rapeseed / Mustard, Safflower, Copra,
Jute, and Sugarcane are covered under the MSP.  The Committee note that
there have been demands for inclusion of banana crop, green coconut, red
variety of rice (common in Kerala), arecanut, tea, coffee, spices, tomato, potato
and other cash crops for fixation of MSP.  But in view of the subsidy involved,
their perishable nature and existence of Market Intervention Scheme, the system
of minimum support price was not introduced.  The Committee are unable to buy
this argument of the Government and also that in the absence of MSP, how the
value of subsidy is calculated under MIS for these crops. The Committee are of
the opinion that in order to prepare ourselves to face the climate change due to
global warming, the Government should widen the food security basket by
including tubers (viz. potato, onions, etc.) and orphan crops such as minor millets
(viz, kodu, ramdana, etc.), banana crops, red variety of rice (Kerala), green
coconut and other such crops under MSP.  In several countries the tubers-crops
such as potatoes, onions, etc. and minor millets are recognized as food crops.
The Committee, therefore recommend that these crops should also be covered
under MSP and ensure that adequate storage and processing facilities are
provided to save these crops from going waste.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 6
Awareness about MSP amongst Farmers
 The Committee note that as per the National Sample Survey Organization
(NSSO) report, at the all-India level only 19% farmers understood the idea of
MSP and they knew the agency to which they could sell their crops if their market
price fell below the MSP. It shows that extension machinery is not fully oiled
even though the MSP is being fixed for more than four decades.  Though the
Government have enumerated a number of schemes such as State Extension
Programme, Mass Media Support to Agriculture, Kisan Call Centres, etc. to make
the farmers aware about the MSP, however, the Committee are pained to
observe that it is the will-power of successive Governments, which is lacking and
not the number of programmes/schemes, which are being implemented half-
heartedly only on paper.  They, therefore, recommend that the Governments at
Central as well as State level should develop strong extension services to help
the farmers to get remunerative prices of their produce.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 7
Need to increase 50% Food Production
 The Committee note that agricultural commodity prices rose sharply in the
past two years and continue to rise even more sharply during the first half of this
year.  According to a joint report by Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO)
and Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) the food
prices are expected to remain high over the next decade even if they would ease
from their recent peaks.  According to UN Security General ¶s report, food
production needs to rise by 50% by 2030 to meet the rising demand.  The
investment in agriculture is vital to ensure global food security.  It has been
reported that in American, Australian and European countries production of
wheat has gone down even 15 to 20%. So it is not possible to control the these
prices artificially for the benefit of the middleman to buy at the MSP and then sell
it in international market at twice the prices and the farmers suffer losses in
between.  So far India is concerned, this is absolutely necessary to find out ways
and means to enhance food production capacity of farmers so that they may
produce enough food grains, not for their own families but also contribute to
national food security system.  If we count the price of wheat in Euro instead of
Dollar, then according to experts in field, the prices of wheat are almost stable
since 1996.  To offset this stagnation, the Committee urge upon the Government
to take concrete steps to enhance the food availability to vulnerable people.
Distributing high-yielding seeds and fertilizers on time should urgently boost
small farmers food crop production capacity and they should be given
remunerative price of their produce.
Global food crisis is a wake-up call for Indian agriculture food grains
production. We should now build our own national food security system and
should not depend on imports, which are very expensive as compared to the
food grain prices prevalent in the Indian market.
The Committee are of the opinion that there is a dire need of an evergreen
revolution to cop up with the over increasing populating of our country and that
can be achieved only developing new high yield variety seeds which can be
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

grown in a near dry situation due to shortage of irrigation facilities, coupled with
remunerative prices, which will encourage the farmers to grow those crops.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 8
Farmer as Skilled Labour
The Committee note that CACP recommends only the Minimum Support
Prices with an objective to provide the farmers a reasonable and remunerative
price of a commodity.  The cost of nourishment of farmers, their income parity
with the Government employees are not taken into account with the result that
the farmers are not even treated as skilled labour and the living standard of small
and marginal farmers is even below that of a Group µ'¶ Government employee, in
terms of his standard of living, rearing & educating his children and his monthly
income, though they fully engage themselves in agriculture and allied activities
for the whole day and even at night.
The Committee have been apprised by the Government that farmers skill
is certainly taken into consideration as one of the cost factor for fixing MSP,
however, the value of family labour is imputed at actual market rate paid to the
hired labour or statutory wage rate.  The Committee recommend that as has
been admitted by the Government, considering the managerial skill and
experience in various agricultural activities such as ploughing and watering the
fields, roping of different crops at different times and other related activities such
as rearing of animals, etc., the farmer and his family members should be treated
as skilled labour and CACP should also treat the farmers that way while
computing the value of their family labour and the statutory wage rate or actual
market rate of farmers labour should also be revised accordingly.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 9
Crop Loan
 The Committee have been apprised that farmers are provided short term
crop loan from Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks, Cooperative Credit
Structure, etc. upto Rs.3 lakh at 7% rate of interest.  The Committee are of the
considered view that keeping in view the MSP announced for different crops, the
loan amount of Rs. 3 lakh is quite low and the rate of interest is very high. As the
MSP for agricultural crops is not remunerative enough for the farmers to take up
agriculture as first priority to earn their livelihood, the Committee, therefore,
recommend that the loan amount should be raised to Rs.5 lakh and as
suggested by the National Commission on Farmers, the rate of interest on crop
loan to farmers should be fixed at the rate of 4%.
The Committee further recommend that the period of calculating the rate
of interest should be fixed from the date of sowing crops to the date when the
farmers actually gets the money in hand after selling his crops i.e. based on the
cycle of the Rabi or Kharif crop season.  This total sum of interest paid on crop
loans during this period should be taken as one of the cost factors while
calculating the total cost fixation of MSP.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 10
Agriculture Subsidies
 The Committee have noted that agricultural subsidies are given by both
the Central and the State Governments.  The Central Government gives
subsidies on fertilizers, seeds, machinery, etc. and the State Governments give
subsidies for irrigation, power, etc. under various schemes. The estimated
subsidy on fertilizer alone is Rs.60649.36 crore for 2008-09.  How and to whom
this subsidy is given remains a puzzle to be solved, as the total cropped area/net
sown area and cropping intensity have been stagnating or rather decreasing over
the years.  On the one hand, it is an admitted fact that a gradual degradation of
natural resources through excessive and inappropriate use of chemicals
fertilizers has affected the soil quality, resulting in stagnation in the yield levels,
and on the other hand, Government are increasing subsidy on chemical fertilizers
and the bio-fertilizers and manures are yet to be considered for any subsidy or
financial help.  So the Committee are unable to comprehend as to how the
amount of subsidy on chemical fertilizers is increasing year after year and is
given in the name of agriculture subsidy with no direct benefit to the farmers. The
current system of fertilizer subsidy has allowed the inefficient units to persist.
The Committee view this fact seriously. Even in Economic Survey 2007-08,
Government has admitted that a large proportion of fertilizer subsidy goes to the
fertilizer units, which is paid on a (group based) cost plus basis.    The current
pricing mechanism of fertilizers has also encouraged nutrient imbalance in the
agriculture land.  The excessive use of urea is a bias against micro-nutrients.  As
against the desirable NPK proportion of 4:2:1, the average use is 6.2:4:1.  The
Steering Committee of the Planning Commission has also observed that
³because nitrogenous fertilizers are subsidized more than potassic and
phosphatic fertilizers, the subsidy tends to benefit more the crops and regions
which require higher use of nitrogenous fertilizers as compared to crops and
regions which require higher application of P&K. ´  The excessive use of urea has
also affected the soil profile adversely.  A healthy plan growth is possible only if
all the 16 nutrients are available in soil.  The farmers should be encouraged to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

use bio-fertilizers and manures and for that they should be given monetary help
so that the fertility of the soil is increased resulting in higher production of crops.
The Committee also note that the prices of GM/Hybrid/high yield varieties
of seeds are hardly subject to any regulation, which need to be regulated without
any further delay.
 The Committee recommend that as the price mechanism of chemical
fertilizers have created nutrient imbalance in the agriculture land it needs to be
balanced and farmers should be given fertilizer as well as water and power
subsidy directly, rather than the producers and suppliers, as it is the farmers who
knows better about the quality/quantity of seeds, fertilizers and water to be used
in the fields to make the agricultural production a profitable avocation.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 11
Contract Farming
The Committee note that several national and multinational food
processors or fast food chains are increasingly entering into contract with the
farmers to encourage them to cultivate farm produce mainly fruits, vegetables,
etc. of the desired quality by providing them not only seeds and other inputs but
also assured procurement of the produce at pre-determined contracted prices.
The Committee feel that in the absence of any rules/guidelines governing the
operations of contract farming, it is vulnerable to manipulation of agriculture land
of small and marginal farmers by the contracting companies.  Till now, whole lot
of issues relating to contract farming remain to be legally streamlined and will
need foremost consideration towards the interests of the farmers.  Otherwise,
such a situation can even result in µbonded farming¶ instead of µcontract farming¶
and expansion of contract farming may lead to imbalance in land and irrigation
water use for the contracted crops.  Even agricultural production under contract
farming may not cater to the regional requirements of the food grains and the
crops that are not used by the local population, may be preferred by the
contracting companies, thereby causing rise in price of locally used food crops.  If
the MSP is fixed, keeping in view the local conditions and expenses involved and
risk factors taken into account, the farmers may not have to enter into contract
with the national or multinational companies and can bargain effectively and earn
more from the same company even without entering into any contract farming for
them.  The interests of farmers particularly of the small and marginal farmers
have to be protected, so that these farmers can also contribute to national food
basket and produce food crops of their choice to fulfil the needs of their families
and fodder for cattle, poultry, etc. which may earn them extra income by selling
milk, butter, eggs, chicks, etc.
The Committee are of the unanimous opinion that contract farming will be
beneficial to the contracting companies and the food security of the nation and
farmers¶ family interest will take a back seat, as he will work like a machine to
earn his livelihood by growing the crops for the contracting partners and will not
be able to even rear any animal of his choice to earn extra money. They,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

therefore, recommend that the Government should take corrective steps to save
the contracting farmers from becoming µbonded farmers ¶ working only for the
contracting firms/companies, so that they may also contribute to the food-basket
of the country.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 12
Forward Market Trading
 The Committee note that forward market in agricultural commodities
enable the stakeholders/market participants to hedge their price risk in an open
market environment.  It also help them in price discovery based on which the
producers can take informed decision.  But the Committee feel that forward
market in India till now, has not been beneficial to the farmers, or to the
consumers, however, the traders in the market or say the middle man is earning
at the cost of farmers.  82% of the farming community in India is constituted of
small and marginal farmers who are resource poor and not aware of the pros and
cons of the speculative price discovery in the forward market trading, hence
unable to take its advantage.  These farmers have to be protected against any
sharp fall in the prices of their produce. Recently the commodity market has
attracted a lot of investment and they have earned a lot through speculative price
discovery of the prices of the commodities in international market.  Again the
loser is the farmer, who is unaware of such market forces, who fix up the price of
their food grains, without going through the heat and strain of growing the food
grains, the middle man fixes their prices and earn huge profit, at the cost of
farmers¶ earnings.
 The forward market can wait but the small farmers can ¶t wait, as they are
forced to sell their produce just after it is harvested, so the remunerative price at
the time of harvesting is more important to these farmers, than a higher price at a
future date.  The present trade must be fair than profit making future trade.  The
future trade benefit the big farmers, traders and exporters and it needs a large
number of warehouses at different places to store the agricultural produce for
future trade which can be built only with an extra expenditure by the Government
as well as the private sector.
Forward market trading can boost the sale artificially by speculating the
price at a future date and the consumers have to pay a higher price, even after a
bumper crop near their home.  We should remember that farmers is the largest
group of consumers of their produce, once they sell it at a fixed price of MSP at
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the harvesting time, they also suffer when they buy the same food crops in
future.
The Farmers all over India have to be made aware about the future
trading in agricultural commodity so that they know the prices of their
commodities in futures market well in advance and plan their production
accordingly.  Unless this is done and minimum contract size of agricultural
commodity for trading is fixed and a farmers-friendly platform by restructuring
agricultural commodity trading is set up, the Indian agricultural commodity futures
market should not be linked to international futures trading market. As has been
admitted by the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture that markets are not
always perfect and market failures and market imperfections are well established
and we cannot entirely depend on the market, particularly in a developing country
like ours with large number of small farmers and where there is a lot of non-
availability of even market infrastructure, communication facilities, etc., the
Committee, therefore, recommend that future trading in agricultural commodities
should be discouraged to contain the speculative and paper trading which
generally result in artificial rise in prices.  The Committee also recommend that
the Government should expedite the setting up of a regulatory authority for
forward market trading on the lines of Securities and Exchange Board of India.
NEW DELHI;                     PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV
 24 June, 2008 Chairman,
 3 Ashadha, 1930 (Saka)                                            Standing Committee on Agriculture
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 04 OCTOBER, 2007 AT 1500 HRS. IN
COMMITTEE ROOM µ%¶, GROUND FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW
DELHI
    The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1700 hrs
PRESENT
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav ± Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Ranen Barman
3. Shri Anil Basu
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
6. Shri Khagen Das
7. Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar
8. Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire
9. Shri Prabodh Panda
10. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
11. Shri K.J.S.P.Reddy
12. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh
13. Shri M.P.Veerendra Kumar
14. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
15. Shri Harish Rawat
16. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
17. Shri Vikram Verma
18. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed
19. Shri Datta Meghe
20. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
21. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy
22. Prof. M.S.Swaminathan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri Rajkumar    -  Deputy Secretary
3. Shri N.S. Hooda   -  Deputy Secretary
4. Ms. Amita Walia   -  Under Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

WITNESSES
1. Dr. P.K. Mishra  -  Secretary (DAC)
2. Dr. T. Haque   -  Chairman (Commission for Agricultural
Costs & Prices)
3. Sh. Karnail Singh  -  Addl. Secretary (DAC)
4. Dr. N.B. Singh   -  Agricultural Commissioner (DAC)
5. Dr. A.K. Neog   -  Economics & Statistical Adviser  (DAC)
6. Sh. P.P. Mathur  -  Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser
(DAC)
7. Sh. Siraj Hussain  -  J.S.( Deptt. of Food & Public Distribution)
8. Sh. U.K.S. Chauhan  -  J.S., Marketing (DAC)
9.   Ms Madhu Bala  -  Adviser, Dte of Economics & Statistics (DAC)
10. Sh. R. Viswanathan  -  Adviser, Dte of Economics & Statistics (DAC)
11. Dr. K.G. Radkhakrishnan -  Secretary(Commission for Agricultural Costs
& Prices)
12. Sh. A.K. Jena   -  Director (Commission for Agricultural Costs
& Prices)
13. Sh. K.S. Sethi   -  Director, Finance (DAC)
At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the representatives of the Ministry
(Department of Agriculture and Co-operation) to the sitting of the Committee and
explained the Direction 55 (1) of the µDirections by the Speaker, Lok Sabha ¶ to treat the
proceedings as confidential till the Report is presented to Parliament and then asked the
Secretary to brief the Committee about the subject µPricing Policy of Agricultural
Produce¶.  While briefing about the subject, the Secretary (Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation) apprised the Committee about the three basic pillars of a sound
agricultural economy as per the Agriculture Price Policy of 1986 viz. production
technology package, efficient deliveries of inputs and services and remunerative and
stable market prices for agricultural products.  He also apprised the Committee about the
role of Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) and their efforts in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

recommending the Minimum Support Price (MSP) for 25 crops: Market Intervention
Scheme, State Agriculture Produce Market Committee acts (APMC), forward and futures
market and other issues of price mechanism.
2. The Members raised queries on the methodology adopted by CACP while
deciding the cost of production, need of CACP as a central body, risk factors involved in
price estimation, time for announcing MSP and bonus, inclusion of some other crops in
the ambit of MSP, the recommendations of National Commission for farmers on the
subject and import of wheat etc.
3. The representatives of the Department replied to some of the queries.  The
Chairman then desired that in respect of the points and queries of the Members which
could not be replied to instantly, the Department may send their replies in writing to the
Secretariat.
4. A verbatim record of the proceeding of the sitting was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 30 OCTOBER, 2007 AT 1500 HRS. IN
COMMITTEE ROOM µ139¶, FIRST FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW
DELHI
    The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1730 hrs
PRESENT
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav ± Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
1. Shri Ranen Barman
2. Shri Anil Basu
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
7. Shri Prabodh Panda
8. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar
9. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh
10. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
11. Shri Harish Rawat
12. Dr. M.S. Gill
13. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
14. Shri Vikram Verma
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar
16. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed
17. Shri Datta Meghe
18. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
19. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri Rajkumar    -  Deputy Secretary
3. Shri N.S. Hooda   -  Deputy Secretary
4. Ms. Amita Walia   -  Under Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

WITNESSES
Sl.No. Name Designation
1. Dr. P.K. Mishra                : Secretary (DAC)
2. Dr. S.M. Jharwal              : Principal Adviser (DAC)
3. Sh. P.P. Mathur               : Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser (DAC)
4. Sh. Karnail Singh           : Additional Secretary (DAC)
5. Dr. N.B. Singh                : Agricultural Commissioner (DAC)
6. Dr. A.K. Neog                 : Economics & Statistical Adviser Dte of
Economics & Statistics (DAC)
7. Sh. Siraj Hussain           : Joint Secretary (Department of Food & Public
Distribution)
8. Sh. U.K.S. Chauhan       : Joint Secretary (Marketing) (DAC)
9. Sh. Satish Chander       : Joint Secretary (INM, Credit, Coop.)
10. Sh. K.S. Sethi                 : Director (Finance) (DAC)
11. Ms Madhu Bala              : Adviser, Dte of Economics & Statistics (DAC)
12. Sh. R. Viswanathan       : Adviser, Dte of Economics & Statistics (DAC)
13. Sh. D.S. Kolamkar         : Economic Adviser (Department of Consumer
Affairs)
14. Dr. K.G. Radhakrishnan : Member-Secretary (Commission for Agricultural
Costs & Prices)
15. Sh. A.K. Jena                  : Director (Commission for Agricultural Costs &
Prices)
16. Dr. Rajeev Mehta Adviser (Hort.) Deptt. of A&C
At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture, welcomed the
representatives of the Ministry (Department of Agriculture and Co-operation) and
apprised of the provisions of Direction 55(1) of Directions by Speaker to treat the
proceedings of the meeting as confidential till the Report is presented to Parliament, and
asked them to give specific and clear reply of the queries made by the Members during
the last sitting.  The Secretary (Department of Agriculture and Co-operation) explained
the Government ¶s viewpoint on the subject µPricing Policy of Agricultural Produce ¶.
Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised certain queries relating to Minimum
Support Price (MSP) synthetic modeling method of cost estimation vis-a-vis average
cost method being used by CACP, risk factor at productivity level, variation of C 2 cost in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

different States, cost of inputs and labour in various States, farmers to be treated as
skilled labours, rate of interest being charged from the farmers, plight of cotton growers,
mechanism of price fixation with the help of Agricultural Universities and futures market
etc.
2. The representatives of the Department clarified some of the points raised by the
Members and assured to give replies of some other points in written to the Secretariat.
3. A verbatim record of the proceeding of the sitting has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 12 TH JUNE, 2008 AT 1130 HRS. IN
COMMITTEE ROOM µ(¶, BASEMENT, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1245 hrs.
PRESENT
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav ± Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Ranen Barman
3. Shri Anil Basu
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
5. Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar
6. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
7. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
8. Shri Prabodh Panda
9. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil
10. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
11. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
12. Shri Harish Rawat
13. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
14. Shri Vikram Verma
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar
16. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
17. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy
18. Shri Ishwar Singh
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  -  Director
3. Shri Raj Kumar  -  Deputy Secretary
4. Shri N.S.Hooda  -  Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary
At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture, welcomed the
Members of the Committee and introduced Shri Ishwar Singh, MP, a Rajya Sabha
member, who was nominated to the Committee on 14 th May, 2008.  Thereafter, he
requested the Members to consider the Draft Report on µPricing Policy of Agricultural
Produce¶.
2.  The Members of the Committee then considered the Draft Report and put
forward their suggestions on various issues contained in the Report.  After detailed
discussions, the Committee decided to hold another sitting on 19 th June, 2008 to finalise
the Draft Report.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX  IV
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 19 TH JUNE, 2008 AT 1100 HRS. IN
COMMITTEE ROOM µ'¶, GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW
DELHI
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1255 hrs.
PRESENT
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav ± Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Ranen Barman
3. Shri Anil Basu
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
6. Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
8. Shri Prabodh Panda
9. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
10. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh
11. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
12. Shri Harish Rawat
13. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
14. Shri Vikram Verma
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar
16. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
17. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy
18. Shri Ishwar Singh
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh  -  Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma  -  Director
3. Shri Raj Kumar  -  Deputy Secretary
4. Shri N.S.Hooda  -  Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary
 At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture welcomed the
Members of the Committee and requested them to continue the discussions on the Draft
Report on µPricing Policy of Agricultural Produce ¶ and consider the Report for adoption.
2. After discussing in detail the suggestions of the Members, the Draft Report was
adopted with certain additions and modifications, which have been carried out in the
Report.   The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the report and present
the same to the Hon ¶ble Speaker, as the Lok Sabha was not in Session.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages