      
  23 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2006-07) 
                 
         
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
         
         
                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE  AND COOPERATION) 
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007) 
         
         
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006)} 
         
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
  
                                                      
  
         
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
MARCH, 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (Saka) 
 1

 
 
  
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2006-07) 
          
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
 
 
         
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations  contained in the Eighteenth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006] 
         
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   
  
 2

                                                     
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
           MARCH, 2007/, PHALGUNA 1928 (Saka) 
 3

 
COA No  188 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price:  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
        © 2007 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Pr ocedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha  (Eleventh Edition).  
 
 
 
 4

 
 
<CONTENTS> 
                  
 PAGE 
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………   
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
held on 08.03.2007 .      
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth  
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2005-2006) on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of  
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation1  
 
 
                                                 
1  
 5

   
Composition of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Ranen Barman 
3. Shri Anil Basu  
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
6. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
7. Shri Khagen Das 
8. Shri Dharmendra 
9. Shri GadakhTukaram Gangadhar 
10. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
11. Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
12. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
13. Shri Prabodh Panda 
14. Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Patil Nilangekar 
15. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
16. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
17. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
18. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
19.    Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
20.    Shri Baleshwar Yadav    
21.    Smt. Kalpana  Ramesh Narhire 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.    Shri Harish Rawat 
23.   Dr. M.S.Gill 
24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25. Shri Vikram Verma 
26. Shri  Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28. Shri Datta Meghe 
29. Shri  Debabrata Biswas 
30. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
31.        Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K.Singh   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Hardev Singh   - Director 
4. Shri N.S.Hooda   - Deputy Secretary 
   5.       Ms. Amita Walia      - Under Secretary  
 6

INTRODUCTION 
         
         
I, the Chairm an, Standing Committee on Agriculture, [2006-2007] having 
been authorized by the Comm ittee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained  in the E ighteenth Report of the Standing C ommittee on 
Agriculture (2005-2006) (Fourteenth Lok Sa bha) on De mands for Gr ants of the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Departm ent of Agriculture and Cooperation) f or the year 
2006-2007. 
 
2. The Eighteenth Report of the Stan ding Committee on Ag riculture (2 005-
2006) on De mands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of Agriculture  
(Department of Agriculture and C o-operation) was presented to Lok Sabha on 
19.05.2006 and laid in Rajya Sabha on the sam e day.  The Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Co-operati on) was requested to furnish action taken 
replies of the Governm ent to the  reco mmendations containe d i n the  Ei ghteenth 
Report.  The replies of the Government to all the recomm endations contained in the 
Report were received. 
 
3. The Committee con sidered the acti on taken replies furnished by the 
Government at their sitting held on 08.3.2007, approved the draft comments and 
adopted the Twenty Third Report.  Minutes of the sitting are placed at Appendix I.  
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Governm ent on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Eighteenth Report (14 th Lok Sabha)  
of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
        
           
           
                                                                                     
NEW DELHI;                          PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
08  March, 2007                                   Chairman, 
17 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)                              Standing Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
 
 7

CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
 
 This Report of the C ommittee on Agriculture deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in th e 
Eighteenth Report (F ourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture (2005-2006) on Dem ands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry 
of Agriculture (Departm ent of Agriculture and Co operation) which was  
presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 19.5.2006. 
 
1.2 The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government 
have been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by 
the Government (Chapter II of  the Repor t) Recommendation 
Sl.Nos. 3,5,7,8, 13, 17 and 18 (Total –7) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s action taken reply 
(Chapter III of the Report)  (Total –NIL) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respe ct of whic h action  
 taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
 Committee (Chapter IV of the Report) Recommendation Sl. No. 
 9,10,11,12, 16 and 19  (Total-6) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations  in res pect of which final 
replies of the Government ar e still awaited. (Chapter V)  
Recommendation Sl.Nos. 1,2,4,6, 14 and 15 (Total –6) 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of their recommendations. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Budgetary Allocation 
1.4 The Committee note that despite  their repeated recommendations in 
various Reports to substantially increase budgetary allocations for Agriculture 
Sector to give required impetus to agricultural development, the allocations in 
respect of this vital sector continues to be unsatisfactory and much below the 
 8

requirement.    The Committee have been informed by the representatives of 
the Department of Agricu lture and Cooperation that  to build and sustain 
momentum of the Agriculture Sector it is necessary t hat both State and 
Central Plan outlays are augmented to achieve the required per centage of  
anticipated growth in the agriculture sect or.   Keeping that in view they had 
proposed a Plan outlay of Rs.5917 cr ore for 2006-2007 but only Rs.4840  
crore have been approved.  The Committ ee note that Plan allocation of  
Rs.3920 crore for 2005-06 at Revised Estimate (RE) stage was 6.3% less as 
compared to Budget Estimate (BE) of Rs.4209.32 crore of the same year. 
 The Committee are not at all im pressed by the rosy picture portrayed 
by Member Secretary, Planning Commission during evidenc e where he 
profoundly declared that Plan allocation in favour of all the three departments 
of the Agriculture put  together (Department of Ag riculture and Cooperation,  
Department of Agric ultural Research and Educ ation and De partment of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisher ies) has been doubled within a single 
Plan period from R s.3242 crore in  2002-03 to Rs.6900 c rore.  The 
Committee observe that in view of the inflation and the value of money in real 
terms, the overall allocations are not ac tually being made for Agriculture to 
carry out activities under its various progammes, although it has been termed 
as a priority sector.   This can also  be gauged from the fa ct that percentage 
share of the Agriculture to Central Pl an Outlay of Government of India has  
come down from 2.84% in 2005-2006 to 2.73% in 2006-2007, of which share 
of Department of Agricu lture and Cooperation a ccounts for 1.98% in 2005-
2006 and 1.89% in 2006-2007. 
 9

 The Committee are of the firm opini on that to meet the challenges  
faced by Agriculture Sector, the Governm ent has to reprioritize t he role for 
Department of Agric ulture and Coop eration to achieve the targeted 4%  
growth rate env isaged for agricultura l and allied sector and to help the  
farmers to compete in the WTO regime. 
 The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should be 
provided Rs.5917 crore by  Planning Commission and Mi nistry of Finance a t 
the RE stage, as proposed by them at BE stage, since many o f their new  
initiatives and other progr ammes are suffering owing to lack of requisit e 
funding. The Committee further recommend that no financial cuts  should be 
imposed on the Department at RE st age f or smooth implement ation of the 
Schemes, as financ ial cuts imposed no w may lead to further addition of  
miseries to Indian farmers and people eng aged in the agricultur al sector, in 
the absence of timely help. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.5 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that on the 
basis of requirement to be projected for RE 2006- 2007 by s ubject matter 
divisions, SBEs (proposed) will be forwar ded to Ministry of Finance (Budg et 
Division) a nd while furnishin g SBEs (pro posed) the recommendation o f 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agricu lture will also be forwarded t o 
them emphasizing the need to augment the budget at RE 2006-2007 stage 
for agriculture sector. 
 Reprioritization of the Role of  Depart ment of Agriculture and 
Cooperation 
 10

 It is endeavour of the Department of  Agriculture and Cooperation to 
effectively contribute to the achievement of the 4% growth rate in agricultur e 
and allied sectors envisaged for the Tenth Plan.  Towards this end a number  
of new initiatives have been launc hed t o improve the production and  
productivity in the Agriculture Sec tor.  These, inter-alia include the schemes  
relating to National Horticulture Mission,  Micro Irrigation, National Project on 
Organic F arming, Support to State Ex tension Programmes for Extension  
Reforms, Development of Market Infr astructure Grading and Standardization  
Scheme.  These programmes have been de signed to promote diversification 
from cereals to high value crop s and ac tivities; maximize the utilization of  
scarce water resources; encourage organic farming on a large scale ; 
revitalizing and revamp the delivery of extension services; and strengthening 
the agricultural marketing infrastructure. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.6 The Committee feel that the e nhanced budget for the agricultural 
sector is the need  of the hour . Therefore, concert ed efforts should be 
made to get adequate funds fr om Planning Commission and Finance 
Ministry so that the new  initiatives and  program mes taken  up b y th e 
Department of Agriculture a nd Co -operation (D AC) to achieve the 
targeted 4% growth rate in agricu lture and allied sectors, do not suffer  
due to lack of requisite funds. 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Allocation for North Eastern States  
 11

1.7  The Committee note that though 10% of the total funds is invariably  
being allocated for North Eastern States  but actual release is far less than 
the money allotted.   During 2004- 2005 actual release has been Rs.262.00 
crore as against the allocation of Rs.294.50 crore and during 2005-2006 only 
Rs.289.36 crore could be released against the allocation of Rs.389.00 crore. 
The Com mittee have been inf ormed that  late approval of Sc hemes, non-
submission of proposals and unspent bal ances are the reasons  for shortfall 
in the actual releas e.  The Committee also observe that there is a lack of 
financial performance appraisal system in respect of North Eastern States. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that in order to receive timely 
proposal from North Eastern States, due publicity of the Schemes should be 
given by providing more extension services in these areas.  Timely release of 
the funds should be made to this otherwise resource  starved area of the 
country.   They further desire that the expenditure actually inc urred on the 
schemes in North Eastern States shoul d be reflected in Demands for Grants 
of the Department separately so as to  have clear cut picture of progress 
made in this regard. 
 The Committee further note t hat the Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
‘National Mission on  Bamboo Technolog y’ for North Eastern States is still 
pending for final approval.    They, ther efore, desire that  this Scheme be 
implemented at the earliest, because all Members of Group of Ministers 
(GoM) including Finance Minist er have accorded their approval and only the 
CCEA sanction is required after getting PMOs approval, so that North 
Eastern States could reap the benefit of this very useful scheme. 
 12

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.8 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that several 
initiatives have been t aken by the Govern ment to strengthen and to provide 
more extension services in the North Eastern States durin g the Tenth Fiv e 
Year Plan.   A major initiative has been the launching of a new scheme 
“Support to State Extension Programme s for Extension Refor ms” during 
2005-06 to make the extension system farmer driven and farmer accountable 
by way of new institut ional arrangements for technology dissemination in the 
form of an Agricultural T echnology Management Agency (AT MA) at the 
district level to operationalize the ext ension reforms.  During the Tenth Fiv e 
Year Plan, out of 252 dist ricts proposed to be covered by the scheme in the 
whole country, half of the distric ts from North Eastern St ates and Jammu & 
Kashmir shall be covered as compared t one third of the districts in other 
States.  To facilitate the States to  understand the concept, implementation of 
the scheme and sharing of experienc es among the States, State Level 
Orientation Workshops have been organiz ed by MANAGE in all the States 
including North-Eastern States.  One Kis an Call Centre located in Kolkata is  
catering to queries of farmers from Sikkim and Tripura.  The Kisan Cal l 
Centre at Guwahati cover calls from Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, 
Manipur and Nagaland.  Agriculture Graduates are engaged as  Call Centre 
agents to reply to the queries of the farmers in respec tive languages.  The 
Guwahati Kendra of Doordarshan is telecasting a 30 minute daily programme 
on five days of the week for t he benefit of the far ming com munity.  Six 
Narrowcasting Kendras of Doordarshan and  FM Kisan Vani Stations located 
 13

at Itanagar (Arunachal Pradesh), Jorhat, Dhubri, Haflong and Nowgaon (all in 
Assam), Jowai (Meghalaya), Lunglei  (Mizoram), Mokokchung (Nagaland),  
Kailashahr and Belonia (both in Tri pura) are disseminating suitable 
information on various Government schemes and programmes widely among 
the farming community.  The Kisan Call Centre No. 1551 – is being 
publicized extensively through these programmes.  An Extension Education 
Institute set up at Jorhat (Assam) in 1987 has been providing training support 
at the regional level, to middle level f unctionaries of the State Governments.  
Moreover, two training centers in A ssam and Manipur  are imparting training 
to agriculture graduates to enable them to set up viable agri-clinic s and agri-
business centers for providing extension services to farmers.  For giving wide 
publicity of the schemes of the Government, an Agri-Expo 2006 was  
organized at Dimapur, Nagaland, from 27th to 31st March 2006. 
 Every effort is made by the Govern ment to ensure timely release of 
funds in respect of various schemes being implemented in the North Eastern 
Region.  The matter relating to reflection of actual expenditure on schemes in 
the NER in the Demands for Grants has  been taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance and reply is s till awaited.  The reply/observation received from that 
Ministry would be intimated to the Committee. 
 Regarding the National Mission on Bamboo Technology it is hereby 
informed that the Cabinet Commi ttee on Economic Affairs (CCEA)  
considered the Note for CCEA on 18th May 2006 and decided that, in the first 
instance, the Group of Minist ers (GoM ) consistin g of the Minister for 
Agriculture, Minister f or Environment  & F orests, Minister for Science &  
 14

Technology and Deputy Chairman, Plan ning Commission may consider the 
matter.  The matter will be considered by the GoM very soon. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.9 The Com mittee desire that the matter of reflecting a ctual 
expenditure on the schemes in the North Eastern region in the  
Demands for Grants of the Ministr y sho uld be taken up exp editiously 
and it should be reflected in the ensuing Demands for Grants. 
 The Committee further desire that extension ser vices for North-
Eastern region should be strengthened further so that they  are able t o 
reflect the true picture of the much  needed development of Agriculture 
and allied sectors in the region. 
 The Committee would also like to be apprised of the outcome of 
the meeting of the Group of Minister s set up for implementation of the 
Centrally sponsored scheme ‘National Mission on Bamboo Technology’ 
for the North Eastern States and other areas. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Revamping of Cooperatives 
1.10 The Com mittee note with diss atisfaction that ther e has been gross 
under-utilisation of the funds und er cooperation division during the last a few 
years.    D uring 2003-2004, only  Rs.42.36 crore could be spent as agains t 
the allocation of Rs.70.00 crore B udget Estimates and in 2004-2005 also  
Rs.66.17 crore were spent in  spite of an allocation of Rs.74.17 crore.   The 
main reas ons as  told to the Committee are uns pent balanc es with th e 
 15

Implementing agenc ies and non-approval  of Schemes.   The Committee 
desire that  the Government sho uld fully ut ilise Rs.10 0 crore allocated for 
2006-2007 and ask  for enhanc ed allocation at RE stage because as the  
pending Schemes have been approved now, the amount of Rs.100 crore is 
not sufficient enough to implement all the Schemes of Cooperative Sector. 
 The Committee are at a loss to notic e the deterioratin g conditions of 
the cooper atives in India.  The Report  of the Task  Force headed by  Shri 
Jagdish Capoor on revamping of cooperatives was received by the 
Government in July 2000.  The Task Fo rce under the Chairmanship  of Prof. 
A. Vaidyanathan,  to suggest measures for revival of rural cooperative  cred it 
institutions, has also submitted its report in respect of Short-term Cooperative 
Credit Structure and examin ation of the  long term cooperative credit 
structure is in process. Meanwhile, the cooperatives are in complete disarray, 
with the result the financia l position of cooperatives, which are backbone of  
agriculture, is going down from bad to wor se.   Most of t he Cooperatives in 
India are in shambles being financia lly and structurally weak.   The 
Committee feel that unless ur gent steps are taken to arrest this decline, the 
Cooperatives cannot perform effectively in making av ailable the credit and 
other requirement of the farmers.  They, therefore, recommend that since the 
scope of the cooperatives in our country is very wide, so urgent steps should 
be taken for their revival by impl ementing the rec ommendations of the 
Capoor Committee and A. Vaidy anathan Committee in letter and spirit at the 
earliest. 
 16

 The Com mittee have experienced that sometimes the default ers in 
repayment of loans manipul ate to become the Member  of the Executive of  
Cooperative Societies and then misuse thei r position in not paying their loan 
on time.   The Committee, therefor e, recommend that the Government  
should ensure that no defaulter is  included/elec ted to the executiv e 
committee of the cooperatives  so that  the cooper atives are saved from 
further becoming financially weak and corrupt. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.11 The Gover nment in t heir action taken reply have stated that the 
schemes of the Cooperation Div ision have been restructured by merging the 
on-going s chemes impl emented during the 9 th Plan and inc orporating ne w 
components.  The re-structured sc heme on Coop erative Education and 
Training has been approved during J anuary, 2005 and the restructured 
scheme of Assistanc e to NCDC program mes for Cooperative Development 
has been approved by the competent authority for implementation during 10th 
Plan on 16.03.2005.  Since the restructured schemes were cleared by CCEA 
at the feg end of 2004-05, t herefore, allocations we re reduced at the RE  
stage.  However, there is no under ut ilization of the funds durin g 2005-06.  
The funds kept at RE stage were almost fully utilized during 2005-06. 
 As far as full utilization of allocat ion in the c urrent year i.e. 2006-07 is  
concerned, we will convey the desire  of the Lok Sabha Standing Committee 
to the implementing agencies  and it can be ass ured on the basis of 
expenditure figure of 2005-06 that the budget earmarked for 2006-07 would 
be utilized fully.  Regar ding enhanced  allocation at RE stage we shall 
 17

propose for enhanced budgetary allocation in accordance with the demand 
and the pr ogress of utilizat ion by the Co operative Organizations fall un der 
the ambit of Cooperation Division. 
 Government of India constituted a Task Force under  the 
Chairmanship of Prof. A. Vaidy anathan in August 2004, for suggesting 
measures for revival of cooperative cr edit institutions.  The Task Force ha s 
submitted its Report in respect of shor t term cooperative credit s tructure and 
recommended a financial package of Rs.14,839 crore for the short term rural 
credit co-operative institutions.  Th e pack age cov ers accumulat ed losses, 
unpaid inv oked guar antees, receivables from  State Governments, return of 
share capital to State Government s, Human Resources Development,  
conduct of special audits, computerization, implementation costs, etc. 
 Based on the consensus arrived at  with State Governments and other  
stakeholders on the recommendations made by the Task Force, Government 
has approv ed the pac kage for revival of  the Short-term Rural Cooperativ e 
Credit Structure involving financ ial assi stance of Rs.13,596 crore.  The 
provision of financial assistanc e under  t he package has been link ed to 
reforms in the cooperative sector.  Th e same Task Force has been assigned 
the mandate for suggesting revival package for the Long Term Cooperativ e 
Credit Structure.  Government will initiate steps for reviving Long-term 
Cooperative Credit St ructure after receiv ing the report of the Task Force in 
this regard. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 18

 
1.12 The Com mittee note that the  Government is silent about the  
recommendation of the Committee in  regard to ensur ing that no 
defaulter is included/elected to  the Executive Committee of the 
Cooperatives to save it from becomin g financially  w eak and corrup t.  
They d esire the Go vernment to take action on th is aspect also an d 
apprise the Committee about the re vival package for Long-term 
Cooperative Credit Structure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Modified National Crop Insurance Scheme 
 
1.13 The Committee note that taking  cognizance of  certain 
shortcomings/limitations like ‘unit’ area of insu rance, calculation of 
guaranteed income, low indemnity level,  delay in settlement of insurance  
claims etc., a Modified National Agricu ltural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) has 
been prepared by the Ministry of Ag riculture and submitted to Planning 
Commission for appr oval in February 200 5.  Even after 14 months, the 
Planning Commission has not been able to approve it, which speak s 
volumes of  disinterest and c allous atti tude shown towards the farmers of 
India who never get remuner ative price of t heir crop when compared to the 
inputs he uses in growing them.  Duri ng the evidence when repr esentatives 
 19

of Planning Commission and Department of Agricult ure & Cooperation wer e 
called together, Secretary, DAC, in formed the Committee that Plannin g 
Commission has returned the MNAIS with certain obs ervations on 20 th April 
2006 v iz (i) Shifting of NAIS to non- Plan side, (ii) Planning Co mmission 
favours funding only the overhead component of costs of Modified NAIS such 
as undertaking crop cutting experiments and threshold yield determination for 
major crops, (iii) Pla nning Co mmission also sup ports implementation of  
proposed MNAIS on pilot bas is in district s/States which have requisite data 
collection capabilit y/infrastructure for obtaining the feedback.  The 
representative of Department submitted that these contradictory observations 
are harsh blow to their efforts to brin g more farmers under the umbrella of  
insurance and Department is   unable to interpret th eir observations.  The 
representative of the Pl anning Commission informed the Committee that in 
view of non-availability of data requi red to have actuarial calc ulations, and 
there being need to have subsidy on the premium, this cannot  be a Plan 
activity and it should come under Non-Plan .  Therefore, in its totality, the 
Scheme will not get through the Planning  Commission.  He further testified 
emphatically that he was reflecting the views of the whole inter nal Planning 
Commission, namely Member Agriculture, the Deputy Chairman and all other 
Members in it. 
 The Committee, while taking serious note of the issue, feel that how 
come an ongoing Sc heme whic h is very  much being implementated as a 
Plan Sc heme since, 2000, if approached for some modifications, can be 
categorized under non-plan activity.  Moreover, the modifications a re 
 20

suggested in view of covering more  farmers and crops, the proposal to 
implement it on pilot basis  defeat the very  purpose of it.  The Committee,  
therefore, desire that the matter should immediately be resolved and may be 
taken up at Cabinet level, if required.  They feel that the further delay in the 
issue means playing the havoc with the lives of farmers, who are the 
backbone of our country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.14 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that as the 
issues raised by the Committee under the abovesaid recommendation relate 
to the Planning Commission, this Department vide O.M. dated 5 th June, 2006 
and subsequent reminders dated 21 st June and 12 th July, 2006 sought the 
views/comments of Planning Commissi on on the recommendation.  The 
Planning Commission vide their letter dated the 19th June, 2006 has informed 
that they are taking up the matter with t he Ministry of Finance.  The Ministry 
of Finance has already communicated their views in the matter to the 
Planning Commission.  The Mi nistry of Financ e is of the view that the 
scheme s hould be continued  as a Plan Scheme dur ing the pilot period 
constant monitoring and ev aluation on com pletion to assess the replicability 
of the scheme on a larger scale.  A fi nal reply from the Planning Commission 
is awaited. 
 In the meantime, this Department  has finalized the Memorandum for 
the Expenditure Finance Committee on th e Modified Nation al Agricultural  
Insurance Schemes (MNAIS) and circulated amongst the appraisal agencies 
 21

for their comments.  The com ments of  the Departments/agencies except 
Planning Commission have been received.   After receiving the comments of 
Planning Commission, Me morandum on MNAIS will be submit ted for the 
consideration of EF C.  Thereafter, note for the cons ideration of Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) will be submitted. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
1.15 The Committee are of the view  that the  Planning Commission is 
taking a ver y long time  to finalise the schem e.  This s hould be 
approved as a Plan  Schem e, as rightly  approved by  the Ministry  of 
Finance, and the Committe e should be apprised of the same 
immediately after the final action is taken in this regard. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Balanced Use of Fertilisers 
1.16 The Committee note that the continuing use of chemical fertilisers has 
started showing de leterious effects on so il fertility specially in h igh fertiliser 
consuming and intensively cultivated areas.    The Committee are perturbed 
to note the alarming NPK consumption ratio, which is an indicator of 
balanced use of chemical fertilisers on All India basis up to 5. 7:2:1 during 
2004-2005 as against the suggested ratio of 4:2:1 by the Ministry.    In s ome 
of the food growing tradition al states like Punjab, this ratio has gone as high 
as 35:9.5:1.   To incr ease the foodgrain production, the farmers are just 
injecting lot of nitrogen and thus  doing damage to our agriculture.  On the 
 22

issue of increasing productivity, the Committee was informed by Secretary, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education that due to unjudiciou s 
use of fertilisers not only in Punjab, even in other states of the country also in 
90% of land, sulphur has been decreas ed and nearly  in 80% of  land, zinc  
and boron has been reduced.   So t he requisit e micro-nutrients are 
decreasing which are affecting the produc tivity.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend to the Department of Agricu lture and Cooperation t o implement 
the Integrated Nutrient Management Scheme more vigorously.    The farmers 
should be educated a bout judicious use of chemical f ertilisers.  They shou ld 
also be made aware of the organic source of nutri ents like organic manure, 
farm yard manure, green manure, com post, vermicompost and bio-fertilisers  
also.  The micro-bacterial activities  of the soil depe nd on organic carbon,  
therefore, they should be advised to increase the organic matter of the soil t o 
increase the productiv ity.  The Committ ee further desire the Government to 
take up the Scheme of ‘Na tional Project on Organic Farming’ seriously and 
popularise this conc ept because the de mand of organic food is not only  
increasing in domestic market but the food is being welcomed world wide for 
having good nutrient value in this health conscious global scenario. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.17 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that the role of 
fertilizer in  agricu lture is well k nown and substantial growth in  agricu lture 
production is main ly due to use  of fert ilizers.  The c onsumption of fertilizers  
depends on a number of facts like high y ielding varieties of seeds, irrigation, 
 23

weather, soil fertility s tatus and b alanced use of fertilizers for obtaining ratio  
of 4:2:1. 
For bala nced use  of fertilizers De partment of Agricult ure &  
Cooperation is promoti ng Integrated Nutrient management (IN M), whic h 
includes soil test base d balanced and judi cious use of  chemical f ertilizers in 
conjunction with Far m yard manur e (FYM) compost, vermi-compost, 
phospho c ompost, bio-fertilizers etc.  for improving  the prod uctivity an d 
fertilizer use efficiency. 
To obtain t his objective, the INM Div ision is implementing a centrally 
sponsored scheme “Balance d and Integr ated Use of Fertilizer” through  
Annual Ac tion Plan of t he State Government under Macro Management  
Mode of operation, with the following components. 
1. Establishment of Compost plants. 
2. Strengthening of soil testing services. 
(i) Strengthening of existing Soil Testing laboratories:- 
(a) Soil Testing laboratories with micro-nutrient facilities 
(b) Soil Testing laboratories for NPK but without 
micronutrient facilities. 
(ii) Establishment of new Soil Testing laboratories:- 
(a) Soil Testing laboratories for NPK but without 
micronutrient facilities. 
(iii) Training Course for staff of Soil Testing laboratories 
(iv) Organization of Regional Workshops 
(v) Organization of National Seminars 
 24

INM Division has already launched since October 2004 a new central 
sector  scheme ‘National Project on Organic Farming’ for production , 
promotion, certification and market development of organic production in 
the country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
1.18 The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made 
after implementation of this National Project on Organic Farming. 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Soil Testing Laboratories 
1.19 The Committee note that at pres ent there are 551 soil testing  
laboratories out of which 426 are static and 125 are m obile laboratories, with 
the total annual analy sing capacity of 67. 46 lakh samples.   The Committee 
recommend that the Departm ent should give encouragement to the private 
sector also for setting up soil testi ng laboratories so t hat en deavour to 
provide one soil- testing laboratory in each Block/Mandal could be reached.   
The Government should also set up more mobile soil testing labs so that the 
farmers could go for the soil testing in  their vicinity and they could be 
educated t o use on ly those fertilizer nut rients which are found deficient in  
their land and also up to the extent required.   The help of soil testing labs will 
 25

also be beneficial for the farmers in choosing the crop to be s own.  The 
Committee would like the Government to find out the feasibi lity of providing 
the soil testing facilitie s and authorizing Agriculture Universities and colleges 
to do the soil testing on c ommission basis  so as to sustain their test lab  
facilities. 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.20 The Government in their action ta ken reply have stated that all I ndia 
Soil & Land Use Survey, carries out deta iled Soil Survey all over India using 
remote sensing techniques and bring out detailed soil s urvey reports on the 
basis of soil samples collected during fiel d work.  However, at present there 
is no provision to car ry out soil testing on farmer’s fields as  it wo uld require 
additional infrastructure and manpower .  In other schemes of the NRM  
Division s uch as River Valley  Proj ect and Flood Prone Riv er Projects, 
Reclamation of Alkali Soils  and Watershed Developm ent Projects in Shifting 
Cultivation Areas, there is  no established soil testing laboratories.  However, 
efforts are being made to introduce soil testing and issue soil health cards for 
the farmers in the area covered under above schemes. 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
1.21 The Com mittee are not at all happy w ith the repl y o f the 
Government and the unw illingness of the Government to increase the 
soil testing laboratories in the count ry, w hich is  ver y crucial for the 
 26

survival of the farmers.  The Government simply replied that there is no 
provision to carr y out soil testing on farmer’s field  as it w ould require 
additional infrastructure and manpo wer.  The  Committee fail to 
understand w hy Government cannot add infrastructure for this 
purpose.  The Com mittee strongly recommend that mobile  soil testing 
laboratories should be increased and efforts should be made to provide 
one lab in each block/mandal.  Private sect or should  also be 
encouraged in this regard.  Th e Committee depricate the lax attitude of 
the Government in not establishing soil testing labs under  various 
schemes of the NRM Division and st rongly recommend that the soil 
testing labs should be established for the farmers covered under these 
schemes also. 
 Further, the Committee note w ith dissatisfaction that the repl y of 
the Government is silent about the recommendation of the Committee 
regarding authorizing agricultural universities and colleges to do th e 
soil testing on commission basis.  The Committee desire to be apprised 
of the fe asibility report in this regard w ithin three months of  
presentation of this Report. 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
Agricultural Credit and Rate of Interest 
1.22 The Committee appreciate the gesture that in order to ensure the crop 
loans at reasonable rates, the Government has decided to provide short term 
credit at 7 per cent with an upper limit of Rs.3 lakh principal amount.   The 
Committee have been informed that I ndian Banks Association (IBA) and 
 27

NABARD are working out th e modalities for interest  subvention required to 
be given to NABARD in this regard.    Furthermore, period of short-term crop 
loans depends upon the crop cy cle of t he particular c rop for which loan has 
been availed plus some buffer period required for undertaking necessary 
harvest and post-harvest operations.    
 The Committee find the c larification given by t he Gover nment 
regarding period of short-term i s very vague.   Because if any farmer take s 
loan for a tractor or other agricultural ma chinery, it has nothing to do with the 
crop of that particular harvesting s eason.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the loan should be made available for at least 3 years at this 
rate.  IBA and NABARD should be ask ed to expedite to finaliz e the 
modalities so that farmers  get loan on time. 
 The Committee feel that worst exploitation of the farmers is through 
the adverse credit policies of the financia l institutions which com pel farmers 
to starve under the burden of loans and commit suicides.    The Committee 
find that in 1918 Britis hers passed a Usurious Loans Act which provided that 
no farmer can be c harged a rate of intere st higher than the authorised rate 
which at that time was 5.5 per cent  and if charged, the case could be 
reopened in the court and entire accounts resettled.   Moreover, the total 
amount of interest could not be higher t han the original capital.  But in 1949  
a Banking Regulation Act was passed which made a special prov ision under 
Article 21(a) saying that these will not  apply to bank ing companies including 
cooperative banks. 
 28

 In view of plight of farmers due to heavy burden of credits  the 
Committee recommend that section 21(a)  of the Banking Regulation Act 
should be scrapped.   All out concerted efforts should be made to bring down 
the rate of interest on Farm Credit to the level of 5.5% simple interest, as it 
used to be in early  20 th century.   In case of  c ooperatives, transaction 
cost/margin at each layer must be reduced  as the length of chain, from RBI 
to NABARD to State-District and Cooperat ive Societies at villag e level and  
Regional Rural Banks , is very big.   Event ually the farmer has to take the 
burden of all these m iddlemen/lending agencies.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend to shorten this chain so that eventual creditor is directly linked to 
the borrower.   The Committee further desire the Government to ensure that  
in no case, the interest should be hi gher than the original capital and 
charging of compound rate of interest should be absolutely prohibited so that 
exploitation of farmers by financial institutions is minimised. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.23 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that in order to 
bring down rate of interest on farm loans it has been announced in the Union 
Budget for  the year 2006-07 that effe ctive from Kharif 2006-07, farmers 
would receive crop loans upto a principal amount of Rs.3  lakh at 7% rate of 
interest and the Government of Indi a would provide necessary interest 
subvention for this purpose.  Crop loans to farmers are generally made 
available through Kis an Credit Cards (KCC ) which are valid for 3 years.  As  
incentive for good performance, credi t limits under KCC could be enhanc ed 
to take care of increase in costs, change in cropping pattern, etc. 
 29

 Banks hav e been advised by  RBI t hat total interest debited to an 
account should not exceed the principal amount in respect of short term 
loans adv anced to small and marginal farmers.  As per the extant RBI 
instructions, banks are not allowed to  compound interes t on current dues of  
crop loans and term loans in res pect of di rect agricultural advanc es granted 
to farmers.  If such loans bec ome over due banks have bee n advised that 
where the default is due to genuine reasons, they should extend the period of 
loan or reschedule the installments under term loans.  Once such a relief has 
been extended the ov erdues become current dues and hence banks should  
not compound interest thereon.  In case  of long durat ion crops, interest is  
recovered only annually. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
1.24 The Committee are dismayed  to k now that the Department has 
not paid an y heed t o the reco mmendation of the Committee to  scrap 
Section 21 (a) of Banking Regulat ion Act, 1949 w hich hinders the 
provision of Usurious Loan s Act,  1918 under w hich it w as, inter alia, 
provided that the total amount of in terest on a loan taken by  a farmer  
could not be higher than the original capital.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that Section 21 (a) of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 should be deleted so as to ensure that no Ban k 
charges the interest more than the original capital, irrespective of the 
fact, whether it is a short term loan  or long term loan, from small and 
marginal farmers.    
 30

Moreover, the issue of cutting the costs/margin at each laye r of 
cooperatives has also not been addre ssed.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommenda tion to shorten the chain of 
cooperative loan institutions and dir ectly link the eventual creditor to 
the borrowers.   
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Debt Recovery Measures 
1.25 The Committee are shocked to lear n that  in some States like Uttar 
Pradesh and Bihar, there is a law to a rrest farmers who default in repayment 
of loans.   Moreover, t hey are not only kept in jail but the expenditure 
incurred on their food, transport and othe r things in jail is als o said to be 
recovered from them. The Committee ar e informed by the Secr etary of the 
Department that in some St ates, provision in the Public Debt Rec overy Acts 
provide for  imprisonment of loanees who default in repayment of loans.    
After exhausting all other avenues for re covery of loans, banks invoke this 
legal provision to sec ure arrest wa rrants for the defaulters.  The Committee 
fail to understand as to what are the other avenues that are exhausted before 
the imprisonment of defaulting farmers is sought.   How any law stipulates for 
recovery of food, transport and other expenditure from a farmer detainee in a 
country where even hard core criminals  have free food and shelter in jail.    
And why the provision of this law ar e not invoked t o imprison defaulting  
industrialists and commercial borrowers.    
 31

The Committee wish to draw the attention of the Government  towards 
Debt Reconciliation Board organised by Ch audhary Chhottu Ram in 1939  in  
Punjab St ate.   One of the main feat ures of that Board, wit h substantial  
membership of farmers, was that all the legal processes for debt recovery or 
mode of repayment, etc., had to start fr om the Debt Reconc iliation Board.   
The Board used to decide, weighing a ll the circumstances, the amount to be 
paid, amount to be written off, mode of repayment and number of instalments 
etc., but not let them adopt any coercive measure to take  away the source of 
the livelihood of the farmers like land,  cattle, machinery, hearth and home 
etc. 
The Com mittee, theref ore, urge upon the Central Government to 
immediately get abrogated this draconian law which provide the detention o f 
the poor farmers and make them pay for it too.   When pre independence era 
could see farmers from humanitarian angl e, why can’t independent India see 
it.    
The Com mittee recommend that the State Governments should be 
sternly instructed to immediately  stop this trend.   The Government should 
further evolve some mechanism on the li nes of Debt Reconciliation Board by  
incorporating suitable pr ovisions as per the need of the hour, wit h a vie w to 
providing some respite to poor farmers , so that they can pay their debt  
conveniently and do not resort to the extreme steps of committing suicide. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.26 The Government in t heir action taken reply have stat ed that Hon’ble 
Union Agriculture Minister  vide his letter dated the 28 th August, 2000 has  
 32

requested the Chief Minister of all the  St ates to review their state laws to 
remove the provision for arrest and detentio n of farmers in cas e of default in 
repayment of loans.  Hon’ble Agricult ure Minister ha s vide his letter dated 
26th April, 2005 to the Chief Minister of Haryana, Bihar, Jharkhand, Kerala,  
Orissa, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh further taken up the matter of review of 
state laws to remove the provision for arrest and detention of farmers.  
Secretary (A&C) vide letter dated 12 th August, 2005 has further reminded to 
Chief Secretaries of concerned States for expediting action for amending the 
relevant state laws. 
In case of natural calamities result ing in damage of crops, instructions 
have already been issued to banks to assess the situation and take 
immediate measures to provide appropria te relief to affected borrowers.  
Such relief could be provided by way of conversion of short term loans into 
medium term loans , deferring/postponi ng of the installments of the 
medium/long term loans, postponement of  interest on such loans and one 
time settlement of dues.  Banks have also been advised to provide fresh 
credit to farmers to enable them to carry on their agricultural operations. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
1.27 The Committee do not agre e w ith the view s expressed b y th e 
Government.  The last letter for am ending the relevant State law s was 
issued on  12 August, 2005 and it seems that the  Government has no 
will to act but is only  performing th e duty of a postman in a w ay, that 
based on the recom mendations of th e Committee, a letter is w ritten to 
 33

the States to do the needful.  The  Government should take immediate  
steps to get the draconian law  abrogated at the earliest.  In the interest  
of millions of farmers, it should be ensur ed that no farmer who defaults 
in his pay ment of  cooperative loans due to some circumstances 
beyond his control, is arrested. 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
Suicides by  Farmers 
 
1.28 Since Independenc e, the hardwor king and proud farmers of India 
have increased the c ountry’s foodgrain pr oduction by nearly  four times from 
60 million  tonnes at I ndependence to 210 million ton nes (MT) in 2005-06.     
The Committee are pained to see the plight of farmers today who have made 
this possible with their blood and toil,  tears and sweat with the hope and 
aspirations to get rid of hunger and pov erty and to lead a respectable life for  
themselves and their children. 
 Unfortunately, the farmers have not got  their full dues.   They hav e to 
sell their produce at  very low rates;  there are continuous cr op failures ; 
droughts and they are not able to repay their debts.   Under the  
circumstances, the only escape route for t hem is to commit suicide.   Thus in 
the last 5 years, as  per the r ecords of Department of Agric ulture and 
Cooperation, about 11782 farmers have ended their lives out of frustration 
and humiliation. 
 The Committee note that the Government has announced a pack age 
for 30 districts in 4 States namely Maharashtra, Karnataka, Kerala and 
 34

Andhra Pradesh whic h will addr ess the farme rs’ credit, insurance, irrigation, 
subsidy and income needs through Dairy, poultry and horticulture.  
 The Com mittee are informed that t he criteria for selection  of the  
districts has been the severity of suic ides and the State Governments have 
conducted some studies in this regard.   The Committee opine that one of the 
main reasons for crop failures , which in turn compel farmers to commit 
suicides, is  adverse c limatic conditi ons and droughts in many parts of the 
country.   Rajasthan, Gujarat and Orissa  are mainly dr ought-affected States 
but why none of their districts is included in the list of 30  districts.   In Punjab 
and other States also a number of fa rmers have committed suicide.   The 
Committee wonder whether t he Government is waitin g for farmers of these 
States to commit suicide in large numbers before announc ing any package 
for them.   The Committee, therefore,  recommend that while  identifying the 
districts for suicide af fected areas, gr ound realities  s hould be t aken into 
consideration and the rehabilitation package for these States should also be 
drawn in order to save the farmers and their families well before they commit 
suicide.  The Committee further reco mmend that instead of severity of  
suicide by the farmers of a particular di strict of the Stat e, their economic  
condition to repay the loans, crop failure, drought conditions and natural 
calamity should be the criteria fo r giving spec ial package for their 
rehabilitation. 
 The Comm ittee further note that as  per the information provided by 
the Department, number of suicide cases in the country during last 5 year s 
(2000 onwards) is 11782 but t he figure does not s eem to be correct for  
 35

example in Maharashtra t he number of cases projec ted by Department are 
142 in 2005 whereas the Committee are aw are that only in Vidarbha region 
of Maharashtra 435 farmers have committed suicide since June 2005.    The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to straighten their  
records and ask the State Governments to project the factual position so that 
the Government and the people of t he c ountry are aware of the actual 
position and act accordingly. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.29 The Gover nment in t heir action taken reply have stated that the 
Government is fully committed to the ca use of farmers.  Accordingly, high 
priority has  been acc orded to the revitaliz ation of the agriculture sector as 
well as to bring improvements in the condition of farmers under the National 
Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) of the UPA Government. 
 It is a fact that agriculture growth  has decelerated in the recent times 
owing to natural calamities such  as droughts, floods and repeated crop 
failure.  Consequently,  there is high in debtedness among the farmers.  This 
among wit h other so cial, economic and psychologic al reasons , have in 
certain cas es, even promoted them to commit suicide.  Cases of farmers’  
suicide have been mainly reported fr om the State of Andhra Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala.  Such instanc es have also been 
reported from the States of Gujarat, Orissa and Punjab. 
 Besides the measures already ta ken by the State Governments, 
several initiatives are under implementation from the Central Government for 
elevating the lot of farmers.  A co mprehensive credit policy was announced 
 36

by the Government on 18 th June, 2004, containing meas ures for doubling of  
agricultural credit flow in three years and provisio n of debt relief to the 
farmers affected by natural calamities.  During the 2004-05, the achievement 
of agricult ure credit flow was  Rs.1 ,25,309.37 crore which s ubstantially 
exceeded the target of agric ulture credit flow for the year 2005-06 fixed at  
Rs.1,41,000 crore, the achiev ement was Rs.1,57,497.57 cr ore forming 
111.69% of the target.  The target for provision of farm credit for the year  
2006-07 has been fixed at a substantially higher level of Rs.175000 crore. 
 To reduce the debt burden of farmers, the Government has decided to 
ensure that the farmer receives short-term credit at 7%, with an upper limit of  
Rs.3 lakh on the principal amount.  Further, in order t o provide r elief to the 
farmers who have availed crop loans from Commercial Banks , RRBs and 
PACs for Kharif and Rabi 2005-06,  an amount equal to two percentage 
points of the borrower’s interes t liab ility o n principal amount u pto Rs. One  
lakh will be credited to hi s/her bank account before 31st March, 2006.  There 
are mentions in the Union Budget  (2006-07) about asking NABARD to open 
a separate line of c redit for financ ing farm production and investment  
activities through Self Help Groups as well as proposal to appoint a 
Committee on financial Inclusion which will  identity the reasons for exclus ion 
of cultivator households from credit sources and suggest a plan for designing 
and deliv ering credit  to every house hol d that seeks credit from lendin g 
institutions.  It is expected that the credit initiatives would positively impact on 
the economic condition of farmers and improve their capacity to repay loans. 
 37

 To enhanc e the irrigation covera ge, an outlay of Rs.7121 crore has 
been alloc ated for the Acceler ated I rrigation Benefit Programme in the 
current year.  The Government is  formulating a scheme on Enhancing 
Sustainability of Dryl and Rainfed Fa rming Systems.  This scheme will 
address is sues like r ainwater harvesting and its sufficient utiliza tion, in situ 
soil moisture conservation, use of organic manures, alternate land use and 
adoption of improved dryland farming technologies.   An announcement  
regarding setting up of a National rain fed Area Authority has already been 
made. 
 As regards  the package being draw n up for 30 Distric ts affected by  
farmers’ suicide, the major considerat ion has been t he severity of suicide 
incidence.  Since the incidents have la rgely taken place in the  States of 
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Kar nataka and Kerala, it was deemed 
appropriate to focus the package on these f our States.  At present, the intent 
is to reach out to the Districts that are worst affected by the problem.  Hence, 
even among the 4 States, not all t he districts have been chosen for 
implementation of the package.  Cases of suicide by farmers have not been 
reported by the State Gove rnment from the States other than the 7 States  
mentioned above.  There is no neglect or lack of consideration of other 
States, but only  training the focus towa rds the States that are severely  
affected so that a dent on the problem co uld be attained at the earliest.  All 
the initiatives under implementation for revitalization of agriculture, other than 
this package, are made equally applicable for all the States in the country. 
 38

 To provide relief in the event of drought and other natural calamities,  
two schemes are administered by the mini stry of Home Affairs in terms of  
recommendations of  the Finance Com mission.  These scheme are: (i) 
Calamity Relief Fund (CRF) which is a fund available with each State 
Government to which Central and State Government contribute in the ratio of 
3:1.  (ii) N ational Calamity Contingency Fu nd (NCCF) : For severe calamity  
where relief expenditur e cannot be accommodated within the CRF, NCCF  
provides additional funding solely from the Central government.  Besides, the 
National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (N AIS) for providing a s afety net to 
the farmers is under  operation since Rabi 1999-2000.  Actions are on for 
implementing a Modified National Agri culture Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) 
that contains several farmer-friendly measures such as reduction in unit area 
of insurance for major crops,.  Improvement  in calculation of threshold y ield, 
recommending high indemnity levels  of 80-90%, coverage of pr e-
sowing/planting risks and post-harvest lo sses, and provision of extended  
insurance coverage. 
 In respect of obtaining the corre ct and updated data  on suicide by  
farmers, all the State Governments have been requested to furnish the 
requisite information in this regard. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.30 The Committee are dismayed at the reply of the Government and 
are of strong vie w that schemes a nnounced by the Government for 
rehabilitation of farmers and to st reamline their loans have not brought 
any relief to the farmers.  The gr ants provided under these schemes 
 39

have not taken care of their existi ng loans w hich the farmers are not 
able to repay in the case of f ailure of their crop, and, the interest is 
piling up.   
The Committee are of strong opinion that the debt of the farmers 
should be restructured in a w ay the farmers do not get in debt trap 
again and  again an d their crops, as recommend ed b y th e Committee 
earlier, should be covered under th e Modified National Agriculture 
Insurance Scheme raising the level of indemnit y to 80-90 % in case o f 
natural calamities damaging crops etc.  The package ann ounced b y 
Prime Minister for Vidarbha regi on, Maharashtra, not re aching the 
farmer is a glaring example o f the in efficiency of the Government in 
ameliorating the conditions of the farmers.  The Committe e desire t he 
Government to ensure that the financial help so announced in the 
package reaches the farmers in time. 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
Agri-Clinics and Agri business Centres 
1.31 The Committee in their earlier Reports had recommended to provide 
25% subsidy under  the Schem e of Establ ishment of Agri-clinic s and Agri  
Business Centres by  Agricu lture Graduates.   They   are informed that the 
Scheme is  under implementat ion with only the training component, as i n 
March 2004,   Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance did not agree to 
the subsidy component.   Again, when the matter was taken up with Planning 
Commission in October, 2004, as per the Committee’s recommendation, they 
 40

have accorded ‘in principle’ approval in January 200 6.    The Committee 
recommend that now the 25% subsid y component of the Scheme should 
also be c leared at the earliest so that  more agriculture graduates could set  
up their ventures which in turn is benef icial for the agrari an economy of the 
country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.32 The Gover nment in t heir action taken reply have stated that the 
meeting of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) held on 5th June, 2006 
has recommended inclusion of subsidy component under the scheme for the 
X Plan as follows: 
(i) Credit linked back-ended capital subsidy @ 25% of the capital cost 
of the project funded through bank loan.  This subs idy would b e 
33.33% in respect of candidates belonging to SC, ST, Women and 
other disadvantaged section and those from North-Eastern and Hill 
States. 
(ii) Full interest subsidy for the first two years of the project. 
(iii) Approval of the Competent Authority on the EFC recommendations 
is being obtained. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
1.33 The Com mittee are happ y to not e that the Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) has included the subsidy  component under ‘The 
Scheme of Establishment of Agri-Clinics and Agri Business Centres’ by 
agricultural graduates, as per th e recommendation of the Standing 
 41

Committee.  The C ommittee desire th at now  this subsidy  provision 
should be implemented at the earli est and the Com mittee be informed 
about the status. 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
Kisan Call Centres 
1.34 The Com mittee are satisfied to note that with a v iew to solv ing the 
queries of  farmers and diss eminate information, the Government has 
provided the facility of Kisan Call C entres with toll free number 1551 in 21 
languages, wherein about 13 lakh call s have been received since it s 
inception in January,  2004.    T he Committee feel that this medium can be 
used as knowledge centre to know about t he actual needs of the farmers of 
the country.   The Committee desire the Government to make an assessment 
study to know the s atisfaction level of the queries  made by t he farmers.   
They, therefore, recommend that an evaluation study should be conducted to 
know the n umber of farmers utilizing this fa cility and their satisfa ction leve l 
with regard to their queries.  Some agriculture scientists should be deputed 
on fixed days, to these centres t o solve the farmer’s queries on t he spot and 
they are not asked to ring up again som e day or that the answer to their 
queries will be sent in due cours e.  The farmers do not have that much time 
to wait and work.  They require the hel p immediately so t hat they can take 
the quick decision about sowing of crops,  using fertilizers or pesticides for a  
particular crop. 
 42

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.35 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that an impact 
evaluation study of the Kisan Call  Centres (KCCs) sche me, has been 
awarded to Administrative Staff Colle ge of India (ASCI), Hyderabad, and the 
study is underway.  The study is likely to be completed by September 2006.   
One of the major mandates of the study is to find out the efficacy of Kis an 
Call Centres to meet the information needs of farming community. 
With regard to the deputation of so me agriculture scientists on fixed 
days to these centers, to solve the farmer’s queries on the spot, it i s 
submitted that Agriculture Graduates  are being engaged as Kisan Call  
Centre Agents at Level – I.  These agents give farmers suitable replie s 
towards solving their problems.  The queries and replies are also stored in a 
computerized databas e.  In case a Kis an Call Centre agent is not able to 
answer the query made by the farmer, the call is transferred on a conference 
call mode to a identified Level-II Agricu ltural Expert for giving appropriate 
reply on line.  These experts belong to  State Agriculture Univ ersity, ICAR 
Institutes which inc lude Agr icultural Scientists or the State Department of 
Agriculture/Horticulture/Allied Sec tor, of  the State from w here the farmer is 
calling.  The services of the Kisan Ca ll Centre are provided to the farmers on 
line and the farmers are not asked to ring-up some other day. 
As already  indicated in Repl y to Recommendation No. 13,  Mass 
Media, namely Radio and TV, is  also being used to disseminate agricultural  
information to farmers. 
 43

 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.36 The Committee desire that they should be apprised of the impact 
evaluation stud y of  the Kisan Call Centres as the stud y w as to be 
completed by September, 2006. 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
Enhancing Sustainability  of dryland farming systems 
1.37 The Committee note that the sc heme for ‘Enhancing s ustainability of 
dryland farming systems’ whic h was s ent to Planning Com mission on 
20.6.2005 is yet to be cleared.  The Committee have been informed by the 
Secretary, Department of Agricultur e and Coopera tion that initially the 
scheme was sent to Planning Commi ssion for Rs.2640 c rore to be 
implemented in 200 districts of the count ry but on the instruction of Planning 
Commission, it was reduced to Rs.73 crore covering 16 districts only, on pilot 
basis.   Moreover, the Ministry of Finance has desir ed that launchin g of  
separate Scheme on Enha ncing Sustainability of dryland farming system  
should be reconsidered.   However, during the course of evidence it  
appeared t hat there is some confus ion bet ween Planning Commission an d 
Department of Agricultur e and Cooperation regarding t he allocation of funds  
for dryland farming system.  The Secret ary, Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation clarifie d that as per the advic e of  Planning Commission, the 
Scheme has been approved for Rs.73. 70 crore on 3.2.2006 but afterwards  
Planning Commission has  ask ed Ministry of Agric ulture to bring it up t o 
 44

Rs.200 crore because the Prime Minister has made an announcement in this 
regard.  Therefore, again this Scheme has to be rescheduled and modified. 
 The Committee taking cognizanc e of the whole situation recommend 
that since at one stage th is scheme has already been approved for Rs.73.70 
crore, it should immediat ely be implemented.   As far as the issue of 
enhancing it to Rs.200 crore  is concerned, it can be taken up separately.   At 
least, no further dilly-d allying should be made and no more reconsiderations 
are required at present st age.    The Committee opine that at the time when 
ground water level in the whole country  is decreasing, there is an urgent 
need to enhance the sustainability of  dryland farming and in another few 
years there will be huge scarcity of water.    They, therefore, recommend its 
immediate implementation and desire the Planning Commission and Finance 
Ministry to clear it immediately  in  the present form and modify other  
modalities later at the revised esti mates stage so that the scheme is  
implemented immediately and t he enhanced amount is made available later 
on in this financial year itself. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.38 The Gover nment in t heir action taken reply have stated that the 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has been requested at the 
level of Secretary (A &C) to re-look in to th eir observations on the scheme.   
The following points hav e been mentioned for implementing a new schem e 
on dryland farming as stand alone scheme: 
 45

“Integrating/merging the propos ed dryland programme  with ongoing 
watershed programme of the Macro Management is not lik ely to help in 
fulfilling the objectives envisaged as: 
(a) it would limit the promotion of improved dryl and improvement 
technologies only to identified/ selected watersheds whic h 
constitute/would cover only  a small fraction of the dryland 
area/holdings and a few villages in a district; 
(b) a large dryland area/holdings  would remain outside the 
integrated/converged programme; 
(c) progress in achieving the obj ectives would remain slow as the 
resources required to cover a sizeable area through watershed 
programme would always be a limitation; and 
(d) the integr ated/converged Prog ramme would k eep out a large 
resource poor dryland farmers from  participating in this endeav our 
and at their own (without Government  support) they would not have 
the resources to invest in adopting rain harvesting technologies.” 
The response of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance is awaited. 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
1.39 The Com mittee are dismayed to  note that in spite of the 
Committee’s recommendation, ‘The Schem e for Enhancing 
Sustainability of Dry land Farming Sy stems’ has not been implemented 
as yet.  T he confusion between the Department of Agriculture and Co-
 46

operation and Planning Commission are yet to be  cleared, as a result  
the fate of this important scheme is in doldrums.  Moreover, in their 
reply the Government have n ot mentioned about their efforts to get it 
cleared at Revised Estima te stage.  No w, that the Tenth  Plan period i s 
about to complete, the Committee de sire that it is high time the  
Government should stop dilly  dall ying tactics and implement the 
scheme at the earliest and the scheme should continue during Eleventh 
Plan Period uninterruptedl y and the shortcomings faced in the 
implementation during the Tenth Plan Period should be taken care of.   
The Com mittee should be apprised of impleme ntation of the scheme 
within three months of presentation of this Report. 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
Remunerative Prices to Farmers 
 
1.40 While explaining the reasons fo r t he decis ion of the Government to 
import five lakh tonnes of wheat to replenish the deplet ed buffer stock of 
wheat, the Committee have been inform ed by the representative of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affa irs, Food and Pu blic Distribution on 3. 5.2006, that 
the decision to import  five lakh t onnes of wheat was  taken because of low 
buffer stocks (norm 40 lakh tonnes), fa lling procurement and to contain the 
price rise of wheat especially in the southern States.  The decis ion to import 
another 30 lakh tonnes has also been taken. 
 The Committee feel that the low pr ocurement of wheat in the current  
year by the Government Agencies is due to the fact that the farmers prefer to 
sell their produce to private traders w ho offer them better prices than the 
 47

Minimum Support Pric e (MSP) fixed by the Government.   MSP announc ed 
this is Rs.650 per quintal and after in cluding bonus of Rs.50, i t comes to 
Rs.700 whereas the farmers have sold their produc e to privat e traders at 
Rs.800 per quintal.  The Committee fail to under stand as to why the  
Government cannot pay remunerative price to the farmers in the first  
instance rather than importing wheat and spending more on import.  Had the 
Government sufficiently raised the MSP at  the initial stage it self, they would 
have not gone to the private traders. 
While agreeing that interests of  both the farmers and consum ers 
should be t aken care of, the Committee recommend that the int erest of the 
poor farmers should be assiduously pr otected by paying them remunerative 
prices for their produce.  Once the farme rs are assured of attracti ve price for 
their produce, they would prefer  to se ll their entire surplus produce to the 
Government Agencies and there woul d be no difficulty in m eeting the 
procurement targets.  The Committ ee fu rther reco mmend th at the MS P 
should be fixed well in advance,  as this year, wheat started coming from 
Madhya Pr adesh around 15 th of  March itself but by that time Government 
price was not announced which compelled the farmers to sell their produce in 
the open market dominated by private traders. 
 The Com mittee observe that the gr owth of grain production is not 
matching with the populati on growth.  Also due to the non-remunerative 
prices of foodgrains, the farmers are l eaning towards cash crops, leadin g to 
lower production of foodgrai ns, especially wheat.  If the Government really 
want to increase the foodgrain production, they should announce  MSP long 
 48

before the arrival of the crops in  the market and give reasonable 
remunerative price to the farmers so that the Government could have the 
desired foodgrain stocks to cater to the future needs of nation.  Moreover, the 
Government should not import the wheat at  the time of arrival of new crop in 
the market, since it will be a discour aging factor fo r the far mers.  The 
Government can imp ort the wh eat later o n if they ar e not ab le to fill u p the 
requisite stock from indigenous procurement of wheat. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.41 The Gover nment in t heir action taken reply have stated that the 
Government’s price policy for agricul tural commodities seeks  to ensure 
remunerative prices  to the grower s for their produce with a view to 
encouraging higher investment and production, and to safeguard the interest 
of consumers by making available s upplies at reasonable pric es.  The 
minimum support price is a guaranteed pric e for the growers in a situation 
when prices tend to fall below MSP.  T he price policy also seeks to evolve a 
balanced and integrated price structure in the perspective of  the overall 
needs of the economy .  Towards this  end, the Government announces each 
season Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) for major agricultural commodities 
and organizes purchase operations through public and cooperative agencies.  
The designated central nodal agenc ies intervene  in  the market for 
undertaking procurement operations with the objective that the market prices 
do not fall below the MSPs fixed by the Government. 
 49

The Government decides on the support price for various agricultural 
commodities taking into account the recommendations of the Commission for 
Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) , the views of St ate Governments and 
Central Ministries as well as such other relevant factors which are considered 
important for fixation of support prices. 
The CACP, while formulating its recommendations on price policy  
considers a number of impor tant factors which incl ude cost of production , 
changes in input pric es, i nput/output price parity, tr ends in mar ket prices, 
demand and supply situation, int er-crop price parity, effect on ind ustrial cost 
structure, effect on general price level, effect on cost  of living, international 
market price situation and parity between prices paid and prices received b y 
the farmers. 
The cost of cultivation/production taken into account includes all paid 
out costs, such as, those inc urred on account of hired human labour, bulloc k 
labour/machine labour (both hired and owned) and r ent paid for leased in 
land besides cash and kind expenses on use of material inputs  like seeds , 
fertilizers, manures, irrigation ch arges incl uding cost of diesel/e lectricity for  
operation of pump sets, etc.  Besides , c ost of production inc ludes imput ed 
value of wages of family labour and rent for owned land.  The cost als o 
covers depreciation of  farm machinery and  buildings.  As such, the cost of 
production covers not only actual ex penses in cash and kind but als o 
imputed value of owned assets includi ng land and family labour.  The pric e 
policy for Rabi crops  of 2005-06 s eason to be mark eted in 2006-07 was  
announced on 29th September, 2005. 
 50

A comparative position of C2 c ost (all expenses paid in cash and kind 
including rent for leased in land, imput ed value of wages of family labour, 
rental value of owned l and, int erest on fi xed capital) and MSP of wheat is 
shown below: 
Comparative Statement on Cost of  Produc tion (CoP)  and Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) for Wheat 
Year State CoP (C2) 
(Rs./Quintal) 
MSP  
(Rs./Quintal) 
2004-05 Haryana 
Punjab 
Uttar Pradesh 
522.87 
494.35 
597.81 
640.00 
640.00 
640.00 
2005-06 Haryana 
Punjab 
Uttar Pradesh 
516.00* 
516.00* 
528.00* 
650.00 
650.00 
650.00 
*  As projected by CACP 
Note:  C2 cost of production: all expenses paid in  cash and kin d including rent for 
leased in land, imputed value of wages of family labour, re ntal value of owned land, 
interest on fixed capital. 
 
 With a view to ensuring adequate st ocks of wheat in t he Central Pool 
as well as  giving the right signals to farmers and curbing any speculativ e 
trading, Government has announced an inc entive bonus of Rs.50 per quintal 
on wheat over the Minimum Support Price (MSP) of Rs.650 per quintal.  This 
year the wholesale pr ices of wheat have been substantially  high er than its 
MSP and the farmers have s old their cr op in the open market.  This  has  
benefited the farmers as they have got a good price for their produce.  Since 
the consumer also needs to be provided wheat at reasonable  price, it was 
felt necessary for FCI to have sufficient  stocks of wheat.  Thus, a decision t o 
import 3.5 million tones of wheat was taken. 
 51

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
1.42 On the issue of pr oviding remunerative prices t o farmers the 
opinion of the Committee differ from  that of the  Department.  They 
opine that the Government’s pricing policy for agricultural commodities 
should safeguard the interests of fa rmers at initial stage itself w hile 
announcing Minimum Support  Price (MSP)  rather than giving bonus at  
a later stage w hen farmers have sold  most of their crops to private 
market.  The Committee are not in ag reement w ith the logic given b y 
the Depar tment that w hen MSP was Rs.650 fo r w heat, the farmers 
benefited b y selling it at highe r prices in the open market and  
afterwards for the benefit of consumers, the Government had to import 
it.  The Committee recommend that at  initial stage the MSP should b e 
attractive enough for the farmers so that they sell their produce directly 
to the Government agencies.  In this  way, the stock of the Government  
godowns would be sufficient and Government would not have to import 
foodgrains at a later stage w hich results in imbalancing the market 
prices and loss of foreign currency to the exchequer.   
 The Committee, therefore, desi re the Government to have a little 
farsight while announcing the MSP so that the Government do not have 
to suffer the double burden and thus save the farmers and  consumers 
as well. 
 
 
 52

CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
Delay in approval of Schemes 
2.1 The Committee are constrained to find that there are inordinate delays 
in the c onceptualisation and final impl ementation of t he various  schemes.   
The Committee have been informed that eight schemes of the Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperati on are pending at various stages for approval and 
most of these Schemes are pending with Planning Commission for approval 
of funds or otherwise.    The Repres entatives of Plann ing Commission while 
admitting the delays  and need to im prove the system, pointed that 
sometimes schemes  at design stage are not conceptualised correctly, 
therefore, additiona l/modified information/clarif ications s ought from the 
Ministries results in delays.  Even the representatives of Ministry of Finance,  
while emphasising the need for greater exercise and due dilig ence at every 
stage, admitted that the Planning Commission and Finance Ministry must cut 
out the time they take for granting approvals for the schemes. 
The Com mittee feel that whatev er is announced in Budget and in 
Parliament, do not get into executi on for  long bec ause of difference of  
opinions among various sanctioning/approving agenc ies involved.    They , 
therefore, recommend that  whenever any such situation aris es, all the  
authorities/Ministries involved shoul d have  coordinated meetings together  
and solve the issues expeditiously in stead of writing,  clarifying and /or  
 53

reclarifying again and again to each ot her thus wasting valuable time and 
money.   Together during discus sions they can come to amicable solution s 
and get the Schemes  cleared real fast.  The Committee observe that since 
sometimes apprais al agencies also take long to submit their comments, a 
definite time frame should be  given to  them, failing whic h it should b e  
deemed  t hat they don’t have anythi ng t o comment and further process  
should continue.     
The Committee desire that the depar tment should concentrate more 
on the proper formul ation of the schem es at conceptualising stage before 
sending the scheme to Planning Co mmission.  The Committee urge upon 
Planning Commission to have a detailed scrutiny before granting ‘in principle’ 
approval and send any suggestion/clarifica tion for modifications or otherwise 
before that only, so that the Departm ent does not have to waste time in 
redrafting the memos and project repor ts again and again resulting in  
inordinate delays in approval of the much awaited schemes for the welfare of 
farmers. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.2 The aforesaid recommendation ess entially entails the review and 
revision of  the existing procedures to formulate the new sc hemes and 
programmes and their finaliz ation in consultation  with the 
Ministries/Departments concerned of the Government of India in a better 
coordinated manner and in a specified time frame so as to avoid delays. 
Normally new schemes as per announc ement of the Government are 
formulated after series of discussi ons with Planning Commission.  A 
 54

Feasibility Report (FR) is prepared by t he Administrative Ministry and sent to 
Planning Commission for t heir detailed scrutiny and ‘in  principal’ approval in 
accordance with the procedures  laid down by the Mi nistry of Finance vide 
their O.M.No.1 (2)-PF-II/03 dated 7 th May, 2003.  After ‘in princ ipal’ approval 
of Planning Commission, a Detailed Pr oject Report (DPR) is pr epared and 
circulated with draft EFC to all conc erned Departments/Agenc ies for their 
comments.  Further, on the bas is of t he total outlay,  SFC/EF C is dec ided 
upon by the competent authority, and approvals taken thereafter.  Efforts are 
continuously made by the Department to shorten the time gap between 
announcement of the scheme and the appro val by t he competent authority 
through mutual cons ultations with o ffices of Planning Com mission and 
Ministry of Finance. 
In exceptional cases the Hon’ble Pr ime Minister/Agriculture Minister 
also make certain announcements in the larger interest of farmers depending 
on prevailing agricultural conditions.  In such cases also efforts a re made by 
the Depart ment in c ooperation with Mi nistry of Finance and Planning 
Commission to take necessary approval  of competent authority within the 
shortest possible time period. 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
Inclusion of Frost, Heat waves etc for Crop Insurance 
 55

2.3 The Committee are pained to observe that the farmers are facing  lots 
of troubles due to crop failures f or various reasons and consequently some 
farmers even commit suicide as they ca nnot face the distress ed life an d 
humiliation at the hands of lending agencies.   National Agricultural Insurance 
Scheme (NAIS) is being implemented in the co untry but a lot of 
improvements are required therein.   T he Committee note that  Frost, fog, 
Pala and extreme c onditions of Heat  Waves (Lu) are not cov ered under 
National Calamity Relief Fund.   The Committee have been infor med by the 
Secretary, Department of  Agriculture and Cooper ation that the natural  
calamities other than drought are respons ibility of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs but the committee do not question the jurisdiction  of Ministries rather 
they desire to cover these conditions under Crop Insurance. 
The Committee opine that Frost, fog and Pala do sev ere damage to 
the crops as it did to mu stard crop this year.   Even in s ome areas, Heat  
Waves (Lu) have a devastating effect and create drought condit ions.   They 
feel that till now no insurance scheme is farmer specific as many a times, the 
crop of a particular area or village is  damaged, for example by Frost, hail-
storm or whirl-wind and sometimes only a few farmers are affected.  Also 
there are examples of mix-crop sown by the farmers and either of t he crop is 
damaged by Frost, Pala or  heat-waves conditions, but no insuranc e 
compensation is given to the farmers nor that condition is taken into 
consideration for deferring his crop loans  to next seas on which many a time 
lead to his  selling a part of his land to  save his honour or may lead him to 
commit suicide.  They , therefore, recommend that Frost, Fog, Pala, extreme 
 56

Heat waves (Lu), and hailstorms, all should be covered for compensation 
under NAI S and taken into consideration while ass essing the damage for 
crop insurance.    Whenever, there is any  crop failure due to either of these 
reasons, the claim s hould be s ettled und er NAIS.  The Committee further 
recommend that as the farmers are giv ing their 100 per cent in growing their  
crops and it is not the shift system of work, as in case of commerci al 
establishments or Industrie s, but 24 hours vigil as well as hard work is 
involved, therefore, Agri culture Insurance for cr ops should be made more 
comprehensive to giv e the farmers health insuranc e, life ins urance and 
insurance f or his agricultural im plements as well sinc e these ar e the basic 
needs of the farmers for growing crops , to avoid any suicide attempt or 
distress sale of their agricultural land. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.4 National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) which is under 
implementation in the c ountry since Rabi 1999-2000  season is a Yield 
Guarantee Scheme wherein the shortfall in Actual Yield of the current season 
as compared to the Threshold/Guaranteed Yield is indemnified.  It operates  
on ‘Area Approac h’, which means a homogenous cont iguous ar ea 
experiencing almost the same agro- climatic conditions and the risks is 
considered as a single unit of insurance. 
Scheme provides comprehensive risk insurance to cover yield losses  
to non-preventable risks viz. natural fi re and lightening; Storm, Hailstorm , 
Cyclone, Typhoon, Tempest, Hurric ane, Tornado, Flood, Inundation, 
Landslide, Drought, Dry Spells; Pests/Dis eases etc. Losses arising out of 
 57

practically any natural calamit y ar e compensated under this scheme.  
Although, not specifically m entioned, it also covers lo ss in yield due to hot & 
cold winds, fog, frost, pala etc. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
Balanced Use of Fertilisers 
2.5 The Committee note that the continuing use of chemical fertilisers has 
started showing de leterious effects on so il fertility specially in h igh fertiliser 
consuming and intensively cultivated areas.    The Committee are perturbed 
to note the alarming NPK consumpti on ratio, which is an indicator of 
balanced use of chemical fertilizers on All India basis up to 5. 7:2:1 during 
2004-2005 as against the suggested ratio of 4:2:1 by the Ministry.    In s ome 
of the food growing tradition al states like Punjab, this ratio has gone as high 
as 35:9.5:1.   To incr ease the foodgrain production, the farmers are just 
injecting lot of nitrogen and thus  doing damage to our agriculture.  On the 
issue of increasing productivity, the Committee was informed by Secretary, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education that due to unjudiciou s 
use of fertilisers not only in Punjab, even in other states of the country also in 
90% of land, sulphur has been decreas ed and nearly  in 80% of  land, zinc  
and boron has been reduced.   So t he requisit e micro-nutrients are 
decreasing which are affecting the produc tivity.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend to the Department of Agricu lture and Cooperation t o implement 
the Integrated Nutrient Management Scheme more vigorously.    The farmers 
should be educated a bout judicious use of chemical f ertilisers.  They shou ld 
also be made aware of the organic source of nutri ents like organic manure, 
 58

farm yard manure, green manure, com post, vermicompost and bio-fertilisers  
also.  The micro-bacterial activities  of the soil depe nd on organic carbon,  
therefore, they should be advised to increase the organic matter of the soil t o 
increase the productiv ity.  The Committ ee further desire the Government to 
take up the Scheme of ‘National Project on Organic  
Farming’ s eriously and popular ise th is concept bec ause the demand of  
organic food is not only increasing in domestic market but the food is being 
welcomed world wide for having good nutrien t value in this health consciou s 
global scenario. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.6 The role of fertilizer in agriculture is well known and substantial growth 
in agriculture production is mainly due to  use of fertilizers.  The consumption 
of fertilizers depends  on a nu mber of fa cts like high yie lding varieties of  
seeds, irrigation, weather, soil fertility status and balanced use of fertilizers  
for obtaining ratio of 4:2:1. 
For bala nced use  of fertilizers De partment of Agricult ure &  
Cooperation is promoti ng Integrated Nutrient management (IN M), whic h 
includes soil test base d balanced and judi cious use of  chemical f ertilizers in 
conjunction with Farmyard manure (FYM) compost, vermi-compost, phospho 
compost, bio-fertilizers etc.  for improving the productivity and fertilizer use 
efficiency. 
To obtain t his objective, the INM Div ision is implementing a centrally 
sponsored scheme “Balance d and Integr ated Use of Fertilizer” through  
 59

Annual Ac tion Plan of t he State Government under Macro Management  
Mode of operation, with the following components. 
1. Establishment of Compost plants. 
2. Strengthening of soil testing services. 
(i) Strengthening of existing Soil Testing laboratories:- 
(a) Soil Testing laboratories with micro-nutrient facilities 
(b) Soil Testing laboratories for NPK but without 
micronutrient facilities. 
(ii) Establishment of new Soil Testing laboratories:- 
(a) Soil Testing laboratories for NPK but without      
micronutrient facilities. 
(iii) Training Course for staff of Soil Testing laboratories 
(iv) Organization of Regional Workshops 
(v) Organization of National Seminars 
INM Division has already launched since October 2004 a new central 
sector scheme ‘National Project on Organic Far ming’ for productio n, 
promotion, certification and market development of organic product ion in the 
country. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
2.7 For comments of the committee please refer to Para No. 1.18 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
Supply of Sub Standard Fertiliser 
 60

2.8 The Committee are constrained to note t hat during last three years 
about 7% of fertiliser samples co llected and analysed, have been found sub-
standard on an all India bas is.    In North Zone alone, out of 20182 samples  
analysed, 1561 samples (7.7%) have not been found of the requisit e 
standard during 2004-2005.  What  is more ironical is that in Uttar Pradesh 
alone, there are 1033 such cases out of which 576 cases are still pending for 
final follow-up action. 
The Com mittee have also experienc ed that farmers are getting 
duplicate/sub-standard/adulterated/spurious fertilisers and they realise it only 
after their crop fails and soil ar e damage d over a period of t ime.   The 
Committee, therefore, urge upon the depar tment to ensure availability of 
standard fertilisers in time.  For this, fa rmers should be told that they can get  
the sample tested at the test laborator ies.    Moreover, the Government 
should als o increase the number of fertiliser testing labs, as  the present  
number of 67 labs wit h ann ual analysing c apacity of  124730 is  very much 
inadequate and cannot cater to the needs of all the farmers in the country. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.9 The Government ensures t he qua lity of fertilizers b eing 
manufactured/imported in the c ountry and sold to t he farmers under the 
provisions of FCO, 1985, issued under Essential Commodities Act (1955).  
The order provides for compulso ry registration of fertiliz er 
manufacturers/importers and dealers, specification of all fertilizers, regulation 
 61

on manufacture of fertilizer mixtures , packing and  labeling of fertilizer,  
appointment of enforcement agencies,  setting up of quality control 
laboratories and prohibit ion on manufacture/import and sale of any non-
standard/spurious/adulterated fertilizers.  The ord er also p rovides fo r 
suspension/cancellation of authoriza tion letter of dealers/certificate of 
manufacture of mixture manufacturers and imprisonment from 3 months to 7 
years with fine to offenders under the provisions of ECA. 
The State Governments are the executive agency  to enforce the 
provisions of FCO, who have been give n adequate powers under  the order.  
The Central Government provides  necessary technical advice and 
assistance for trainings to their enf orcement officers and need bas ed 
regulatory amendments of the FCO provisions. 
Statement showing the samples of fertilize rs drawn and found n on-
standard during the last three years i.e. 2002-2005 are enclosed at Annexure 
No. 1 to VI  for reference.  The follo w up action on non-standard samples is  
taken by t he State Governments.  Th is include administrative action of 
cancellation of authorization lett er of  dealer/manufacturer, seizure of stock 
and also t he launching of pros ecution.  During 2004-05, prosecution has  
been launched in 274 cases mainly in t he States of UP, Maharashtra, MP , 
Gujarat, Haryana and J&K.  Howev er, the prosecution action is  not  
commensurate in most of the States. 
The state Governments have been periodically advis ed to energiz e 
their enforcement machinery to ensure drawal of  adequate number of 
samples e specially from fertiliz ers lik e fertilizer mixtures, micronutrient  
 62

fertilizers, SSP and c omplexes and string ent action against the  offenders.  
State Governments have been advised to include t he component “Quality 
control of fertilizer” under the “Ma cro Management Scheme” to open ne w 
Fertiliser Quality Control testing Laboratories and to strengthen the e xisting 
laboratories in terms of equipment/gla sswares and chemical.  Some State 
Governments have initiated  a ction to  o pen/strengthen fertiliz er testing  
laboratories under the said scheme. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 13 
Agricultural Extension 
2.10 The Com mittee find that Agricult ure Extension is a weak area in 
agriculture.   Agriculture Extension is aimed at providing farmers with 
information and training on continuous ba sis regarding improved production 
technologies and their adoption.    The Committee are informed that mass 
media like Radio and T.V. is als o used to educate farmers about the latest 
techniques for agriculture activities, seed, and latest schemes of the 
Government.    The Committee feel t hat a lot more need to be done in this 
direction.   According to situation a ssessment survey of farmers carried out  
by National Sample Survey Organisati on (NSSO), 71 per cent of farmers did 
not know or understand the concept of Minimum Support Price (MSP).   The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that more programmes for farmers should 
be started on Telev ision not only on  Doordarshan Channel  but on othe r 
channels also, wher ein the information about the new schem es/ongoing 
schemes, agricultural concept, etc., s hould be disseminated as  the farmers  
are  simply not aware of them. 
 63

The Com mittee, further recommend that whenever  any scheme is 
announced/proposed, the detailed informa tion may be provided t o Members 
of Parliament, MLAs and Members of local bodies, so that they can also  
educate the farmers about thes e, becaus e those are the people, who are 
well connected with the masses and are aware of the ground realities. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.11 The Extension Div ision of t he Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation in the Ministry of A griculture is implementing a Central Sector  
Scheme ‘Mass Media Support to Agricu lture Extension’.  This  Scheme has  
been launched during the Xt h Plan Period with a view to c ontribute to 
revamping the extension services in the country by using electronic media for 
transfer of technology/informati on to the farmers.  Under the scheme the 
existing infrastructure of Doordarshan and All India Radio is being utiliz ed to 
produce and transmit programmes coveri ng a wide spectrum  of topics in 
agriculture and allied f ield for bringing the lat est information on new/ongoing 
schemes and agric ulture knowledge to the farming community .  Apart from 
telecast/broadcast in Hindi, the sch eme also aims at disseminating 
programmes in regional languages and local dialects for the specific needs of 
different regions covered under the scheme. 
Doordarshan through its countrywide net work of transmitters i s the 
only agency in the country which is  presently running the terrestri al 
transmission at National and Regional levels  and has facility to narrowcas t 
locality-specific programmes for the farming community through its various  
high and low power transmitters (HPTs/ LPTs).  The overall outreach of 
 64

Doordarshan is to 89% of the populat ion of the country and out of 38.7 
million rura l TV home s, 25.4 million can se e only  Doo rdarshan for various  
reasons.  Doordarshan als o covers mo st regional languages  of the country  
which is highly significant for the use of  Mass Media in agriculture.  With the 
availability of Narrowc asting facilities in Doordarshan Centres, it is  possible 
to provide extens ion services that m eet the needs  of that particular agr o 
climatic zone.  Further specific problem s of the agriculturist residing in that  
area can be addressed in a spec ific manner by taking help of the local and 
nearest available agriculture research st ation, as eac h transmitter operate s 
as a stand alone station. 
Under the scheme half an hour of programme is  being telecas t in 
narrowcast mode by 180 HPTs/LPTs of Doordarshan, five days a week, with 
five days transmitters, on an average, sharing the same programme.  Thus,  
w.e.f. 1.4 .2005, under the Scheme, 36 DD Stations are transmitting 30 
minutes programmes five days a week through various transmitters covered 
under respective narrowcasting clusters. 
` Doordarshan is also telecasting 30 minutes of regional agric ultural 
programmes five days a week, back to back with Kris hi Darshan programme 
of Doordarshan, through the eighteen Regional Kend ras of Doordarshan.  
These programmes are repeated during t he next morning through respective 
Regional Satellite Ch annels of Doordarsh an.  Furt her, a 30 min. nation al 
agricultural programme for 6 days a week is telecast on DD National Channel 
in the morning. 
 65

This approach has several advantages.  The programmes are telecast 
in terrestrial mode.  T he regional programmes are in local languages.  The 
National/Regional c hannels of D oordarshan are mandatory for cable 
operators.  These are also being carried on the Direct-to-Home (DTH)  
platform of Doordarshan.  Thus, th is approach provides the maximum 
outreach to the farming community.  Production and transmission of regional 
programmes has commenced from 2 nd May, 2005 and that of the National  
Programme through CPC of Doordarshan from 16th May, 2005. 
Till no w A ll India Ra dio has been using the existing MW and SW 
network for broadcasting agriculture- based programmes.  The emerging 
technology is in the form of FM trans mission.  This has the capacity to 
provide high quality output and also deliv er local content in the area of its 
range.  As the infrastructure for the FM transmission is widely available with 
the All India Radio, the lo cality-specific agricultural programmes can reach to 
farmers in rural areas in their  lo cal language/dialect through FM Radio 
transmission by the Stations covering rural areas without much capital cost. 
With effect fro m 1 st April, 2005 the Kisanv ani programmes from 96 
Rural Area FM Stations are being broadcast for half an hour duration daily, 6 
days a week, with each station broadcasting separate programme. 
Doordarshan has made an in novative effort of organizing 20 ‘Live 
Crop Seminars’ during Rabi Season 2005- 06 involv ing farmers, officials of 
the State Department of Agriculture and Experts of all major crops for 
addressing the problems of the farmers on a single platform in 12 States .  
These pr ogrammes were covered live through the concerned 
 66

Regional/Narrowcasting Kendras for ext ending their benefit to other farmers 
widely. 
With a view to cater sustained flow of information on agricult ural 
developments and t o provide farmers with the latest mandi rates of 
agricultural commodities in various par ts of  the country, Doordarshan has  
started outsourced production of Agricu ltural News Bulletins (each of 5 
minute duration) and Mandi Bhav Bullet ins (each of 3 minute duration) for 
daily telecast during National and Regi onal Programmes.  Te lecast of thes e 
programmes has begun from 22nd May, 2006. 
Audio/video spots on many usef ul aspects viz. Rabi/Kharif Advisories 
Kisan Call Centres, Kisan Credit Cards, and  information relatin g to weather,  
Minimum Support Price, Mandi Bhav, etc. are being regularly telecast 
through DD/AIR programmes under t he Scheme.  The coverage o f 
information relating to Government schemes & pr ogrammes, Agricultural 
Exhibitions and service-oriented programmes is being encouraged under the 
programmes. 
Some priv ate cable TV channels are also telecas ting agricultural 
programmes such as E-TV in various languages and Asianet in Malayalam.   
However, due to limited outreach of c able-based channels in rural areas, the 
Ministry has concentrated on terrestrial TV transmission and radio broadcast. 
The information on various schemes  of the Department is widely  
disseminated through the websit e of the DAC.  This information has already 
been provided to Hon’ble Members of the Standing Committee.  Steps ar e 
 67

being taken to spec ifically provide this information to MPs, MLAs and 
Members of Local Bodies. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 17 
Quality Seeds 
2.12 The Committee feel that the quality seed is the most critical and basic  
input for agricultural output, and acc ounts for 25-30 per cent  of yield 
increase.    In India 80 per cent of  the farmers rely on farm saved seed and  
the low seed replacement rate results in low yields.   Through the information 
furnished by the Department, the Commi ttee have been informed that there 
is adequate availability of Certified Q uality seeds as p er the demand of th e 
farmers.    However, the experience of Members of the Committee is different 
from the picture project ed by t he Department.    They obs erve that the 
farmers are not getting adequat e quality s eeds in tim e.   When the farmers  
require the seed, the Government agenc ies do not have sufficient stock to 
supply and the farmers have to buy it fr om private dealers at high rate, who 
do not guarantee for i ts germination.    Even the Department has admitted 
that the volume of seeds made availa ble during 2005-2006 by priv ate sector 
is 66.61 lakh quintals , out of total supply of 140.51 lakh quintals.   T he 
Committee further note that there are so me instances when spurious seed is 
supplied to the farmer, like chamatka r cotton seed s old by  Mahyco Seed  
Company, but he gets to know about it only  after some time when the seeds 
are either not properly ge rminated or there is much lesser yield .   Now he 
becomes helpless as he has already spent  the money on those seeds and 
there is no time left to use other good quality seeds  again, and so he is  
 68

completely ruined.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that Government 
should deal the issue of spuri ous seeds with iron hand and deterrent 
punishment or fine may be imposed on these spurious seed dealers.    There 
should be checks on seeds/seeds dealers be fore making them available to 
the farmers.   All out concerted e fforts should be made to provide good 
quality seeds in time because without good quality seeds, it is not possible to 
increase production and have a good crop. 
 The Com mittee further recommend t hat special attention should be 
paid to grow drought tolerant varieties and hybrids for oilseeds, wheat, maize 
and pulses to increase their productivity. 
 The Com mittee desire the Government to oversee the role of 
Genetically Modified (GM) seeds.   These are sold on exorbitant prices luring 
the farmers for double yield but do not produce the desired result.   
Moreover, it has also been seen that in some case s the yield of  under trial 
GM seeds is sold and without knowin g the final outcome and their impact,  
these are used by farmers and consumer s. Therefore, there is  an urgent  
need to have a check  in this regard to ens ure no under trial seed/crop goes 
into the m arket.   Moreover, pros and c ons and requir ements for using GM 
seed should also be told to the farmers before selling it to them. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.13 Quality seed is the most critical  and basic input for agriculture output, 
and accounts for 25-30 percent yield in crease.  In order to address the 
problem of  low qualit y farm saved seed,  low seed r eplacement rate and 
inavailability of adequate quantity of quality seeds at affordable prices and in 
 69

time, a restructured Central Sector Scheme ‘Development and Strengthening 
of Infrastructure Facilities for Produc tion and Distribution of  Quality Seed” is 
being implemented from the year 2005- 06.  Under Seed Village Programme, 
which is  one of the component s of this  s cheme, as sistance in the form of 
subsidy on seeds, storage bins and trainings is provided through 
implementing agencies.  The Seed Vill age Programme essentially intended  
to empower the farmers to produce quality seed in their own land under the 
guidance and assistance of the impl ementing agencies, has caught the 
imagination of the farmers and has ev oked positiv e response f rom many 
States. 
 Besides, for increasing the seed pr oduction, distribution and to m ake 
quality seeds available to the farmers at reasonable rate, seed distribution 
subsidy is  being provided through State Department of Agriculture.  The 
details are as under: 
(i) Under Macro Management mode of  Agriculture, seed distribution 
subsidy is give @ Rs.200/- per qui ntal for wheat and rice, Rs.400/- 
per quintal for varieties of coarse cereals like Bajra, jowar, ragi and 
barley and Rs.1000/- per quintal fo r hybrid seed of Bajra and 
jowar.  For Jute and Mesta seed distribution, assistance is given @ 
Rs.800/- per quintal or 25% of th e seed cost to farmers which ever 
is less and is being implement ed through State Department of 
Agriculture. 
(ii) Under ISOPOM, seed production  subsidy @ Rs.500/- per quinta l 
for foundation and c ertified seed and certified seed distribution 
 70

subsidy @ Rs.800/- per quintal or 25% of seed cost for certified 
seed whichever is less on oilseeds, pulses and maize are provided 
to States and is being impl emented through State  Department 
Agriculture. 
(iii) Under Technology Mission on Cotton seed production  subsidy @  
Rs.50/- per kg. Or 50% cost of foundation seed whichever is less, 
seed production subsidy @ Rs.15/- per kg. Or 25% cost of certified 
seed whichever is less, seed distribution subsidy @ Rs.20/- per kg. 
and subsidy  on seed treatment @ 50% limited to Rs.40/- per kg 
are provided to State and is being implemented 
The Government always give s pecial attention through cr op 
diversification to grow drought tolerant varieties and hybrids of oilseed,  
maize, wheat and pulses to increase their productively. 
The Seeds Act, 1966 provides a legislative framework for regulation of 
quality seeds in the Country.  The Act provides for a system ofnotification 
of kind or variety of seeds.  Notifi cation of seeds is a process, which 
brings seed of a particular kind, or  a Variety under the purview of quality  
control pr ovisions of seeds Act.  Notification facilitates Seeds Law 
Enforcement.  Once a variety is  notified, the seeds of  the variety can be 
sold only if the confirm to the mi nimum standards of germination, genetic  
purity and physical purity prescribed und er Section 6 (a) and (b) of the 
Seeds Act, 1966.  It is also mandatory that the producer/dealer to indicate 
adaptability of the c ultivator on t he label along with the prescribed 
standards.  Central Seeds Committee established under Seeds  Act, an 
 71

apex body,  recommends the notification of  varieties.  The variet ies are 
being notified on the agronomic trials at different locations.  The Act also 
provides for certification of seeds of varieties.  Certification invo lves a  
third party guarantee regar ding t he quality of the seed provided by an 
independent certification a gency.  Certified seeds has  to conform to the 
standards laid down in the Indian Mi nimum Seed Certification Standards, 
which has been notified under 17 (a) of the Seeds Rule, 1968.  Therefore, 
the seeds  of notified ki nd/variety sold in the market guaran tees its 
germination, physical purity and genetic purity. 
 In order to ensure equitable di stribution of quality seeds to 
farmers, seeds has been declared as an es sential commodity under the 
Essential Commodity Act, 1955.  U nder Section 3 of the Essential 
Commodity Act, 1955, Central Govern ment made the Seeds (Control)  
Order, 1983 to control and regulate seed production.  The sa id order  
provides for compulsory licensing of  seed dealers and has put in place a 
rigorous system of regul ation and enforcement.  T he Order lists the 
modalities of inspection, sampling,  punis hment of dealers, sus pension 
and cancellation of licenses, etc. 
The responsibility of Seeds Law Enforcement (Seeds  Act, 1966  and 
Seeds (Control) Order, 1983) is vest ed in the State Governments.   
Accordingly, State Governments/Un ion Territories have notified Seed 
Inspectors to regulate the quality of seeds.  Seed Inspectors are 
authorized to take punitive action agai nst dealers found to be selling sub-
standard seeds.  Seeds dealers are also liable to be p roceeded against 
 72

under the relevant provisions of Seeds Ac t, 1966 and Seeds (Control) 
Order, 1983 for contravention of these legal instruments. 
Bt. Cotton is the only Genetically Modified crops  available for 
commercial cultivatio n in the c ountry.  The Bt. Cotton hybrid see ds are  
approved by Genetic E ngineering Approv al Committee (GEAC) in the 
Ministry of Environm ent and F orests, after several years of rigorous 
testing and trials at different l ocations for biosafety and agronomical 
performance.  Every efforts are made by  the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests that seeds of GM  crops still u nder trials may n ot be sold without  
knowing the final outcome and their impac t.  Besides, directions are also 
issued by GEAC to t he seed companies to provid e necessary guidelines 
and requirements for using GM Seeds by the farmers and put them with 
the seed packet.  The responsibility of  Seed Law enfor cement vests with 
the State Governments.  Howeve r, advisories hav e been is sued by 
Government of India to Bt. Cotton gro wing States to take stringent action 
against persons selling spurious and illegal seeds. 
The matter regarding the exorbitant  prices charged by the seed 
companies from the farmers is subjudice with the Hon’ble Supreme Court.  
In the meantime, seed companies have also reduced their trait value from 
Rs.1250/- to Rs.880/- per packet of 450 gms.  The GEAC h as, so far, 
approved 62 hybrids of various compani es for cultivation, which besides  
MAHYCO Seed Company, include hy brid technology  developed 
indigenously.  This step of GEAC sh all increase further competition 
among the companies and help reduce seed price.  The role of 
 73

Genetically Modified seeds of  B t. Cotton in the country has great 
importance in the c ountry due to increas e in the yield by 15% to 30% a s 
compared to non Bt. Cotton.  The area under Bt. Cotton has also 
increased from 2.30 lakh acres in 203 to 25.07 lakh acres in 2005. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 18 
Rural Godowns and Cold  Storages 
2.14 The Committee note that  with a view to creati ng scientific storage in 
rural areas to meet the requirem ents of farmers for storing farm produce, a 
Central Sector Scheme of construction of  Rural God owns  with 15%  - 25 % 
of capital cost being provided as  credit linked bac k–ended s ubsidy, is  
implemented.   The Committee are informed that 11113 rural godowns with a  
total capacity of 163.94 lakh tonnes  have been sanctioned up to 28.2.2006 
with an am ount of Rs. 289.79 crore as s ubsidy for cons truction/renovation of 
godowns. The Committee also note a capital subsidy  scheme for 
construction/expansion/modernisation of cold storage and s torages of  
Horticulture Produce is also being implemented and cold storage capacity of 
56.18 lakh metric tonnes has been creat ed with as sistance of  Rs.356.47 
crore from NABARD through National Horticulture Board. 
 The Committee have also noted that every year, there is wastage of at 
least Rs.50,000 crore worth of foodgrains , fruits and  vegetables, wh ich if  
could be s aved, will add to the farmer’s prosperity.   The av ailable facility of 
rural  godowns an d cold storages ar e still very far from the actual 
requirement.   In the absence of  adequate storage facilities in th eir vicinity, 
 74

farmers have to sell their produce in  grain /vegetable mandi s at a very low 
price.   Therefore, the Committee re commend that all out efforts should be 
made to increase the number of  godowns and cold storages, and 
cooperatives and private entrepreneur s may be encouraged to set up the 
ventures in the rural areas. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.15 The above recommendation has been noted.  Under the Central 
Sector Scheme of Capital Investment Subsidy for Construction/Renovation of 
Rural Godowns, Ch. Charan Singh Nati onal Institute of Agricultura l 
Marketing, Jaipur has  been ass igned the s pecific task  of publicit y, training 
and awareness programme to encourage people to undertake projects under 
the Scheme.  In addition to this the following modifications have been made  
in the existing guidelines to encour age small farmers and entrepreneurs in 
North East Region in t he country to under take construction of projects under 
the scheme:- 
a) Smaller godowns  of 50 to 100 MTs hav e been m ade eligible for 
 subsidy under the scheme to encourage on farm storage. 
b) For hilly ar eas, where there is a scarcity of land, the s ize of godown 
 eligible for subsidy under the sc heme of Rural Godowns has further 
 been reduced from 100 MT to 25 MT. 
c) Five lakh MTs capacity has been reserved for small farmers. 
d) Target of 90 lakh M Ts of rura l godown was fixed for construction 
 during 10th Plan period which has now been revised to 140 lakh MTs. 
 75

Similarly, under the Cent ral Sector Scheme of  Capital Invest ment 
Subsidy for Construction/Modernizati on/Expansion of  Cold Storages and 
storages for horticult ure produc e, Nation al Horticultur e Board, Gurgaon is  
promoting the Scheme through their awareness programmes in the States. 
Till now, 11803 rural godowns have been sanctioned with the capacity 
of 166.70 lakh MTs by National Bank fo r Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD) and National Cooperative De velopment Corporation (NCDC) and 
1548 number of cold storages with a capaci ty of 67.59 lakh for horticulture 
produce. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 76

 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
-- Nil -- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 77

CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Soil Testing Laboratories 
4.1 The Committee note that at pres ent there are 551 soil testing  
laboratories out of which 426 are static and 125 are m obile laboratories, with 
the total annual analy sing capacity of 67. 46 lakh samples.   The Committee 
recommend that the Departm ent should give encouragement to the private 
sector also for setting up soil testi ng laboratories so t hat en deavour to 
provide one soil- testing laboratory in each Block/Mandal could be reached.   
The Government should also set up more mobile soil testing labs so that the 
farmers could go for the soil testing in  their vicinity and they could be 
educated t o use on ly those fertilizer nut rients which are found deficient in  
their land and also up to the extent required.   The help of soil testing labs will 
also be beneficial for the farmers in choosing the crop to be s own.  The 
Committee would like the Government to find out the feasibi lity of providing 
the soil testing facilitie s and authorizing Agriculture Universities and colleges 
to do the soil testing on c ommission basis  so as to sustain their test lab  
facilities. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.2 All India Soil & Land Use Survey, ca rries out detailed Soil Survey all 
over India using remote sensing techniques and bring out detailed soil survey 
reports on the basis of soil samples collected during field work.  However, at 
 78

present there is no provision to carry out  soil testing on farmer’s fields as it  
would require additional infrastructure and manpower.  In other schemes of 
the NRM Divis ion s uch as River Va lley Project and Flood Prone Riv er 
Projects, Reclamation of Alkali Soils and Watershed Development Projects in 
Shifting Cultivation Ar eas, there is no es tablished soil testing laboratories.  
However, efforts are being made to introduce soil testing and issue soil 
health cards for the farmers in the area covered under above schemes. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.3 For comments of the committee pl ease refer to Para No. 1.21 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
Agricultural Credit and Rate of Interest 
4.4 The Committee appreciate the gesture that in order to ensure the crop 
loans at reasonable rates, the Government has decided to provide short term 
credit at 7 per cent with an upper limit of Rs.3 lakh principal amount.   The 
Committee have been informed that I ndian Banks Association (IBA) and 
NABARD are working out th e modalities for interest  subvention required to 
be given to NABARD in this regard.    Furthermore, period of short-term crop 
loans depends upon the crop cy cle of t he particular c rop for which loan has 
been availed plus some buffer period required for undertaking necessary 
harvest and post-harvest operations.    
 The Committee find the c larification given by t he Gover nment 
regarding period of short-term i s very vague.   Because if any farmer take s 
 79

loan for a tractor or other agricultural ma chinery, it has nothing to do with the 
crop of that particular harvesting s eason.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the loan should be made available for at least 3 years at this 
rate.  IBA and NABARD should be ask ed to expedite to finaliz e the 
modalities so that farmers get loan on time. 
 The Committee feel that worst exploitation of the farmers is thr ough 
the adverse credit policies of the financia l institutions which com pel farmers 
to starve under the burden of loans and commit suicides.    The Committee 
find that in 1918 Britis hers passed a Usurious Loans Act which provided that 
no farmer can be c harged a rate of intere st higher than the authorised rate 
which at that time was 5.5 per cent  and if charged, the case could be 
reopened in the court and entire accounts resettled.   Moreover, the total 
amount of interest could not be higher t han the original capital.  But in 1949  
a Banking Regulation Act was passed which made a special prov ision under 
Article 21(a) saying that these will not  apply to bank ing companies including 
cooperative banks. 
 In view of plight of farmers due to heavy burden of credits  the 
Committee recommend that section 21(a)  of the Banking Regulation Act 
should be scrapped.   All out concerted efforts should be made to bring down 
the rate of interest on Farm Credit to the level of 5.5% simple interest, as it 
used to be in early  20 th century.   In case of  c ooperatives, transaction 
cost/margin at each layer must be reduced  as the length of chain, from RBI 
to NABARD to State-District and Cooperat ive Societies at villag e level and  
Regional Rural Banks , is very big.   Event ually the farmer has to take the 
 80

burden of all these m iddlemen/lending agencies.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend to shorten this chain so that eventual creditor is directly linked to 
the borrower.   The Committee further desire the Government to ensure that  
in no case, the interest should be hi gher than the original capital and 
charging of compound rate of interest should be absolutely prohibited so that 
exploitation of farmers by financial institutions is minimised. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.5 In order to bring down rate of  interest o n farm loa ns it has been 
announced in the Union Budget  for the year 2006-07 that effective from 
Kharif 2006-07, farmers would r eceive crop loans upto a principal amount of 
Rs.3 lakh at 7% rate of interest and the Government of India would provide 
necessary interest subvention for this purpose.  Crop loans to f armers are 
generally made available through Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) which are valid 
for 3 years.  As inc entive for good performance, credit limits under KCC 
could be enhanced t o take care of in crease in costs, change in cropping 
pattern, etc. 
 Banks hav e been advised by  RBI t hat total interest debited to an 
account should not exceed the principal amount in respect of short term 
loans adv anced to small and marginal farmers.  As per the extant RBI 
instructions, banks are not allowed to  compound interes t on current dues of  
crop loans and term loans in res pect of di rect agricultural advanc es granted 
to farmers.  If such loans bec ome over due banks have bee n advised that 
where the default is due to genuine reasons, they should extend the period of 
loan or reschedule the installments under term loans.  Once such a relief has 
 81

been extended the ov erdues become current dues and hence banks shou ld 
not compound interest thereon.  In case  of long durat ion crops, interest is  
recovered only annually. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.6 For comments of the committee pl ease refer to Para No. 1.24 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
   
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Debt Recovery Measures 
4.7 The Committee are shocked to lear n that  in some States like Uttar 
Pradesh and Bihar, there is a law to a rrest farmers who default in repayment 
of loans.   Moreover, t hey are not only kept in jail but the expenditure 
incurred on their food, transport and othe r things in jail is als o said to be 
recovered from them. The Committee ar e informed by the Secr etary of the 
Department that in some St ates, provision in the Public Debt Rec overy Acts 
provide for  imprisonment of loanees who default in repayment of loans.    
After exhausting all other avenues for re covery of loans, banks invoke this 
legal provision to sec ure arrest wa rrants for the defaulters.  The Committee 
fail to understand as to what are the other avenues that are exhausted before 
the imprisonment of defaulting farmers is sought.   How any law stipulates for 
recovery of food, transport and other expenditure from a farmer detainee in a 
country where even hard core criminals  have free food and shelter in jail.    
And why the provision of this law ar e not invoked t o imprison defaulting  
industrialists and commercial borrowers.    
 82

The Committee wish to draw the attention of the Government  towards 
Debt Reconciliation Board organised by Ch audhary Chhottu Ram in 1939  in  
Punjab St ate.   One of the main feat ures of that Board, wit h substantial  
membership of farmers, was that all t he legal processes for debt recovery or 
mode of repayment, etc., had to start fr om the Debt Reconc iliation Board.   
The Board used to decide, weighing a ll the circumstances, the amount to be 
paid, amount to be written off, mode of repayment and number of instalments 
etc., but not let them adopt any coercive measure to take  away the source of 
the livelihood of the farmers like land,  cattle, machinery, hearth and home 
etc. 
The Com mittee, theref ore, urge upon the Central Government to 
immediately get abrogated this draconian law which provide the detention of  
the poor farmers and make them pay for it too.   When pre independence era 
could see farmers from humanitarian angl e, why can’t independent India see 
it.    
The Com mittee recommend that the State Governments should be 
sternly instructed to immediately  stop this trend.   The Government should 
further evolve some mechanism on the li nes of Debt Reconciliation Board by  
incorporating suitable pr ovisions as per the need of the hour, wit h a view to 
providing some respite to poor farmers , so that they can pay their debt  
conveniently and do not resort to the extreme steps of committing suicide. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.8 Hon’ble Union Agr iculture Mi nister vide his letter dated the 28 th 
August, 2000 has requested the Chief Mini ster of all the States to review 
 83

their state laws to remove the provisi on for arrest and detention of farmers in 
case of default in repayment of loans.  Hon’ble Agriculture Minister has vide 
his letter dated 26 th April, 2005 to the Chief Mi nister of Haryana, Bihar, 
Jharkhand, Kerala, Orissa, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh further taken up the 
matter of review of state laws  to remove the provision for arrest and 
detention of farmers.  Secret ary (A&C) vide letter dated 12 th August, 2005 
has further reminded to Chief Secretaries of concerned States for expediting 
action for amending the relevant state laws. 
In case of natural calamities result ing in damage of crops, instructions 
have already been issued to banks to assess the situation and take 
immediate measures to provide appropria te relief to affected borrowers.  
Such relief could be provided by way of conversion of short term loans into 
medium term loans , deferring/postponing  of the installments of the 
medium/long term loans, postponement of  interest on such loans and one 
time settlement of dues.  Banks hav e also been advised to provide fresh 
credit to farmers to enable them to carry on their agricultural operations. 
 
 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
4.9 For comments of the committee pl ease refer to Para No. 1.27 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
Suicides by  Farmers 
 
 84

4.10 Since Independenc e, the hardwor king and proud farmers of India 
have increased the c ountry’s foodgrain pr oduction by nearly  four times from 
60 million  tonnes at I ndependence to 210 million ton nes (MT) in 2005-06.     
The Committee are pained to see the plight of farmers today who have made 
this possible with their blood and toil,  tears and sweat with the hope and 
aspirations to get rid of hunger and pov erty and to lead a respectable life for  
themselves and their children. 
 Unfortunately, the farmers have not got  their full dues.   They hav e to 
sell their produce at  very low rates;  there are continuous cr op failures ; 
droughts and they are not able to repay their debts.   Under the  
circumstances, the only escape route for t hem is to commit suicide.   Thus in 
the last 5 years, as  per the r ecords of Department of Agric ulture and 
Cooperation, about 11782 farmers have ended their lives out of frustration 
and humiliation. 
 The Committee note that the Government has annou nced a pack age 
for 30 districts in 4 States namely Maharashtra, Karnataka, Kerala and 
Andhra Pradesh whic h will addr ess the farme rs’ credit, insurance, irrigation, 
subsidy and income needs through Dairy, poultry and horticulture.  
 The Com mittee are informed that t he criteria for selection  of the  
districts has been the severity of suic ides and the State Governments have 
conducted some studies in this regard.   The Committee opine that one of the 
main reasons for crop failures , which in turn compel farmers to commit 
suicides, is  adverse c limatic conditi ons and droughts in many parts of the 
country.   Rajasthan, Gujarat and Orissa  are mainly dr ought-affected States 
 85

but why none of their districts is included in the list of 30  districts.   In Punja b 
and other States also a number of fa rmers have committed suicide.   The 
Committee wonder whether t he Government is wa iting for farme rs of these 
States to commit suicide in large numbers before announc ing any package 
for them.   The Committee, therefore,  recommend that while identifying the 
districts for suicide af fected areas, gr ound realities  s hould be t aken into 
consideration and the rehabilitation package for these States should also be 
drawn in order to save the farmers and their families well before they commit 
suicide.  The Committee further reco mmend that instead of severity of  
suicide by the farmers of a particular di strict of the Stat e, their economic  
condition to repay the loans, crop failure, drought conditions and natural 
calamity should be the criteria fo r giving spec ial package for their 
rehabilitation. 
 The Comm ittee further note that as  per the information provided by 
the Department, number of suicide cases in the country during last 5 year s 
(2000 onwards) is 11782 but t he figure does  not s eem to be correct for  
example in Maharashtra t he number of cases projec ted by Department are 
142 in 2005 whereas the Committee are aw are that only in Vidarbha region 
of Maharashtra 435 farmers have committed suicide since June 2005.    The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to straighten their  
records and ask the State Governments to project the factual position so that 
the Government and the people of t he c ountry are aware of the actual 
position and act accordingly. 
 86

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.11 The Government is fully commi tted to the cause of farmers.   
Accordingly, high priority has been a ccorded to the revitalization of the 
agriculture sector as well as to br ing improvements in the condition of 
farmers under the National Com mon Mi nimum Programme (NCMP) of the 
UPA Government. 
 It is a fact that agriculture growth  has decelerated in the recent times 
owing to natural calamities such  as droughts, floods and repeated crop 
failure.  Consequently,  there is high in debtedness among the farmers.  This 
among wit h other so cial, economic and psychological reasons , have in 
certain cas es, even promoted them to commit suicide.  Cases of farmers’  
suicide have been mainly reported fr om the State of Andhra Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala.  Such instanc es have also been 
reported from the States of Gujarat, Orissa and Punjab. 
 Besides the measures already ta ken by the State Governments, 
several initiatives are under implementation from the Central Government for 
elevating the lot of farmers.  A co mprehensive credit policy was announced 
by the Government on 18 th June, 2004, containing meas ures for doubling of  
agricultural credit flow in three years and provisio n of debt relief to the 
farmers affected by natural calamities.  During the 2004-05, the achievement 
of agricult ure credit flow was  Rs.1 ,25,309.37 crore whic h s ubstantially 
exceeded the target of agric ulture credit flow for the year 2005-06 fixed at  
Rs.1,41,000 crore, the achiev ement was Rs.1,57,497.57 cr ore forming 
 87

111.69% of the target.  The target for provision of farm credit for the year  
2006-07 has been fixed at a substantially higher level of Rs.175000 crore. 
 To reduce the debt burden of farmers, the Government has decided to 
ensure that the farmer receives short-term credit at 7%, with an upper limit of  
Rs.3 lakh on the principal amount.  Further, in order to provide relief to the 
farmers who have availed crop loans from Commercial Banks , RRBs and 
PACs for Kharif and Rabi 2005-06,  an amount equal to two percentage 
points of the borrower’s interes t liab ility o n principal amount u pto Rs. One  
lakh will be credited to hi s/her bank account before 31st March, 2006.  There 
are mentions in the Union Budget  (2006-07) about asking NABARD to open 
a separate line of c redit for financ ing farm production and investment  
activities through Self Help Groups as well as proposal to appoint a 
Committee on financial Inclusion which will  identity the reasons for exclus ion 
of cultivator households from credit sources and suggest a plan for designing 
and deliv ering credit  to every house hold that seeks credit from lending 
institutions.  It is expected that the credit initiatives would positively impact on 
the economic condition of farmers and improve their capacity to repay loans. 
 To enhanc e the irrigation coverage,  an outlay of Rs.7121 crore has 
been alloc ated for the Acceler ated I rrigation Benefit Programme in the 
current year.  The Government is  formulating a scheme on Enhancing 
Sustainability of Dryl and Rainfed Fa rming Systems.  This scheme will 
address is sues like r ainwater harvesting and its sufficient utiliza tion, in situ 
soil moisture conservation, use of organic manures, alternate land use and 
adoption of improved dryland farming technologies.   An announcement  
 88

regarding setting up of a National rain fed Area Authority has already been 
made. 
 As regards  the package being draw n up for 30 Distric ts affected by  
farmers’ suicide, the major considerat ion has been t he severity of suicide 
incidence.  Since the incidents have la rgely taken place in the  States of 
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Kar nataka and Kerala, it was deemed 
appropriate to focus the package on these f our States.  At present, the intent 
is to reach out to the Districts that are worst affected by the problem.  Hence, 
even among the 4 States, not all t he districts have been chosen for 
implementation of the package.  Cases of suicide by farmers have not been 
reported by the State Gove rnment from the States other than the 7 States  
mentioned above.  There is no neglect or lack of consideration of other 
States, but only  training the focus towa rds the States that are severely  
affected so that a dent on the problem co uld be attained at the earliest.  All 
the initiatives under implementation for revitalization of agriculture, other than 
this package, are made equally applicable for all the States in the country. 
 To provide relief in the event of drought and other natural calamities,  
two schemes are administered by the mini stry of Home Affairs in terms of  
recommendations of  the Finance Com mission.  These scheme are: (i) 
Calamity Relief Fund (CRF) which is a fund available with each State 
Government to which Central and State Government contribute in the ratio of 
3:1.  (ii) N ational Calamity Contingency Fu nd (NCCF) : For severe calamity  
where relief expenditur e cannot be accommodated within the CRF, NCCF  
provides additional funding solely from the Central government.  Besides, the 
 89

National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (N AIS) for providing a s afety net to 
the farmers is under  operation since Rabi 1999-2000.  Actions are on for 
implementing a Modified National Agri culture Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) 
that contains several farmer-friendly measures such as reduction in unit area 
of insurance for major crops,.  Improvement  in calculation of threshold y ield, 
recommending high indemnity levels  of 80-90%, coverage of pr e-
sowing/planting risks and post-harvest lo sses, and provision of extended  
insurance coverage. 
 In respect of obtaining the corre ct and updated data  on suicide by  
farmers, all the State Governments have been requested to furnish the 
requisite information in this regard. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.12 For comments of the committee please refer to Para No. 1.30 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
Enhancing Sustainability  of dryland farming systems 
4.13 The Committee note that the sc heme for ‘Enhancing s ustainability of 
dryland farming systems’ whic h was s ent to Planning Com mission on 
20.6.2005 is yet to be cleared.  The Committee have been informed by the 
Secretary, Department of Agricultur e and Coopera tion that initially the 
scheme was sent to Planning Commi ssion for Rs.2640 c rore to be 
implemented in 200 districts of the count ry but on the instruction of Planning 
Commission, it was reduced to Rs.73 crore covering 16 districts only, on pilot 
 90

basis.   Moreover, the Ministry of Finance has desir ed that launchin g of  
separate Scheme on Enha ncing Sustainability of dryland farming system  
should be reconsidered.   However, during the course of evidence it  
appeared t hat there is some confus ion bet ween Planning Commission an d 
Department of Agricultur e and Cooperation regarding t he allocation of funds  
for dryland farming system.  The Secret ary, Department of  Agriculture and 
Cooperation clarifie d that as per the advic e of  Planning Commission, the 
Scheme has been approved for Rs.73.70 crore on 3.2.2006 but afterwards  
Planning Commission has  ask ed Ministry of Agric ulture to bring it up t o 
Rs.200 crore because the Prime Minister has made an announcement in this 
regard.  Therefore, again this Scheme has to be rescheduled and modified. 
 The Committee taking cognizanc e of the whole situation recommend 
that since at one stage th is scheme has already been approved for Rs.73.70 
crore, it should immediat ely be implemented.   As far as the issue of 
enhancing it to Rs.200 crore  is concerned, it can be taken up separately.   At 
least, no further dilly-d allying should be made and no more reconsiderations 
are required at present st age.    The Committee opine that at the time when 
ground water level in the whole country is decreasing, ther e is an urgent 
need to enhance the sustainability of  dryland farming and in another few 
years there will be huge scarcity of wate r.   They, theref ore, recommend its 
immediate implementation and desire the Planning Commission and Finance 
Ministry to clear it immediately  in  the present form and modify other  
modalities later at the revised esti mates stage so that the scheme is  
 91

implemented immediately and t he enhanced amount is made available later 
on in this financial year itself. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.14 The Department of Expendit ure, Ministry of Fin ance has  been 
requested at the level of Secretary (A&C) to re-look into their observations on 
the scheme.  The following points hav e been mentioned fo r implementing a 
new scheme on dryland farming as stand alone scheme: 
“Integrating/merging the propos ed dryland programme  with ongoing 
watershed programme of the Macro Management is not lik ely to help in 
fulfilling the objectives envisaged as: 
(a) it would limit the promotion of improved dryl and improvement  
technologies only to identifi ed/selected watersheds whic h 
constitute/would cover only  a small fraction of the dryland 
area/holdings and a few villages in a district; 
(b) a large dryland area/holdings  would remain outside the 
integrated/converged programme; 
(c) progress in achieving the objec tives would remain slow as the 
resources required to cover a sizeable area through watershed 
programme would always be a limitation; and 
(d) the integrated/converged Programme would keep out a large resource 
poor dryland farmers from partici pating in this endeavour and at their 
own (without Government support) they would not have the resources 
to invest in adopting rain harvesting technologies.” 
The response of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance is awaited. 
 92

 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.15 For comments of the committee pl ease refer to Para No. 1.39 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
Remunerative Prices to Farmers 
 
4.16 While explaining the reasons fo r the decis ion of the Government to 
import five lakh tonnes of wheat to replenish the deplet ed buffer stock of 
wheat, the Committee have been inform ed by the representative of the 
Ministry of Consumer Affa irs, Food and Pu blic Distribution on 3. 5.2006, that 
the decision to import  five lakh t onnes of wheat was  taken because of low 
buffer stocks (norm 40 lakh tonnes), fa lling procurement and to contain the 
price rise of wheat especially in the southern States.  The decis ion to import 
another 30 lakh tonnes has also been taken. 
 The Committee feel that the low pr ocurement of wheat in the current  
year by the Government Agencies is due to the fact that the farmers prefer to 
sell their produce to private traders w ho offer them better prices than the 
Minimum Support Pric e (MSP) fixed by the Government.   MSP announc ed 
this is Rs.650 per quintal and after in cluding bonus of Rs.50, i t comes to 
Rs.700 whereas the farmers have sold their produc e to privat e traders at 
Rs.800 per quintal.  The Committee fail to under stand as to why the  
Government cannot pay remunerative price to the farmers in the first  
instance rather than importing wheat and spending more on import.  Had the 
 93

Government sufficiently raised the MSP at  the initial stage it self, they would 
have not gone to the private traders. 
While agreeing that interests of  both the farmers and consum ers 
should be t aken care of, the Committee recommend that the int erest of the 
poor farmers should be assiduously pr otected by paying them remunerative 
prices for their produce.  Once the farme rs are assured of attracti ve price for 
their produce, they would prefer  to se ll their entire surplus produce to the 
Government Agencies and there woul d be no difficulty in m eeting the 
procurement targets.  The Committ ee fu rther reco mmend th at the MS P 
should be fixed well in advance,  as this year, wheat started coming from 
Madhya Pr adesh around 15 th of  March itself but by that time Government 
price was not announced which compelled the farmers to sell their produce in 
the open market dominated by private traders. 
 The Com mittee observe that the gr owth of grain production is not 
matching with the populati on growth.  Also due to the non-remunerative 
prices of foodgrains, the farmers are l eaning towards cash crops, leadin g to 
lower production of foodgrai ns, especially wheat.  If the Government really 
want to increase the foodgrain production, they should announce  MSP long 
before the arrival of the crops in  the market and give reasonable 
remunerative price to the farmers so that the Government could have the 
desired foodgrain stocks to cater to the future needs of nation.  Moreover, the 
Government should not import the wheat at  the time of arrival of new crop in 
the market, since it will be a discour aging factor fo r the far mers.  The 
 94

Government can imp ort the wh eat later o n if they ar e not ab le to fill u p the 
requisite stock from indigenous procurement of wheat. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.17 The Government’s price policy f or agricultural commodities seek s to 
ensure remunerative prices to the grow ers for their produce wit h a view to 
encouraging higher investment and production, and to safeguard the interest 
of consumers by making available s upplies at reasonable pric es.  The 
minimum support price is a guaranteed pric e for the growers in a situation 
when prices tend to fall below MSP.  T he price policy also seeks to evolve a 
balanced and integrated price structure in the perspective of  the overall 
needs of the economy .  Towards this end, the Government announces each 
season Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) for major agricultural commodities 
and organizes purchase operations through public and cooperative agencies.  
The designated central nodal agenc ies intervene  in  the market for 
undertaking procurement operations with the objective that the market prices 
do not fall below the MSPs fixed by the Government. 
The Government decides on the support price for various agricultural 
commodities taking into account the recommendations of the Commission for 
Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) , the views of St ate Governments and 
Central Ministries as well as such other relevant factors which are considered 
important for fixation of support prices. 
The CACP, while formulating its recommendations on price policy  
considers a number of impor tant factors which incl ude cost of production , 
 95

changes in input pric es, i nput/output price parity, tr ends in mar ket prices, 
demand and supply situation, int er-crop price parity, effect on ind ustrial cost 
structure, effect on general price level, effect on cost  of living, international 
market price situation and parity between prices paid and prices received by  
the farmers. 
The cost of cultivation/production taken into account includes all paid 
out costs, such as, those inc urred on account of hired human labour, bulloc k 
labour/machine labour (both hired and owned) and r ent paid for leased in 
land besides cash and kind expenses on use of material inputs  like seeds , 
fertilizers, manures, irrigation ch arges incl uding cost of diesel/e lectricity for  
operation of pump sets, etc.  Besides , c ost of production inc ludes imput ed 
value of wages of family labour and rent for owned land.  The cost als o 
covers depreciation of  farm machinery and  buildings.  As such, the cost of 
production covers not only actual ex penses in cash and kind but als o 
imputed value of owned assets includi ng land and family labour.  The pric e 
policy for Rabi crops  of 2005-06 s eason to be mark eted in 2006-07 was  
announced on 29th September, 2005. 
A comparative position of C2 c ost (all expenses paid in cash and kind 
including rent for leased in land, imput ed value of wages of family labour, 
rental value of owned land,  int erest on fi xed capital) and MSP of wheat is 
shown below: 
Comparative Statement on Cost of  Produc tion (CoP)  and Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) for Wheat 
 96

Year State CoP (C2) 
(Rs./Quintal) 
MSP  
(Rs./Quintal) 
2004-05 Haryana 
Punjab 
Uttar Pradesh 
522.87 
494.35 
597.81 
640.00 
640.00 
640.00 
2005-06 Haryana 
Punjab 
Uttar Pradesh 
516.00* 
516.00* 
528.00* 
650.00 
650.00 
650.00 
*  As projected by CACP 
Note:  C2 cost of production: all expenses paid in  cash and kin d including rent for 
leased in land, imputed value of wages of family labour, re ntal value of owned land, 
interest on fixed capital. 
 
 With a view to ensuring adequate st ocks of wheat in t he Central Pool 
as well as  giving the right signals to farmers and curbing any speculativ e 
trading, Government has announced an inc entive bonus of Rs.50 per quintal 
on wheat over the Minimum Support Price (MSP) of Rs.650 per quintal.  This 
year the wholesale pr ices of wheat hav e been substantially  high er than its 
MSP and the farmers have s old their cr op in the open market.  This  has  
benefited the farmers as they have got a good price for their produce.  Since 
the consumer also needs to be provided wheat at reasonable price, it was 
felt necessary for FCI to have sufficient  stocks of wheat.  Thus, a decision t o 
import 3.5 million tones of wheat was taken. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.18 For comments of the committee pl ease refer to Para No. 1.42 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 97

 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Budgetary Allocation 
5.1 The Committee note that despite  their repeated recommendations in 
various Reports to substantially increase budgetary allocations for Agriculture 
Sector to give required impetus to agricultural development, the allocations in 
respect of this vital sector continues to be unsatisfactory and much below the 
requirement.    The Committee have been informed by the representatives of 
the Department of Agricu lture and Cooperation that  to build and sustain 
momentum of the Agriculture Sector it  is necessary that  both State and 
Central Plan outlays are augmented to achieve the required per centage of  
anticipated growth in the agriculture sect or.   Keeping that in view they had 
proposed a Plan outlay of Rs.5917 cr ore for 2006-2007 but only Rs.4840  
crore have been approved.  The Committ ee note that Plan allocation of  
Rs.3920 crore for 2005-06 at Revised Estimate (RE) stage was 6.3% less as 
compared to Budget Estimate (BE) of Rs.4209.32 crore of the same year. 
 The Committee are not at all im pressed by the rosy picture portrayed 
by Member Secretary, Planning Commission during evidenc e where he 
profoundly declared that Plan allocation in favour of all the three departments 
of the Agriculture put  together (Department of Agri culture and Cooperation,  
Department of Agric ultural Research and Educ ation and De partment of 
 98

Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisher ies) has been doubled within a single 
Plan period from R s.3242 crore in  2002-03 to Rs.6900 c rore.  The 
Committee observe that in view of the inflation and the value of money in real 
terms, the overall allocations are not ac tually being made for Agriculture to 
carry out activities under its various progammes, although it has been termed 
as a priority sector.   This can also  be gauged from the fa ct that percentage 
share of the Agriculture to Central Pl an Outlay of Government of India has  
come down from 2.84% in 2005-2006 to 2.73% in 2006-2007, of which share 
of Department of Agricu lture and Cooperation a ccounts for 1.98% in 2005-
2006 and 1.89% in 2006-2007. 
 The Committee are of the firm opini on that to meet the challenges  
faced by Agriculture Sector, the Governm ent has to reprioritize t he role for 
Department of Agric ulture and Coop eration to achieve the targeted 4%  
growth rate env isaged for agricultura l and allied sector and to help the  
farmers to compete in the WTO regime. 
 The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should be 
provided Rs.5917 crore by  Planning Commission and Mi nistry of Finance at  
the RE stage, as proposed by them at BE stage, since many o f their new  
initiatives and other progr ammes are suffering owing to lack of requisit e 
funding. The Committee further recommend that no financial cuts  should be 
imposed on the Department at RE st age f or smooth implement ation of the 
Schemes, as financ ial cuts imposed now may lead to further addition of  
miseries to Indian farmers and people eng aged in the agricultur al sector, in 
the absence of timely help. 
 99

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 On the basis of requirement to  be projected for RE 2006-2007 by  
subject matter divisions, SBEs (proposed)  will be forwarded to Ministry of  
Finance (Budget Division) an d wh ile furnishing SBEs  (proposed) th e 
recommendation of Parliament ary St anding Commit tee on Agriculture will 
also be forwarded to them emphasizin g the need to augment the budget at  
RE 2006-2007 stage for agriculture sector. 
 Reprioritization of the Role of  Depart ment of Agriculture and 
Cooperation 
 It is endeavour of the Department of  Agriculture and Cooperation to 
effectively contribute to the achievement of the 4% growth rate in agricultur e 
and allied sectors envisaged for the Tenth Plan.  Towards this end a number  
of new initiatives have been launc hed t o improve the production and  
productivity in the Agriculture Sec tor.  These, inter-alia include the schemes  
relating to National Horticulture Mission,  Micro Irrigation, National Project on 
Organic F arming, Support to State Ex tension Programmes for Extension  
Reforms, Development of Market Infr astructure Grading and Standardization  
Scheme.  These programmes have been de signed to promote diversification 
from cereals to high value crop s and ac tivities; maximize the utilization of  
scarce water resources; encourage organic farming on a large scale ; 
revitalizing and revamp the delivery of extension services; and strengthening 
the agricultural marketing infrastructure. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 100

5.3 For comments of the committee pl ease refer to Para No. 1.6 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Allocation for North Eastern States  
5.4 The Committee note that though 10%  of the total funds is invariably  
being allocated for North Eastern States but actual release is far less than 
the money allotted.   During 2004- 2005 actual release has been Rs.262.00 
crore as against the allocation of Rs.294.50 crore and during 2005-2006 only 
Rs.289.36 crore could be released against the allocation of Rs.389.00 crore. 
The Com mittee have been inf ormed that  late approval of Sc hemes, non-
submission of proposals and unspent bal ances are the reasons  for shortfall 
in the actual releas e.  The Committee also observe that there is a lack of 
financial performance appraisal system in respect of North Eastern States. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that in order to receive timely 
proposal from North Eastern States, due publicity of the Schemes should be 
given by providing more extension services in these areas.  Timely release of 
the funds should be made to this otherwise resource  starved area of the 
country.   They further desire that t he expenditure actually inc urred on the 
schemes in North Eastern States shoul d be reflected in Demands for Grants 
of the Department separately so as to  have clear cut picture of progress 
made in this regard. 
 The Committee further note t hat the Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
‘National Mission on  Bamboo Technolog y’ for North Eastern States is still 
 101

pending for final approval.    They, ther efore, desire that  this Scheme be 
implemented at the earliest, because all Members of Group of Ministers 
(GoM) including Finance Minist er have accorded their approval and only the 
CCEA sanction is required after getting PMOs approval, so that North 
Eastern States could reap the benefit of this very useful scheme. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.5 Several initiatives hav e been tak en by the Government to strengthen 
and to provide more extens ion services in the North Eastern States during  
the Tenth Five Year Plan.  A major in itiative has been the launching of a new 
scheme “Support to State Extension Programmes for Extensio n Reforms” 
during 2005-06 to make the extensi on s ystem farmer driven and farmer  
accountable by way  of new instit utional arrangements for technolog y 
dissemination in the form of an Agricultural Technology Management Agency 
(ATMA) at the district le vel to operationalize the extension reforms.  During 
the Tenth Five Year Plan,  out of 252 districts propos ed to be covered by the 
scheme in the whole country , half of the dis tricts from North East ern States 
and Jammu & Kashmir shall be covered as compared tone third of the 
districts in other States.  To facilitat e the States to understand the concept, 
implementation of the scheme and sharing of experiences among the States, 
State Level Orientation Workshops have been organiz ed by MANAGE in all 
the States including North- Eastern States.  One Kisan Call Centre located in 
Kolkata is catering to queries of farmers  from Sikkim and Tripura.  The Kis an 
Call Centre at Guwahati cover ca lls from Assam, Arunachal Prades h, 
Meghalaya, Manipur and N agaland.  Agric ulture Graduates are engaged as 
 102

Call Centr e agents to reply to the quer ies of the farmers in respective 
languages.  The Guwahati Kendra of Door darshan is telecasting a 30 minute 
daily programme on five days of the week for the benefit of the farming 
community.  Six Narrowcasting Kendras  of Doordarshan and FM  Kisan Vani 
Stations located at Itanagar (Arunacha l Pr adesh), Jorhat, Dhubri, Haflong 
and Nowgaon (all in Assam), Jowai (Meghalaya), Lunglei (Mizoram), 
Mokokchung (Nagaland), Ka ilashahr and Belonia ( both in Tripura) are 
disseminating suitable information on various Government schemes and 
programmes widely among the farming comm unity.  The Kisan Call Centre 
No. 1551 – is being publiciz ed extensively through t hese programmes.  An 
Extension Education Inst itute set up at Jorhat (Assam) in 1987 has been 
providing training support at the regional level, to middle level functionaries of 
the State Governments.  Moreover, two training c enters in Assam and 
Manipur are imparting trai ning to agriculture graduates to enable them to set 
up viable agri-clinics  and agri-business c enters for providing extension 
services to farmers.  For giving wide p ublicity of the schemes of the 
Government, an Agri-Expo 2006 was org anized at Dimapur, Nagaland, from 
27th to 31st March 2006. 
 Every effort is made by the Govern ment to ensure timely release of 
funds in respect of various schemes being implemented in the North Eastern 
Region.  The matter relating to reflection of actual expenditure on schemes in 
the NER in the Demands for Grants has  been taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance and reply is s till awaited.  The reply/observation received from that 
Ministry would be intimated to the Committee. 
 103

 Regarding the National Mission on Bamboo Technology it is hereby 
informed that the Cabinet Commi ttee on Economic Affairs (CCEA)  
considered the Note for CCEA on 18th May 2006 and decided that, in the first 
instance, the Group of Minist ers (GoM ) consisting of the Minister for 
Agriculture, Minister f or Environment  & F orests, Minister for Science &  
Technology and Deputy Chairman, Plan ning Commission may consider the 
matter.  The matter will be considered by the GoM very soon. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
5.6 For comments of the committee pl ease refer to Para No. 1.9 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Revamping of Cooperatives 
5.7 The Com mittee note with diss atisfaction that ther e has been gross 
under-utilisation of the funds und er cooperation division during the last a few 
years.    D uring 2003-2004, only  Rs.42.36 crore could be spent as agains t 
the allocation of Rs.70.00 crore B udget Estimates and in 2004-2005 also  
Rs.66.17 crore were spent in  spite of an allocation of Rs.74.17 crore.   The 
main reas ons as  told to the Committee are uns pent balanc es with th e 
Implementing agenc ies and non-approval  of Schemes.   The Committee 
desire that  the Government sho uld fully ut ilise Rs.10 0 crore allocated for 
2006-2007 and ask  for enhanc ed allocation at RE stage because as the  
pending Schemes have been approved now, the amount of Rs.100 crore is 
not sufficient enough to implement all the Schemes of Cooperative Sector. 
 104

 The Committee are at a loss to notic e the deterioratin g conditions of 
the cooper atives in India.  The Report  of the Task  Force headed by  Shri 
Jagdish Capoor on revamping of cooperatives was received by the 
Government in July 2000.  The Task Fo rce under the Chairmanship  of Prof. 
A. Vaidyanathan,  to suggest measures for revival of rural cooperative  cred it 
institutions, has also submitted its report in respect of Short-term Cooperative 
Credit Structure and exam ination of the  long term cooperative credit 
structure is in process. Meanwhile, the cooperatives are in complete disarray, 
with the result the financia l position of cooperatives, which are backbone of  
agriculture, is going down from bad to wor se.   Most of t he Cooperatives in 
India are in shambles being financia lly and structurally weak.   The 
Committee feel that unless ur gent steps are taken to arrest this decline, the 
Cooperatives cannot perform effectively in making av ailable the credit and 
other requirement of the farmers.  They, therefore, recommend that since the 
scope of the cooperatives in our country is very wide, so urgent steps should 
be taken for their revival by impl ementing the rec ommendations of the 
Capoor Committee and A. Vaidy anathan Committee in letter and spirit at the 
earliest. 
 The Com mittee have experienced that sometimes the default ers in 
repayment of loans manipul ate to become the Member  of the Executive of  
Cooperative Societies and then misuse thei r position in not payin g their loan 
on time.   The Committee, therefor e, recommend that the Government  
should ensure that no defaulter is  included/elec ted to the executiv e 
 105

committee of the cooperatives  so that  the cooper atives are saved from 
further becoming financially weak and corrupt. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
5.8 The schemes of the Cooperation Division have be en restructured by 
merging the on-going schem es implem ented during the 9 th P lan and 
incorporating new com ponents.  The re-structu red scheme on Cooperativ e 
Education and Training has been approv ed during January, 2005 and the 
restructured scheme of Assistance  to NCDC programmes for Cooperative 
Development has been appr oved by the competent authority for 
implementation during 10 th Plan on 16.03.2005.  Si nce the restructured 
schemes were cleared by  CCEA at  th e feg end of 2004- 05, therefore, 
allocations were reduced at the RE stage.  However, there i s no under 
utilization of the f unds during 2 005-06.  T he funds  k ept at RE stage were  
almost fully utilized during 2005-06. 
 As far as full utilization of allocat ion in the c urrent year i.e. 2006-07 is  
concerned, we will convey the desire  of the Lok Sabha Standing Committee 
to the implementing agencies  and it can be ass ured on the basis of 
expenditure figure of 2005-06 that the budget earmarked for 2006-07 would 
be utilized fully.  Regar ding enhanced  allocation at RE stage we shall 
propose for enhanced budgetary allocation in accordance with the demand 
and the pr ogress of utilizat ion by the Co operative Organizations fall un der 
the ambit of Cooperation Division. 
 Government of India constituted a Task Force under  the 
Chairmanship of Prof. A. Vaidy anathan in August 2004, for suggesting 
 106

measures for revival of cooperative cr edit institutions.  The Task Force ha s 
submitted its Report in respect of shor t term cooperative credit s tructure and 
recommended a financial package of Rs.14,839 crore for the short term rural 
credit co-operative institutions.  Th e pack age cov ers accumulat ed losses, 
unpaid inv oked guar antees, receivables from  State Governments, return of 
share capital to State Government s, Human Resources Development,  
conduct of special audits, computerization, implementation costs, etc. 
 Based on the consensus arrived at  with State Governments and other 
stakeholders on the recommendations made by the Task Force, Government 
has approv ed the pac kage for revival of  the Short-term Rural Cooperativ e 
Credit Structure involving financ ial assi stance of Rs.13,596 crore.  The 
provision of financial assistanc e under  t he package has been link ed to 
reforms in the cooperative sector.  Th e same Task Force has been assigned 
the mandate for suggesting revival package for the Long Term Cooperativ e 
Credit Structure.  Government will initiate steps for reviving Long-term 
Cooperative Credit St ructure after receiv ing the report of the Task Force in 
this regard. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
5.9 For comments of the committee pl ease refer to Para No. 1.12 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Modified National Crop Insurance Scheme 
 
 107

5.10 The Committee note that taking  cognizance of  certain 
shortcomings/limitations like ‘unit’ area of insu rance, calculation of 
guaranteed income, low indemnity level,  delay in settlement of insurance  
claims etc., a Modified National Agricu ltural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) has 
been prepared by the Ministry of Ag riculture and submitted to Planning 
Commission for appr oval in February 200 5.  Even after 14 months, the 
Planning Commission has not been able to approve it, which speak s 
volumes of  disinterest and c allous atti tude shown towards the farmers of 
India who never get remuner ative price of t heir crop when compared to the 
inputs he uses in growing them.  Duri ng the evidence when repr esentatives 
of Planning Commission and Department of Agricult ure & Cooperation wer e 
called together, Secretary, DAC, in formed the Committee that Plannin g 
Commission has returned the MNAIS with certain obs ervations on 20 th April 
2006 v iz (i) Shifting of NAIS to non- Plan side, (ii) Planning Co mmission 
favours funding only the overhead component of costs of Modified NAIS such 
as undertaking crop cutting experiments and threshold yield determination for 
major crops, (iii) Pla nning Co mmission also sup ports implementation of  
proposed MNAIS on pilot bas is in district s/States which have requisite data 
collection capabilit y/infrastructure for obtaining the feedback.  The 
representative of Department submitted that these contradictory observations 
are harsh blow to their efforts to brin g more farmers under the umbrella of  
insurance and Department is   unable to interpret th eir observations.  The 
representative of the Pl anning Commission informed the Committee that in 
view of non-availability of data requi red to have actuarial calc ulations, and 
 108

there being need to have subsidy on the premium, this cannot  be a Plan 
activity and it should come under Non-Plan .  Therefore, in its totality, the 
Scheme will not get through the Planning  Commission.  He further testified 
emphatically that he was reflecting the views of the whole inter nal Planning 
Commission, namely Member Agriculture, the Deputy Chairman and all other 
Members in it. 
 The Committee, while taking serious note of the issue, feel that how 
come an ongoing Sc heme whic h is very  much being implementated as a 
Plan Sc heme since, 2000, if approached for some modifications, can be 
categorized under non-plan activity.  Moreover, the modifications a re 
suggested in view of covering more  farmers and crops, the proposal to 
implement it on pilot basis  defeat the very  purpose of it.  The Committee,  
therefore, desire that the matter should immediately be resolved and may be 
taken up at Cabinet level, if required.  They feel that the further delay in the 
issue means playing the havoc with the lives of farmers, who are the 
backbone of our country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.11 As the is sues raised by the Committee under t he abov esaid 
recommendation relate to the Planning Commission, this Department vide 
O.M. dated 5th June, 2006 and subsequent reminders dated 21 st June and 
12th July, 2006 sought  the views/comm ents of Planning Commission on the 
recommendation.  The Planning Co mmission vide their letter dated the 19 th 
June, 2006 has informed that they are taking up the matter with the Ministry 
 109

of Finance.  The Ministry of Finance has already communicated their views in 
the matter to the Planning Commission.  The Ministry of Finance is of the 
view that the scheme should be cont inued as a Plan Scheme during the pilot  
period constant monitoring and evalua tion on c ompletion to assess the 
replicability of the scheme on a larger scale.  A final reply from the Planning 
Commission is awaited. 
 In the meantime, this Department  has finalized the Memorandum for 
the Expenditure Finance Committee on th e Modified Nation al Agricultural  
Insurance Schemes (MNAIS) and circulated amongst the appraisal agencies 
for their comments.  The com ments of  the Departments/agencies except 
Planning Commission have been received.   After receiving the comments of 
Planning Commission, Me morandum on MNAIS will be submit ted for the 
consideration of EF C.  Thereafter, note for the cons ideration of Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) will be submitted. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
5.12 For comments of the committee pl ease refer to Para No. 1.15 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
Agri-Clinics and Agri business Centres 
5.13 The Committee in their earlier Reports had recommended to provide 
25% subsidy under  the Schem e of Establ ishment of Agri-clinic s and Agri  
Business Centres by  Agricu lture Graduates.   They   are informed that the 
 110

Scheme is  under implementat ion with only the training component, as i n 
March 2004,   Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance did not agree to 
the subsidy component.   Again, when the matter was taken up with Planning 
Commission in October, 2004, as per the Committee’s recommendation, they 
have accorded ‘in principle’ approval in January 200 6.    The Committee 
recommend that now the 25% subsid y component of the Scheme should 
also be c leared at the earliest so that  more agriculture graduates could set  
up their ventures which in turn is benef icial for the agrarian econ omy of the 
country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.14 The meeting of the Expenditure  Finance Committee (EFC) held on 5 th 
June, 2006 has recommended inclus ion of subsidy component  under the 
scheme for the X Plan as follows: 
(i) Credit linked back-ended capital subs idy @ 25% of the capital cos t of 
the project funded through bank loan.  This subsidy would be 33.33% 
in respect of candidates belon ging to SC, ST, Women and other 
disadvantaged section and those from North-Eastern and Hill States. 
(ii) Full interest subsidy for the first two years of the project. 
(iii) Approval of the Competent Authority on the EFC reco mmendations is 
being obtained. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
5.15 For comments of the committee pl ease refer to Para No. 1.33 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
 111

Recommendation No. 15 
 
Kisan Call Centres 
5.16 The Com mittee are satisfied to not e that with a v iew to solv ing the 
queries of  farmers and diss eminate information, the Government has 
provided the facility of Kisan Call C entres with toll free number 1551 in 21 
languages, wherein about 13 lakh call s have been received since it s 
inception in January,  2004.    T he Committee feel that this medium can be 
used as knowledge centre to know about t he actual needs of the farmers of 
the country.   The Committee desire the Government to make an assessment 
study to know the s atisfaction level of the queries  made by t he farmers.   
They, therefore, recommend that an evaluation study should be conducted to 
know the n umber of farmers utilizing this fa cility and their satisfa ction leve l 
with regard to their queries.  Some agriculture scientists should be deputed 
on fixed days, to these centres t o solve the farmer’s queries on t he spot and 
they are not asked to ring up again som e day or that the answer to their 
queries will be sent in due cours e.  The farmers do not have that much time 
to wait and work.  They require the hel p immediately so t hat they can take 
the quick decision about sowing of crops, using fertilizers or pesticides for a 
particular crop. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.17 An impact evaluation study of t he Kisan Call Centres (KCCs) scheme, 
has been awarded to Administrative  Staff College of India (ASCI ), 
Hyderabad, and the s tudy is underway.  Th e study is likely to be completed 
 112

by September 2006.  One of the major mandates of the study is  to find out  
the efficacy of Kisan Call Centres to meet the information needs of farming 
community. 
With regard to the deputation of so me agriculture scientists on fixed 
days to these centers, to solve the farmer’s queries on the spot, it i s 
submitted that Agriculture Graduates  are being engaged as Kisan Call  
Centre Agents at Level – I.  These agents give farmers suitable replie s 
towards solving their problems.  The queries and replies are also stored in a 
computerized databas e.  In case a Kis an Call Centre agent is not able to 
answer the query made by the farmer, t he call is transferred on a conference 
call mode to a identified Level-II Agricu ltural Expert for giving appropriate 
reply on line.  These experts belong to  State Agriculture Univ ersity, ICAR 
Institutes which inc lude Agr icultural Scientists or the State Department of 
Agriculture/Horticulture/Allied Sec tor, of  the State from where the farmer is 
calling.  The services of the Kisan Ca ll Centre are provided to the farmers on 
line and the farmers are not asked to ring-up some other day. 
As already  indicated in Repl y to Recommendation No. 13,  Mass 
Media, namely Radio and TV, is  also being used to disseminate agricultural  
information to farmers. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
5.18 For comments of the committee pl ease refer to Para No. 1.36 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
NEW DELHI;     PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
08  March, 2007                   Chairman, 
17 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on Agriculture 
 113

APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE S IXTH SITTIN G OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICUL TURE HELD ON THURS DAY, THE  8 TH MARCH, 2007 AT 
1500 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, GROUND FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT 
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1500 HRS TO 1630 HRS 
                                                                                   
 
PRESENT 
 
       Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
2. Shri  Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri   Khagen Das 
4. Shri  Deepender Singh Hooda 
5. Shri  Hari Rama Jogaiah 
6. Shri  M.P.Veerendra Kumar 
7. Shri  Baleshwar Yadav 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
8. Shri Harish Rawat 
9. Shri Vikram Verma 
10. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed  
11. Shri Datta Meghe 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Director 
3. Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Deputy  Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita  Walia   -  Under Secretary 
 
 114

At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee and r equested th em to take up the f ollowing Mem oranda on draf t 
Action Taken Reports on  De mands for Gr ants (2006-07) of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Ministry of Food Proce ssing Industries for consideration and 
adoption: 
(1) Memorandum No. 2 regarding 23 rd  Action Taken Report on reco mmendations 
contained in the 18 th Report on Dem ands for Grants (2006-07) in respect of 
Ministry of Agriculture (Deptt. of Agriculture and Co-operation) 
 
(2) Memorandum No. 3 regarding 2 4th Action Taken Report on reco mmendations 
contained in the 19 h Repo rt on Demands for Grants (2006-0 7) i n respect of 
Ministry of Agriculture (Deptt. of Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
(3) Memorandum No. 4 regarding 2 5th Action Taken Report on reco mmendations 
contained in the 20 th Report on Dem ands for Grants (2006-07) in respect of 
Ministry of Agriculture (Deptt. of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) 
 
(4) Memorandum No. 5 regarding 26 th Action Taken Report on reco mmendations 
contained in the 21 st  Rep ort on Demands for Grants (2006-0 7) in respect of 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2 The Committee then considered and adopted the dr aft Action Taken Reports 
with minor additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, authorized the Chairman to present the above-
mentioned Reports to the House on a date and time convenient to him. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 115

 116
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 18TH REPORT 
OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE  
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations              19 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
Accepted by the Government 
Serial Nos. 3, 5, 7, 8, 13, 17 and 18       
T o t a l            7  
Percentage                37% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observa tions which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
Nil 
T o t a l           0  
Percentage                0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Serial Nos. 9, 10, 11, 12, 16 & 19 
T o t a l           6  
P e r c e n t a g e             3 1 . 5 %  
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final replies 
 of the Government are still awaited 
 Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 14 & 15 
 T o t a l           6  
 P e r c e n t a g e             3 1 . 5 %  
 