STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2006-07) 
                 
         
22 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION) 
         
         
                 
THE SEEDS BILL, 2004 
 
         
        
         
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
  
         
         
              
         
             
  
         
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
OCTOBER, 2006/ASVINA, 1928 (Saka) 

TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2006-07) 
          
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION) 
         
THE SEEDS BILL, 2004 
 
         
         
         
Presented to Lok Sabha on __________________________ 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on _____________________________ 
  
                 
 
  
         
        LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
                 
OCTOBER, 2006/ASVINA, 1928 (Saka) 
 
 i

 
COA No.  187 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
                 
            
 
           
 
 
         
        © 2006 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  ( Tenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ii

<CONTENTS> 
                   P AGE 
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
  INTRODUCTION                    (vi) 
 
  REPORT       PART - I   An Overview       1 
                PART - II                           Clause-Wise Analysis   1 2 
   
 
     APPENDICES 
 
 APPENDIX  I Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the  Committee(2004-05)  
   held on 17th Feb, 2005 
 
 APPENDIX  II Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting  of the Committee (2004-05)  
   held on  21st June, 2005 
 
APPENDIX  III Minutes of Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee (2005-06) held  
on 19th June, 2006 
 
APPENDIX IV Minutes of Nineteenth Sitting of the Committee (2005-06) held   
   on 20th June, 2006 
 
APPENDIX V  Minutes of Twentieth Sitting of the Committee (2005-06) held   
   on 03rd  July, 2006 
 
APPENDIX VI Minutes of Twenty First Sitting of the Committee (2005-06) held   
   on 18th July, 2006 
 
APPENDIX VII        Minutes of Twenty Third Sitting of the Committee (2005-06) held   
   on 26th July, 2006 
 
APPENDIX VIII Minutes of Second Sitting of the Committee (2006-07) held   
   on 26th Sep, 2006 
 
  
ANNEXURE  The Seeds Bill, 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 iii

COMPOSITION  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
FOR THE YEAR – 2005-06 
                                                                    
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri  Kuldeep Bishnoi 
6. Shri Khagen Das 
7. Shri  Dharmendra 
8. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
9. Shri Raghunath Jha 
10. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan  
11. Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Patil Nilangekar 
12. Shri Sippiparai Ravichandran  
13. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
14. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
15. Shri Harihar Swain 
16. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
17      Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
18      Shri Anil Basu 
19.     Shri Munshi Ram 
20.     Shri Rajesh Verma 
21.    Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Sm t. Mohsina Kidwai 
23.    Shri Harish Rawat 
24.   Dr. M.S.Gill 
25. Shri  Pyarelal Khandelwal 
26. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
27. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28. Shri  Bhagwati Singh 
29. Shri Datta Meghe 
30.         Shri Anantrao Joshi 
31. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Sh. N.K. Sapra  -    Joint Secretary 
2.  Sh. A.K. Singh  -               Joint Secretary 
3. Sh. Devender Singh  -    Director 
4.  Sh. Hardev Singh  -    Deputy Secretary 
5.  Sh. N.S. Hooda  -    Under Secretary 
6.  Ms. Amita Walia  -               Committee Officer 
 
 iv

COMPOSITION  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
FOR THE YEAR – 2006-07 
                                                  
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
         MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ranen Barman 
3. Shri Anil Basu  
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
6. Shri  Kuldeep Bishnoi 
7. Shri Khagen Das 
8. Shri  Dharmendra 
9. Shri GadakhTukaram Gangadhar 
10. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
11. Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
12. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
13. Shri  Prabodh Panda 
14. Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Patil Nilangekar 
15. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
16. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
17. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
18. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
19. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
20. Shri Baleshwar Yadav    
21. Smt. Kalpana  Ramesh Narhire 
 
     RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Harish Rawat 
23. Dr. M.S.Gill 
24. Sm t. Mohsina Kidwai 
25. Shri Vikram Verma 
26. Shri  Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28. Shri Datta Meghe 
29. Shri  Debabrata Biswas 
30.Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
30. Sh. M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.   Sh. S.K. Sharma   -    Addl. Secretary 
2.  Sh. A.K. Singh  -               Joint Secretary 
3.  Sh. Hardev Singh  -    Deputy Secretary 
4.  Sh. N.S. Hooda  -    Under Secretary 
5.  Ms. Amita Walia  -    Committee Officer 
 v

INTRODUCTION 
  
I, the Chairman, Standing Committ ee on Agricult ure having been 
authorized by the Committee to  present the report on their behalf, present this  
Twenty Se cond Rep ort (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘The See ds Bill, 20 04’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Agricult ure (Department of Agric ulture and Co-
operation). 
 
2. One of the functions of the Standing Committee on  Agriculture  as laid  
down in Rule 331 E (1) (b) of ‘The Rule s of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha’ is  to ex amine such Bills pertai ning to t he conc erned 
Ministries/Departments as are referred to the Committee by the Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha or the Speaker, as the case may be, and m ake Re port thereon.  In 
pursuance of this Rule, Honourable Speak er referred ‘The Seeds Bill, 2004’ t o 
the Committee on 16 th December 2004 for examin ation and Report.   The 
Committee decided to know the views of various institutions/experts in the field to 
enable the Members to have an in-depth k nowledge about various clauses of the 
Bill and therefore called for written me moranda from the Agri cultural Research 
Institutions, Agricultural Universities, National and State level Seed Corporations, 
private Seed Companies, scientists, expe rts, farmers’ organizations, NGOs and 
other interest groups or individual s. A Press Communiqué was issued for  
publication in the National  and regional newspapers an d All India Radio and 
Doordarshan’s National as  well as Regional Channel s.  Out of these the 
Committee heard the views of  the following experts/or ganizations and discussed 
with them various provisions of the Bill: 
 
 
1. Dr. Vandana Shiva  - Director, Navdanya, New Delhi 
2. Dr. Suman Sahai  - Convenor, The Gene Campaign, New    
      D elhi 
 
All India Kissan Sabha (CPM), New Delhi  
 
3. Sh. S. Ramachandran Pillai - President, AIKS 
 
4. Sh. K. Varadharajan  - General Secretary, AIKS 
 
All India Kissan Sabha (CPI), New Delhi  
 
5. Sh. Kolli Nageswara Rao - General Secretary,Andhra Pradesh  
Ryotu Sangham 
 
6. Mr. Chittar Singh  - Vice President, UP Kissan Sabha 
Member, All India Kissan Sabha 
National Council 
 vi

 
 
BHARAT KRISHAK SAMAJ, NEW DELHI 
 
7. Dr. Krishan Bir Chaudhary - Executive Chairman Bharat Krishak Samaj 
 
 
ASSOCIATION OF SEED INDUSTRY, MUMBAI 
 
8. Shri Nandkishor Kagliwal - Chairman, Nath Seeds Limited  
9. Shri Raju Barwale  - MD, Maharashtra Hybrid Seeds Company  
      L td.  
10. Shri M. Ramasami  - MD, Rasi Seeds Pvt. Ltd.   
11. Dr.Arvind Kapur  - MD, Numhems Seeds India Pvt. Ltd. 
12. Dr. Paresh Verma  - Director-Research, Bioseed Research India  
      P vt Ltd. 
13. Shri R.S.Arora   - MD, Century Seeds Pvt. Ltd. 
14. Shri R.K.Sinha  - Executive Director, Association of Seed  
      Industry and All India Crop Biotechnology. 
 
 
SHETKARI SANGTANA, PUNE 
 
15. Dr. Manavendra Kachole - Member of the Executive Committee 
16. Shri Nikhade   - Member of the Executive Committee 
17. Shri Govind Joshi  - Member of the Executive Committee 
 
3. In all the Committee held Eight  Sitti ngs for detailed examinations of the 
Bill.  The sittings were held on 17 Feb, 2005, 21 June, 2005, 19 June 2006, 20 th 
June, 2006, 03rd July, 2006, 18th July, 2006, 26th July, 2006 and 26th Sep, 2006. 
The Com mittee took oral evidence of t he representatives of the Ministries of 
Agriculture, Law, Just ice and Company Af fairs on 17 th Feb, 2005, 21 st J une, 
2005, 18th May, 2006 and 26 th July, 2006.  The Committee expre ss their thanks  
to the experts/NGOs/farme rs/organizations and seed industry, w ho gave their  
valuable s uggestions/views to enable t he Committee to arrive at consens ual 
decisions on various  clauses of the Bi ll.  The Committee also express their  
thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and 
Co-operation) and Ministry  of Law, Chair man of PPV&FR Aut hority for placin g 
before them the material a nd information desired by t he Committee from time to  
time in connection with the examination of the Bill. 
 
 vii

 viii
4. The Committee appreciate the strenuous efforts put in by the Officers and 
staff of Committee Secretariat in connection with the examinati on of the Bill and 
drafting an excellent Report. 
 
5. The Committee considered and adopt ed the Report at their sitting held on 
26th September, 2006. 
 
 
New Delhi;                 Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
26 Sep, 2006                             Chairman 
04 Asvina, 1928 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
                       
 
 

 1
REPORT 
PART – I 
 
 AN OVERVIEW 
 
1. The seed is the most important det erminant of agricultural production.  
The organized seed programme in India is four decades old which began with 
the implementation of ‘The Seeds Ac t, 1966.’  A sustai ned increase in 
agricultural production and producti vity has become dependent on the 
development of new and improved variet ies of crops and an efficient system 
for supply of quality seeds to farmers.   
 
2. ‘The Seeds Act, 1966’ regulates only notified kinds and varieties of 
seeds. It became operational with the enac tment of the Seeds Rules in 1968.  
Amendments to the Seeds Act and Rule s were introduced in 1972, 1973, 
1974 and 1981.  The Seeds (Control) Order, 1983, which was an order issued 
under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, established a regulatory 
framework for controlling t he distribution and supply of  seeds to farmers.  
Owing to litigation, howe ver, the Seeds (Control ) Order became enforceable 
only from July 1994.  In October 1988, the Government of India announced 
the ‘New Policy on Seed Development’ with the objective of making the best 
planting material anywhere in the worl d available to Indian farmers for 
increasing productivity and to encourage the growth of export in seeds. 
According to the Government a need was felt to substantially revise the 
existing seeds legislation and policy.   
 
3. ‘The Seeds Bill, 2004’ which was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 
9.12.2004, seeks to repeal and replace ‘The Seeds Act, 1966’.  It was referred 
to the Standing Committee on Agricult ure on 16.12.2004 for examination and 
Report.  The Bill is covered under the C onstitution of India, Seventh Schedule 
Entry 41 & 42 of the ‘Union List’ which relate to ‘trade and commerce with 
foreign countries, import and export acro ss customs frontiers’, etc and inter-
State trade and commerce.  It is also covered under Entry 33 of the 
Concurrent List, which inter-alia covers, ‘Trade and Commerce in, and the 
production, supply and distribution of f ood stuff, including ed ible oilseeds and 
oils, cattle fodder, raw cotton whether  ginned or un-ginned, and cotton seed 
and raw jute’. 
 
4. Numerous changes have taken plac e in the national and international 
environment since the enactment of the existing seeds legislation.  The 
plateauing of agricultural growth dur ing the nineties has necessitated new 
strategies to ensure food security.  Pr ovision of good quality seeds to the 
Indian farmer is a key factor in order to  attain the objective of ‘doubling food 
production in ten years’. A quantum incr ease in production can be affected by 
enhancing Seed Replacement Rate (SRR) of various crops or, in other words, 
by increasing the use of quality seeds  in comparison with farmers’ saved 

 2
seeds.  According to the Government, this would require a vastly expanded 
role for the private seed industry.  T he creation of a facilitative climate for 
growth of the seed industry, boosti ng of exports and encouragement of 
imports of useful germplasm lies at the core of the ag riculture strategy in the 
new Millennium.   
  
5. The liberalized climate for investment led to vigorous participation by 
the private sector in the s eed industry.  The rapid grow th of the private sector 
also raised issues relating to co llaboration between t he public research 
system and the private seed industry.  This raised issues regarding the 
relative roles that should be assigned to the public sector  and private sector, 
including trans-national corporations in  the seed sector.  To resolve these 
issues the Department of Agriculture and Co-operation (DAC) constitute a 
Seed Policy Review Group under the chairm anship of Dr. M.V.  Rao, the then 
Vice Chancellor of Andhra Pradesh Agricultural Univ ersity to examine the 
changes required in the seed sector  in the context of the changing 
environment.  The principal recommendati ons of the Review Group were as 
under: 
 
• Compulsory registration of varieties be introduced 
• Amalgamation of Seeds (Control) Or der with the provisions of Seeds 
Act be effected. 
• Self-certification by Seed Producing Agencies be provided. 
• Accreditation of private Seed Testing Laboratories be promoted. 
• Revamping Central Seed Committee. 
• Increase in penalties for offences. 
• Review of labeling of certification standards. 
 
6. A Core group constituted under the Chairmanship of Additional 
Secretary, Department of Agricu lture & Co-operation, studied the 
recommendations of the Seed Policy Revi ew Group.  Subsequently, a small 
Working Group was set up under the Join t Secretary (Seeds), with technical 
back-up, to detail the implementation process. 
 
7. The Government have info rmed the Committee that the 
recommendations of the Seed Policy Re view Group form the basis of the 
seed sector reforms undertaken by the Department of Agriculture Co-
operation.  The draft Seeds Bill, 2004 has been prepared on the basis of the 
recommendations of the Seed Policy Re view Group and consultations with 
seed experts and various stakeholders. 
 
8. A National Symposium was or ganized in September 1999 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (A&C) to elic it the views of stake-holders like the 
Indian Council of Agricultur e Research institutions, universities, national and 
state level seeds corporations, privat e seed companies, scientists, experts, 
farmers group, Non Governmental Or ganizations and St ate Governments 
before finalizing the legislative and administrative changes. 

 3
 
9. According to the Government, some  of the deficiencies in the existing 
seed legislation are as enumerated below:   
 
• Present Seeds Act regulates only notified kind and va rieties and does 
not touch non-notified varieties, so called research hybrid varieties, 
etc.; 
• Central Seeds Committee and Central Seeds Certification Board are 
not adequately empowered to effectively regulate seed production and 
distribution; 
• Green manure seeds, commercial crops, plantation crops, and the like 
are not covered; 
• Registration of seeds is not compulsory; 
• No provision is available to regul ate the quality of seeds of non-food 
crops; 
• No provision of self-certification and accreditation of private seed 
testing laboratories; 
• No provision for regulation of transgenic materials; 
• Definition for “farmers’ exemption” is ambiguous; 
• Penalties for infringement are very mild. 
 
10. Since the enactment of the 1966 Seeds Act, far-reaching changes 
have occurred in the agriculture and horticulture areas with crop diversification 
and biotechnology emerging as vital element s of such change.  Building of a 
conducive environment for enhanced investment in research and 
development and quality seed production including application of frontier 
sciences are sought to be established under the present Seeds Bill, 2004. 
 
11. According to the Stat ement of Objects and Reas ons of the Seeds Bill, 
2004, the proposed legislation inter-alia provides for the following changes; 
 
(i) regulation of seeds and planting materi al of all agricultural, horticultural, 
plantation, crops so as to ensure av ailability of true to type seeds to 
Indian farmers; 
(ii) provisions for constitution of a separate Registration Sub-Committee of 
the Committee to look after the va rious registration aspects and 
maintenance of a National Register of seeds of kinds and varieties. 
(iii) Check on the sale of spurious and poor quality seed and provision for 
compensation to farmer. 
(iv) provision of registration of seed  producers, seed producing units, seed 
dealers and horticulture nurseries; 
(v) regulation of sale of seeds and increase in the pr oportion of availability 
of quality seed for sowing; 
(vi) increase in the seed replacement rate resulting in higher productivity; 
(vii) simplification of pr ocedures and placing a more efficient regulatory 
mechanism; 

 4
(viii) increased private participation in seed production, distribution, 
certification and seed testing; 
(ix) regulation of import and sale of transgenic seed and planting material; 
(x) liberalised import of  seed and planting material s compatible with World 
Trade Organisation (WTO) commitments; 
(xi) provision for right of farmers for exemption from regi stration in certain 
cases. 
 
12. The expected benefits from the re vised seed legislation have been 
stated as follows: 
 
• Availability of true to type seeds to Indian farmers; 
• Check on sale of spurious and poor quality seed; 
• Increase in the proportion of quality seed available for sowing; 
• Increase in the seed replacement rate resulting in higher productivity; 
• Simplification of procedures and more efficient regulation; 
• Revamping of Central Seed Committee as a permanent body for 
effective monitoring of the s eed development programme in the 
country; 
• Increased private participation in seed production, distribution, 
certification and seed testing; 
• Regulation of import and sale of transgenic seed and planting material; 
• Liberalised import of seeds and planting materials compatible with 
WTO commitments; 
• Provision of farmers’ exemption from registration, etc. 
  
13. The seed legislation also seeks to address issues regarding sale of 
newly developed material while keeping in tact the interest of the farmers and 
sustainability of Indian agriculture.  The most im portant feature stated in the 
new Bill is that it explic itly protects and recognises the traditional rights of 
farmers to produce, sell and exchange seeds, and non-requirement of them to 
register their varieties under the proposed Bill.   
 
14.  An act for establishment of an e ffective system for pr otection of plant 
varieties, the rights of farmers and plant breeders and to encourage the 
development of new varieties of plant s, known as ‘The Protection of Plant 
Varieties and Farmers Rights Act, 2001’ (PPV&FR Act), already exists.  
 
15. The Committee, before going into  detailed examination of the Bill 
invited written memoranda from Agricultural Rese arch Institutions and 
Universities, National and State level Seeds Corporations , Private Seed 
Companies, Scientists, Experts, Farme rs’ Organisations, NGOs and other 
interested groups/individuals their view s/suggestions/comments on the Bill.   
70 memoranda were received, based on wh ich representatives from seven 
Organizations were called in to give their expert comments on various clauses  

 5
of the Bill.  The experts’  views on various clauses have immensely helped the 
Committee to understand the intr icacies of the contentious  issues involved in 
various clauses and to arrive at consensual recommendations. 
 
16. The Committee have gone through the Bill threadbare and clause-wise 
comments have been given in Part-II of th is Report.  The clauses which have 
not been covered/commented upon in the Report are found to be in order.  
However, some of the important re commendations of the Committee which 
have far reaching effects on the implem entation of The Seed Bill have been 
summarised hereunder. 
 
17. The Committee feel that the S eed legislation should address the 
issue of promoting sale of newly developed kinds or varieties of seeds 
and at the same time ensure that the interest of the farmer and the 
sustainability of Indian agriculture are not jeopardized. The Seed Bill 
should not undermine the farmers/primary conserver friendly provisions 
of the Plant Protection of Variet ies and Farmers Rights Act 2001 and 
Bio-diversity Act, 2002.  It should not also undermine the existing 
procedure for the assessment and release of genetically modified crop 
varieties.  Its main aim should be to strengthen the integrated growth of 
farmers and commercial seed systems,  so that every farmer has access 
to high quality seed/planting material at the right time and place and at 
appropriate prices.  The Committee strongly recommend that the 
‘PPV&FR Act, 2001’ should be made  fully operative first, before 
passing/implementing ‘The Seeds Bill, 2004’ so as to ensure the 
harmony between the two. 
 
18. The Committee note that Clause 43 begins with a positive note by 
stating that farmers wi ll continue to exercise all rights including the 
rights to save, use, exchange, share or sale his farm seeds and planting 

 6
material, but in the same line the pos itive gesture has been qualified by 
a negative rider which states that the farmers whose seeds do not 
conform to the minimum limit of germination, physical purity and 
genetic purity prescribed under sub-clauses (a) and (b) of section 6 of 
the Bill would constitute a violation of the Act.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that this provision will restrict the rights of the farmer.  
The Committee recommend that the words, ‘or which does not conform 
to the minimum limit of germinati on, physical purity, genetic purity 
prescribed under Clause (a) or Clause (b) of section 6’ should be deleted 
from Clause 43 (1) so that the rights of the farmer are not infringed and 
the provision of the new Seed B ill is made consistent with the 
corresponding provision in the PPV&FR Act 2001. 
The Committee further recommend that Clause 43, which exempts 
the farmers from registration, shoul d come in the beginning of the Bill 
and may be placed just after Clause 1 (3) so as to avoid any confusion 
about the registration of the farmers’ seeds. 
 
19. There is a growing dependency of farmers on seed market 
dominated by Private seed companies for their seed requirements, 
which are out to make more and more profits at the expense of farmers.  
Unscrupulous trading in seed by supplying spurious, substandard and 
misbranded seed, which is going unchec ked, more so in private sector, 
can be curbed by incorporating sp ecific provisions in the Bill.  The 
Committee feel that the public sector should be encouraged to play the 
main role in the seed sector and it should not be marginalized for 
commercial gains of private seed industry. 

 7
Private participation in seed certification and seed testing could 
bring in serious elements of conflict of interest and defeat the objectives 
of the Government by marginalizing the farmers who practise traditional 
systems of exchange and sale of seeds.  For instance, under the new 
Seeds Bill 2004, individuals and or ganizations are proposed to be 
accredited for seed certification under Clause 27 and they will be 
competing with the already existing St ate Seed Certifi cation Agencies.  
Increasing private participation in seed production, dist ribution as well 
as certification and seed testing is bound to bring in conflict of interest 
where the producer becomes the judge to award certificate to himself for 
minimum limit of germin ation, genetic and phys ical purity of the seeds 
he produces.  The Committee observe that the provision of self-
certification will upset the seed market with a high risk to the consumers 
and farmers as well, because it will encourage the producers to 
introduce such seed varieties into the market which have not yet been 
tested by Government approved Labs/Agencies. The Committee 
strongly recommend that the provisi on of self-certification in the Bill 
should be dispensed with. 
  
20. The powers of the Central Seed  Committee given in the Bill are 
very comprehensive, yet there is no mention of price regulation of seeds 
either by the Central Seed Committ ee or State levels Committee or by 
any other agency/authority.  The Co mmittee feel that the Seed Company 
will be getting exclusive, perpetua l and monopolistic rights over the 
seed prices. The Committee do not ag ree with the views expressed by 
the Government that when most of the sectors of the economy are 

 8
opening up, it will not solve public  purpose to exercise control over 
seed industry, except in matter of quality. Policy of the Government is to 
encourage public-private partnership and create a conducive 
environment for growth of seed industry.  However, the Committee have 
a strong view that in addition to  necessary growth of seed industry, 
conducive environment should be crea ted for farmers also, so as to 
provide them the seeds at reasona ble price. The recent case of 
Monsanto Company charging exorbitan t price for the BT Cotton seed is 
the proof of unfair trade practices being exercised by the multinational 
companies. The Committee recommend that a price regulatory provision 
should be provided in the Bill itself so  as to ensure that the farmers are 
not charged arbitrary price by the seed producer/supplier. 
 
21. According to the Government, penalties for infringement are very 
mild in the existing Seeds Act, a nd this is one of the reasons for 
bringing new legislation. But in the present Bill, which repeals and 
replaces the old Seeds Act, the Government have not suggested any 
deterrent punishment/penalty for th e persons who sell spurious or 
misbranded/sub-standard seeds or th e seed which does not give the 
promised yield.  In th e Seeds Act, 1966 the penalty for first offence was 
up to Rs.500 and in case of repetition of the offence the fine could 
extend to Rs.1000 or an imprisonmen t for a term which may extend to 
six months or both. The Committee feel that Rs.500 in 1966 would 
become more than Rs.1,00,000 in 2006 even if we calculate the interest 
on bank rates prevailing from time to time.  It is not understood, how the 
penalty of only Rs.5000 in place of Rs.500 has been fixed in the new 

 9
Seeds Bill. The small trader or dealer  who sells misbranded or spurious 
seeds cannot be spared with a mild  penalty.  This will be an 
encouragement to commit the offences, which may have irreparable and 
incalculable loss to the farmer wh o may use these seeds for cropping. 
Given that the misbranded and spurious seed trade is worth crores of 
rupees, the small penalties being proposed are of no use to deter the 
offenders. The Committee recommend  that the punishment for the 
offences committed under the new Seed s Bill should be in consonance 
with the stringent penalties provided in PPV&FR Act, 2001.  
 
22. The new Seeds Bill envisages that the farmers can claim 
compensation from the producer, distributor or vendor under ‘The 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986’. The Committee are of the opinion that 
the farming community in the rural ar eas, are not aware of the existence 
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 or the District Consumer Forum or 
the State Consumer Council or for that  matter any other authority set up 
for the purpose of claiming compensat ion.  The Committee strongly feel 
that compensation provision should be  included in the Bill itself on the 
lines of Clause 39 (2) of the Protect ion of Plant Varieties & Farmers’ 
Rights Act, 2001, which can be implemented through specially 
designated arbitration Tribunal/ Co mpensation Committee or any other 
authority constituted for this purpose by the Government. 
 
23. The Committee are of the opinion that insurance could be one of 
the solutions for providing compen sation to the farmers whose seeds 
have not given the desired yield. Duri ng the Ninth Five Year Plan period, 

 10
the Government had started a pilot scheme on ‘seed crop insurance’ but 
later on it was discontinued, th e Committee feel that ‘seed crop 
insurance’ scheme should be re-intr oduced by incorporating a suitable 
provision in the Bill itself so as to  award timely compensation to the 
farmers. The seed producer should pay the premium for the seed 
insurance.  
 
24. The Committee are in agreement with the conclusions arrived at a 
symposium organized by the Government on seed sector reforms that a 
seed mark, or symbol on the lines of Agmark to denote quality of the 
seed should be introduced and the labelling provisions under the Seeds 
Act should be harmonized with the provisions of other Acts such as 
Weights & Measurement Act, Package Act, etc. 
 
25. The Committee feel that the powers of the seed inspector is the 
most important section and need careful  attention as he has been given 
the responsibility of seed law enforcement. The Committee apprehend 
that Clause 35 will bring an ‘Inspector  Raj’ to exploit the poor farmers. 
Under this Clause the inspector can enter and search any place in which 
he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been or is 
being committed. The Committee are of the firm opinion that to give 
such sweeping powers to an officer of a junior level to inspect and 
search a place on a mere belief, without a proper procedure or 
authorization from higher authoriti es could lead to disastrous results 
and there is every possibility of his taking prejudiced decision or that he 
may be subjected to the pressure to misuse his powers.  The powers of 

 11
the inspector in the proposed Bill be ing similar to the Seeds Act 1966 
does not ensure that the inspector w ill not misuse the powers given to 
him.    The Committee are not convinced by the arguments given by the 
Government that this apprehension expressed by the Committee can be 
taken care of while making the rules for implementing this provision.  
The Act has to have a precedent over th e rules and regulations.  It is not 
understandable that powers can be gi ven in the Act but the control will 
be provided in the regulations made thereafter.  The Committee strongly 
recommend that the controls over the power of the inspector should 
also be provided in the Act itself.  The inspector should be allowed to 
search or break open any premises only on the written orders of the 
District Collector or a Magistrate sp ecially authorised to exercise the 
powers given under the Seeds Act. Moreover, as the farmers are not 
selling any branded seeds, they should be exempted from this Clause. 
 
26. The Committee have considered each Clause of the Bill very 
carefully and are of the opinion that  the Clauses, other than those 
discussed in the Report, should be made  consistent with the provisions 
on which amendments/suggestions have  been made by the Committee 
in the Report. 
  
 
     
 
 
 
 

 12
PART – II 
 
CLAUSE-WISE ANALYSIS 
 
Clause 1 
1. Clause 1 gives the short title of t he Bill, the area of its operation and its 
applicability.  
 
Clause 1 (3) of the Bill states as under: 
Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall apply to- 
(a) every dealer; and 
(b) every producer of seed except when the seed is produced by 
him for his own use and not for sale. 
2. The Committee recommend that the words ‘Other than farmer’  
should be added after the word ‘Producer’ and in order to safeguard the 
interest of the farmers the words ‘and not for sale’ should be deleted 
from Clause 1 (3) (b).   
The Clause 1(3)(b) should read as under: 
(b)     every producer of seed, other than farmer, except when the         
seed is produced by him for his own use. 
 
Clause 2 (11) 
 
 
3. Clause 2 (11) specifies the definition of farmer as under: 
“farmer” means any person who cultivat es crops either by cultivating 
the land himself or through any other  person but does not include any 
individual, company, trader or dealer  who engages in the procurement and 
sale of seeds on a commercial basis; 
 
4. The Committee observe that the definition of farmer is incomplete. 
Therefore, the following words should be added after the words ‘through 
any other person’ to make the definition of farmer more comprehensive: 

 13
‘or who conserves and preserves, severally or jointly with any 
person, any traditional varieties or adds value to such traditional 
varieties through selection and identification of their useful properties’ 
 
Clause 2 (16) & 2 (27) 
5. Clause 2 (16) is defined as under: 
“misbranded” - A seed shall be deemed to be misbranded if- 
(i)  it is a substitute for, or re sembles in a manner likely to deceive, 
another variety of seed under the name of which it is sold, and is not 
plainly and conspicuously labelled so as to indicate its true nature; 
(ii)  it is falsely stated to be the product of any place or country; 
(iii) it is sold by a name which bel ongs to another kind or variety of 
seed; 
(iv) false claims are made for it upon the label or otherwise; 
(v)  when sold in a package which has been sealed or prepared by, or 
at the instance, of the dealer and which bears his name and address, 
the contents of each package are not  conspicuously and correctly 
stated on the outside ther eof within the limits of variability prescribed 
under this Act; 
(vi) the package containing it, or the label on the package bears any 
statement, design or device regardi ng the quality or the kind or 
variety of seed contained therein, wh ich is false or misleading in any 
material particular or if t he package is other wise deceptive with 
respect to its contents; 
(vii) it is not registered in the manner required by or under this Act; 
(viii) its label contains any reference to registration other than the 
registration number; 
(ix) its label does not contain a warning or caution which may be 
necessary, and sufficient, if complied with, to protect human, animal 
and plant life and health or to avoid serious prejudice to the 
environment; 
(x) the package containing it or the label on the package bears the 
name of a fictitious individual or co mpany as the dealer of the kind or 
variety; or 

 14
(xi) it is not labelled in accordance with the requirements of this Act or 
the rules made thereunder. 
 
6. Clause 2 (27) of the Bill is defined as under: 
“spurious seed” means any seed which is not genuine or true to type;. 
 
7. The Committee have come to kn ow through the field experience of 
the farmers that the seed package,  many a time, gives deceptive 
information to our predominantly ill iterate farmers. Containers having 
alluring pictures have misled many  a farmers, but seed companies may 
get away by printing in small letters somewhere on the package “picture 
on this container is intended to re present the kind only”.  Farmers do 
not understand these qualifying lines on the package and purchase the 
package in the hope of getting the crop yield as depicted on the 
package.  However, when the seeds do not give the promised yield or 
fail to germinate, the farmer is disa ppointed and financially shattered.  
The Committee feel that misleading pictures/ads should not be printed 
on the seed packages unless they are true to the variety inside the 
package. 
 
8. The Committee recommend that a suitable clause should be 
added to the Bill itself for describi ng the mechanism for disposal of 
misbranded and spurious seeds so that undesirable seeds are not sold 
in the market. 
 
 
 

 15
Clause 2(19) 
9. Clause 2(19) is defined as under: 
“producer” means a person, group of persons, firm or organisation who 
grows or organizes the production of seeds; 
 
10. The Committee are of the opinion that though the term ‘farmer’ 
has been defined separately in Clause 2(11), however, to make the 
definition of ‘producer’ more clear, the words ‘other than the farmer’  
should be added after the words ‘group of persons’ and the Clause 2 
(19) should read as under:  
 “producer” means a person, group of persons other than the 
farmer, firm or organisation who gr ows or organizes the production of 
seeds; 
 
Clause 2 (23) 
11. Clause 2 (23) of Bill gives t he definition of ‘Seed’ as under: 
“seed” means any type of living embryo or propagule capable of 
regeneration and giving rise to a plant of agriculture, which is true to 
such type. 
12. The Committee desire that the following words may be added after 
the words ‘Embryo or propagule’ to make the definition more clear: 
“Including seedlings, tuber, bulbs, rhizomes, roots, cuttings, all 
type of grafts and other vegetatively propagated material” 
Clause (4) 
13. Clause (4) of the Bill deals wit h Composition of the Central Seed 
Committee.  In Clause 4 (3) there is a provision of nominating ex-officio 
Members to the Central Seed Committee, as indicated below:   

 16
 (i)   the Agriculture Commissioner,  Department of Agriculture and Co-
operation, Government of India ; 
(ii)   the Deputy Director General (Crop Sciences), Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research; 
(iii)   the Deputy Director General (Horticulture), Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research; 
(iv)   the Joint Secretary  in charge of  seeds in the Department of Agriculture 
and Co-operation, Government of India 
(v)   the Horticulture Commissioner, Department of Agriculture and Co-
operation, Government of India; 
(vi)    a representative of the Depa rtment of Bio-technology, Government of 
India, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India; 
(vii)    a representative of the Mi nistry of Environment and Forests, 
Government of India, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government 
of India. 
 
14. Since the Bill includes medicinal and aromatic plants in the 
definition of Agriculture, the Commi ttee recommend that the Director of 
the National Centre for Aromatic and Medicinal Plants should be made 
an ex-officio member of the Central Seed Committee. 
 
Clause 4 (4) (i) 
15. Clause 4 (4) (i) states that Secretar y (Agriculture) from five states, one 
each from three out of the five geogr aphical zones of the country as 
mentioned in the Schedule, on rotation basis will be nominated by the Central 
Government to the Central Seed Committee. 
 
16. The Committee note that in the present Bill, only five States, one each 
from five geographical zones, on a rotation basis, will get representation in the 
Central Seed Committee, whereas the Seed Act of 1966 provided 
representation to all the States on th is Committee.  The Government have 
argued that it is desirable to have a compact Central Seed Committee for 
purposes of in-depth deliberations. However, during evidence, on the 
insistence of the Committee that ours is a vast country  with much diversity in 
the field of agriculture, so instead of geographical zones, the representation of 
the States should be based on the ag ro-climatic zones, the Secretary, 

 17
Department of Agriculture and Co-operation, accepted the suggestion to have 
one representative State from every agro-climatic zone of the country.  
 
17. The Committee recommend that Agriculture being a State subject, 
Clause 4 (4) (i) should be amende d and the Central Seed Committee 
should have a representative of one Stat e from each of the agro-climatic 
zones, as specified by the Pl anning Commission, instead of 
geographical zones, on rotation basis and the Clause should read as 
under: 
‘The Secretary (Agriculture), one each from the agro-climatic 
zones of the country on rotation basis;’ 
 
Clause 4 (4) (iv) 
18. Clause 4 (4) (iv) provides two r epresentatives of the farmers to be 
nominated by the Centra l Government to the Central Seed Committee.  
Clause 4 (4) reads as under: 
 The Committee shall consist of the following other members to be 
nominated by the Central Government, namely:- 
(i) the Secretary (Agriculture) from fi ve States, one each from three out of 
the five geographical zones of the country as mentioned in the Schedule on 
rotation basis; 
(ii) Director, State Seed Certification Agency from one State which is not 
represented under clause (i); 
(iii) Managing Director, State Seeds Corporation, from one State which is 
not represented under clause (i) or clause (ii); 
(iv)  two representatives of farmers; 
(v)   two representativ es of seed industry; 
(vi)   two specialists or experts in the field of seed development. 
 
19. The Committee feel that two representatives of the farmers in the 
Central Seed Committee is too small a representation keeping in view 

 18
the number of farmers in our country.  Since the farming in India is of a 
diverse nature, as there are different kinds of land formations and 
climatic zones, the Committee r ecommend that farmers representation 
on the Central Seed Committee should be raised to five Members, one 
each from different geographical zones. 
 
Clause 5 
20. The Clause 5 deals with powers and func tions of the Committee.  It 
states that the Committee shall be responsible for and shall have all the 
powers for the effective implementati on of this Act and shall advise the 
Central Government and the State Governments on matters relating to- 
(a)    seed programming and planning; 
(b)    seed development and production; 
(c)    export and import of seeds; 
(d)   standards for registration,  certification and seed testing; 
(e)   seed registration and its enforcement; 
(f)  such other matters  as may be prescribed. 
 
21. The Committee observe that though the powers of the Central 
Seeds Committee are very comprehensi ve, yet in the Bill, there is no 
mention of price regulation of seed s either by the Central Seed 
Committee or State level Committees or by any other agency/authority.  
They feel that the Seed Companies will be getting exclusive, perpetual 
and monopolistic rights to arbitrar ily fix the price of the seeds 
developed by them.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a price 
regulatory provision should be made in  the Bill itself to ensure that the 
farmers are not charged exaggerated price by the seed supplier. This 
can be done by setting up a sub-Committee of the Central Seed 

 19
Committee to control the prices of the seeds and for that the Clause 5 (e) 
should be amended and read as under: 
 ‘Seeds registration, its enfo rcement and price regulation;’ 
 
Clause 6 & Clause 7 
22. Clause 6 deals with the powers of the Central Seed Committee to 
specify minimum limits of germination, purity, seed health, etc.  It reads as 
under: 
  
‘The Committee may, by notification, specify –  
 
(a) the minimum limits of germinatio n, genetic and physical purity and 
maximum seed health, with respec t to any seed of any kind or 
variety’. 
 
(b) the mark or label on the packet or  container to indicate that such 
seed conforms to the minimum limits of germination, genetic and 
physical purity, and seed health s pecified under clause (a), and 
other particulars, such as expected performance of the seed in 
accordance with the information provided by the producer under 
section 14 which such mark or label may contain. 
 
23. Clause 7 deals with registration and other sub-committees of the 
Central Seed Committee and their functions. 
 
The Central Seed Committee through its Registration Sub-Committee 
or a sub-committee on seed certification is duty bound ‘to register seeds of 
varieties after scrutinizing their claims  as made in the application in such 
manner as may be prescribed’ [Clause 7(2)(a)]  
 
24. As has been provided in the B ill itself, the Seed Certification 
Committee would be giving its cer tificate for ‘minimum limits of 
germination, genetic and physical purity etc.’. However, the seed selling 
company will be putting a label on their seed packets of their expected 
performance which will be more th an the minimum standards fixed by 
the Committee.  The farmer will buy th e seed by seeing the label of the 
company and he will be ignorant about the minimum standards based 

 20
on which the seed certificate has been issued. The Committee are 
unable to comprehend the basis on which the compensation to the 
farmers will be provided, if the seed does not conform to the minimum 
standards fixed by the Committee.  Whether it will be the minimum 
standard as fixed by the Seed Committee while issuing the Seed 
Certificate or the standard given/p rinted by the Seed Company on the 
label of the package of the seed. The Committee are of the opinion that 
the compensation to the farmers should be based on the expected 
performance as mentioned by the Seed Producer on the label of the 
seed package. 
 
25. The very purpose of having a seed certification agency, which 
through its officers is expected to put a certification tag and seal on 
every bag, is to ensure the quality of that seed.  The seed producers pay 
a fee to inspect the farmers’ fields  and to supervise the grading and 
packing processes of the seeds. The see ds of every lot are supposed to 
be tested by this agency at their seed testing laboratories so the quality 
of seeds is guaranteed to the farmers by the seed certification agency.  
Therefore, the Committee recommend that  if the seed delivered to the 
farmer is from the same stock which has been certified by the Seed 
Committee, but has failed to give the desired result, as was specified in 
the Certificate issued by it, this Seed Certification agency should be held 
responsible for the quality of the seeds and should invariably be made a 
party to the compensation process, along with the seed 
producer/supplier, in case the seed fails to give the desired yield.  The 
Committee recommend that the Clause 7 should be suitably amended to 

 21
hold the Central/State Seed Certifi cation Committee responsible for the 
powers exercised and functions under Clause 5 and issuance of seed 
certificate under Clauses 13, 14 and  28 of the Bill. 
  
26. In Clause 7(2)(a) the word, ‘kinds and’ should be added after the 
words, ‘to register seeds of’. 
 
Clause 12 (1) 
27. As per Clause 12 (1) a register of a ll kinds and varieties of seeds to be 
called the National R egister of Seeds shall be ke pt by the registration Sub-
Committee wherein all specifications , as may be prescribed, shall be 
maintained. 
 
28. The Committee are of the opinion that the farmers’ varieties 
should be entirely excluded from the registration in the Seeds Bill.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that  the following words should be 
added to Clause 12: 
‘However, Farmers will not be re quired to register farmers’ 
varieties in the National Register Of Seeds’. 
 
29. The registration of farmers’ varieties of seeds should be the 
responsibility of District Admini stration, either through Gram 
Panchayat/Block Development Office/Zi la Parishad who themselves will 
register the extant varieties of seed s and farmers need not be asked to 
register their varieties as most of th em are unaware of the technicalities 
involved in the registration process.  The information may then be 
forwarded by the registering authorit y to the State level and/or national 
level Registration Committee.  As  the Committee have been informed 

 22
that farmers’ variety will be regist ered as per PPV&FR Act, making it a 
community right because generally most of the farmers’ varieties, as we 
have today like that of the Nagpur or ange or basmati rice, belong to a 
community rather than to an indivi dual. And this collective community 
right will automatically have the power to produce those farmers’ variety 
seed because it is not qualified as  a brand.  Irrespective of the 
provisions in the PPV&FR Act, if the varieties of common knowledge are 
not entered/registered in the Nati onal Register of Seeds within a 
stipulated time it should become the property of the concerned State 
and should not be allowed to be registered by any private agency.  The 
Committee recommend that to make it clear and known to all, that extant 
varieties and patrimony varieties bel ong to the Government, the entries 
of these varieties should be made in a Register maintained by the 
concerned State Government. 
 
Clause 12(3) 
30. Clause 12(3) provides that the registration sub- committee shall, within 
such intervals and in such  manner as it think appropr iate, publish the list of 
kinds and varieties of seed which have been registered during that interval.   
 
31. The Committee recommend that the Registration Sub-Committee 
should maintain a National Register Of Seeds of kinds and varieties and 
the updated list must be published and put up on the website every 
three months. 
 
Clause 13 (1) 
32. Under Clause 13 of the Bill, com pulsory registration of all kinds and 
varieties of seeds is a pre-requisite for their sale in the market.    

 23
33. The Committee feel that this Cl ause does not make it clear that the 
farmers need not get their seeds registered.  Therefore, they recommend 
that in order to exempt the farmers from compulsory registration of their 
seeds, the words ‘ except the farmers’ variety’ should be added after the 
words ‘No seed of any kind or variety’ and Clause 13 (1) may read as 
under: 
 ‘ No seed of any kind or variety, excep t the farmers’ variety, shall, 
for the purpose of sowing or planting by any person, be sold unless 
such seed is registered under sub- section (2) by the Registration Sub-
Committee in such manner as may be prescribed.’  
 
34. The Committee further recomme nd that the following proviso may 
be added to Clause 13(1) which may read as under: 
‘Provided that the Registrati on Sub-Committee may decide to 
implement this provision in phases for registration of seeds of any kind 
or variety.’ 
 
Clause 13(4) & (5) 
35. Under Clause 13(4) a registration made under this Act shall be valid for 
a period of fifteen years in case of  annual and biennial crops, and eighteen 
years for long duration perennials. And u nder Clause 13 (5) at the expiry of 
the period granted under Sub section (4) the seeds may be re-registered for a 
like period on the basis of information furnished by the producer on the results 
of such trials as may be prescribed to  re-establish performance of the kind or 
variety of seeds.  
 
36. When the Committee suggested to the Go vt. that   why this provision of 
re-registration should not be deleted to br eak the monopolistic control of the 
seed industry which may go on exploiti ng the farmers for unlimited period as 
the holder of the registration without adding any quality to the seeds.  The 
Govt. accepted the suggestion. 
 

 24
37. The Committee are of a firm opi nion that this provision of re-
registration will give monopolistic control on the seeds marketing by the 
seed industry, which may go on expl oiting the farmers for unlimited 
period.  Even the period of fifteen years, in case of annual and biennial 
crops, and eighteen years for long dur ation perennials, is quite a long 
time considering the progress/innovations in research and development 
being made in the agricultural sector worldwide.  The duration of 
registration period for any kind or variety of a seed should be reduced to 
ten and twelve years for annual & biennial crops and perennials, 
respectively. 
The Committee are of the firm vi ew that when the holder of 
registration is not adding any quality or  change in the variety of seed, it 
will increase the monopolies of th e seed producer, which may exploit 
the farmers for unlimited period. As has also been agreed to by the 
Government, the Committee, strongly recommend that this provision of 
re-registration under Clause 13 (5) should be deleted. 
 
Clause 14  
38. Clause 14 deals with the procedure for registration of a kind or variety 
of seed and issuance of certificate of registration. 
 
Clause 14(2) reads as under: 
‘On receipt of any such application for the registration of a kind or variety 
of seed, the Registration Sub-Committee may, after such enquiry as it deems 
fit and after satisfying itself that the kind or variety of seed to which the 
application relates conforms to the cl aims made by the importer or by the 
seller, as the case may be, as regards the efficacy of the kind or variety of 
seed and its safety to human beings and animal s, register the kind or variety, 
as the case may, of the seed on such conditions as may be specified by it and 
allot a registration number thereto and issue a certificate of registration’.  
 

 25
39. The Committee have been informed through a written reply that 
seed testing laboratory is a post-registration phenomenon and not a pre-
registration requirement.  Registrati on is to be granted on the basis of 
agronomic performance includi ng yield, resistance to 
disease/droughts/salinity, response to inputs, etc., assessed through an 
elaborate process of evaluation and tr ial including value for cultivation 
and usage trials.  The Committee are of the strong opinion that seed 
testing including seed germination and yield test ing should mandatorily 
be a pre-registration requirement, as yi eld testing is must, in so far as 
farmers are concerned.  They, ther efore, recommend that for this the 
services of Agriculture Un iversities, Agricultur e Colleges and Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras laboratories may be utilised so as to save time and 
provide easy accessibility which wi ll avoid the necessity of self-
certification and provisional certification of seeds.  
 
40. The Committee also recommend th at the word ‘may’ should be 
replaced with ‘shall, only’  in the second line of Clause 14(2) so as to 
make it mandatory for the Seed Committee to make such enquiry, as it 
deems fit, to conform to the claims made by the importer or the seller, as 
the case may be, as regards the efficacy of the kind or variety of seeds, 
its yield and safety to human beings  and animals, before issuing a 
certificate of registration.  The Committee further recommend that the 
maximum time limit for registration should also be specified in the 
Clause itself, in order to ensure th at all the actions, from receipt of 
application to the issuance of certi fication of registration, are taken 
within the stipulated time. 

 26
 
41. The Committee note that there is no provision in the present Bill 
for pre-grant opposition to registration of a new kind or variety of seed, 
on the lines of Section 21 of the PPV&FR Act 2001, to ensure more 
transparency. They are of the consid ered view that a provision for pre-
grant opposition will allow legitima te opposition to the grant of a 
registration of a new variety before registration is granted.  Thus, people 
will have an opportunity to raise obj ections, if they have reason to 
believe that the variety is not what  is being claimed or the person 
opposing the application is entitled to  the breeder’s right as against the 
applicant or the variety may have ad verse effect on the environment or 
any other reason which the Government may consider appropriate for 
pre-grant opposition to the registrati on of any new kind or variety of a 
seed.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that a suitable Clause 
containing the pre-grant opposition to the registration of the new kind or 
variety of the seed be added to the Bill. 
 
42. The Committee note that the pr esent Seeds Bill is silent on the 
origin and ownership aspect of a re gistered variety of seed.  The 
PPV&FR Act, 2001 vide Section 18(1), has provisions relating to 
declaring the origin i.e., parentage of variety, the conditions for multi-
location testing, etc., whereas ‘ The Seeds Bill 2004’ which requires 
mandatory registration of the seed s, does not give importance to 
declaring the parentage.  In the absence of such a provision, established 
seed companies could use farmer varie ties in breeding the new species 
without paying anything to them or to  the Government.  For example, all 

 27
agriculture scientists and business professionals know that most hybrid 
varieties of various crops that I ndian private firms sell - except 
vegetables, maize and sunflower- ar e created from varieties developed 
by ICAR institutions.  But this cannot be verified because there is no 
compulsion on private players to discl ose parental lines, while those of 
public sector varieties, is a public knowledge.  Therefore, the Committee 
feel that this Bill should be in cons onance with other laws which require 
pre-requisite disclosure of parentage for doing registration. This will 
facilitate unrestricted commerciali sation of varieties in the public 
domain, including farmers’ varieties, by private parties. The Committee 
recommend that a sub-Clause may be added to the Clause 14 as under: 
‘Every application for registration under Section 13 shall contain a 
complete passport data of the parental lines from which the variety has 
been derived and from where the genetic material has been taken and all 
such information relating to the cont ribution, if any, of any farmer, 
village community, institution or or ganisation in breeding, evolving or 
developing the variety’.  
 
Clause 15 
43. Clause 15(1) provides special prov ision for registration of transgenic 
varieties of seeds, which needs the clearance under the Environment 
Protection Act, 1986.  It also incorpor ates a proviso regarding grant of 
provisional registration/clearance for a period of two years irrespective of such 
clearance under EPA.  The Clause reads as under: 
 
      ‘Notwithstanding anything cont ained in section 14, no seed of any 
transgenic variety shall be register ed unless the applic ant has obtained 
clearance in respect of the same as requi red by or under the provisions of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986: 
 
Provided that the Registration Sub-Committee may, subject to 
clearance under the said Act, grant provisional registration, for a period not 

 28
exceeding two years on the basis of information furnished by the producer on 
the results of multi-locational trials conducted in the prescribed manner.’ 
 
44. The Committee are of a str ong view that the provisional 
registration of transgenic varieties would bring the untested seeds and 
genetically engineered food crops in the market from backdoor, which 
may sabotage the entire bio-safety regulatory system of our country.  
Also, as the transgenic seeds can not be released for commercial 
cultivation without the approval of the Geneti c Engineering Approval 
Committee (GEAC), provisional registration/clearance should not be 
allowed and the proviso to Clause 15 (1) should be deleted. 
 
Clause 17 
45. Clause 17 deals with notif ication of cancellation of registration of seeds 
of kinds and varieties which reads as under: 
 
‘The Registration Sub-Committee sha ll notify the canc ellation of a 
registration of any kind or variety of seed made under section 13 or a 
registration made under section 15 in the Official Gazette’. 
 
46. The Committee suggest that th e names of the seed producers as 
well as dealers who have been charged with contravention of the 
provisions of the Seeds Act and whose registration of any kind or 
variety of seed made under Section 30 has been cancelled, should be 
published in a manner that the information reaches the farm produce 
users and the general public. 
 
 
 
 

 29
Clause 19 
47. Clause 19 provides as under: 
‘The Committee may, for conducting trials to assess performance, 
accredit centers of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, State 
Agricultural Universities and such other organizations fulfilling the eligibility 
requirements as may be prescribed, to conduct trials to evaluate the 
performance of any kind or variety of seed.’ 
 
48. The Committee recommend that in Clause 19 the words ‘and such 
other organizations’ may be replaced with the words ‘and such other 
government/semi-government/autonomous organizations’ so as to avoid 
any private and trans-national seed -testing laboratory to conduct the 
trials to evaluate the performance of  any kind or varie ty of seeds, as 
they are not directly accountable to the Government of India or any State 
Government.  Multi-locational testing of varieties bred by the private 
sector must be done by the ICAR.  The Committee suggest that the seed 
industry may contribute to a fund to pay for multi-location testing but 
the testing itself should be done by  the ICAR and its subsidiary 
laboratories only.  The Committee desire that all out concerted efforts 
should be made to increase the numbe r of seed testing laboratories in 
Government or Semi-Government sector with at least one seed testing 
laboratory in each district.  
 
Clause 20 
49. Clause 20 deals with compensation to farmers and which reads as 
under: 
 
 ‘ Where the seed of registered kind or  variety is sold to a farmer, the 
producer, distributor or vendor, as t he case may be, shall disclose the 
expected performance of such kind or  variety to the farmer under given 
conditions, and if, such registered seed fails to provide the expected 
performance under such given c onditions, the farmer may claim 

 30
compensation from the producer, dealer, distributor or vendor under the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986’. 
 
 Section 39 (2) of the Protection of Plant Varieties & Farmers’ Rights 
Act, 2001 relating to compensation reads as under: 
 
 ‘Where any propagating material of a variety registered under this Act 
has been sold to a farmer or a group of farmers or  any organisation of 
farmers, the breeder of such variety shall discuss to the farmer or the group of 
farmers or the organizations of farmers , as the case may be, the expected 
performance under given conditions, and if such propagating material fails to 
provide such performance under such given conditions, the farmer or the 
group of farmers or the organisation of  farmers, as the case may be, may 
claim compensation in the prescri bed manner before the Authority and the 
Authority, after giving notice to the br eeders of the variety and after providing 
him an opportunity to file opposition in the prescribed manner and after 
hearing the parties, may direct the br eeder of the variety to pay such 
compensation as it deems fit, to the fa rmer or the group of farmers or the 
organisation of farmers, as the case may be’. 
 
50. The Committee are of the opinion that the term ‘expected 
performance under given conditions’ is very vague and can lead to 
avoidable litigation for claiming comp ensation.  Moreover, to claim the 
compensation under ‘Consumer Protecti on Act, 1986’, the farmers need 
the receipt as an evidence for the purchase of seed from the seed 
producer, distributor or vendor and in most of the cases, the seed 
vendor do not provide them the receipt and the farmers also do not 
know that they should insist for it .  The farming community in the rural 
areas in general is not aware of the existence of the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 or the District Consumer  Forum or the State 
Consumer Council or for that matter any other authority set up for this 
purpose for claiming compensation.  They do not know the procedure to 
claim the compensation through these authorities.  Majority of the 
farmers are unaware of genetic purity of  the seed, so, if there is a failure 
of agronomic performance due to genetic impur ity, they                  

 31
cannot identify and claim the compensation from seed producer, 
distributor or vendor under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.  
 
51. The Committee also note that one of the objectives mentioned at 
Para 5(iii) in the Statement of Objects & Reasons of the present Bill, is to 
‘check on the sale of spurious and poor quality seeds and provision for 
compensation to farmers’. The Committee strongly feel that 
compensation provisions should be in cluded in the Bill  itself on the 
lines of Section 39 (2) of the Protect ion of Plant Varieties & Farmers’ 
Rights Act, 2001, through specially designated arbitration 
Tribunal/Compensation Committee cons tituted by the Government.  
After the words ‘compensation from the producer, dealer, distributor or 
vendor ’ in Clause 20 the following words may be added: 
‘through a Sub-Committee especially designated for this 
purpose within the Consumer  Protection Act, 1986 or  certifying 
agency through Arbitration or Compen sation Committees or Special 
Tribunals/Fast Track Court/Authority established by the Government 
which may award the compensation wi thin 30 days of the filing of 
the claim’.  
The Consumer Protection Act, may be amended accordingly, 
if needed. 
Clause 21 
52. Clause 21 deals with the seed produc ers and seed processing units to 
be registered and reads as under: 
(1) ‘No producer shall grow or organize the production of seed unless he is 
registered as such by the State Government under this Act.   

 32
(2) No person shall maintain a seed- processing unit unless such unit is 
registered by the State Government under this Act. 
(3) The State Government shall regi ster a producer or  seed-processing 
unit if he or it meets the specifications prescribed by the Central Government 
in terms of infrastructure, equipment and qualified manpower. 
(4)  Every application for registration under sub-section (3) shall be made in 
such form and manner and shall be a ccompanied by such fee as may be 
prescribed. 
(5)  The State Government may, af ter making such enquiry and subject to 
such conditions as it thinks fit, grant a certificate for maintaining   a   seed 
producing or a seed processing unit in such form as may be prescribed. 
(6)   Every seed producing unit and every seed processing unit shall furnish 
periodic returns on the quantity of seed s of different kinds or varieties 
produced or processed by it to the Seed Certification Agency in such form and 
at such time as may be prescribed. 
(7)  The State Government may, after giving the holder of  certificate of 
registration under sub-section (1), or s ub-section (2), as the case may be, 
suspend or cancel the registration if  
 (a)      such regi stration has been obtained by misrepresentation as to a 
material particular relating to the specification in terms of infrastructure, 
equipment or availability of qualified manpower; or 
(b)     any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made there under 
has been contravened’. 
 
53. The Committee find that ther e is an obligation upon the seed 
producer and seed-producing agency to be registered by the State 
Government as such under the Bill.  But the seed producers operate in 
different States, and hence, there s hould be only a central register for 
them, and they should be spared the ordeal of registration in every State 
in which they operate.  The Committ ee, therefore, recommend that the 
seed producer and processing unit shoul d be allowed to register only in 
the State where the seed production is taken up. 
  
 

 33
Clause 22 (1), Clause 25 & Clause 28(1)  
54. Clause 22  deals with compulsory registration of the seed dealers. 
Clause 22(1) reads as under: 
‘Every person who desires to carry on the business of selling, keeping 
for sale, offering to sell, bartering, import or export or otherwise supply any 
seed by himself, or by any other person on his behalf shall obtain a 
registration certificate as a dealer in seeds from the State Government’. 
 
55. Clause 25  deals with regulation of sale of seeds of registered kinds 
and varieties, which reads as under: 
‘No person shall himself, or by any other person on his behalf, carry on 
the business of selling, keeping for sale , offering to sell, bartering, import or 
export or otherwise supply any kind of seed of any registered kind or variety 
unless-………………’ 
56. And Clause 28  deals with grant of certificate by the State Seed 
Certification Agency; and the Clause 28(1) reads as under: 
‘Any person selling, keeping for sale, offering to sell, bartering or 
otherwise supplying any seed of any registered kind or variety may, if he 
desires to have such seed certified by the State Seed Cert ification Agency, 
apply to that Agency for the grant of a certificate for the purpose’. 
 
57. The Committee feel that ‘bartering’  is the traditional way of mutual 
exchange of seeds in Indian farming community and stopping bartering 
among the farming community will put an end to the seed security in the 
rural India. The farmers’ excha nging seeds through ‘barter system’ 
among themselves should be exempted from the purview of these 
Clauses and the word ‘bartering’ shoul d be removed from Clause 22(1), 
Clause 25 & Clause 28(1).  
 
 
 
 

 34
Clause 27 
58. Clause 27 provides for accreditati on of seed certification agencies, and 
reads as under: 
(1)  The Committee may in consultation with the State Government and the     
State Seed Committee, accredit –  
(a)    organizations to carry out certification,  on the fulfilment of su ch criteria,      
as may be prescribed, or 
(b)    individuals or seed producing organisations to carry out self-  
certification,    in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2)  The accredited organizations, individuals and seed producing       
organisations shall be subject to su ch inspection and control of the 
Committee, the concerned State Government and State Seed 
Certification Agency, as may be prescribed. 
(3) The accreditation may be withdrawn by the Committee, for reasons to be   
recorded in writing and after giving to the concerned organization or 
individual, as the case may be, a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
 
59. On the issue of the accreditation  of the seed certifying agencies, the 
Committee suggested to the Government that the organisations to carry out 
the seed certification should be qual ified with the words ‘Govt/Semi 
Government’ and Clause 27(1)(b), which provides for individuals or seed 
producing organisations to carry out self -certification, should be deleted and 
also in Clause 27(2) and 27(3) the words ‘individual and seed producing 
organisations as the case may be’ should be deleted. To this the Government 
replied that ‘Accreditation will be grant ed on the basis of standards to be 
prescribed in the Ru les with a view to improvi ng and expandin g the quality 
regulation regime.  Accreditation can be granted to ICAR institutions, State 
Agriculture universities, State Departm ents, Seeds Corporations, Cooperative 
institutions, farmers’ organizations on the basis of prescribed standards.  
There will be stringent standards for accreditation and certification’. 
 
60. The Committee are unable to ag ree to the views expressed by the 
Government and observe that the Clause 27(1)(b) accrediting the 
‘individuals or seed producing orga nisations to carry out self-
certification, in such manner as may be prescribed’ should be deleted.  
Provision of self-certification is bound to upset the seed market because 
it will encourage the seed varieties to come into the market which have 

 35
not yet been tested by Government  approved Labs/Agencies.  These 
self-certified seeds may pose high risk to the consumers and the 
farmers as well.  Therefore, the Committee recommend as under: 
(i)   In Clause 27(1) (a) add ‘Government/Semi-Government’ before 
the words ‘Organisations to carry out certification….’ 
(ii)  Clause 27(1)(b) should be deleted. 
(iii) In Clause 27(2) the words ‘individuals and seed producing   
organisations’ should be deleted. 
(iv) In Clause 27(3) the words ‘Or  individual, as the case may be’   
should be deleted. 
 
Clause 28  
61. Clause 28 deals with grant of certificate by the State Seed Certification 
Agency, which reads as under: 
(1) Any person selling, keeping for sale, offering to sell, bartering or 
otherwise supplying any seed of  any registered kind or  variety may, if he 
desires to have such seed certified by the State Seed Cert ification Agency, 
apply to that Agency for the grant of a certificate for the purpose. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made in such form, 
shall contain such particulars and sha ll be accompanied by such fee as may 
be prescribed. 
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the State Seed 
Certification Agency may, after such enquiry as it thinks fit and after satisfying 
itself that the seed to wh ich the application relates co nforms to the prescribed 
standards, grant a certificate in such form and on such conditions as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that such standards shall not be lower than the minimum limit 
of germination, genetic and physical pur ity specified for that seed under 
clause (a) of section 6. 
 
62. The Committee recommend that  the word ‘may’ should be 
replaced with ‘shall, only’  in the second line of Clause 28(3) so as to 

 36
make it mandatory for the State Seed Certification Agency to make such 
enquiry, as it deems fit, to conform to the claims made by the applicant 
as regards the prescribed standards, kind or variety of seeds and its 
safety to human beings and animals, before issuing a certificate of 
registration.
 
 
Clause 30 
63. Clause 30 provides for the recogniti on of seed certification agencies in 
foreign countries and reads as follows: 
 
‘The Central Government may,  on the recommendation of the 
Committee and by notification, recognise  any seed certification agency 
established in any foreign country, for the purposes of this Act’. 
 
64. The Committee are of the opin ion that the recognition of seed 
certification agencies in foreign count ries is likely to be harmful for the 
Indian farmers since the climatic environment, soil, crop management 
system and other such conditions in the foreign land vary from the 
conditions in our country, and th e same seed may not give the same 
yield to our farmers, as it might have given to the farmers of the country, 
where the seed’s yield trials have been conducted. Moreover, it can 
upset the indigenous seed market in our country, as the multinational 
companies do not follow the Indian laws and exploit the farmers by 
charging the price of their seeds exorbitantly, disproportionate to the 
inputs made.  In Committee’s view it  is dangerous to accredit any 
foreign seed certification agency to certify the seed to get it registered in 
India without conducting localised tr ials of that seed in our country. 
They, therefore, recommend that the Seed Certification Agency 
established in any foreign country should be recognised only if the seed 

 37
certified by it is invariably tested  on Indian soil to conform to the 
specified minimum limits of germination, genetic and physical purity 
and maximum seed health.    
 
Clause 32 (2) 
65. Clause 32 (2) which deals with t he Central and State Seed Testing 
Laboratories, states as under: 
 
 ‘The State Government may, in c onsultation with the Committee, and 
by notification, establish one or more State Seed Testing Laboratories or 
declare any seed testing laboratory in  the Government or non-Government 
sector as a State Seed Testing Laboratory, where analysis of seed of any kind 
or variety shall be carried out under this Act in the prescribed manner’. 
 
66. The Committee desire that since this lab will be called ‘State Seed 
Testing Laboratory’ so the word ‘non-Government’ in clause 32(2) 
should be replaced with ‘Semi-Government’   
 
67. The Committee note that there is no audit of the performance of 
the Government Seed Testing Laborat ories (STLs).  The adoption of 
standard operating practices and main tenance of the required condition 
of seed germination are not subject to any audit by the independent 
agencies, which results in wrong test results at times.  Therefore, there 
should be a provision for the audit of the notified STLs to conform to the 
ISO standards by accredited Central Seed Testing Laboratory especially 
designated for the purpose.     
 
 
 
 

 38
Clause 35 
68. Clause 35 deals with powers of S eed Inspectors, the places where 
samples may be taken, how to issue a ‘stop sale’ order for a period of thirty 
days and how to seize the stock, ledger, etc., and reads as under: 
 (1) The Seed Inspector may- 
(a)     take samples of any seed of any kind or variety from- 
 (i)     any person selling such seed; or 
 (ii)     any person who is in t he course of conveying, delivering or 
preparing to deliver such seed to a purchaser or a consignee; or 
 (iii)  a purchaser or a consignee  after delivery of such seed to 
him; 
(b) send such sample for analysis to the Seed Analyst of the area 
within which such sample has been taken; 
(c) enter and search, at all reasonab le times, with such assistance, 
if any, as he considers necessary, any place in which he has 
reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been or is 
being committed and order in writing the person in possession of 
any seed in respect of which th e offence has been or is being 
committed, not to dispose of any stock of such seed for a 
specific period not exceeding th irty days or, unless the alleged 
offence is such that the defect may be removed by the 
possessor of the seed, seize the stock of such seed; 
(d) examine any record, register, document or any other material 
object found in any place menti oned in clause (c) and seize the 
same if he has reason to believe that it may furnish evidence of 
the commission of an offence punishable under this Act; and 
(e) exercise such other powers as may be necessary for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act or an y rule or regulation made there 
under. 
(2) The power conferred by this sect ion includes the pow er to break-open 
any container in which any seed of any kind or variety may be contained or to 
break-open the door of any premises where any such seed may be kept for 
sale: 
           Provided that the power to break-open the door shall be exercised only 
after the owner or any other person in occupation of the pr emises, if he is 
present therein, refuses to open the door on being called upon to do so. 

 39
(3) Where the Seed Inspector takes any action under clause (a) of sub-
section (1), he shall, as far as possible, call not less than two independent and 
respectable persons to be present at t he time when such action is taken and 
take their signatures on a memorandum to be prepared in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(4)     The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or in relation to 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the prov isions of any corresponding law in 
force in that State, shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure 
under this section as they apply to any  search or seizure made under the 
authority of a warrant issued under sect ion 94 of the said Code, or, as the 
case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the said law. 
  
69. The Committee apprehend that Clause 35 will bring an ‘Inspector 
Raj’ to exploit the poor farmers. Under Clause 35 (1)(c) the inspector can 
enter and search at all reasonable time any place in which he has reason 
to believe that an offence under this Act has been or is being committed. 
The Committee are of the firm opi nion that to give such sweeping 
powers to the inspectors to inspect and search a place on a mere belief 
without a proper procedure could lead to disastrous results and there is 
every possibility of misuse of power by the inspector.   The Committee 
are not convinced with the arguments given by the Government that this 
apprehension expressed by the Committ ee can be taken care of while 
making the rules for implementing this provision of the Bill.  As the Act 
has to have a precedent over the regulations, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the controls over the power of the inspector should 
also be provided in the Act itself.  The inspector should be allowed to 
search or break open any premises only on the written orders of the 
District Collector or a Magistrate sp ecially authorised to exercise the 
powers given under the Seeds Act and as the farmers are not selling any 
branded seeds, they should be specifically exempted from this Clause. 
 

 40
70. The Committee feel that as the sowing season for any crop is of a 
limited period, the period of thirty da ys for not disposing of any stock of 
defective seeds should be reduced to fifteen days.   In the Committee’s 
view, fifteen days is a sufficient period to check a seed to conform to the 
prescribed standards for its germination.  Hence, in sub-section 35(1)(c) 
the words, ‘thirty days’ should be replaced with words, ‘fifteen days’. 
 
71. The Committee are of the view th at the words ‘as far as possible’ 
may give a handle to the seed inspector to not to call the two 
independent witnesses of the same lo cality at the time of taking the 
samples of any seed. They, theref ore, recommend that these words 
should be deleted from this Clause and the words ‘from the same 
locality’ should be added after the word s ‘respectable persons’. Clause 
35(3) should read as under: 
‘Where the Seed Inspector takes any action under clause (a) of 
sub-section (1), he shall call not less than two independent persons 
from the same locality, to be present at the time when such action is 
taken and take their signatures on a memorandum to be prepared in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed.’
 
 
72. The Committee suggest that after Clause 35(3), the following 
Clause as 35(4), on the lines of Section 16 of ‘The Seeds Act, 1966’, may 
be added: 
 “35(4) (a) The Seed Analyst sh all, as soon as may be after the 
receipt of sample, under Section 35( 1)(b), analyse the sample at the 
State Seed Testing Laboratory and deliver, in such form as may be 

 41
prescribed, one copy of the report of the result of the analysis to the 
Seed Inspector and another copy th ereof to the person from whom the 
sample has been taken. 
 (b) After the institution of a prosecution under this Act, the 
accused vendor or the complainant may, on payment of the prescribed 
fee, make an application to the c ourt for sending any of the samples 
retained under Section 35(1)(b) to the Central Seed Laboratory for its 
report and on receipt of the application, the court shall first ascertain 
that the mark and the seal or fastening as provided in Section 35(1)(a) 
are intact and may then despatch the sample under its own seal to the 
Central Seed Laboratory which shall thereupon send its report to the 
court in the prescribed form within one month from the date of receipt of 
the sample, specifying the result of the analysis. 
 (c) The report sent by the Cent ral Seed Laboratory under sub-
section (b) shall supersede the report given by the Seed Analyst under 
sub-section (a). 
 (d) Where the report sent by the Central Seed Laboratory under 
sub-section (b) is produced in an y proceedings, it shall not be 
necessary in such proceedings to produce any sample or part thereof 
taken for analysis.” 
Present Clause 35 (4) should read as 35 (5). 
 
Clause 36  
73. Clause 36 deals with the import of seeds.  Clause 36 (1) (c) says: 
‘All import of seeds – shall be subj ect to registration as may be granted 
on the basis of information furnished by the importer on the results of multi-

 42
locational trials for such period as may be prescribed to establish agronomic 
performance’. 
 
74. The Committee feel that the im porters’ data on multi-locational 
trials should not be accepted as it  is, because the climatic, soil, crop 
management and other conditions vary from country to country and 
region to region and so their results may not be applicable to India as 
the aforesaid conditions mentioned above may not be the same here as 
in the trial country.  Therefore, unless lo calized trials are held in India, 
permission for registration of imported seeds should not be granted.  
The Committee recommend that after th e words ‘on the results of multi-
locational trials’ the words ‘and also localized trials in India’  should be 
added to Clause 36 (1) (c). 
 
Clause 38 
75.  Clause 38 lays down certain off ences under the proposed legislation 
and the penalty for such offences.  It reads as under: 
 
‘If any person –  
(a)   contravenes any provision of this Act or any rule made 
thereunder; or 
(b)   imports, sells, stocks or exhibits for sale or barter; and or 
otherwise supplies any seed of any kind or variety deemed to be 
misbranded; or 
(c)   imports, sells, stocks or exhibi ts for sale or barter, or otherwise 
supplies any seed of any kind or va riety without a certificate of 
registration; or 
(d)   obstructs the Committee, Registration Sub-Committee or Seed 
Certification Agency or Seed In spector or Seed Analyst or any 
other authority appointed or duly empowered under this Act in 
the exercise of its powers or discharge of their duties under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder, 

 43
He shall, on conviction, be punishable – with fine which shall not be 
less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty five thousand 
rupees. 
(2) If any person sells any seed which does not conform to the standards 
of physical purity, germination or health  or does not maintain any records 
required to be maintained under this Act or the rules made there under he 
shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five 
thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty- five thousand rupees. 
(3) If any person furnishes any false information relating to the standards 
of genetic purity, misbrands any seed or supplies any spurious seed or 
spurious transgenic variety, or sells any non-registered seeds he shall, on 
conviction be punishable with imprisonment  for a term which may extend to 
six months or with fine which may exte nd to fifty thousand rupees or with 
both’. 
  
76. When the Committee pointed out t hat punishment for offences under 
this Clause starting from Rs.5000 to Rs .50,000 is very low, anybody can pay 
this penalty without feeling any  pinch.  As the penalty should actually work as 
a deterrent, this should be raised in c onsistence with the penalties prescribed 
in the PPV&FR Act that provides penalty up to twenty lakh rupees and there is 
a provision of imprisonment also. To this the Government replied:  
 
“The seed production and distribution involves a large number of 
people, many of whom are small traders/dealers operat ing at village level 
whose volumes of trade and turnover  are small. On the other hand 
development of new varieties which is a subject matter of PPV & FR Act, 
2001 involves big organizations/companies  capable of making considerable 
investments. Therefore, the proposed penalties may be retained.”  
 
77. The Committee find that the r easons given by the Government for 
fixing mild penalties in new Seed s Bill are not satisfactory and not 
consistent with the penalties provided in the Seeds Act, 1966 as the 
penalty of Rs.500 for firs t offence would become more than Rs.1,00,000 
in 2006 even if we calculate the real  value of the rupee.  It is not 
understood, how the penalty amount of only Rs.5000 has been arrived at 
after forty years of the previous Seed Act.  The small trader or dealer 
who sells misbranded or spurious seeds cannot be spared with a mild 
penalty. Considering the huge losses, the person using these seeds may 

 44
suffer as a result of contravention of one rule or the other by the holder 
of the seed registration certificate,  the punishment in the Seeds Bill 
should be minimum of Rs.50,000 which may extend to Rs.2,00,000 along 
with an imprisonment which may exte nd to three month or with both 
depending on the offender involved from vendor, distributor, seed 
producer for the violations of the provisions of Clause 38 (1) & (2). 
  
78. The Committee further recommend that since the person who 
indulges in ‘fly by night’ seed business cannot be controlled by 
imposing a small fine for the violation of the provisions of Clause 38 (3), 
the punishment for such person who furnishes any false information 
relating to the standards of geneti c purity or misbrands any seed or 
supplies any spurious seed or spurious transgenic variety, the level of 
punishment should begin with the fine  of Rs.2,00,000 which may extend 
up to Rs.10,00,000 along with an imprisonment for a term of three 
months which may extend up to one year.  The imprisonment will help in 
creating the fear among the vendors/ dealers/producers etc., who supply 
spurious or misbranded seeds to the farmers.  For repeated violations 
under this Clause, the punishment sh ould be in cons onance with the 
penalties provided in Section 73 of PPV&FR Act, 2001. 
 
Clause 40  
79. Clause 40 deals with the offences by the companies.  It seeks to 
provide that where a person committing offence is a company, every person 
responsible in the company for the c onduct of its business will be liable and 
where a person accused, proves that  the offence was committed without his 
knowledge he will not be liable. Clause 40(1) reads as under: 
 

 45
 ‘Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who at the time the o ffence was committed was in charge of, 
and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
          Provided that nothing cont ained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment under this Act if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge and that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence’. 
 
80. The Committee note that Clause 40(1) excludes higher ups in the 
company if they could anyhow prove that the offence was committed 
without their knowledge.  The Commi ttee are of the opinion that the 
active members of the governing body of any company are responsible 
for all the ins and outs of the work ing of the company, hence they 
should also be held responsible i ndividually and collectively for the 
offences committed by the company.  Therefore, they recommend that 
the proviso to the Clause 40(1) should be deleted. 
Clause 43 
81. Clause 43 relates to exemption from  registration.  It states as under: 
43(1)   Nothing in this Act shall restri ct the right of the farmer to save, use, 
exchange, share or sell his farm seeds and  planting material, except that he 
shall not sell such seed or planting material under a brand name or which 
does not conform to the minimum limit of germination, physical purity, genetic 
purity prescribed under clause (a) or clause (b) of section 6. 
(2)  The Central Government may, by notification, and subject to 
conditions, if any, as it may specify t herein, exempt from all or any of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, any educational, scientific 
or research or extension organization. 
 
 
 

 46
82. The Committee note that Clause 43 begins with a positive note by 
stating that farmers wi ll continue to exercise all rights including the 
rights to save, use, exchange, share or  sell his farm seeds and planting 
material, but in the same line the pos itive gesture has been qualified by 
a negative rider that states that the farmers whose seeds do not conform 
to the minimum limit of germination,  physical purity and genetic purity 
prescribed under sub-clauses (a) and (b ) of section 6 would constitute a 
violation of the Act.   
83. The Committee are of considered  view that Clau se 43 will restrict 
the rights of the farmers.  The Committee recommend that in Clause 
43(1) the word ‘grow’, should be added after the words, ‘the right of the 
farmer to’ and the word ‘barter’ should be added after the word 
‘exchange’.  
84. The Committee further note that the majority of farmers in India 
are unaware and do not understand the scientific or technical terms 
such as minimum limit of germination, physical purity or genetic purity.  
So they may not conform to these standards while selling their seeds or 
bartering or exchanging the seeds with  other farmers.  Considering the 
views expressed by the experts on th e subject, the representatives of 
the Government and its own members, the Committee recommend that 
the words, ‘or which does not conform to the minimum limit of 
germination, physical purity, geneti c purity prescribed under Clause (a) 
or Clause (b) of section 6 ’ should be deleted from the Clause 43 (1) so 
that the rights of the farmer are saved and the provision is made 
consistent with the corresponding provision in the PPV&FR Act 2001. 

 47
The Committee further recommend that Clause 43, which exempts 
the farmers from registration, shoul d come in the beginning of the Bill 
and may be placed just after Clause 1 (3) so as to avoid any confusion 
about the registration of the farmers seeds. 
 
Clause 45 
85. Clause 45 empowers the Central Gove rnment to remove any difficulty 
in implementing the Act.  It states as under: 
Clause 45 (1) ‘If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government ma y, by order publis hed in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not incons istent with the provisions of this Act 
as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 
       Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of 
two years from the date of commencement of this Act’. 
 
86. The Committee feel that the r estriction of two years for making 
orders to remove the difficulties in implementing the Act should be done 
away with because the Seed Bill is likely to have far-reaching effects on 
the farming community and the difficulties may arise from time to time in 
enforcing the Act.   Some unf oreseen circumstances may arise 
necessitating amendments even after the expiry of the period of two 
years after the commencement of th is Act, and at that time the 
Government will be helpless to make any amendment due to this 
proviso.   Therefore, the Committee recommend that the proviso to 
Clause 45(1) should be deleted.  
 
 
 

 48
Clause 46 
87. Clause 46 deals with the power of C entral Government to make rules.  
Clause 46 (zf) states as under: 
‘the form and manner in which t he memorandum shall be prepared 
under sub-section (3) of section 35;’  
 
88. The Committee recommend that  the following words may be 
added to the sub-clause to avoid any confusion in the manner and 
procedure of seed sampling by the seed inspector.   
“Manner and procedure of seed sampling and”  
The Clause 46 (zf) should read as under: 
 ‘manner and procedure of seed sampling and the form and 
manner in which the memorandum shall be prepared under sub-section 
(3) of section 35;’ 
 
NEW DELHI;     PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
26 Sep, 2006               Chairman, 
04 Asvina, 1928 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Agriculture  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 49
APPENDIX - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 17 FEBRUARY, 2005 AT 1100 HRS. 
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘E’, BASEMENT, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW 
DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1220 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri G.L. Bhargava 
5. Shri Shivraj Singh Chauhan 
6. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
7. Smt. Anuradha Choudhary 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Harish Rawat 
9. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
10. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
11. Dr. M.S.Gill 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1.   Shri N.K.Sapra    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh   -  Director 
3.  Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
4. Smt. Ratna Bhagwani   -  Assistant Director  
 
   WITNESSES 
1. Smt. Radha Singh  - Secretary (A&C) 
2. Shri Champak Chatterji - A.S. 
3. Shri Prem Narain  - Joint Secretary (Seeds) 
4. Shri N.K.Nampoorthri - J.S.(legis lative Counsel) Ministry of Law 
5. Dr.S.P. Tiwari   - ADG (Seeds), ICAR 
6. Dr.S.R.K.Varshney  - Director (Finance) 
7. Shri Harish Prasad  - Director (Seeds) 
8. Shri C. Shanmugam  - DC (QC) 
9. Shri S. Selvaraj  - DC (Seeds) 
     

 50
  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed th e representatives of the Ministry and 
asked them to brief the Committee about the provision of  ‘The Seeds Bill, 2004’. 
 
2. Before the briefing, with the permissi on of the Chair, a Member raised the 
issue of the devastation caused by the Tsunami waves on 26 December 2005 in the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands which had rendered the agricultural land incultivable 
for many years to come and the paltry amounts of compensation given to the farmers by 
the Government of India.  The Chairman, thereupon, directed that a comprehensive factual 
report may be obtained from the Ministry. 
 
3. While briefing about the Bill, the Secr etary (Department of Agriculture and Co-
operation) referred to the Seeds Act which was enacted in 1966 and the Rules  framed 
thereunder.   The Secretary also mentioned about the Seeds (Control) Order, 1983 issued 
under section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 to regulate the quality of the seeds 
sold in the market.   She referred to the defi ciencies in the existing seeds legislation and the 
need to revise it.  It was further stated that  the main object of the ‘Seeds Bill, 2004’ was to 
regulate the quality of seeds for sale, import and export and to facilitate production and supply 
of quality seeds to the farmers. 
 
4. The Members raised queries on Terminator Technology or harmful technology, 
application procedure for registration and also regarding inclusion of views of farmers’ 
organizations and experts in the Bill, etc. 
 
5. The representative of the Department replie d to some of the queries.   The Chairman 
then desired that in respect of the points or queries of the Members which could not be replied 
to instantly the Department may send in their re plies in writing to the Secretariat later along 
with the views/suggestion emerging from ma in Seminars/Workshops organized by the 
Ministry in connection with the Seeds Bill. 
 
6. A verbatim record of the pro ceeding of the sitting has been kept. 
 
7. The witnesses then withdrew.   
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 

 51
APPENDIX - II 
 
MINUTES OF THE  NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, 21 JUNE, 2005 AT 
1100 HRS. IN ROOM ‘A’, GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1225 hrs.  
                        and   1240hrs to 1321 hrs 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri G.L. Bhargava 
4. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
7. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
8. Shri A. Ravichandran 
9. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
 
 
       RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
11. Shri Harish Rawat 
12. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
13. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
14. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
15. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
16. Dr. M.S.Gill 
 
        SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri N.K. Sapra    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh   -  Director 
3. Smt. Ratna Bhagwani   -  Assistant Director  
 
 
 
 
 

 52
           WITNESSES 
 
1. Dr. Mangala Rai  - DG, ICAR 
2. Shri Champak Chatterji - Additional Secretary 
3. Dr. N.B. Singh  - A.C.  
4. Dr. M.L. Chowdhary  - H.C. 
5. Dr. G. Kalloo   - DDG{Crop Sciences(ICAR)} 
6. Shri Prem Narain  - Joint Secretary  
7. Shri N.K.  Nampoorthri - Joint Secretary 
8. Shri Harish Prasad  - Director (Seeds) 
9. Dr. S.R.K. Varshney  - Director (F) 
10. Shri C. Shanmugam  - Deputy Commissioner 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry and 
asked them to brief about the Salient features of the Bill, and counter views expressed 
by the various interested groups on the various provisions of  ‘The Seeds Bill, 2004’. 
 
2. Before the briefing, with the permission of the Chair, Members wanted to 
discuss about the comments received from various agencies.   All members were of 
the opinion that there should be some mo re discussions and the Committee should 
take its own time and the farmers should be consulted, as they are the end users of the 
Seeds  
3. The representative of the Department re plied to some of the queries.   The 
Chairman then desired that in respect of the points or queries of the Members which 
could not be replied to instantly the Department may send in their replies in writing to 
the Secretariat later al ong with the views/suggestion emerging from main 
Seminars/Workshops organized by the Ministry in connection with the Seeds Bill. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceed ing of the sitting has been kept. 
 
5. The witnesses then withdrew.  
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

 53
APPENDIX- III 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 19 JUNE, 2006 
AT 1500 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, GROUND FLOOR, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs  to 1735 hrs 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri  Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri Sharanjit Singh  Dhillon 
7. Shri Raghunath Jha 
8. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
9. Shri Sippiparai Ravichandran 
10. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
11. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
12. Shri Anil Basu 
13. Shri Munshi Ram 
14. Shri Rajesh  Verma 
 
            RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
15. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
16. Shri Harish Rawat 
17. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
18. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
19. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1.      Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
2.      Shri N.S.Hooda   -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 54
 
WITNESSES 
 
1. Dr. Vandana Shiva  - Founder Director, Navdanya, New Delhi 
 
2. Dr. Suman Sahai  - Conve nor, The Gene Campaign,  
New Delhi 
      
 
 
     
 
 
 
  
 
   

 55
At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture welcomed 
the Members and Dr. Vandana Shiva, Founder Director, Navdanya and Dr. Suman 
Sahai, Convenor, The Gene Campaign to the sitting of the Committee.  After the 
introduction the Chairman requested Dr. Vandana Shiva to apprise the Committee 
about her views and suggestions on ‘The Seeds Bill, 2004’.  Dr. Vandana Shiva 
expressed her concern about the welfare of  the farmers and the negative impact of 
‘The Seeds Bill, 2004’ on the farmers.  She de sired that either ‘The Seeds Bill, 1966’ 
should be amended or this new Bill should be redrafted. 
2. Dr. Suman Sahai expressed that the objec tive of ‘The Seeds Bill, 2004’ is to 
govern trading and not the intellectual propert y.  The suitable clause to ensure quality 
and price should be incorporated in the Bill.   She stressed that the Bill should be in 
harmony with the Protection of Plant Variet ies and Farmers’ Rights Act (PPV&FR).  
According to her the rights of the farmers have been protected in PPV&FR Act but 
the same rights have been curtailed by the registration provision in ‘The Seeds Bill. 
3. Thereafter the Members made some que ries to both the experts and they 
clarified one by one.  They also assured the Committee to  send the suggestions and 
clause wise analysis of the Bill in writing afterwards.  
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the meeting has been kept.    
The witnesses then withdrew. 
        The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 56
APPENDIX - IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 20 JUNE, 
2006 AT 1100 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’, GROUND FLOOR, 
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1100 hrs   to 1150 hrs 
                                                                                  1210  hrs   to 1240 hrs 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
4. Shri Khagen Das 
5. Shri Sharanjit Singh  Dhillon 
6. Shri Raghunath Jha 
7. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
8. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
9. Shri Sippiparai Ravichandran 
10. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
11. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
12. Shri Anil Basu 
13. Shri Munshi Ram 
14. Shri Rajesh  Verma 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
15. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
16. Shri Harish Rawat 
17. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
18. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
19. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
20. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
           SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 57
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
1. Sh. Ramachandran Pillai - Presid ent, All India Kissan Sabha,  
      ( C P M )  
2. Sh. Kolli Nageshwarao - General Secretary, Andhra Pradesh,  
Ruthu Sangam 
3. Sh. Bhupender Sambher - General Secretary,  Punjab Kissan Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 58
 
At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture welcomed 
the Members and representative of A ll India Kissan Sabha (CPM), Sh. S. 
Ramachandran Pillai and read out the contents of Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by 
the Speaker.  Thereafter the Chairman asked Mr. Pillai to give his suggestions on ‘The 
Seeds Bill, 2004.’ Sh. S. Ramachandran Pill ai expressed his apprehension that with 
the introduction of this Bill, terminator technology is bound to come in India, which is 
very harmful for our Indian  agriculture.  He also ga ve his sugges tions on the 
registration of traditional s eed varieties, pre-grant opposition, rights of the seeds 
inspectors and monopoly of the seed industrie s etc.  He also clarified some of the 
points made by the Members of the Committee.  The Chairman asked him to send 
clause by clause analysis on the provisions of the Bill to the Committee at his earliest.  
The witness then withdrew.  
2. Thereafter, the representatives of All India Kissan Sabha (CPI) were called in 
and asked to present their views on the subject.  One of the witnesses, Sh. Kolli 
Nageswara Rao shared his views with the Committee and apprised the Members 
about the steps taken by him on the issue of arbitrary price being charged by 
Monsanto/Mhyco industries from the Indian farmers for the BT cottonseeds.  He 
desired that the clause for the price fixati on by some Govt. agency should be included 
in the Bill.  He also gave his views on va rious other clauses of the Bill.  Sh. Chittar 
Singh, another representative of All India Kissan Sabha (CPI) also expressed his 
concern about the protection of rights of th e farmers in India.  According to him the 
illiterate farmers cannot register their seeds.  Therefore, the compulsory registration of 
seeds as provided in ‘The Seeds Bill, 2004’ is unwarranted.   
 

 59
3. Thereafter the Members of the Committee raised some clarificatory queries to 
the representatives and they answered some  of the points and a ssured to send written 
replies clause by clause later on.      
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the meeting has been kept.    
The witnesses then withdrew. 
        The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 60
APPENDIX - V 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 3 JULY, 2006 AT 1030 HRS. 
IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘139’, FIRS T FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE 
ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1030 hrs   to 1408 hrs 
                                                                                   
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh  Dhillon 
5. Shri Raghunath Jha 
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangek 
8. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
9. Shri Anil Basu 
10. Shri Munshi Ram 
11. Shri Rajesh  Verma 
 
     RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
12. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
13. Shri Harish Rawat 
14. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
15. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
16. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 61
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
 
BHARAT KRISHAK SAMAJ, NEW DELHI 
 
1. Dr. Krishan Bir Chaudhary - Executive Chairman Bharat Krishak Samaj 
 
ASSOCIATION OF SEED INDUSTRY, MUMBAI 
 
1. Shri Nandkishor Kagliwal - Chairman, Nath Seeds Limited  
2. Shri Raju Barwale  - MD, Maharashtra Hybrid Seeds Company   
     L t d .  
3. Shri M. Ramasami  - MD, Rasi Seeds Pvt. Ltd.   
4. Dr.Arvind Kapur  - MD, Numhems Seeds India Pvt. Ltd. 
5. Dr. Paresh Verma  - Director-Research, Bioseed Research India  
      P v t .  L t d .  
6. Shri R.S.Arora   - MD, Century Seeds Pvt. Ltd. 
7. Shri R.K.Sinha   - Executive Director, Association of Seed  
Industry and All India Crop Biotechnology. 
 
SHETKARI SANGTHAN, PUNE 
 
1. Dr. Manavendra Kachole - Member of the Executive Committee 
2. Shri Nikhade   - Member of the Executive Committee 
3. Shri Govind Joshi  - Me mber of the Executive Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 62
At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture welcomed 
the Members and Dr. Krishan Bir Chaudha ry, Executive Chairman, Bharat Krishak 
Samaj and read out the contents of Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker.  
Thereafter, the Chairman asked Dr. Krishan Bir Chaudhary to give his suggestions on 
‘The Seeds Bill, 2004’.  Dr. Chaudhary expressed his concern about the welfare of 
farmers and strongly expressed his view to delete the latter portion of Clause 43 (1) so 
as to exempt the farmers from registration of  their seeds.  He also clarified some of 
the points made by the Members of the Co mmittee.  The Chairman thanked him for 
briefing the Committee and also asked him to submit his point of view on various 
clauses of the Bill.    
2.  The witnesses then withdrew 
 
3. Thereafter the representa tives of the Association Of Seed Industry were 
welcomed in and asked to present their views on the subject.  They gave their point of 
view on various clauses of the Bill.  The Members appreciated their concern and they 
were also asked to send clause-by-clause anal ysis from the point of view of the Seed 
Industry.   
4. The witnesses then withdrew 
 
Then there was a tea break 
 
5. After tea break representatives of Shet kari Sangathan were called in to depose 
before the Committee about their point of vi ew on the various clauses of ‘The Seeds 
Bill, 2004’.  They were also apprised of  the Direction 55 (1) of ‘Directions by the 
Speaker’. 
6. The Members of the Committee raised some clarificatory queries to the 
representatives and they answered some of the points and assured to send written 
replies clause by clause later on. 
 

 63
7. A verbatim record of the pro ceeding of the sitting has been kept. 
 
8. The witnesses then withdrew.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 64
APPENDIX - VI 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST  SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HELD  ON TUESDAY, THE 18 JULY, 
2006 AT 1100 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, GROUND FLOOR,  
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1312 hrs 
                                                                                   
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
1. Shri Hiten Barman 
2. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
4. Shri Sharanjit Singh  Dhillon 
5. Shri Raghunath Jha 
6. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangek 
7. Shri S.Ravichandran 
8. Shri Anil Basu 
9. Shri Munshi Ram 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
10. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
11. Shri Harish Rawat 
12. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
13. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
14. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
          SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 65
WITNESSES 
 
 
1. Smt. Radha Singh  - Secretary (A&C) 
2. Dr. N.B.Singh   - Agriculture Commissioner 
3.  Shri S.L.Bhat   - J.S.(Seeds) 
4. Shri Nampoothiry  - J.S., Ministry of Law 
5.  Dr. M.L.Chaudhary  - Horticulture Commissioner 
6. Dr. S. Nagrajan  - Chairman, PPV&FR Authority 
7. Shri Harish Parasad  - Director (Seeds) 
8. Dr. S.R.K.Varshney  - Director (Finance) 
9. Shri C.Shanmugam   - Dy. Commissioner (QC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 66
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture a nd Co-operation), Mi nistry of Law and 
Chairman, PPV&FR Authority to the sitting of the Committee and read out contents 
of Direction 55 (1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ and thereafter 
Secretary (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) explained the Ministry’s point 
of view on the points raised by the Committee. 
 
2.       The evidence could not be concluded and the Committee decided to take further 
evidence of the Government on 26.07.06.  
3. A verbatim record of the pro ceeding of the sitting has been kept. 
 
4. The witnesses then withdrew.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 67
APPENDIX - VII 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON WEDNEDSAY, THE 26 JULY, 
2006 AT 1500 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’, GROUND FLOOR,  
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1712 hrs 
                                                                                   
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
1. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
2. Shri G.L.Bhargava 
3. Shri Khagan Das 
4. Shri Raghunath Jha 
5. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
6. Shri Sippiparai Ravichandran  
7. Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy 
8. Shri Anil Basu 
9. Shri Munshi Ram 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
10. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
11. Shri Harish Rawat 
12. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed  
13. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 68
WITNESSES 
 
1. Smt. Radha Singh  - Secretary (A&C) 
2. Dr. S. Nagrajan   - Chairman, PPV&FR Authority 
3. Dr. S.P.Tewari   - D.D.G.(ICAR)  
4. Dr. N.B.Singh   - Agriculture Commissioner 
5. Shri S.L.Bhat   - Joint Secretary 
6. Shri  M.L.Chaudhary  - Horticulture Commissioner 
7. Shri N.K.Nampoothiry  - J.S., Ministry of Law 
8.  Shri R.S.Shukla  - Dy. Legislative Council 
9. Shri Harish Prasad  - Director (Seeds) 
10. Dr. S.R.K.Varshney  - Director (Finance) 
11. Shri C.Shanmugam   - Dy. Commissioner (Seeds) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 69
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture a nd Co-operation), Mi nistry of Law and 
Chairman, PPV&FR Authority to the sitting of the Committee and read out contents 
of Direction 55 (1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’. 
2. Thereafter, the Committee took further evidence of the officials who gave the 
Government’s point of view on the questions raised by the members of the Committee 
on various clauses of ‘The Seeds Bill.  The evidence was concluded. 
3. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the meeting has been kept. 
 
4. The witnesses then withdrew.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 70
APPENDIX- VIII 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDA Y, THE 26 SEPTEMBER, 2006 AT 
1100 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT 
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1320 hrs 
                                                                                   
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Ranen Barman 
3. Shri Anil Basu 
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
7. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda 
9. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
10. Shri  M.P.Veerendra Kumar 
11. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
12. Shri Baleshwar Yadav 
 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Harish Rawat 
14. Dr.M.S.Gill 
15. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
16. Shri Vikram Verma 
17. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
18. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed  
19. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
20. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
21. Shri  M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2 Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 71
At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture welcomed 
the members and apprised the Members a bout the deliberations/ evidences of the 
experts/NGOs/farmers or organizations, Seed Industries and Govt. officials held with 
a view to examine ‘The Seeds Bill, 2004’ in detail.  He also apprised them that the 
Draft Report on the Bill is ready for their consideration.  Then the Report was taken 
up for clause-by-clause consideration.  The Report was unanimously adopted with 
minor modifications.  The Committee also  put on record their appreciation of 
strenuous efforts put in by the Committee Secretariat for reflecting Committee’s 
concern and observations in drafting such an excellent Report.  As the House is not in 
session the Committee authorized the Chairman  to finalize the Report on their behalf 
and to present the same to Honourable Speaker on a date and time convenient to him.   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
 
 
  
   THE SEEDS BILL, 2004 
   ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES  
   CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES    
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
   CHAPTER II 
THE CENTRAL SEED COMMITTEE, REGISTRATION AND 
OTHER SUB-COMMITTEES 
3. Constitution of the Central Seed Committee. 
4. Composition of the Committee. 
5. Powers and functions of the Committee. 
6. Power of Committee to specify minimum limits o f germination, 
purity, seed health, etc. 
7. Registration and other Sub-Commi ttees of the Committee and  
their functions. 
8. Procedure of the Committee and its Sub-Committees. 
9. Secretary and other officers of the Committee. 


10. Meetings of the Committee. 
11. State Seed Committee. 
   CHAPTER  III 
REGISTRATION OF KINDS AND VARIETIES OF SEEDS, ETC. 
12. Maintenance of National Register of Seeds of kinds and 
varieties. 
13. Registration of seeds of any kind or varieties. 
14. Procedure for registration. 
15. Special provision for registration of transgenic varieties.  
16. Cancellation of registration of seeds of kinds and varieties. 
17. Notification of cancellation of registration of seeds of kinds and 
varieties. 
18. Exclusion of certain kinds or varieties of seed from 
registration. 
19. Evaluation of  performance. 
20. Compensation to farmers. 
21. Seed producers and processing units to be registered. 
22. Seed dealers to be registered. 
23. Horticulture nursery to be registered. 
24. Duties of registration holder of horticulture nursery. 
   CHAPTER  IV 
REGULATION OF SALE OF SEED AND SEED CERTIFICATION 
AGENCIES  
25. Regulation of sale of seeds of registered kinds and varieties. 
26. State Seed Certification Agency. 
27. Accreditation of Seed Certification Agencies. 
28. Grant of certificate by the State Seed Certification Agency. 
29. Revocation of certificate. 
30. Recognition of seed certification agencies in foreign countries. 
   CHAPTER  V 
APPEALS 

31. Appeals. 
   CHAPTER  VI 
SEED  ANALYSIS  AND  SEED  TESTING 
32. Central and State Seed Testing Laboratories. 
33. Seed Analysts. 
34. Seed Inspectors. 
35. Powers of Seed Inspector. 
   CHAPTER  VII 
EXPORT AND IMPORT OF SEEDS AND PLANTING MATERIALS 
36. Import of seeds. 
37. Export of seeds. 
   CHAPTER VIII 
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENT 
38. Offences and punishment. 
39. Forfeiture of property. 
40. Offences by companies. 
   CHAPTER IX 
POWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
41. Power of the Central Government to give directions to the State 
Governments. 
42. Power of the Central Government to issue directions to the 
Committee. 
43. Exemptions from registration 
   CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 
44. Protection of action taken in good faith 
45. Power to remove difficulties. 
46. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
47. Power of the Committee to make regulations. 
48. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 
49. Repeal and savings. 
   THE SCHEDULE 

THE SEEDS BILL, 2004 
A 
BILL 
 to provide for regulating the quality of seeds for sale, import and  export and to 
facilitate production and supply of seeds of quality and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.                    
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-Fifth  Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:- 
   CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title, 
extent, 
application 
and 
commenceme
nt. 
1.(1)    This Act may be called  the Seeds Act, 2004. 
(2)       It extends to the whole of India . 
(3)    Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall apply to- 
(a)                every dealer; and 
(b)               ever y producer of seed except when the 
seed is produced by him for his own use and not 
for sale. 
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint. 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for 
different provisions of this  Act and any reference in 
any such provision to the commencement of this Act 
shall be construed as a reference to the coming into 
force of that provision. 
   

Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 
(1)  "agriculture" includes horti culture, forestry and cultivation 
of plantation, medicinal and aromatic plants; 
(2)    “Central Seed Testing Laboratory” means the Central 
Seed Testing Laboratory established or declared as such under 
sub-section (1) of section 32; 
(3)  "Certification Agency" means an agency established 
under section 26 or accredited under sect ion 27 or recognised 
under section 30; 
(4)     “Chairperson” means t he Chairperson of the Committee; 
(5)    “Committee” means the Central Seed Committee 
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3; 
(6)     “container” means a box, bottle, casket, tin, barrel, case, 
receptacle, sack, bag, wrapper or other thing in which any 
article or thing is placed or packed; 
(7) “dealer” means a person who carries on the business of 
buying and  selling,  exporting,  or importing seed, and includes 
an agent of a dealer; 
(8)      “essentially derived variety”, in relation to a variety or an 
initial variety means a variety of  seeds essentially derived from 
such initial variety when it - 
(a)    is predominantly derived from such initial variety, or from a 
variety that itself is predominan tly derived from such initial 
variety, while retaining th e expressionof the essential 
characteristics that result from  the genotype or combination of 

genotypes of such initial variety; 
(b) is clearly distinguished from such initial variety; and 
(c) conforms (except for the diff erences which result from the 
act of derivation) to such initia l variety in the expression of the 
essential characteristics that result from the genotype or 
combination of genotypes of such initial variety; 
(9)    “export” means taking out of India by land, sea or air; 
(10) “extant variety” means a variety available in India which –  
(a) had been notified under secti on 5 of the Seeds Act, 1966 
and remains as such on the date of commencement of this Act; 
or 
(b) is a farmers’ variety as defined in clause (i) of section 2 of 
the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers” Rights Act, 2001; 
or 
(c) is a variety about which there is common knowledge; or 
(d) a variety other than a variety referred to in sub-clauses (a) to 
(c) and is in the public domain; 
(11)   “farmer” means any person who cultivates crops either by 
cultivating the land himself or  through any other person  but 
does not include any individual, co mpany, trader or dealer who 
engages in the procurement and sale of seeds on a commercial 
basis;  
(12)    “horticulture nursery” means any place where horticulture 
plants are, in the regular course of business, produced or 

propagated and sold for transplantation; 
(13) “import" means bringing into  India by land, sea or air; 
(14) “kind” means one or more related species or sub-species 
of crop plants each individually or collectively known by one 
common name such as cabbage, maize, paddy and wheat; 
(15)    “member” means a member of the Committee;  
   (16) “misbranded” - A seed shall be deemed to be 
misbranded if- 
(i)  it is a substitute for, or  resembles in a manner likely to 
deceive, another variety of seed under the name of which it is 
sold, and is not plainly and conspicuously labelled so as to 
indicate its true nature; 
(ii)  it is falsely stated to be the product of any place or country; 
(iii) it is sold by a name which belongs to another kind or variety 
of seed; 
(iv) false claims are made for it upon the label or otherwise; 
(v)  when sold in a package whic h has been sealed or prepared 
by, or at the instance, of t he dealer and which bears his name 
and address, the contents of each package are not 
conspicuously and correctly stated on the outside thereof within 
the limits of variability prescribed under this Act; 
(vi) the package containing it, or the label on the package bears 
any statement, design or device regarding the quality or the 
kind or variety of seed containe d therein, which is false or 
misleading in any mate rial particular or if the package is 

otherwise deceptive with respect to its contents; 
(vii) it is not registered in the manner required by or under this 
Act; 
(viii) the label contains any reference to registration other than 
the registration number; 
(ix) its label does not contain a warning or caution which may be 
necessary, and sufficient, if complied with, to protect human, 
animal and plant life and health or to avoid serious prejudice to 
the environment; 
(x) the package containing it or  the label on the package bears 
the name of a fictitious individual or company as the dealer of 
the kind or variety; or 
(xi) it is not labelled in accor dance with the requirements of this 
Act or the rules made thereunder; 
(17)     "notification" means  a notification published in the 
Official Gazette; 
(18) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(19) “producer” means a person,  group of persons, firm or 
organisation who grows or organizes the production of seeds; 
(20) “registered kind or variety”, in relation to any seed, 
means any kind, or variety thereof, registered under section 13; 
   (21)  “Registration Sub-Co mmittee” means the Registration 
Sub-Committee constituted under sub-section (1) of section 7; 

(22)   “regulation” means  a regulation made by the Committee 
under this Act; 
(23) “seed” means any type of  living embryo or propagule 
capable of regeneration and giving rise to a plant of agriculture 
which is true to such type; 
(24)     "Seed Analyst" means  a Seed Analyst appointed under 
Sub-section (1) of section 33; 
(25) "Seed Inspector" means a Seed Inspector appointed 
under Sub-section (1) of section 34; 
(26)    “seed processing” m eans the process by which seeds 
and planting materials are dried,  threshed, shelled, ginned or 
delinted (in cotton), cleaned, graded or treated; 
(27)    “spurious seed” means any  seed which is not genuine or 
true to type; 
(28) “State Government” ,in relation to a Union territory, 
means the  administrator thereof; 
(29)    “State Seed Testing Laboratory”, in relation to any State, 
means the State Seed Laboratory established or declared as 
such under sub-section (2) of section 32 for that State; 
   (30)    “transgenic variet y” means seed or planting material 
synthesized or developed by modi fying or altering the genetic 
composition by means of genetic engineering;  
(31)    “variety” means a plant grouping except micro-organism 
within a single botanical taxon of the lowest known rank, which 
can be 

(a)   defined by the expression of the characteristics resulting 
from a given genotype of that plant grouping; 
(b)  distinguished from any other plant grouping by expression 
of at least one of the said characteristics; and 
(c)  considered as a unit with regard to its suitability for being 
propagated, which remains unchanged after such 
propagation, 
and includes propagating material of such variety, extant 
variety, transgenic variety, fa rmers' variety and essentially 
derived variety. 
 
   
   
   CHAPTER II   
THE CENTRAL SEED COMMITTEE, REGISTRATION AND   
OTHER SUB-COMMITTEES  
Constitution 
of Central 
Seed 
Committee. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
constitute, for the purpose of this Act, a Committee to be called 
the Central Seed Committee. 
Composition 
of the 
Committee. 
4.(1)    The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson, 
members, ex-officio  and other members, to be nominated by 
the Central Government. 
(2)  The Secretary to the Go vernment of India in the 
Department of Agriculture and Co-operation, Ministry of 
Agriculture, shall be Chairperson, ex officio. 

   (3)  The Committee shall cons ist of the following members, 
ex officio namely:- 
(i)   the Agriculture Co mmissioner,  Department of 
Agriculture and Co-operation, Government of India ; 
(ii)   the Deputy Director Gener al (Crop Sciences), Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research; 
(iii)   the Deputy Director General (Horticulture), Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research; 
(iv)   the Joint Secretary  in charge of seeds in the 
Department of Agriculture and Co -operation, Government of 
India 
(v)   the Horticulture Co mmissioner, Department of 
Agriculture and Co-operation, Government of India; 
(vi)    a representative of t he Department of Bio-technology, 
Government of India, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to 
the Government of India; 
(vii)    a representative of t he Ministry of Environment and 
Forests, Government of India,  not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India. 
(4) The Committee shall consis t of the following other 
members to be nominated by the Central Government, 
namely:- 
(i) the Secretary (Agriculture) from five States, one each 
from three out of the five  geographical zones of the country as 
mentioned in the Schedule on rotation basis; 
(ii) Director, State Seed Cert ification Agency from one State 
which is not represented under clause (i); 
(iii) Managing Director,  State Seeds Corporation, from one 
State which is not represented under clause (i) or clause (ii); 
(iv)  two representatives of farmers; 
(v)   two representativ es of seed industry; 

(vi)   two specialists or ex perts in the field of seed 
development. 
   (5) The Committee may associate with it, in such manner, on 
such terms and for such purposes as it may deem fit, any 
person whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying 
with any of the prov isions of this Act, and a person so 
associated shall have the right to  take part in the discussion of 
the Committee relevant to the pu rposes for which he has been 
associated, but shall not have t he right to vote and shall be 
entitled to receive such allowances  or fees as may be fixed by 
the Central Government. 
   (6) A Member nominated under sub-section (5) shall, unless 
his seat becomes vacant earlier by resignation, death or 
otherwise, be entitled to hold offi ce for two years from the date 
of his nomination but shall be  eligible for re-nomination 
provided that the said member shall hold office only for so long 
as he holds the appointment by virtue of which his nomination 
was made. 
   (7) Save as otherwise provided, the terms and conditions of 
service of the members shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(8) A member other than an ex officio member may resign 
his office by giving notice in wr iting to the Central Government 
and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed to 
have vacated his office. 
   (9) A person shall be dis qualified for being nominated or 
appointed as a member if he- 
(i)    has been convicted and s entenced to imprisonment for 
an offence which, in the opini on of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude; or 
(ii)   is  an undischarged insolvent; or 

(iii)   is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
competent court. 
(10) No act or proceeding of the Committee shall become 
invalid merely by reason of –  
(i)    any vacancy therein, or any defect in the constitution 
thereof; or 
(ii)   any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the 
Chairperson or a member of the Committee; or 
(iii)   any irregularity in t he procedure of the Committee not 
affecting the merits of the case. 
(11)    The Central Government may, at any time, remove from 
office any member other than me mber, ex-officio after giving 
him a reasonable opportunity of  showing cause against the 
proposed removal. 
Powers and 
functions of 
the 
Committee.  
5.     The Committee shall be respons ible for and shall have all 
the powers for the effective implementation of this Act and shall 
advise the Central Government and the State Governments on 
matters relating to- 
(a)    seed programming and planning; 
(b)    seed development and production; 
(c)    export and import of seeds; 
(d)   standards for registration, certification and seed testing; 
(e)   seed registration and its enforcement; 
(f)   such other matters as may be specified by the Central 
 Government. 
Powers of 
Committee to 
specify
6.   The Committee may, by notification, specify–  

specify 
minimum 
limits of 
germination, 
purity, seed 
health, etc.  
   
(a)       the minimum limits of germination, genetic and physical 
purity, and seed health, with re spect to any seed of any 
kind of variety; 
(b)   the mark or label to indicate that such seed conforms to 
the minimum limits of germination, genetic and physical 
purity, and seed health specifie d under clause (a), and 
other particulars, such as expected performance of the 
seed in accordance with the in formation provided by the 
producer under section 14 whic h such mark or label may 
contain. 
Registration 
and other 
Sub-
Committees of 
the Committee 
and their 
functions.  
7.(1)   The Committee shall constitute a Sub-Committee to be 
called the Registration Sub-Committee consisting of a 
Chairman and such number of other  members, to assist him in 
the discharge of the functions of the Committee, as may be 
prescribed. 
(2)   It shall be the duty of the Registration Sub-Committee- 
(a)   to register seeds of variet ies after scrutinizing their claims 
as made in the application in  such manner as may be 
prescribed; 
(b)   to perform such other functions as are assigned to it by the 
Committee. 
(3)  The Committee may appoint as many other Sub-
Committees including a Sub-Commi ttee on Seed  Certification  
as it deems fit consisting wholly of the members of the 
Committee or wholly of  other persons or partly of members of 
the Committee and partly of other persons as it thinks fit to 
exercise such powers and pe rform such duties as may be 

delegated to them. 
Procedure of 
the Committee 
and its Sub-
Committees.  
8.    The Committee may, subject to  the previous approval of 
the Central Government, make r egulations for the purpose of 
regulating its own procedure an d the procedure of any Sub-
Committee thereof.  
Secretary and 
other officers 
of the 
Committee.  
9.   The Central Government shall –  
(a)       appoint a person to be  the Secretary of the Committee; 
and 
(b)   provide the Committee wit h such technical and other 
officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient 
performance of the functions of the Committee under this Act.   
Meetings of 
the 
Committee.  
10. (1) The Committee shall meet as and when necessary at 
such time and place and sha ll observe such procedure in 
regard to transaction of business at  its meetings (including the 
quorum at meetings) as may be provided by regulations. 
(2) The Chairperson or, in hi s absence, the Agricultural 
Commissioner or, in the absence of both the Chairperson and 
the Agriculture Commissioner, any member chosen by the 
members present from amongst t hemselves, shall preside at a 
meeting of the Committee. 
(3) All questions at a meeting of the Committee shall be 
decided by a majority of votes of the members present and 
voting and in the case of an equa lity of votes, the Chairperson 
or, in his absence, the Agricult ure Commissioner or, in the 
absence of both the Chairperson and the Agriculture 
Commissioner the person presiding shall have and exercise a 
second or casting vote 
State Seed 
Committee.  
11.   Every State Government shall establish a State Seed 
Committee to

Committee to –  
(a)   advise the Committee on regi stration of regional or local 
seeds of any kind or variety; 
(b)   advise the State Govern ment on registration of seed 
producing units, seed proce ssing units, seed dealers and 
horticulture nurseries; 
(c)   maintain, in each distric t, a list of seed dealers, seed 
producers, seed processing units and horticulture nurseries; 
(d) seek information from persons engaged in the 
production, supply, distribution, trade or commerce in seeds of 
any kind or variety regarding stocks, prices, sales and other 
information in the manner as may be prescribed; 
(e) advise the State Governm ent and the Committee on all 
matters arising out of the admin istration and implementation of 
this Act; and 
(f) carry out  other functions assigned to, by, or under this 
Act. 
   CHAPTER  III 
REGISTRATION OF KINDS AND VARIETIES OF SEEDS, 
ETC. 
Maintenance 
of National 
Register of  
seeds of kinds 
and varieties.  
12.(1) For the purposes of this Ac t, a register of all kinds and 
varieties of seed to be called the National Regist er of Seeds  
shall be kept by the Registra tion Sub-Committee wherein all 
specifications, as may be prescribed, shall be maintained. 
(2) Subject to the directions of the Committee, the Register 
shall be kept under the cont rol and management of the 

Registration Sub-Committee.  
(3)    The Registration Sub- Committee shall, within such 
intervals and in such manner as  it thinks appropriate, publish 
the list of kinds and variet ies of seed which have been 
registered during that interval. 
Registration 
of seeds of 
any kind  or 
variety.  
13.(1)  No seed of any kind or vari ety shall, for the purpose of 
sowing or planting by any person,  be sold unless such seed is 
registered under sub-section (2 ) by the Registration Sub-
Committee in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2)  Subject to the provisions of sections 14 and 15, the 
Registration Sub-Committee may register, or refuse any kind or 
variety of seed on the basis of information furnished by the 
producer who develops the vari ety on the results of multi-
locational trials for such period as may be prescribed to 
establish the performance of that seed. 
 Provided that no application for registration shall be refused 
under this sub-section unless th e applicant has been given an 
opportunity to represent his case: 
Provided further that seeds of any kind or variety  in respect of 
which a valid registration exis t on the date of commencement 
of this Act are not required to  be registered again under this 
section on basis of the  info rmation on the results of multi-
location trials. 
(3) The Registration Sub-Committee may grant provisional 
registration to the varieties of seeds which are available in the 
market on the date of commencement of this Act. 
(4) Registration made under this Act shall be valid for a 

period of fifteen years in the ca se of annual and biennial crops, 
and eighteen years for long duration perennials.   
(5)    At the expiry of the per iod granted under sub-section (4), 
the kind or variety of seed may be re-registered for a like period 
by the Registration Sub-Committ ee on the basis of information 
furnished by the producer on the re sults of such  trials as may 
be prescribed under sub-section (2)  to re-establish 
performance of the kind or variety of seed.  
(6)   The Registration Sub-Co mmittee shall have the power to 
issue such directions to prot ect the interests of a producer 
against any abusive act committed by any third party during the 
period between the date of filing of  application for registration 
and the date of decision by the Committee on such application. 
Procedure for 
registration.  
14.(1)    Every application for registration under sub-section 
(2)of section 13 shall be made in such form and contain such 
particulars and be accompanied by such fees as may be 
prescribed. 
(2)   On receipt of any such app lication for the registration of a 
kind or variety of seed, the Registration Sub-Committee may, 
after such enquiry as it deems fit and after satisfying itself that 
the kind or variety of seed to which the application relates 
conforms to the claims made by the importer or by the seller, 
as the case may be, as regards the efficacy of the kind or 
variety of seed and its safety to human beings and animals, 
register the kind or variety, as  the case may, of the seed on 
such conditions as may be s pecified by it and allot a 
registration number thereto and issue a certificate of 
registration. 

(3)   The Registration Sub-Co mmittee may, having regard to 
the efficacy of the seeds and it s safety to human beings and 
animals, vary the conditions subject to which a certificate of 
registration has been granted and may, for that purpose, 
require the certificate holder by notice in writing to deliver the 
certificate to it within such time as may be specified in the 
notice. 
Special 
provision for 
registration of 
transgenic 
varieties. 
15. (1) Notwithstanding anything c ontained in section 14, no 
seed of any transgenic variety shall be registered unless the 
applicant has obtained clearance in  respect of the same as 
required by or under the prov isions of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986:    
          Provided that the Registration Sub-Committee may, 
subject to clearance under the said Act, grant provisional 
registration, for a period not exceeding two years on the basis 
of information furnished by the producer on the results of multi-
locational trials in the prescribed manner. 
(2)   Save as otherwise provided  in sub-section (1), the form 
and manner and the procedure for registration of transgenic 
variety of seed and the fee payab le thereto shall be the same 
as applicable in case of registration under section 13. 

Cancellation 
of registration 
of  seeds of 
kinds and 
varieties.  
16.(1) The Registration Sub- Committee may cancel any 
registration granted under section 13 or section 15 or any one 
or more of the following grounds, namely:-  
(a)   that the holder of the ce rtificate has violated any of the 
terms and conditions of the registration; or 
(b)  that the registration has been obtained by 
misrepresentation or concealment of essential data; or    
(c)  that the variety is not performing in accordance with the 
information provided by the produc er under sub-section (3) of 
section 14 or has become obsolete or has outlived its utility; or 
and be made available for sale in  the market in the public 
interest; or 
(d)  that prevention of commercial exploitation of such variety of 
seeds is necessary. 
(i)    in the public interest; 
(ii)   to protect public order  or public morality; or 
(iii)  to protect human beings, an imal and plant life and health 
to avoid  serious prejudice to the environment. 
(2) No order of cancellation of registration under this section 
shall be made unless the holder  thereof or the affected person 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause in respect of the grounds for such cancellation.  
Notification of 
cancellation 
of registration 
of seeds of 
kinds and 
17.   The Registration Sub-Co mmittee shall notify the 
cancellation of registration of any kind or variety of seed made 
under section 13   or any regist ration made under section 15 in 
the Official Gazette

varieties. the Official Gazette 
Exclusion of 
certain kinds 
or varieties of 
seed from 
registration.  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 Evaluation of  
performance.  
18.    Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in this Act, no 
registration of any kind or vari ety of seed sha ll be made under 
this Act, if prevention of commercial exploitation of such kind or 
variety is necessary to protect public order or public morality or 
human, animal or plant life and health, or to avoid serious 
prejudice to the environment. 
 (2)  A kind or variety of seed containing any technology, which 
is harmful, or potentially harmful, shall not be registered.  
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section, the 
expression “technology” incl udes genetic use restriction 
technology and terminator technology. 
19.   The Committee may, for conducting trials to assess 
performance, accredit centers of the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research, State Agricultural Universities and such 
other organizations fulfilling the eligibility requirements as may 
be prescribed, to conduct trials to evaluate the performance of 
any kind or variety of seed. 
Compensation 
to farmer.  
20. Where the seed of any regist ered kind or variety is 
sold to a farmer, the producer, distributor or vendor, 
as the case may be, shall disclose the expected 
performance of such kind or variety to the farmer 
under given conditions, and if, such registered seed 
fails to provide the expected performance under such 
given conditions, the farmer may claim compensation 
from the producer, distribut or or vendor under the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986. 
 

Seed producers 
and seed 
processing units 
to be registered.  
21.(1) No producer shall grow or organize the 
production of seed unless he is registered as such by 
the State Government under this Act. 
   
(2) No person shall  maintain  a seed processing unit  
unless such unit is  register ed by the State Government 
under this Act. 
(3) The State Government s hall register a producer 
or seed processing unit if he or it meets the 
specifications prescribed by the Central Government in 
terms of infrastructure, equipment and qualified 
manpower. 
(4)  Every application fo r registration under sub-
section (3) shall be made in such form and manner and 
shall be accompanied by such fee as may be 
prescribed. 
(5)  The State Government may, after making such 
enquiry and subject to such conditions as it thinks fit, 
grant a certificate for maintaining   a   seed producing or 
a seed processing unit  in such form as may be 
prescribed. 
(6)   Every  seed produc ing unit and every seed 
processing units shall furn ish periodic returns on the 
quantity of seeds of different kinds or varieties produced 
or processed by it to the Seed Certification Agency in 
such form and at such time as may be prescribed. 
 
 

(7)  The State Government  may, after giving the 
holder of certificate of registration under sub-section (1), 
or sub-section (2), as the case may be, suspend or 
cancel the registration if  
(a)                such registration has been obtained by 
misrepresentation as to a material particular 
relating to the specification in terms of 
infrastructure, equipmen t or availability of 
qualified manpower; or 
(b)      any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder has been contravened. 
Seed dealers to 
be registered. 
22.(1) Every person who desir es to carry on the 
business of selling, keeping for sale, offering to sell, 
bartering, import or export or otherwise supply any seed 
by himself, or by any other person on his behalf  shall 
obtain a registration certificate as a dealer in seeds from  
the State Government . 
(2)   Every applicant for dealership under sub-section 
(1) shall be required to furnish information about seed 
stocks, sales and other related information as may be 
prescribed. 
(3)       Even application for registration under sub-
section(1) shall be made in such form and manner and 
shall be accompanied by such fee as may be 
prescribed. 
(4)  The State Government  may, after making such 
enquiry and subject to such conditions as it thinks fit, 
 
 

grant a certificate of registra tion as a dealer in seeds in 
such form as may be prescribed. 
(5)    Every dealer register ed under this section shall 
furnish such information and returns regarding seed 
stocks, seed lots, expiry date of seed lots and other 
related information as may be prescribed. 
(6)    The State Governm ent may, after giving the 
dealer an opportunity of being heard, suspend or cancel 
a certificate granted under this Act if- 
(a)    such registration had been obtained by 
misrepresentation of any material fact; 
(b)   contravenes any of the pr ovisions of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder. 
Horticulture 
nursery to be 
registered. 
   
23.(1)    No person shall conduct or carry on the 
business of horticulture nursery  for any of the purposes 
of this Act unless such nursery is registered with the 
State Government. 
(2)    Every application fo r  registration under sub-
section (1) shall be made in such form and contain such 
particulars and shall be accompanied by such fee as 
may be prescribed. 
 
 
Duties of 
registration 
holders of 
horticulture 
nursery.  
24. Every person who is a holder of a registration of a 
horticulture nursery under  section 23 shall- 
(a)    keep a complete record  of the origin or source 
of every planting mate rial and performance 
record of mother trees in the nursery; 
 
 

 (b)   keep a layout plan showing the position of the 
root-stocks and scions used in raising the 
horticulture plants;  
(c)    keep a performance record of the mother trees 
in the nursery; 
(d)   keep the nursery plants as well as the parent 
trees used for the production or propagation of 
horticulture plants free from infectious or 
contagious insects, pests or diseases affecting 
plants; and 
(e)    furnish such information to the State 
Government on the production, stocks, sales 
and prices of planting mate rial in the nursery as 
may be prescribed. 

 
        
 CHAPTER IV 
REGULATION OF SALE OF SEED  AND    
SEED CERTIFICATION AGENCIES  
   
Regulation 
of sale of 
seeds of 
registered 
kinds and 
varieties.  
25. No person shall himself, or by any other person on 
his behalf, carry on the business of selling, keeping for 
sale, offering to sell, bartering, import or export or 
otherwise supply any kind of seed of any registered 
kind or variety unless- 
(a)                such seed is identifiable as to its kind or 
variety; 
(b)               such seed conforms to the minimum limit of 
germination and genetic , physical purity, 
maximum seed health specified under clause (a) 
of section 6; 
(c)                the container of such seed bears in the 
prescribed manner, the mark or label bearing the 
correct particulars thereof, specified under 
clause (b) of section 6; 
(d)               the container of such seed, in the case of 
transgenic varieties, bear s a declaration to this 
effect.  
(e)                he co mplies with such other requirements 
as may be prescribed. 
   
State Seed 
Certification 
Agency.  
26.    The Committee may, in consultation with the 
State Government, by notific ation, establish a State 
Seed Certification Agency for the State to carry out the 
   

functions entrusted to the State Seed Certification 
Agency by or under this Act: 
Accreditatio
n of Seed 
Certification 
Agencies.  
27. (1)   The Committee may in consultation with the 
State Government and the State Seed Committee, 
accredit –  
(a)      organizations to carry out  certification, on the 
fulfillment of such criteria, as may be prescribed, or 
(b)     individuals or s eed producing organisations to 
carry out self- certificati on, in such manner as may 
be prescribed. 
(2) The accredited organi sations individuals and 
seed producing organisations shall be subject to such 
inspection and control of the Committee, the concerned 
State Government and Stat e Seed Certification 
Agency, as may be prescribed. 
(3)  The accreditation may be withdrawn by the 
Committee, for reasons to be recorded in writing and 
after giving to the concerned organization or individual, 
as the case may be, a reas onable opportunity of being 
heard. 
   
Grant of 
certificate 
by the State 
Seed 
Certification 
Agency.  
28.(1)    Any person selling, keeping for sale, offering to 
sell, bartering or otherwise supplying any seed of any 
registered kind or variety ma y, if he desires to have 
such seed certified by t he State Seed Certification 
Agency, apply to that Agency for the grant of a 
certificate for the purpose. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be 
   

made in such form, shall co ntain such particulars and 
shall be accompanied by such fee as may be 
prescribed. 
(3)  On receipt of an application under sub-section 
(1), the State Seed Certif ication Agency may, after 
such enquiry as it thinks fit and after satisfying itself 
that the seed to which the application relates conforms 
to the prescribed standards, gr ant a certificate in such 
form and on such conditions as may be prescribed: 
 Provided that such standards shall not be lower 
than the minimum limit of  germination, genetic and 
physical purity specified fo r that seed under clause (a) 
of section 6. 
Revocation 
of 
certificate.  
29. If the State Seed Certification Agency is 
satisfied, either on a referenc e made to it in this behalf 
or otherwise, that-  
(a)     the certificate grant ed by it under section 28  has 
been obtained by misrepresentation as to an essential 
fact; or 
(b)   the holder of the  certificate has, without 
reasonable cause, failed to comply with the conditions 
subject to which the certificate has been granted or has 
contravened any of the provis ions of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder, 
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which 
the holder of the certificate may be liable under this Act, 
the State Seed Cert ification Agency may, after giving 
   

the holder of the certificat e an opportunity of showing 
cause, revoke the certificate. 
Recognition 
of seed 
certification 
agencies in 
foreign 
countries.  
30. The Central Govern ment may, on the 
recommendation of the Committee and by notification, 
recognise any seed certific ation agency established in 
any foreign country, for the purposes of this Act. 
   
   CHAPTER V 
APPEALS 
   
Appeals. 31.(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the 
Registration Sub-Committee under section 14, section 
16 or section 27 or of t he State Seed Certification 
Agency under section 28 or  section 29 may, within 
thirty days from the date on which the decision is 
communicated to him  prefer an appeal to such 
authority (hereinafter referred to as the appellate 
authority)  as the Central Government may think fit to 
constitute: 
 Provided that the appellate authority may 
entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisf ied that the appellant was 
prevented by sufficient caus e from filing the appeal in 
time. 
(2)  An appellate authority shall consist of a single 
person or three persons as  the Central Government 
may think fit, to be appointed by that Government. 
(3)  The form and manner in which an appeal may 
be preferred under sub-section (1), the fee payable for 
such appeal and the procedure to be followed by the 
   

appellate authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(4)  On receipt of an appeal preferred under sub-
section (1), the appellate authority shall, after giving the 
appellant and the ot her party an opportunity of being 
heard, dispose of the appeal  as expeditiously as 
possible. 
   CHAPTER VI 
SEED ANALYSIS AND SEED TESTING 
   
Central  and 
State Seed 
Testing 
Laboratories
.  
32.(1)   The Central Governm ent may, by notification,  
establish a Central Seed Te sting Laboratory or declare 
any seed-testing laboratory as the Central Seed 
Testing Laboratory to carry out the functions entrusted 
to the Central Seed Testing Laboratory by or under this 
Act in the prescribed manner 
(2)   The State Government may, in consultation with 
the Committee, and by notific ation, establish one or 
more State Seed Testing Lab oratories or declare any 
seed testing laboratory in the Government or non-
Government sector as a State Seed Testing Laboratory 
where analysis of seed of any  kind or variety shall be 
carried out under this Act in the prescribed manner. 
(3) Every Seed Testing Laboratory referred to in 
sub-section (1) shall have as many Seed Analysts as 
the Central Government may consider necessary. 
(4) Every Seed Testing Laboratory referred to in 
sub-section (2) shall have as many Seed Analysts as 
the State Government may consider necessary. 
   
Seed 33.(1) In case of the Central Seed Laboratory, the    

Analysts. Central Government and in other cases the State 
Government may, by notification, appoint such persons 
as the Government thinks  fit and having the prescribed 
qualifications to be Seed A nalysts and define the local 
limits of their jurisdiction. 
(2) Every Central Seed Testing Laboratory 
established or declared under sub-section (1) of section 
32 and every State S eed Testing Laboratory 
established or declared under  sub-section (2) of that 
section shall have as many Seed Analysts as the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the 
case may be, specify. 
Seed 
Inspectors. 
34.(1) The State Government may, by notification, 
appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the 
prescribed qualifications, to  be Seed Inspectors and 
define the areas within which they shall exercise 
jurisdiction. 
(2) Every Seed Inspector shall be subordinate to 
such authority as the State Government may specify in 
this behalf. 
   
Powers of 
Seed 
Inspectors.  
35.(1) The Seed Inspector may- 
(a)     take samples of any  seed of any  kind or variety 
from- 
(i)                  any person selling such seed; or 
(ii)                any person who is in the course of 
conveying, deliverin g or preparing to 
deliver such seed to a purchaser or a 
   
   
   
   
   

consignee; or 
(iii)               a purchaser or a consignee after 
delivery of such seed to him; 
(b)  send such sample for analysis to the Seed 
Analyst of the area within which such sample has been 
taken; 
(c) enter and search, at a ll reasonable times, with 
such assistance, if any, as he considers necessary, any 
place in which he has reason to believe that an offence 
under this Act has been or  is being committed and 
order in writing the person in possession of any seed in 
respect of which the offence has been or is being 
committed, not to dispose of any stock of such seed for 
a specific period not exce eding thirty days or, unless 
the alleged offence is such  that the defect may be 
removed by the possessor of the seed, seize the stock 
of such seed; 
(d)  examine any record, register, document or any 
other material object found in any place mentioned in 
clause (c) and seize the same if he has reason to 
believe that it may furnish evidence of the commission 
of an offence punishable under this Act; and 
(e)   exercise such other powers as may be 
necessary for carrying out t he purposes of this Act or 
any rule or regulation made thereunder. 
(2) The power conferred by this section includes the 
power to break-open any cont ainer in which any seed 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   

of any  kind or variety ma y be contained or to break-
open the door of any premis es where any such seed 
may be kept for sale: 
           Provided that the power to break-open the door 
shall be exercised only afte r the owner or any other 
person in occupation of the pr emises, if he is present 
therein, refuses to open the door on being  called upon 
to do so. 
(3) Where the Seed Inspector takes any action 
under clause (a) of sub-section (1), he shall, as far as 
possible, call not less than two independent and 
respectable persons to be present at the time when 
such action is taken and ta ke their signatures on a 
memorandum to be prepared in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed. 
(4) The provisions of the C ode of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, or in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, 
the provisions of any corres ponding law in force in that 
State, shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or 
seizure under this section as  they apply to any search 
or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued 
under section 94 of t he said Code, or, as the case may 
be, under the corresponding provisions of the said law. 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   CHAPTER VII 
IMPORT AND EXPORT OF SEEDS  
   
Import of 
seeds.  
36. (1)   All import of seeds –  
(a)     shall be subject to the provisions of the Plants, 
Fruits and Seeds (Regulatio n of Import into India) 
   
   

Order, 1989, or any corresponding order made 
under section 3 of the Destructive Insects and 
Pests Act, 1914; 
(b) shall  conform to mini mum limits of germination, 
genetic and physical purity, and seed health as 
prescribed under section 6; and 
(c)   shall be subject to r egistration as may be granted 
on the basis of information furnished by the 
importer on the results of mu lti-locational trials for 
such period as may be prescribed to establish  
agronomic performance. 
(2)   The Central Governm ent may, by notification, 
permit to import an unregistered variety in such quantity 
and subject to fulfilling such conditions as may be 
specified in that notification for research purposes. 
   
   
   
   
2 of 
1914.  
Export of 
seeds. 
37.   The Central Governm ent may, on the advice of 
the Committee, restrict, by notification, the export of 
seeds of any  kind or variety if it is deemed that such 
export may adversely affect the food security of the 
country, or if it is felt t hat the reasonable requirements 
of the public will not be me t, or on such other grounds 
as may be prescribed. 
   
   CHAPTER VIII 
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENT 
   
Offences 
and 
punishment.  
   
   
38.   If any person –  
(a)   contravenes any provision of this Act or any rule 
made thereunder; or 
   

(b)   imports, sells, stocks or exhibits for sale or 
barter; and or otherwise suppl ies any seed of any kind 
or variety deemed to be misbranded ; or 
(c)   imports, sells, stocks or exhibits for sale or 
barter, or otherwise supplies any seed of any kind or 
variety without a certificate of registration; or 
(d)   obstructs the Committee, Registration Sub-
Committee or Seed  Certif ication Agency or Seed 
Inspector or Seed Analyst  or any other authority 
appointed or duly empowered under this Act  in the 
exercise of its powers or discharge of their duties under 
this Act or the rules made thereunder, 
he shall, on conviction, be punishable – with fine which 
shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which 
may extend to twenty five thousand rupees. 
(2) If any person sells any  seed which does not 
conform to the standards of physical purity, germination 
or health or does not maintain any records required to 
be maintained under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder he shall, on convic tion, be punishable with 
fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees 
but which may extend to twenty- five thousand rupees. 
(3) If any person furnishes any false information 
relating to the standards of genetic purity, misbrands 
any seed or supplies any s purious seed or spurious 
transgenic variety, sells any  non-registered seeds he 
shall, on conviction be puni shable with imprisonment 

for a term which may extend to  six months or with fine 
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with both. 
Forfeiture of 
property.  
39. When any person has been convicted under this 
Act for the contravention of any  of the provisions of this 
Act or the rules made ther eunder, the seed in respect 
of which the contravention has been committed shall be 
forfeited to the Central Government. 
   
Offences by 
companies.  
40.(1)  Where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company, every person who at the time 
the offence was committed was in charge of, and was 
responsible to the company  for the conduct of the 
business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished 
accordingly: 
          Provided that  nothing contained in this sub-
section shall render any su ch person liable to any 
punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence 
was committed without his knowledge and that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission 
of such offence. 
(2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attribut able to any neglect on the 
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer 
of the company, such dire ctor, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
   

offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly. 
Explanation. – For the purpose of this section,- 
(a)  “company” means any body corporate and includes 
a firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b)   “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in 
the firm. 
   CHAPTER  IX 
POWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
   
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to give 
directions to 
the State 
Government
s.  
41.  The Central Government may give such directions 
to any State Governments as may appear to the 
Central Government to be necessary for carrying into 
execution in the State any of the provisions of this Act 
or of any rule made there under. 
   
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to issue 
directions to 
the 
Committee.  
42.(1)  Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of 
this Act, the Committee shall, in the discharge of its 
functions and the performance duties under this Act, be 
bound by such directions on questions of policy as the 
Central Government may give in  writing to it from time 
to time. 
(2)  The decision of the Central Government whether 
a question is one of policy or not shall be final. 
   
Exemption 
from 
registration.  
43. (1) Nothing in this Act shal l restrict the right of the 
farmer to save, use, exchange, share or sell his farm 
seeds and planting material, except that he shall not 
sell such seed or planting material under a brand name 
or which does not conform to the minimum limit of 
germination, physical purity,  genetic purity prescribed 
   

under clause (a) or clause (b) of section 6. 
(2)  The Central Government  may, by notification, 
and subject to conditions, if any, as it may specify 
therein, exempt from all or any of the provisions of this 
Act or the rules made ther eunder, any educational, 
scientific or research or extension organization. 
   CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 
   
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good faith.  
44. No suit, prosecution or  other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Government or any person for 
anything which is in good fa ith done or intended to be 
done under this Act. 
   
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.  
45. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by 
order published in the Offici al Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 
       Provided that no order shall be made under this 
section after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act. 
(2)  Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be 
laid before each House of Parliament. 
   
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make 
rules.  
46.(1)   The Central Govern ment may by notification, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2)  In particular and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
   

provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- 
(a)         the terms and c onditions of app ointment of  
members of the Committee under sub-section (7) 
of section 4;  
(b)         the matters to be prescribed under clause (f) 
of section 5;  
(c)         the number of other members who shall assist 
the Chairperson of the Registration Sub-
Committee to discharge its functions under sub-
section(1) of section 7; 
(d) the manner of scrutinizi ng the claims as made in 
the applications under clause (a) of sub-section (2) 
of section 7;  
(e)  the manner of seeking information by a State Seed 
Committee under clause (d) of section11; 
(f)    the specifications which shall be maintained in the 
National Register of Seeds  of kinds or varieties 
under sub-section (1) of section 12;  
(g)     the manner of regist ration of seed of any kind or 
variety under sub-section (1) and (3) of section 
13;  
(h) the period which required to establish performance 
of seed on the results of  multi-location trials 
conducted under sub-section(2) of section 13; 
(i) the form of application and the particulars which 
should be furnished, and the fee which should 
accompany, such application under sub-section(1) of 
section 14; 
(J)  the eligibility require ment which an organization 
shall fulfil for accreditation under section 19;  
(K)   the specification required to be fulfilled for 
registration as a producer or seed producing unit 
under sub-section (3) of section 21;  
(l)   the form and manner in which an a pplication for 

registration under sub-section (3) of section 21 
shall be made and the fee with which such 
application shall be accompanied under sub-
section (5) of said section 21;  
(m)   the form in which a certificate for maintaining a 
seed producing or seed pr ocessing unit may be 
granted under sub-section (5) of section 21;  
(n)    the form in which and time within which periodic 
returns shall be filled under sub-section (6) of 
section 21;  
(o)     the information which an applicant for dealership 
in seeds shall be furnished under sub-section (2) 
of section 22;  
(p)     the form and manner in which an application for 
registration as seed dealer  under sub-section (1) 
of section 22 shall be made and the fee which 
shall accompany such application under sub-
section (3) of that section;  
(Q)    the form in which a certificate of registration as a 
dealer in seeds sha ll be granted under sub-
section (4) of section 22;  
(r)      the information and return which a registered 
dealer shall furnish to the State Government 
under sub-section (5) of section 22;  
(s)      the form in which an application for registration 
of a horticulture nursery shall be made, the 
particulars which such application shall contain 
and fee which shall accompany such application 
under sub-section (2) of section 23;  
(t)     the information on production, stocks, sales and 
prices of planting material in a nursery shall be 
furnished to the State Government under section 
24;  
(u)    the manner in which the container of seeds shall 
bear the mark or label under clause © of section 
25; 

(v)  the requirement which a person carrying on 
business of selling, etc. of  any registered kind or 
variety of seeds shall comply with under clause 
(e) of section 25;  
(w)    the criteria to be fulfilled under clause (a) and the 
manner of carrying out se lf-certification under  
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 27;  
(x)     the inspection and control which the Committee, 
the concerned State Gove rnment and the State 
Seeds Certification Agen cy shall carry out or 
have on an accredited individual and seed 
producing organizations under sub-section (2) of 
section 27;  
(y)        the form of application and the particulars to be 
furnished in such applic ation and the fee which 
shall accompany such application under sub-
section (2) of section 28;  
(z)     the form in which and the conditions subject to 
which a certificate shall be granted under sub-
section (3) of section  28;  
(za)   the form and manner in which an appeal shall be 
preferred and the fee wh ich such appeal shall 
accompany and the procedure which the 
appellate authority shall follow  under sub-section 
(3) of section 31;  
(zb)   the manner in wh ich a Central Seed Testing 
Laboratory established or declared under sub-
section (1) of section 32 shall carry out its 
functions;  
(zc)  the manner of carrying out analysis of seeds shall 
be made under sub-section (2) of section 32;  
(zd)  the qualifications wh ich a person to be appointed 
as Seed Analysts shall possess under sub-
section (1) of section 33;  
(ze)  the qualifications wh ich a person to be appointed 
as Seed Ins pector shall possess under sub-

section (1) of section 34;  
(zf)  the form and manner in which the memorandum 
shall be prepared under sub-section (3) of section 
35;  
(zg)  the grounds on which the Central Government 
may restrict export of seeds under section 37;  
(zh)  any other matter whic h is to be or may be 
prescribed.  
Power of 
Committee 
to make 
regulations.  
47. (1)   The Committee may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Gove rnment, by notification, 
make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for 
all matters for which provision is necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2)   In particular and without prejudice to the generality 
of the foregoing power, such  regulations may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:- 
(a)   the procedure for conduct of business to be 
transacted by the Committ ee or any Sub-Committee 
thereof under section 8; 
(b)   the procedure in regar d to transaction of business 
at meetings of the Committ ee (including the quorum at 
meetings)under sub-section (1) of section 10. 
(c)  any other matter in respect of which regulations are 
to be or may be made. 
   
Rules and 
regu-lations 
to be laid 
before 
Parliament
48.    Every rule and ever y regulation made under this 
Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament , while it is in session, 
   

Parliament.  for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation  or both Houses 
agree that the rule or r egulation should not be made, 
the rule or regulation  shall,  thereafter, have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prej udice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 
Repeal and 
savings.  
49.    (1)   The Seeds Act, 1966 is hereby repealed. 
(2)     Without prejudice to  the provisions contained in 
the General Clauses, 1897, wit h respect to repeals, no 
such repeal shall affect- 
(a)  the previous operation of the law so repealed or 
anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or 
(b)   any right, privilege, obli gation or liability acquired, 
accrued or incurred under the law so repealed; or 
(c)  any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in 
respect of any offence committed against the Act so 
repealed; or 
(d)  any investigation, proceeding, legal proceeding 
or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, fo rfeiture or punishment as 
aforesaid; and any such investigation, proceedings, 
   

legal proceeding or rem edy may be instituted, 
continued or enforced; any such penalty forfeiture or 
punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been 
passed: 
 Provided further that, subj ect to the first proviso 
and any saving provisions made elsewhere in this Act 
anything done, any action taken, any rule made, any 
notifications or orders issued under  the provisions of 
the Act so repealed shall, in  so far as they are not 
inconsistent with the provisi ons of this Act, be deemed 
to have been done, taken, made or issued under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act, and shall continue 
to be in force accordingly, unless and until expressly or 
implied repealed by any thin g done, action taken, rules 
made or, notification or orders issued under this Act. 
(2)    Notwithstanding such repeals any kind or variety 
of seeds that has been notified under the law as so 
repealed shall be deemed to  have been registered 
under this Act, and any seed certification agency 
established under section 18 of the Seeds Act, 1966 
shall be deemed to hav e been established or 
recognized, as the case may be,  under this Act. 
   
 
 
 
 

 THE SCHEDULE   
[See section 4(4)(i),(ii) and (iii)  ] 
GEOGRAPHICAL ZONES 
 
ZONE-I ANDHRA PRADESH, KARNAKATA, KERALA, LAKSHADWEEP ,  
PONDICHERRY AND TAMIL NADU. 
   
ZONE-II ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR IS LANDS , BIHAR , CHHATISGARH,  
JHARKHAND, MADHYA PRADESH, ORISSA AND WEST  
BENGAL . 
ZONE-III ARUNACHAL PRADESH , AS SAM , M ANIPUR, MEGHALAYA, 
MIZORAM, NAGALAND , SIKKIM AND TRIPURA. 
ZONE-IV DADRA A ND NAGA R HAV ELI, DAMAN AND DIU , GOA , 
GUJARAT , RAJASTHAN AND MAHARASHTRA . 
ZONE-V CHANDIGARH, HARYANA, HIMACHAL PRA DESH, JAMMU AND 
KASHMIR, NATIONAL CAPI TAL TERRITORY OF DELHI, 
PUNJAB, UTTRANCHAL AND UTTAR PRADESH. 
   
   
[About Us]  [Programmes & Schemes]  [Farm Produce Prices]  [Statistics]  [Weather]  [Documen
[Stop Press]  [Announcements]  [Feedback]   [Help Desk] 
Last Updated On -  
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 In the  in terest of  incre ased ag ricultural production in India,  it was co nsidered 
necessary to  regulate  th e quality of  cer tain seeds such as seeds for food crops, cotton 
seeds and “Jute seeds” to be sold for the purpose of agriculture including horticulture.  It 
was, therefo re, cons idered necess ary to have  a legis lation for regul ating the quality of 
certain seed s and accordingly the S eeds Act, 1966 was enacted.  However, during  the 
working of the said Act for m ore than four decades, the following deficiencies have been 
noticed:- 
 
 (a) th e Act regula tes o nly notif ied ki nds and varieties of  seeds and does not 
provide for regulation of research hybrid varieties or varieties which are “not notified”; 
 
 (b) registration of seeds is not compulsory under the Act; 
 
 (c) green manure seeds,  commercial crops, plantation crops and the lik e are no t 
covered under the Act; 
 
 (d) the Act does not contai n provisions for self -certification or accreditation of 
private seed testing lab oratories or for regulation of transgenic materials; 
 
 (e) the provisions for exem pting the sa le of seed for purposes other than for  
sowing or planting are ambiguous; 
 
 (f) the penalties for contravention of th e provisions of the Act are very m ild and 
inadequate for any deterrent effect. 
 
2. Further, it has been noticed that far-reaching changes have taken place in the field 
of agriculture since the enactment of the Seeds A ct, 1966.  The plateauing of agricultural 
growth during the last decade has necessitated  new strategies  to ensu re food security .  
Availability of good qua lity seeds to  the Indian farmers is a key factor in order to attain  
the objective of ‘doubling f ood production in ten years’.  A quantum  increase in 
production can be effected  onl y by enhancing S eed Replacement Rates of various crops 
or, in other words, by increasing the use of quality seeds in com parison with far mers’ 
saved seeds.  A sustained increase in agricultural production and productivity has become 
dependent on the development of new and improved varieties of crops.  This will requ ire 
a vastly expanded role for the private seed i ndustry as well.  The creation  of a facilitative 
climate for growth of  the seed industry, boosting of exports a nd encouragem ent of 
imports of useful germplasm  lies at the co re of  the agricultu re str ategy in the new 
millennium.  
 
3. Also, Biotechnology is likely to be a vita l element in agricultural development in 
the coming decades.  A conducive atm osphere for enhanced investm ent in research  and 
development for application of frontier sciences in the develo pment of varieties has been 
sought to be created through the Protection of  Plant Varieties and Farm ers’ Rights Act, 
  

2001.  However, the Seed legisla tion has to address the issue of promoting sale of newly 
developed materials while ensu ring that th e interest of the farmers and the susta inability 
of Indian agriculture are not jeopardized. 
 
4. It has beco me necessary that the existi ng provisions contained in the Seeds Act, 
1966 and th e Seed (Co ntrol) Order, 1983 m ade under the Essential C ommodities Act, 
1955 should be substantially rev ised to add ress the issues ou tlined above.  The need for 
wide-ranging changes has also been supporte d by the National Agriculture Policy, w hich 
inter alia states “Developm ent, production and distribution of improved varieties of seed 
and planting m aterials and st rengthening and expansion of seed and plant certification  
system with private sector participation will receive a high priority.” 
 
5. In view of the above, it is proposed to replace the Seeds Act, 1966 by a new 
legislation.  The proposed legislation inter alia provides for the following, namely:- 
 
 (i) regulation of seeds a nd planting material of all agricultu ral, horticultural and 
plantation, crops so as to ensure availability of true to type seeds to Indian farmers; 
 
 (ii) provis ions f or constitution of  a sepa rate Registration Sub-comm ittee of  the 
Central Seed Committee to look after the various registration aspects and maintenance of 
a National Register of Seeds of kinds and varieties; 
 
 (iii) check on the sale of  spurious and poor quality seed and provisions for 
compensation to farmers; 
 
 (iv) provision of registration of seed producers, seed producing units, seed dealers 
and horticulture nurseries; 
 
 (v) regulation of sale of seeds and increas ing the availability of  quality seed f or 
sowing; 
 
 (vi) increase in the seed replacement rate resulting in higher productivity; 
 
 (vii) sim plification of procedures and placing a m ore efficient regulato ry 
mechanism; 
 
 (viii) increasing private participation in seed production, distribution, certification 
and seed testing; 
 
 (ix) regulation of import and sale of transgenic seed and planting material; 
 
 (x) liberalized import of seed and planting materials compatible with World Trade 
Organisation (WTO) commitments; 
 
 (xi) provision for right of farmers for exemption from registration in certain cases. 
 
6. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill. 
  

7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
 
SHARAD PAWAR 
New Delhi; 
The 24th August, 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
Notes  on clauses 
 Clause 1.-This clause gives the short title of the Bill, the area of its operation and 
its applicability.   The p roposed legislation sh all not be ap plicable to a producer to a 
producer in respect of seeds produced by hi m for his ow n use and not for sale.  As  
adequate steps have to be taken for adm inistering the provision s of the proposed 
legislation, provision has been made that different dates may be appointed for bringing 
different provisions of the proposed legislation into force. 
 Clause 2.- This clause c ontains definitions of certain expressions used in the Bill.   
The definitions of “agricu lture”, “Comm erce”, “farmer”, “ho rticulture nurs ery”, 
“misbranded”, “producer”, “registered kind or variety”, “seed”, “spurious seed”, 
“transgenic variety” and  “variety” are som e of them.   The word “agriculture” in cludes 
horticulture, forestry, cultivation of plantation, medicinal and aromatic plants.  The word 
“seed” is defined to mean any type of living embryo or propagule capable of regeneration 
and giving rise to a plant of ag riculture, which is true to su ch type. ‘Kind’ m eans one or 
more related species or sub-species of crop plants each individually or collectively known 
by one com mon nam e such as cabbage, m aize, paddy and wheat.  “S eed processing” 
means the process by w hich seeds and planting  m aterials are dried, threshed, shelled, 
ginned or delinted (in cotton), cleaned, graded or treated .  “Variety” m eans a plant 
grouping except m icro-organism within a sing le botanical taxon of  the lowest known 
rank, which can be defined by th e expression of the characteristics resulting from a given 
genotype of that plant groupi ng or distinguished from  an y other plant grouping by 
expression of at least one of the said characteristics or considered as a unit with regard to 
its suitability for being propagated, which remains unchanged after such propagation and 
  

includes propagating material of such variety, extant variety, transgenic variety, farmers’ 
variety and essentially derived variety.  Some of these definitions are the same as given in 
the Seeds Act, 1966. 
 Clause 3- This clause provides for the constitution of a Committee to be called the 
Central Seed Committee with its headquarters at New Delhi. 
 Clause 4.- This clause lays down the composition of the Central Seed Committee, 
i.e., a Chairperson, m embers, ex officio, a nd other m embers to be nom inated by the 
Central Governm ent.  The nom inated m embers include representatives from  farm ers, 
seed industry and specialists or experts in the fi eld of seed development.  It also provides 
for the terms and conditions of appointment of members to be laid down by rules.  It also 
makes provisions for removal of the m embers other than the ex officio m embers by  
issuing show cause notice their resignation, etc. 
 Clause 5.- This clause lays down the powers and functions of  the Central Seed  
Committee (hereafter referred to as the Comm ittee).  The Committee shall be responsible 
for and shall have all the powers for the effective im plementation of the proposed 
legislation.  These functions, inter alia, incl ude advising the Central Governm ent and the 
State Governm ents on m atters relating to  seed programming and planning, seed 
development and production and seed registration  and its enforcement.  It also empowers 
the Committee to m ake regulations for regulating its procedure and the procedure of its 
Sub-Committees. 
 Clause 6.-T his clause provides the pr ovision to specif y m inimum lim its of 
germination, purity and maximum percentage of seed health, etc., and the requirements of 
marking or labeling of seeds on its  containers. 
  

 Clause 7.-This clause contains the provi sions for constitution of a  Re gistration 
Sub-Committee and other  Sub-Committees an d their functions.   The Registration Sub-
Committee  to be constituted by the Central Government shall consist  of a Chairman and 
such number of other mem bers of t he Committee as m ay be determ ined by the Central 
Government by rules.    It shall be the duty of the Registration Sub-Committee to register 
seeds of varieties after scrutinizing the claim made by the applicant. 
 Clause 8.- This clau se em powers the Committee to m ake regula tions, with the  
previous approval of the Cent ral Government, for regulating its own procedure and the 
procedure of its Sub-Committees. 
 Clause 9.-T his clause s tipulates that the Central Government shall appoint a 
Secretary of the Comm ittee and provide it  with technical and other officers and 
employees of the Comm ittee for the efficien t perform ance of its functions under the 
proposed legislation. 
 Clause 10.-This clause provides for the conduct of the m eeting of the C ommittee 
for transaction of its business.  It also  em powers th e Comm ittee to lay down detailed 
procedure of transaction of its business at meetings by regulations. 
 Clause 11.-This clause provides for th e establishm ent of a State Seed Sub-
Committee in every State by  the concern ed State Governm ent.  The State Seed 
Committee has, in ter alia, to a dvise the State G overnment on registration of regional or 
local seeds of any kind or variet y and to maintain a district-wise list of seed dealers, seed 
producers, seed processing units and horticulture nurseries. 
 Clause 12.-This clause provides for the m aintenance of a regist er of all kinds and 
varieties of seeds to be called the Nationa l Register of Seeds by the Registration Sub-
Committee.  The specif ications required to b e incorporated in the reg ister shall be laid  
  

down in the rules. The Registration  Sub-Committee shall b e required to publish a list of  
registered kinds and varieties of seeds at certain intervals as decided by it. 
 Clause 13.-This clause m akes compulsory  registration of all varieties as a pre-
requisite f or the ir s ale in the m arket.  Re gistration of the vari ety is based on the 
information as may be furnished by the producer to establish its performance on the basis 
of the results of  m ulti-locational tria ls.  Registration Sub- Committee m ay gran t 
provisional registration as well as regular registration of specific periods depending upon 
the durability of the variety.  The registration shall be valid for a period of fifteen years in 
case of annuals and biennial crops and eighteen years in case of long duration perennials.   
 Clause 14.-This clause lays down the pro cedure for registration of a variety.  The 
form of application, the particulars to be furnished in such application and the fee payable 
shall be laid down by the Central Governm ent in  th e ru les.  The R egistration Sub-
Committee will g ive due regard to the efficacy of the seed s, its safety to hum an beings 
and anim als while laying down the conditions subject to which th e certification of 
registration is granted. 
 Clause 15.-This clause m akes special pr ovisions for registra tion of transgenic 
varieties which invo lves environ mental problems.  Subm ission of environm ental 
clearance under the Environm ent (Protection) Act, 1986 or  the rules m ade thereunder  
shall be a pre-requisite for registration of transgenic varieties.  The procedure for 
registration in all other respects shall be the same as specified under clause 14. 
 Clause 16.-This clause lays down th e grounds on which a re gistration granted 
under section 13 or section 15 could  be ca ncelled.  These grounds inter alia include 
violation of  the term s and conditions of gran t of certificat e by the certif icate holder, 
misrepresentation or con cealment of material facts by the app licant, non-performance of 
  

the seed, prevention of commercia l exploitation of the variety, etc.  It is also prov ided 
that no such cancellation of registration sha ll be m ade unless the certificate holder is 
given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause in respect of  the grounds for the 
proposed cancellation. 
 Clause 17.-This clause stipu lates th at th e Reg istration Su b-Committee should  
notify in the Official Gazette, of every cancellation of registration of seeds of any kind or 
variety made by it. 
 Clause 18.-This clause states the grounds  on which registration in respect of 
certain kinds or varieties of seeds should not be made.  These grounds include prevention 
of comm ercial exploitation of the kind or va riety of seed, if necessary to protect the 
public  order, public m orality, human or animal or plant life and h ealth or the avoidance 
of serious prejudice to the environm ent or  that the seed contains a technology w hich 
would be harmful or potentially harmful.  It is clarified that “technology” includes 
genetic use restriction technology and terminator technology. 
 Clause 19.-This clause provides for accreditation of certain agencies including the 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Stat e Agricultural Universities and such other 
organizations fulfilling the eligib ility requirements  as m ay be  sp ecified by th e Central 
Government, by rules, f or conducting trials to  evaluate the perform ance of any kind or 
variety of seeds. 
 Clause 20.-This clause seeks to provi de adequate  safeguard to provide 
compensation to the farm ers in case any regist ered seed fails to p rovide the expected  
performance under given conditions.   Th e compensation m ay be claim ed from  the  
producer, dealer, distributor or vendor as pe r the provisions of the Consum er Protection 
Act, 1986. 
  

 Clause 21.-This clause deals with the requirement and procedure for registration 
of seed producers and seed processing units with the State Governm ent.   However, the 
specifications in respec t of  inf rastructure, equipm ent, qua lified m anpower, for m of 
application, fee payable for re gistration, etc., will be laid  down by rules by the Central 
Government. 
 Clause 22.-This clause provides for com pulsory registration of seed dea lers who 
carry on the business of selli ng, keeping for sale, offering the sell, bartering or importing 
or exporting seeds and also for requiring th em to furnish inform ation about the seed 
stock, sales and other related in formation.   It further provid es for giving an opportunity 
of being heard to the seed dealer in re spect of suspens ion or cancellation of his 
registration. 
 Clause 23.-This clause provides that no person shall conduct or carry on business 
of horticulture nursery for a ny of the purposes of the prop osed legislation unless such 
nursery is registered with th e State Governm ent.   However, the form  of application for 
registration, the fee payable for such registration, etc., will be laid down by rules made by 
the Central Government. 
 Clause 24.-This clause sets out the duties of  the registration holders of 
horticulture nursery. The regist ration holder of every nursery is required to keep a 
complete re cord of  th e orig in o r s ource of  every planting m aterial and performance 
record of the mother trees in the nursery, a layout plan showing the position of the root-
stocks and scions used in raising the horti culture plan ts, a perform ance reco rd o f the 
mother trees in the nursery, the nursery plants  and parent trees used for the production or  
propagation of horticulture plants free from  in fectious or contagious insects, pests or 
diseases affecting plants and  also to furnish such information to the State Government on 
  

the production, stocks, sales a nd prices of planting m aterial in the nursery as m ay be  
specified by the Central Government by rules. 
 Clause 25.-  This clause prohibits  the selling, bartering, importing, exporting etc., 
of seeds which do not conform  to certain specifications includi ng confor ming to the 
minimum limit of germination, genetic purity or physical purity or maximum seed health.   
It also provides that no seed should be sold wi thout a label or m ark on its container as  
specified by rules and com plies with the othe r requirements prescribed by rules.   The  
transgenic seed to be sold in the market should also bear a declaration about its nature. 
 Clause 26.-  This clause provides fo r the establishm ent of a State Seed 
Certification Agency for every State by the Committee in consultation with the concerned 
State Governm ent to carry out  th e f unctions en trusted to the State Se ed Certif ication 
Agency by or under the proposed legislation. 
 Clause 27.-This clause provides for accred itation of organizations to  carry out 
certification and the individuals or seed producing organizations to carry out self-
certification of seeds in the m anner as m ay be laid down by the Central Governm ent by 
rules.  It also empowers the Committee to withdraw the accreditation or self-certification 
facility for reasons to be recorded in writing.  
 Clause 28.-This clause deals with gran t of c ertificate of seed by the Seed 
Certification Agency to any person selling, k eeping for sale, offering to sell, bartering of 
otherwise supplying such seed. It also provide s for the procedure for such certificatio n as 
per the rules as may be made by the Central Government. 
 Clause 29.-This clause deals with revo cation of certificate granted by the State  
Seed Certification Agency on the grounds of m isrepresentation of essential fact, etc.  
  

however, before such revocation the certificat e holder shall be give n an opportunity to 
show cause against the proposed revocation. 
 Clause 30.-This clause provides for the reco gnition, for the purpos e of the 
proposed legislation, of any Seed Certification Agency established in any foreign 
country.  Such recog nition will be gran ted by the Central Governm ent on the 
recommendation of the Committee. 
 Clause 31.-This clause em powers the Central Governm ent to constitute an 
appellate authority for the purpose of heari ng and disposing of appeals of any pe rson 
aggrieved by the decision off the Registra tion Sub-Committee, under section 14, section 
16 or section 27 of the proposed legislation or  of the State Seed Certification Agency 
under section 28 or s ection 29 thereof.  Th ese m atters include cancellation of the  
registration of seeds of any kind or variety, accreditation of  Seed Certification  Agency, 
revocation of certificate, etc.  The appellate authority is to be c onstituted with a single 
person or three persons by the Ce ntral Government as it thinks fit.  T his clause f urther 
lays down that the period of li mitation of filing appeals shall be thirty days from the date 
of communication of the decision against which such appeal is sought for.  The procedure 
for preferring appeal shall be laid down by the Central Government by rules. 
 Clause 32.-This clause provides for the establishment of a Central Seed Testing 
Laboratory or declaring any seed-testing lab oratory as  the Central Seed Tes ting 
Laboratory.  All such laborator ies are required to have as many Seed Analysts  as  the 
Central Government may specify.  It also pr ovides for the establishm ent of one or m ore 
State Seed Testing Laboratories by the State Government or recognizing any Government 
or non-Government laboratory as a State Seed  Testing Laboratory.  Every Seed Testing 
Laboratory of the State Govern ment or recognized by the St ate Government as a State 
  

Seed Testin g Laborato ry is required to hav e as m any Seed Analy sts as  the State 
Government may consider necessary. 
 Clause 33.-This clause deals with th e appointm ent of Seed Analysts having 
prescribed q ualifications.  In ca se o f th e Central Seed Testing Laboratory, the Central 
Government and in other cases the State Governments shall appoint the Seed Analysts. 
 Clause 34.-This clause deals with the a ppointment of Seed Inspectors by the State 
Government.  The qualifications and the area of jurisdiction of S eed Inspecto rs s hall, 
however, be prescribed by the Central Government. 
 Clause 35.-Under this clause, the powers of the Seed Inspector have been defined.  
The places where sam ples may be taken, how to  issue a stop sale order for a period of 
thirty days and how to seize the stock, ledge r, etc., have also been specified.  The  
provisions of search and seizure under the C ode of Crim inal Procedure, 1973 or in 
relation to the State of Jammu and Kashm ir, the provisions of any corresponding law in 
force in that State, shall, so far as m ay be, apply to any search  and seizure under this 
clause. 
 Clause 36.-This clause stipulates that the import of seeds would be subject to such 
seeds possessing of m inimum standards of germination, genetic and physical purity and 
seed health as required under the proposed le gislation read with the Plant Quarantine 
(Regulation of I mport into India) Order,  2003 or any corresponding order m ade under 
section 3 of the Destructive Insects and Pe sts Act, 1914.  The im ported seed should also 
be registered with the multi-locational trials data.  However, import of unregistered seeds 
may be permitted for research purposes in such quantity and subject to such conditions as 
may be notified by the Central Government. 
  

 Clause 37.-This clause provides for regul ation of export of seeds by the Central 
Government on the advise of the Committee.  If the Central Governm ent considers that 
the export of seeds of a ny kind or variety woul d adversely affect the food security of the 
country or if it feels that the reasonable requ irements of the public will not be m et or on 
such other grounds as m ay be laid down by rules, the Central Governm ent may restrict 
export of seeds. 
 Clause 38.-This clause lays down certai n offences under the proposed legislation 
and the penalty for such offences.  T he penalty for contravention of the provisions of the 
proposed legislation and the rules made there under would be fine which shall not be less 
than five thousand rupees and which m ay extend to twenty-five thousand rupees.  S ub-
clause (2) o f this claus e lays dow n that if any person sells a ny seed which does not 
conform to the standards of physical purity, ge rmination or health or does not m aintain 
any records required to be m aintained under the proposed legislation or the rules made 
there under he shall, on convict ion, be punishable with fine which shall not be less than 
five thousand rupees but which m ay extend to  twenty-five thousand rupees.  Sub-clause 
(3) provides that if any person furnishes any fa lse information relating to the standard of 
genetic purity, m isbrands any seed or supply a ny spurious seed or spurious transgenic 
variety, sells any non-registered seeds he shall, on conviction be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend 
to fifty thousand rupees or with both. 
 Clause 39.-This clause provides that if  any person has been convicted under the 
proposed legislation for contravention of any of the provisions of it, the seed in respect of 
which the  contr avention has  be en comm itted shall b e f orfeited to the C entral 
Government. 
  

 Clause 40.-This clause contains provisions for offences by companies.  It seeks to 
provide that where a person comm itting offence is a com pany, every person respons ible 
in the company for the conduct of its busine ss will be liable and where a person accused, 
proves that the offence was committed withou t his knowledge he will not be liable.   
However, where it is pr oved that a n of fence has been co mmitted with the conse nt o r 
connivance or is attributable to the neglect of any Director , Manager, S ecretary or any 
other officer of the company, he shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence. 
 Clause 41.-This clause sets out the pow ers of the Central Governm ent to give 
directions to State Governm ents for carry ing into executi on of the provisions of the 
proposed legislation. 
 Clause 42.-Under this clause  certain powers are sought to  be given to the Central 
Government to issue directions to the Co mmittee while discharg ing its function and 
duties under the proposed legislation. It further states that the decision of the Central 
Government, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final.  
  Clause 43.-This clause clarifies that nothing contained in the proposed legislation 
will restrict the right of a farmer to save, use,  exchange, share, or sell his farm seeds and 
planting m aterial.  However, this exem ption sh all not be applicable in case of sale of 
seeds under a brand name or in case of seeds whi ch do not conform to the minimum limit 
of ger mination, physical purity or genetic pur ity as m ay be prescr ibed by the Central 
Government.  This clause also em powers th e Central Governm ent to e xempt from the 
requirements of the proposed legislation or the rules m ade thereunder any educational, 
scientific or  resear ch or extens ion orga nization by notification and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified in that notification. 
  

 Clause 44.-This clause seeks to provide im munity to persons from suits, 
prosecution and other legal proceed ings in respect of anything which is done in good 
faith under the proposed legislation. 
 Clause 45.-This clause em powers the Central Governm ent to remove any 
difficulty which may rise in giving effect to  the provisions of the proposed legislation by 
order published in the official Gazette.  Such  order shall not be inconsistent with the 
provisions of the proposed legislation.  This  power can be exerci sed only within two 
years from  t he commencem ent of the proposed legislation.  Every such order shall be 
required to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
 Clause 46.-This clause em powers the Cent ral Government to make rules to carry 
out the provisions of the proposed legislati on.  Sub-clause (2) e numerates the various 
matters in respect of which such rules may be made.  These matters, inter alia, include the 
terms and conditions of appointm ent of members of the Committee, the form of 
application for registration of varieties, the particulars which should be furnished in suc h 
application and the fee whic h shall accom pany such applic ation under p roposed section 
14 or section 15, scrutinizing applications fo r registration of the varieties, m anner of 
registration of seeds, sp ecifications which shall be m aintained in the national Register of 
Seeds, per iods f or which m ulti-locational tr ials of  seeds sh all be cond ucted, e ligibility 
requirements for accreditation of seed testing in stitutes, procedure for registration of seed 
producers, seed processing units, seed deal ers and persons conducti ng or carrying on the 
business of horticulture nurseri es, information on production, stocks sales and prices of 
planting m aterial in a nursery to be furnis hed to the State Governm ent and for m a nd 
manner of filing appeal against the decisions of the Committee. 
  

 Clause 47.-This clause em powers the Ce ntral Seed Committee to m ake, with the 
approval of Central Governm ent, regulations not  inconsistent with the provisions of the 
proposed legislation and the ru les m ade there under.  These include the procedure for 
conduct of business to  be transacted by the Central Seed Comm ittee and its S ub-
Committees and the procedure at m eetings (including the quorum  at such m eetings) of 
the Committee. 
 Clause 48.-This clause provides that ever y rule made by the Central Governm ent 
and every regulation made by the Committee under the proposed legislation shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament. 
 Clause 49.-This clause deals with repeal  and savings.  On the comm encement of 
the proposed legislation, the Seeds Act, 1966 shall stand repealed subject to certain 
savings with regard to investigation, pr oceedings, penalty, fo rfeiture, punishm ent, 
notification of kind and variety, etc. 
  

 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall, by notification in 
the Official Gazette constitute for the purposes of the propo sed legislation a Committee  
to be called the Central Seed Committee.   Clause 4 of the Bill lays down the composition 
of the Committee.   The Committee shall be constituted in the Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation of the Ministry of Agriculture .   The Secretary to the Governm ent of 
India in the said Departm ent shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the Committee.   Sub-
clause (4) of clause 4 provides f or nom ination of certain m embers including two 
representatives each of far mers and seed indu stry and tw o specialis ts or experts in the 
field of seed development. 
 Clause 9 of the Bill provides for appointment of a Secretary of the Committee and 
such technical and oth er officers and em ployees of the Comm ittee by the Central 
Government.    The Committee would be func tioning as a part of the Departm ent of 
Agriculture and Cooperation and existing staff of the Department will look after the work 
relating to the functioning of the Committee.    Hence, no additional recurring or non-
recurring expenditure except the traveling and daily allowance payable to the non-official 
members for attending the meetings of the Committee is envisaged. 
 Clause 31 of  the Bill provides f or filing of  appeals again st the decisio ns of the 
Registration Sub-Committee and S tate Seed Ce rtification Agencies b efore the appellate 
authority.    Sub-Clause (2) of this clause stipulates that an appellate authority shall 
consist of a single person or three persons as the Central Government may think fit to be 
appointed.   In cas e officials are appointed, no additional expenditure would be incurred.  
  

However, when non-officials or officials on deputation are appointed as appellate 
authority b oth recu rring and non-recu rring expenditure will be incurr ed.   The 
requirement depends u pon the nu mber of cas es.   No ad ditional exp enditure to wards 
establishment of  of fice of  appellate author ities is e nvisaged for the financial year            
2004-05. 
 Clause 32 of  the Bill provides f or the establish ment of  a Central See d Testing  
Laboratory and State Seed Test ing Laboratories or declaring any seed-t esting laboratory 
as such labo ratories.   Until new lab oratories are established, no expenditure on acco unt 
of i mplementation of this provision is envisa ged for the current financial year, i.e.,   
2004-05. 
 Clause 33 of the Bill provides for appoint ment of Seed Analysts for th e Central 
Seed Testing Laboratory by the C entral Gove rnment and in other cases by the State 
Governments.   The expenditure for appointm ent of Seed Analysts for the Central Seed 
Testing Laboratory and State Se ed Testing Lab oratories in the Union te rritories is to be  
borne by the Central Government. 
 Sub-clause (1) of clause 34 provides that the State Government shall appoint Seed 
Inspectors.   The State Governm ent in  rela tion to Union  Territor ies being the C entral 
Government the expenditure for appointment of Seed Inspectors for the Union Territories 
is to be met from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 The implementation of the aforesaid provisions would involve certain expenditure 
from the Consolidated F und of India.   Howe ver, it is not possible to give any specific 
figure of expenditure, as it would depend on the specific decision which may be taken on 
the manner of implementation. 
  

 It is estimated that a sum of rupees thirty-six lakhs approximately may be required 
to meet the recurring and non-recurring expe nditure towards the above item s during the 
financial year 2004-05.    The Bill will not involve any other expenditure of a recurring or 
non-recurring nature from of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
 Sub-clause (1) of clause 46 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the provisi ons of the proposed legislati on.   Sub-clause (2) of that  
clause enum erates the m atter in respect of  which such rules m ay be m ade under the 
proposed legislation.   These m atters, inter alia,  relate to the term s and conditio ns of  
appointment of me mbers of the Ce ntral Seed  Committee, functions of the Registration  
Sub-Committee, the form of application for registration of varieties including transgenic 
varieties, th e par ticulars to b e f urnished in s uch applica tion and the  f ee which shall 
accompany such application, the manner of scrutinizing of applications for registration of 
seeds, the eligibility requirements which an organisation shall fulfill for accred itation for 
conducting trial to evaluate the perform ance of any kind or  variety of seed, the 
specifications required to be fulfilled for regis tration as a seed producer or a s eed 
processing unit, the form and m anner in whic h an application for registration as a seed 
producer or a seed  processing un it and the fee which shall accom pany such app lication, 
the f orm in which and the tim e within which  period ic re turns sha ll be f iled by seed  
producers and seed processing units to the Se ed Certif ication Agenc y, the f orm and 
manner of m aking application for obtaining a registration certificate for dealership in 
seeds and the fee which shall accom pany su ch application, the  form  in which an 
application for registration  of a horticulture nursery shall be made, the particulars which 
such application sha ll contain and the fee which such application shall accom pany, the 
information on production, stocks, sales and prices of planting material in a nursery to be  
furnished, the criter ia to be f ulfilled and the m anner of  self -certification of  seeds, the 
form and manner in w hich an appeal shall be preferred against the decisions of the 
  

Central Seed Committee or a St ate Seed Certifying  Agency , the manner of carrying out 
the functions of the Central Seed Testing Laboratory, the manner of carrying out analysis 
of seed by Seed Testing Laboratories, qu alification of  Seeds Analysts  and Seed 
Inspectors, form and manner of preparation of memorandum of seed inspections and the 
grounds on which the Central Government may restrict export of seeds. 
 
2. Sub-clause(1) of clause 47 em powers the Central Seed Co mmittee to  m ake, by 
notification in the Of ficial Gazette and with  the prev ious approval of  the Centra l 
Government  and not inconsistent with the pr ovisions of the proposed legislation and the  
rules made thereunder, regulations to provide for matters for which provision is necessary 
or expedient for the purposes of giving effect to  the p rovisions of the proposed 
legislation.   Sub-clause(2) of that clause enumerates the matters in respect of which  such 
regulations m ay be made under the proposed legisl ation. These m atters, inter alia , 
include the procedure for conduct of busines s to be transacted by the Central See d 
Committee or any of its Sub-Committees and the procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at meetings of the Committee(including the quorum at such meetings). 
 
3. Clause 48 of the Bill provides that th e rules made by the Central Government and 
the regulations m ade by the Committee under the proposed legi slation shall be required 
to be laid before Parliament. 
4. The aforesaid matters in respect of which rules or regul ations may be made relate 
to matters of procedure or adm inistrative details and it is  not practicable to prov ide for 
them in the  Bill itse lf.   The d elegation of  legislative pow er is, theref ore, of a  no rmal 
character. 
  

  
 
 
 
 