 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2005-2006) 
                 
13
         
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
              
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Ninth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005)} 
 
         
        
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2006/Magha, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2005-2006) 
          
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND 
COOPERATION) 
         
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006) 
  
         
[Action Taken by the Government on the  
Recommendations/Observations  contained in the Ninth Report  
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.02.2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.02.2006  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
February, 2006/Magha, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
COA No.178  
         
         
         
         
         

         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
            © 2006 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Ru les of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha  (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
<CONTENTS> 
                   P A G E  
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………  1-17 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations /Observations which have  
   been accepted by the Government …………… 18-28 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendati ons/Observations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations /Observations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Obs ervations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
held on 18.1.2006 .      
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Ninth  
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2004-2005) (14th Lok Sabha)      
 
 
 
 

Composition of  the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
6. Smt. Anuradha Choudhary 
7. Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan 
8. Shri Khagen Das 
9. Shri Dharmendra 
10. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
11. Shri Raghunath Jha 
12. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan  
13. Smt. Rupatai D iliprao Patil Nilangekar 
14. Shri Sippiparai Ravichandran  
15. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
16. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
17. Shri Harihar Swain 
18. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
19. Shri Mahboob Zahedi 
20   *    Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
21   #   Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
23.    Shri Harish Rawat 
24.   Dr. M.S.Gill 
25. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
26. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
27. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
29. Shri Datta Meghe 
30. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
31. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
___________________________________________________________________ 
 
* Shri Prakash V.Patil ceased to be the member of this Committee owing to his demise on 
21 October, 2005 and the vacancy thus created was filled by nomination of Shri 
Deepender Singh Hooda, to this Committee vide L.S. Bulletin Part-II, Para No.1905, 
dated 9th December, 2005 
# Shri Lal Chandra Kol ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his 
expulsion from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 23 December, 2005. vide L.S. Bulletin Part-II, Para 
No.1982  dated 23rd  December, 2005 
 

 6
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   -  Secretary 
2.          Shri  A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri  Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
5. Ms. Amita Walia   -  Executive Officer  
     

 7
  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
         
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture, [2005-2006] having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Repo rt on their behalf, present this Thirteenth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government  on the Recommendations/Observations  
contained in the Ninth Report of the St anding Committee on Ag riculture (2004-2005) 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  on  Demands for Gr ants of the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) for the year 2005-2006. 
 
2. The Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005) on 
Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agriculture and Co-operati on) was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.4.2005 and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on the same day.  The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture 
and Co-operation) was requested to furnish actio n taken replies of the Government to the  
recommendations contained in the Ninth Report.  The replies of the Government to all 
the recommendations contained in the Report were received. 
 
3. The Committee considered the action ta ken replies furnished by the Government 
at their sitting held on 18.1.2006, approved the draft comments and adopted the 
Thirteenth Report.  Minutes of the sitting are placed at Appendix I.  
 
4. An analysis of the Action Take n by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations cont ained in the Ninth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
      
                    
                                          
                                          
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
18, January, 2006                                        Chairman, 
28 Pausa, 1927 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Agriculture  
  
 
 
 
 

 8
 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contai ned in the Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agricu lture (2004-2005) on Demands for Grants 
(2005-2006) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) 
which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.4.2005. 
 
1.2 The Action taken replies have been recei ved from the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) and categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II of the Report) Sl.Nos. 5,6,7,9,13 and16  (Total –6) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s action taken repl y (Chapter III of the Report) Sl.Nos.   
8 (Total – 1) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect  of which the action taken replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV of the Report) 
Sl.No.2,10 and 11 (Total –3) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observa tions in respect of which the final replies of the 
Government are still awaited. (Chapter V) Sl.Nos. 1,3,4,12,14,15,17,18 and 19 
(Total –9) 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations. 
 
 

 9
RECOMMENDATION NO.2 
Delay in implementation of Tenth Plan Schemes  
1.4 The Committee are distressed to find that  out of 10 new Schemes scheduled to be 
started in the Tenth Plan, only 3 Schemes are being implemented while 7 Schemes are 
still in the process of being approved.  The Committee were informed during the 
evidence that operationaliz ation of New Schemes involve s preparation of Detailed 
Project Report and getting ‘in principle’ approval from Planning Commission and other 
competent authorities.  The whole procedur e is very complicated and extremely time-
consuming.   
 The Committee are deeply concerned th at many important Schemes proposed to 
be launched at the start of the Tenth Plan have still not taken off though the Tenth Plan 
has ushered in the fourth year.  The Committee, therefore, feel  that the present system of 
obtaining approval, clearance from Expenditu re Finance Committee, Cabinet Committee 
for Economic Affairs, etc. leads to inordinate  delays in the implementation of Schemes.  
The Committee note that in many cases in tention of launching a new Scheme is 
announced in one Budget, implementation is announced in the subsequent year but the 
Schemes keep on pending for want of ‘in principle’ approval of the Planning 
Commission for years altogether and in some cases the Schemes even if implemented, are 
either fine tuned or retailored drastically or eventually dropped.   Such inordinate delays 
in obtaining ‘in principle’ approval to Schemes which are announced in Parliament with 
great fanfare appear at best mock-exercises.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that  the whole procedure prescribed for 
according Post-Budget approval  needs a sea change and it should be deemed that once a 
Scheme in announced in Parliament,  whether in Presidential Address or in the Budget 
Speech of the Finance Minister it has the approval of the Government.   The Committee 

 10
see no reason as to why the Government s hould rush to announce in the Parliament 
launching of new Schemes before doing the necessary spade work, viz following 
departmental formalities and preparing the detailed modalities of the Scheme. 
1.5 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that  after the Hon’ble 
Committee last met, two other new schemes ‘Monitoring of Pesticides Residues at 
National Level’ and ‘National Horticultu re Mission’ have b een cleared by the 
Government for implementation. 
 Nevertheless, there is a need to simplif y the procedures for obtaining the approval 
of the Government to the implementation of  new schemes so that delays could be 
avoided.  At the same time, this is a complex issue as the schemes involving huge 
financial outlays require to be carefully scru tinized and evaluated at various levels in 
different subject matter Departments, which makes it difficult to compress the processing 
time beyond a certain limit.   This Departme nt nonetheless gives a high priority to 
processing and finalizing such proposals in the shortest possible time. 
 It is further submitted that a new sche me cannot be launched unless a suitable 
budgetary provision has been made for its im plementation.   The declaration of the 
Government’s intention to launch such a ne w scheme at the time of presentation of 
budget before the Parliament cannot, therefore, be avoided.   The details of the scheme 
are accordingly worked out only after suitable financial allocation is allowed by the 
Parliament. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.6  The Committee are dismayed at the casual  reply of the Government and feel 
that the matter is not being taken with th e seriousness it deserves.  The Committee 
feel that the fact that out of 10 new Sc hemes scheduled to be started in the Tenth 

 11
Plan, only 5 could be cleared for implementa tion till last but one year of the Plan 
period, does not portray a very good performance of the Department.  The 
Committee do not agree with the justificat ion given by the Department in their 
action taken reply that since the schemes involving huge financial outlays require to 
be carefully scrutinized and evaluated at various levels in subject matter 
Departments, which makes it difficult to compress the processing time beyond a 
certain limit.  The Committee fa il to understand as to what prevents or compels the 
Government to make announcement of a particular scheme without necessary 
ground work and why this careful scruti ny/evaluation cannot be done before 
proposing the scheme to Planning Commissio n or before including it in the annual 
Plan budget estimates of th e Ministry.  It appears th at the Government has not 
taken the clear and simple recommendation of the Committee seriously.   
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the procedure of obtaining post 
Budget approvals for new schemes should be simplified and streamlined so that the 
schemes are implemented in a time bo und manner. The Department should 
announce the schemes only after their home-w ork is completed in all respect so that 
the schemes so announced with fanfare, should not be dropped unceremoniously 
later on.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
Amount spent by North Eastern States 
1.7 The Committee note that Rs.418 crore, repr esenting  10 per cent of the total Plan 
Outlay of the Departments have been alloca ted for implementation of Plan Schemes in 
North-Eastern States during 2005-2006.  While examining the detailed Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry, the Committee find that though the allocation is invariably 

 12
reflected in the Demands for Grants, but th ere is no mention of actual expenditure on 
specific Schemes.  Though 10 per cent funds ar e allocated for the North-Eastern States in 
accordance with the directions of the Government, the Committee have been furnished no 
information as regards the Schemes implemente d in these States out of such funds.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to evolve some mechanism like 
adding an annexure in the Detailed Dema nds for Grants book reflecting the actual 
expenditure incurred on implementation of each Scheme in North-Eastern States, State-
wise, so that the Parliament is satisfied as to bona fide use of such special allocations. 
1.8 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that the Hon’ble 
Committee have advised that an annexure in the Detailed Dema nds for Grants book 
reflecting the actual expenditure incurred on implementation of each scheme in North-
Eastern States may be added.  This comes under the purview of Ministry of Finance.  The 
matter has been taken up with them.  The Committee would be apprised shortly. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.9 The Committee are deeply concerned ab out the welfare of North –Eastern 
States, hence, they desire the expenditu re incurred on the schemes in the North 
Eastern States to be reflected in Demands  for Grants book  separately so that 
performance appraisal can be made more clearly.  The Committee desire the 
Government to expedite the matter with  Ministry of Finance and apprise the 
Committee within two months of presentati on of this Report.  The Committee also 
desire the Government to have an effect ive monitoring mechanism to oversee the 
proper implementation of the  schemes for North-Eastern States. 
 
 
 

 13
RECOMMENDATION NO.4 
Subsidies in Agriculture  
1.10 The Committee note that the subsidy in th e Agriculture Sector in India constitutes 
less than 2 per cent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).   The Committee are informed 
that Input Subsidies, estimated at about Rs.36,000 crore are given to Agriculture Sector 
under three segments viz  Fertilizer, Water and Electric ity. The Committee, however, 
note that 54 per cent of  Fertilizer subsidy is actually going to industry and as regards 
‘water’ and ‘electricity’,  the subsidy is gi ven by the State Governments.   Moreover, in 
many States, there is tremendous shortage of water and electricity, which in turn has been 
adversely affecting our agriculture. 
 Referring to the view of the World Bank, the representatives of the Department 
deposed that the high rates of subsidy being pr ovided to agriculture in India is crowding 
out the investments.  The witness further testified that India is subsidizing input as well as 
output, but when asked by the Committee to explain the difference between the two 
figures, the witness assured to supply the figures after working out the same.  In the 
considered view of the Committee, the concept of notional subsidy makes no sense unless   
the loss caused to the farmers is quantified and compensated since we do not have access 
to the kind of referral market that the WTO alludes to. 
 The Committee are aware of the heavy subsidies being given by the developed 
countries to its agriculture. The Committee, ther efore, desire the Government to find out 
a way to convert this negative agricultural subs idy into positive subsidy so as to provide 
level playing field to our farmers in the ne w WTO regime so that they could somewhat 
compete with the farmers of other developing and developed count ries.  The Committee 
also call upon  the Government to ensure that real benefit of the subsidies must percolate 

 14
down to the small and marginal farmers, investment flows to agriculture and  agriculture 
becomes a paying proposition.   
1.11 The Government in their action taken reply ha ve stated that the issues raised in the 
recommendation require consultation with di fferent Ministries (like Water resources, 
Power etc.) and other institutions (like Indi an Council for Agricultural Research etc.) 
DAC is in the process of finalizing reply of  the Government in consultation with all 
concerned and will report to Hon’ble Committee soon. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.12 The Committee strongly recommend th at the Government must go into 
details of the question of subsidies being gr anted to our farmers by the Government  
vis-à-vis the stand taken by the agriculturally developed countries in respect of their 
own farmers.   There appears to be double standard being adopted by these 
countries while opposing granting of subsidies by the developing countries like India 
and providing the same to their own farmers. 
 The Committee, therefore,  reiterate its recommendation that Government 
must consider the issue afresh and take a stand which will go in favour of our 
farmers and also which will not harm the Indian Economy.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.10 
Rate of Interest on Agricultural Credit 
1.13 The Committee are unhappy to notice that most of the Cooperative Banks in the 
country are in a shambles.  As reported, six St ates/ Central Coopera tive Banks and 140 
District Central Cooperative  Banks do not comply with Section 11 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949.  They also have difficulty in accessing refinance for agricultural 
credit. 

 15
 During the evidence, Chairman , NABARD admitted that Cooperative Banks are 
charging 14-15 per cent of interest from the farmers as these banks are taking a slice at 
each level.  The Committee desire the Gove rnment to look into the matter and ask 
NABARD to refinance the Cooperative Banks at lower rate of in terest because the 
cooperatives have a pivotal ro le to play in credit deliv ery to the farmers.  The 
Cooperative Banks should also be instructed to  reduce their share at each level so as to 
provide loans to farmers at reasonable rate of interest. 
 The Committee observe that the share of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) in 
institutional credit to Agriculture has been as low as 11 per cent in 2004-2005 and  9 per 
cent in 2003-2004, whereas RRBs are supposed to cat er to the credit needs of farmers, in 
their vicinity.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to streamline their 
structure and instruct them to increase the fl ow of rural credit so as to fulfil their rural 
mandate. 
The Committee note that the extant ceili ng of Rs.50,000 for Agricultural loans  at 
the rate of not more than 9 per cent interest to the farmers is just inadequate. Considering 
the cost of agricultural implements, mach inery and the need for modernization of 
agricultural practices, the Committee strongly recommend  that the ceiling of Rs.50,000 
must  be  reviewed  and  enhanced  upto Rs. 5 lakh  suitably to meet the growing needs of 
the farmers. 
1.14 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that the Government of 
India has been making continuous endeavou r to bring down rate of interest on 
agricultural loans keeping in view the massive development potential existing in 
agricultural sector and its linkage with macro-economic development in the country. 
All the Public Sector banks have been advised to reduce their lending rate for 
agriculture to a single digit rate of not mo re than 9% per annum on crop loans upto a 

 16
ceiling of Rs.50,000/-.  This rate will benefit most of the account holders and will cover 
almost all the small and marginal farmers.  The banks have been advised to ensure that 
the volume of credit to the agriculture sector does not decline  due to the reduction in the 
interest rate.  Further, in case of Commercial  Banks, there is a stipulation that the rate of 
interest charged from the ultimate borrower should not exceed the Prime Lending Rate 
(PLR) in case of loans upto Rs.2 lakh.  In order to bring down the rate of interest on loans 
from cooperatives,  NABARD has been allowed to extend refinance facility directly to 
the District Central Cooperative Banks. 
In order to improve the health of  State Cooperative Banks aznd DCCBs 
Government of India constituted a Task  Force under the Chairmanship of Prof. 
A.Vaidyanathan, which has since submitted its report.  The Government has accepted the 
recommendation of the Task Force and has init iated steps to consult various stakeholders 
for finalizing the modalities for its implementation. 
Ministry of Agriculture has been pursuing with the Ministry of Finance the matter 
of streamlining the functioning of Regional Rura l Banks so as to improve their share in 
agriculture credit.  The Regional Banks so as to  improve their share in agricultural credit.  
The Regional Rural Banks have demonstrat ed positive performance in respect of 
agricultural credit flow growth  rate in the year  2004-05 and it is  proposed to fix 
agricultural credit flow growth rate of 40% for the RRBs in the year 2005-06. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.15 The Committee are not convinced with the presumption of the Government 
that the lending rate for agriculture to a single digit rate of not more than 9 per cent 
per annum on crop loans upto a ceiling of Rs.50,000 will benefit most of the account 
holders and will cover almost all the smal l and marginal farmers.   The Committee 
are very clear in their mind that this  extant ceiling of Rs.50,000 is very much 

 17
inadequate and it should be raised reasona bly upto Rs.5 lakh in view of the high 
costs of inputs and agricultural implements.    The Committee, therefore, wish to 
emphasise that the matter should be co nsidered appropriately to bring more 
farmers under the umbrella of reachable ag ricultural loans by raising the extant 
limit and further reducing the lending rate on crop loan suitably. 
 The Committee also desire the Government  to ensure that  banks should not 
charge more than 9% from small and marginal farmers.  Also there should not be 
any compound interest imposed on them and their land should not be auctioned for 
recovering  loan. 
  
  
RECOMMENDATION NO.11 
Agriculture Extension 
1.16 The Committee find that Agriculture Exte nsion has scarcely made any significant 
impact on our agriculture, since not more than  25 per cent of Agriculture technology is 
reaching the farmers.  Though increased Mass Me dia Support to Agriculture Extension is 
being provided, the Committee feel that there is still a need for revamping the extension 
machinery to make it more farmer-oriented and accessible to them.  The village- level 
workers and community block based extens ion system should be revitalised and 
strengthened and made more responsive to the changing needs of the times.  Village 
Panchayats/Farmers’ organizations should be made  to play a critical role in the effective 
transfer of agricultural technology.  Th e Committee recommend the Department to 
disseminate the outcome of various successf ul researches made by ICAR and other 
agencies to the farmers and encourage them to properly utilise the same.  Otherwise the 

 18
fruits of long years spent in research for th e benefit  of the farmer are likely to remain 
confined to the laboratories.  
The Committee further recommend that n ecessary changes should be carried out 
by encouraging the Research Education and Ex tension Agencies to interact with the 
farmers to know their needs and problems and come out with demand driven solutions. 
1.17 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that a number of 
initiatives taken by the Government of India in this regard are listed here under:- 
1. The ITD component of NATP is under impl ementation with the support of  World 
Bank in seven States, namely, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Punj ab from 1998.  The project focused on 
bottom-up planning process for techno logy assessment, refinement and 
dissemination in order to make the whol e extension system farmer-driven and 
farmer accountable.  This has helped to strengthen research and extension 
capabilities, restructure public extensi on services and test new institutional 
arrangements for technology transfer with involvement of all the stakeholders of 
Government and Non-Government agencies at the district level.  Linkage between 
research and extension has been strengthened by involving KVKs/ZRS 
(Institutions of ICAR/SAUs) and the development departments of State 
Governments at a platform called ‘Agricultural Technology Management 
Agency’ (ATMA); established as a regist ered autonomous body at district level 
under the above-mentioned project.  The out come of this project has been rated 
highly satisfactory by the World Ba nk Supervision Mission (November-
December 2004). 
2. Support to State Extension Programmes for Extension Reforms 

 19
This new Scheme has been approved on 29 th March 2005.  The scheme aims at 
making extension system farmer driven  and farmer accountable by way of new 
institutional arrangements for technology dissemination in the form of an 
Agricultural Technology Management Agen cy (ATMA) at district level to  
operationalise the extension reforms.   The release of  funds will be based on State 
Extension Work Plans (SEWPs) prepared by the State Governments.  It is 
proposed to cover 252 districts across all the States/UTs in the country. 
3. Mass Media Support to Agriculture Extension  is focusing on two initiatives.  
The first is use of Doordarshan infrastructure for providing agriculture related 
information and knowledge to the fa rming community.  180 Narrow casting 
Centres, 18 Regional Centres and 1 Na tional Centre of Doordarshan Kendras 
would telecast agricultural programmes during specific hours.  The second 
component of the mass media initiative is  use of 96 FM Transmitter of AIR to 
broadcast area specific agricultural programme. 
4. Kisan Call Centre 
 These Centres operate through toll free lines throughout the c ountry and provide 
expert advise to the farmers.  A country wide common four digit number 1551 has 
been allocated to these Centers.  13 such centers located at different places cover 
farmer’s queries from all over the c ountry.  Around 8 lakh calls have been 
received in these centers since inception of the scheme in January, 2004. 
5. Farm Information Support Programmes 
 Farm Information Support is provided to supplement States/Agricultural 
Universities efforts.  These include organizations of regional fairs and exhibitions, 
support to State Agricultural Universitie s for print media and Kisan Melas and 

 20
support to National Productivity Council for productivity awards to agricultural 
and allied sectors. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.18 The Committee are at utter loss to see the reply of the Government and 
condemn such a casual treatment given to their recommendation.  The Committee 
fail to understand as to why the Government  has just reproduced the details of the 
schemes being implemented under Extension  Division and not responded to the 
recommendation of the Committee.  While  deploring this attitude of the 
Department, the Committee desire the Go vernment to realize the impact and 
importance of Agriculture Extension on  the farming community in India.  The 
Committee recommend  that village level and community block based extension 
system should be reviewed and strengthene d to come up to the requirements of the 
present time.  The need of the hour is the effective transfer of technology and its 
percolation to the grass root farmers down  below, which is not possible without the 
sincere efforts of the Government at all levels.  The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Government to make all out concerted effo rts to disseminate the outcome of various 
researches made by the ICAR and other agen cies to the farmers.  There is an 
imperative need to give impetus to agricul tural research by undertaking initiatives 
in new emerging areas in consultation with DARE.   Unless the fruits of research are 
reached or utilized by farmers through prop er extension all the efforts made in the 
direction are futile. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.15 
VAMNICOM 
1.19 The Committee are concerned to note th at the Vaikunth Mehta National Institute 
of Cooperative Management (VAMNICOM), Pune a premier Institute in the field of 

 21
Cooperative Management Training has not been accorded the Deemed University status.   
The students who pass the P GDBM programme from the Inst itute suffer, for want of 
recognition by the UGC.  Moreover, the teaching   faculty has been deprived of the pay 
scales which are due to them. 
 The Committee observe that since VAMNIC OM is the only Centre for excellence 
in the field of Cooperative Management Training, the matter of according Deemed 
University status to the Institute should be reviewed expeditiously.  The Pay Scales of the 
faculty of the Institute should also be revised to avoid exodus of highly talented and 
experienced faculty members.  The Comm ittee further recommend that immediate 
necessary steps need to be taken by the Depart ment for Brand Building of the Institute so 
that the students,  otherwise well-qualifie d and  well-trained by the Institute, get good 
placement commensurate with their real calib re.  The Committee also desire that  
renowned Institutions like VAMNICOM  must get a suitable mention in the Annual 
Report and other documents brought out by the Department. 
The Government in their reply stated that  VAMNICOM functions under the 
administrative control of National Council fo r Cooperative Training (NCCT) which is a 
Committee of the National Cooperative Uni on of India (NCUI).  The proposal for 
granting Deemed University status to VAMNI COM, Pune has been examined earlier.  
The matter was taken up with the UGC th rough the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development.  Since the conditionalitie s imposed by UGC was not accepted by the 
NCUI, it was decided by the NCUI that VAMNICOM be developed as a Centre of 
Excellence within the c ooperative system, instead of bei ng converted into a University.  
The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation has not received any fresh proposal from 
NCCT  for granting Deemed University status to VAMNICOM, Pune. 

 22
 The matter of granting UGC pay scales to the faculty of VAMNICOM, Pune was 
taken up with the Department of Expenditure  twice in the past.  The Department of 
Expenditure did not approve the proposal as the UGC pay scales can be introduced only 
in Universities/Deemed Universities. 
 The Department of Agriculture and C ooperation has asked VAMNICOM, Pune to 
prepare a Report for positioning VAMNICOM, Pune as a Centre of Excellence in the 
Cooperative sector.  After receiving the repo rt, necessary steps would be taken by the 
Department for Brand Building of the Institute.  Details regarding the activities of 
VAMNICOM and other Cooperative Training Ins titutes will be suitably incorporated in 
the Annual Report and other documents brought out by the Department. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.20 The Committee note with satisfacti on that the Government is moving 
towards brand building of VAMNICOM and including its activities in the Annual 
Report of the Ministry.  The Committee woul d like to be apprised of the Report 
prepared by the Institute for positioning it  as a Centre of Excellence and the action 
taken by the Department thereon.    The Committee further desire the Government 
to reconsider the decision taken regarding granting of Deemed University status to 
VAMNICOM which is the only Institute im parting training for the welfare of 
cooperatives in India. The granting of UGC pay scales to the faculty will be 
automatic if the Government agrees to the proposal of granting of Deemed 
University status to the VAMNICOM.   The Committee desire the Government to 
apprise the Committee of the steps taken by it within four months of presentation of 
this Report. 
 
 

 23
RECOMMENDATION NO.18 
Post Harvest and Processing Technology on Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize 
1.21 The Committee note that under the Scheme of ‘Research and Development for 
Post Harvest and Processing Technology on Oi lseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize’, no 
funds have been allocated during 2005- 2006 though the Revised Estimate for 2004-2005 
was Rs.17.75 crore.  The Committee have been in formed about the decision to weed  out 
the Scheme by the Planning Commission.   Th e Committee hardly wish to emphasize the 
importance of crops like Oilseeds, Pulses and Maize as the units based upon Post Harvest 
and Processing Technologies of these crops  provide ample employment opportunities 
besides remunerative prices to our farmers.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the assessment  of the Scheme made by the Expenditure Finance Committee and the 
considered views of the Department. 
 The Committee recommend the Government to continue this important Scheme 
and allocate the funds at Revised Estimates stage so that the rese arch work being done 
under the Scheme does not suffer due to reso urce crunch, particularly  when the country 
has to resort to import of edible oils  
1.22 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that the Planning 
Commission in its review exercise of the Plan  Schemes has identified the Central Sector 
Scheme on Research and Development on Po st Harvest and Processing Technology in 
Oilseeds, Pulses and Maize including TMOP headquarters (R&D in PHT Scheme) for 
weeding out as a consequence of which no b udgetary allocation has been provided for 
under the scheme for 2005-06.  The R&D in PHT Scheme was re-structured during X 
Plan with an outlay of Rs.85.00 crores.  While Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of 
Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize deals with the production and productivity aspects 
of oilseeds, pulses, and maize, the R&D in  PHT Scheme was intended to deal with 

 24
research, development and promotion of pr ocessing technologies for these crops.  A 
number of technologies have been developed under this scheme by the CSIR Institutions 
and have been promoted in different parts of the country.  The Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation is of the view that weeding out of the R&D in PHT Scheme, at this stage 
will adversely affect the promotion of oilseeds and pulses, which are extremely important 
crops for our import view point and also in th e context of diversification programme that 
Government wish to persuade. 
Expenditure Finance Committee, while approving the scheme for implementation 
till September, 2004 observed th at an evaluation of the sche me be carried out by an 
independent agency and further continuation of  the scheme may be considered based on 
the evaluation.  The impact evaluation of the scheme has been carried out by an 
independent agency.  The impact evaluati on study while highlighting the achievements 
made under this scheme, has observed that the design of the R&D in PHT Scheme is 
good and the scheme may be fine tuned based on inputs. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.23 The Committee is satisfied that taking into account the importance of the 
R&D in the  PHT Scheme the Government have made efforts by carrying out the 
impact evaluations study of the scheme by an independent agency. 
 Government may pursue the matter further with Planning Commission 
vigorously for consideration of the scheme during the remaining period of the Tenth 
Plan itself keeping in mind its importance and availability of oilseeds and pulses in 
the country. 

 25
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
Export of Agriculture Produce 
2.1 The Committee are constrained to note that the percentage of Agri-Exports as per 
cent of total exports has come down to 9.7 per cent in 2004- 2005 as compared to 11.2 per 
cent in 2003-2004. 
 The Committee are unhappy to note that adequate incentives are not being given 
to the farmers for increasing export of thei r produce.  Countries like  Europe, United 
States,  Japan, etc. are giving export subsidies to the farmer s in their country.  Besides, 
there are some restrictions on export of several agriculture commodities which have 
deprived the farmers in getting good price for their produce.  The Committee desire the 
Government to review the restrictions on e xport of agricultural commodities including 
food grains to keep a balance between the interest of consum ers and the farmers.    The 
Committee also recommend that the Governme nt should give adeq uate incentives to 
farmers including strong infrastructural a nd other necessary support for exploring the 
agriculture commodities for export and also to  give publicity to the same in order to 
encourage and help the farmers to fetch  good price for their produce. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The Government have initiated various m easures to promote export of agricultural 
products.  These, interalia, include setting up of agri export zones to provide enhanced 
international market access and improved infrastructure facilities, better flow of credit, 
assistance for reducing the marketing costs such as for transport, handling and processing 
on export of selected agricultural commodities as also removal of export restrictions like 

 26
requirement for registration, packaging etc. A targeted scheme to in centives agricultural 
exports has been introduced in the Foreign Trade Policy 2004-09 i.e., the ‘Vishesh Krishi 
Upaj Yojana’ for promoting the exports of fruits, vegetables, flowers, minor forest 
produce and their value added products.  Expor ters of such products are entitled to duty 
credit scrips equivalent to 5% of the FOB value of exports for each licensing year 
commencing from 1st April, 2004.  The scrips and the items imported against them would 
be freely transferable. 
Besides various agriculture development sc hemes providing assistance to farmers 
on agricultural inputs such as seeds, fertilizers, irrigation, insecticides, pesticides as also 
for research and development and extens ion for reducing production costs and for 
improving the efficiency of agricultural production are also being implemented. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
Import of Edible oil 
2.3 The Committee are surprised to note that the import of edible oils is the most 
dominant item of agri-imports, accounting fo r more than two-third of the total agri-
imports in recent years registering a sharp in crease of nearly 40 per cent in 2003-2004.   
The Committee are informed that at present th e consumption of oil in  the country is 10 
million tonne and the production is 7.5 million tonne, necessitating import of edible oil. 
 The Committee are, however, perturbed to find the contradiction in the statement 
of the representatives of Department who de posed that edible oil is being imported and 
that the market price of oil seeds are likely to rule below the Minimum Support Price.   
 The Committee are perplexed to note the anomalous situation arising out of the 
import of edible oils by the Government wh ile depriving remunerative prices to the 
farmers producing oilseeds. The Committee further note that the imbalance between the 
import of edible oils and production of oils eeds has become a pere nnial problem for our 

 27
farmers due to the dilemma whether to grow or not to grow the oilseeds as they are 
apprehensive about getting remunerative pri ces. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that a long term policy on import of oilseeds/e dible oil should be chalked out with a view 
to maintaining equilibrium between demand and supply of edible oils as far as possible so 
that the interest of farmers, particularly small and marginal farmers engaged in 
production of oil seeds,  is well protected.  
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The domestic production of oilseeds is not sufficient to meet the demand of edible 
oils in the country.  The gap between demand and supply is met through imports of edible 
oils/ oilseeds.  However, while deciding the import tariffs on edible oils/oilseeds.  
Government take into account the interest  of consumers and oilseeds growers.  
Government keep regular watch on the import of edible oils to take appropriate action to 
protect the interest of the farmers. 
In order to reduce the import of edible  oils and increase  the production and 
productivity of oilseeds in th e country, Government of Indi a is implementing a Centrally 
Sponsored “Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Pa lm and Maize” (ISOPOM) in 
14 major oilseeds growing States.  Under the Scheme, assistance is provided for purchase 
of breeder seed, production of foundation s eed, production and distri bution of certified 
seed, distribution of seed minikits, distri bution of plant protection chemicals, plant 
protection equipments, weedicides supply of  rhizobium culture/phosphate solubilising 
bacteria, distribution of gypsum/pyrite/liming/dolomite, distribution of sprinkler sets and 
water carrying pipes, publicity etc to encourage farmers to grow oilseeds.  In order to 
dissemiate information on improved production technologies amongst the farmers, block 
demonstrations and Integrated Pest Management (IPM) demonstration are organized 
through State Department of Agriculture and Front Line Demonstrations through ICAR. 

 28
Besides, Government of India announ ces Minimum Support Prices for major 
oilseeds every year to provide remunerative price to the Oilseed growers in the country.  
Government of India has been announcing higher increase in the Minimum Support Price 
(MSP) of oilseeds in comparison to cereals li ke wheat and rice to encourage farmers to 
diversify their cultivation towards oilseeds.  National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing 
Federation of India Ltd. (NAFED), as Centra l Nodal Agency, undertakes procurement of 
oilseeds under Price Support Scheme in the country as and when market prices fall below 
MSP. 
 Government of India is taking measur es to improve the administration of 
ISOPOM scheme and to examine the existing policy framework. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
Marketing Reforms 
 
2.5 The Committee observe that the main problem which the farmers face is related to 
the marketing of their produce.  Most of the States have ‘Agricultural Marketing Act’ 
which forces the individual farmers to sell  their produce only to designated agencies and 
do not allow them to sell in the open mark et.  The Committee  note that the State 
Governments of Madhya Prades h, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh 
have amended their Agricultural Produce Marketing Committee (APMC) Act/Rules for 
direct marketing and/or for permitting private and cooperative investments for setting up 
of agricultural markets.  The Committee were  informed by the Secretary, Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation that none of the State Ministers of Agriculture opposed this 
move and they would amend the Act.  Howeve r, this being a legisl ative procedure, it 
shall take some time. 
The Committee feel that the marketing in  Indian Agriculture is something which 
has been neglected all this while.  The representatives of the Department conceded the 

 29
need for easing the State monopoly over agri cultural markets. For want of proper 
infrastructure, right kind of processing and grading facilities and backward and forward 
linkages, the Indian farming community is not able to reach the consumers.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to address the infrastructural 
inadequacies of marketing support for farmer s and develop the forward linkages that are 
necessary for the farmers to get the remunerative price of their produce.  The Committee 
further desire the Union Government to ensu re that  the State Governments  expedite 
amendments in their respectiv e APMC Act so as to form an efficient and well-knit  
agricultural marketing system. 
The Committee look forward to the introduction of a new Scheme namely, 
‘Development/Strengthening of  Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure, Grading and 
Standardisation’ announced in the Budget Proposals for 2005-2006 by the Government 
so as to induce large investments from the private and cooperative sectors for setting up 
agri-markets, marketing infrastructure, support services, etc.  
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The action taken by the Government on the above recommendation is as under:- 
(i) Since the subject of Agricultural Ma rketing falls within the jurisdiction of 
State, the Department is pursu ing the State Governments/UT 
Administrations to amend the APMC  Act to bring reforms in the 
agricultural marketing sector.  So far, 9 States and 4 Uts have provided for 
the suggested reforms. 
(ii) A new scheme viz. Development/S trengthening of Agricultural Marketing 
Infrastructure, Grading and Standa rdization has been implemented on 
20.10.2004.  The scheme is reform linked to provide assistance for the 
market infrastructure development projects in those States/Uts that amend 

 30
the APMC Act on the lines of th e Model Act circulated by this 
Department.  Operational guidelines of the scheme have been circulated to 
all the States/UTs and the implem enting agencies viz. NABARD and 
NCDC.  The State Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Tamil 
Nadu, Kerala and U.T. of A&N Islands have so far been notified for 
implementation of the Scheme. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.9 
Agricultural Credit      
2.7 The Committee note  with some satisfacti on  that for improving the credit flow to 
the  Farm Sector,  the  Fi nance Minister has set a targ et of Rs.1,41,050 crore  for 2005-
2006 which shows  an increase of 30 per cent over  the last year.   Th e representatives of 
the Department assured the Committee of the endeavour of the Government to cover all 
the farmers within the Institutional Credit fold  within the shortest possible time.  The 
Committee, however, note that since most of the small and marginal farmers are already 
indebted to cooperatives or other banks and they are not eligible  for the credit, the 
enhanced flow of credit would make little impact on them.   The Committee are unable  
to understand as to who would be the loanees to receive the credit, when old loans are not 
paid and the farmers are not eligible to receive new loans.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Government  to review the situa tion and consider  waiv ing of interest on the 
old loans of the farmers who are declared to be distressed due to drought, flood or  
otherwise,  so that such farmers could particularly  avail of the new loans.    
The Committee are perturbed to note that 20 Public Sector Banks and 27  Private 
Sector Banks have not been able to reach the mandatory agricultural lending target of 
18% of the net bank credit.  The Committee desire the Government to take stringent 

 31
action against all such banks for neglecting th is important sector while they are giving 
loans to industries in spite of  poor recovery rate from them. 
The Committee are deeply concerned ove r the reported coercive recovery 
measures adopted against the ‘defaulting’ fa rmers in many parts of the country.  They, 
therefore, recommend that no Central/State Government should be allowed to use any 
coercive recovery measures like taking the la nd, machinery, livestock, etc.   from the 
farmers because these are the only sources on which not only the farmer but his entire 
family survives.  How does a farmer live or how can we prevent a farmer from 
committing suicide if the very source of hi s sustenance is taken away.  The Committee 
would like to remind the Government that even  in pre independence era there were  Debt 
Reconciliation Boards which prevented the m oney lenders from committing atrocities on 
the farmers, and therefore, expect the demo cratic government of the people to safeguard 
the life and dignity of the farmers from th e coercive strong arm tactics of the money 
lenders. 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 As a matter of policy Government of Indi a are not in favour of any blanket waiver 
of loans/interest as it tends to vitiate the r ecovery climate.  However, there are standing 
guidelines issued by Reserve Bank of India to the banks for providing relief to the 
farmers in areas affected by natural calamities.  These guidelines have been issued to 
enable the banks to take uniform and conc erted action expeditious ly, particularly to 
provide financial assistance to the farmers affected by natural calamities.  These 
guidelines inter alia, envisages:- 
(i) Conversion/rescheduling of loans in  the event of natural calamity for 
period ranging from 3 to 9 years depending upon the successive crop 
failure/intensity of damage to crops. 

 32
(ii) Grant of  fresh crop loans to affected farmers. 
(iii) Conversion of principal as well as  interest due on the existing loans. 
(iv) Not to treat portion of conve rted/rescheduled loans as NPAs. 
(v) Not to compound interest in respect of loans converted/rescheduled etc. 
(vi) Relaxation in securi ty and margin norms. 
(vii) Provision of consumption loans to agriculturists whose crops have been 
damaged. 
Further, in order to mitigate the distressing situation of the farmers in the country, 
Government of India on 18.6.2004 has announced a special package for providing credit 
related relief to the farmers which inter-alia includes following measures:- 
a. Debt restructuring/rescheduling of loans for distressed farmers and 
farmers in arrears. 
b. Introduction of special one time settlement scheme for small and 
marginal farmers.  This scheme provides for selective waiver  of 
interest on loans. 
c. Fresh credit to farmers whose ear lier debts have been settled through 
compromise or write off. 
d. Loans for farmers indebted to non-institutional lenders. 
As a measure of disincentive, Comm ercial Banks, which fail to achieve 
the stipulated target of lending to ag riculture sector (i.e. 18% of net bank 
credit as agricultural credit) are required to remit the short falls to Rural 
Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) of NABARD.   To further 
disincentives the bank to opt for safe  route of contributing to RIDF, the 
rate of interest on RIDF has been inversely linked to the shortfall in the 
achievement of agricultural lending ta rget.  Commercial Banks have also 

 33
been advised to formulate Special Agriculture Credit Plan (SACP) for 
improving the flow of credit to agri culture.  Government of India has 
recently announced several measures for enhancing credit flow to 
agriculture sector, which would enable the commercial banks to increase 
their loan to agriculture and to reach the stipulat ed target of lending 18% 
of their net bank credit to agriculture sector. 
 As regards coercive recovery m easure, it is mentioned that the 
matter has already been taken up w ith the Chief Ministers of various 
States.  They have been advised to ta ke steps to avoid coercive recovery 
measures like detention  and taking  the land, machinery, livestock etc. 
from the farmers. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.13 
Organic Farming 
2.9 The Committee are constrained to note th at the approved outlay for Tenth Plan 
under the Scheme of ‘National Project on Or ganic Farming’ has been reduced from 
Rs.99.58 crore to Rs.57.05 crore,   due to the late approval of the Scheme.  An amount of 
Rs.27 crore has been now kept for implementation of the Scheme during 2005-2006. 
The Committee are of the view that Organi c Farming is very vital for the present 
agrarian economy as there are special be nefits and there is tremendous scope for 
developing Organic Farming from the view point of providing healthy farm produced 
food without traces of chemical/fertilisers and enhancing the scope  of export of organic 
produce.  The Committee, therefore, desire that since the Scheme has now been approved 
and started, the Department  of Agriculture and Coopera tion  should make concerted 
efforts in realizing the full potential of the Scheme, and for the purpose they should try  to 

 34
get enhanced allocations for the same.  The n eed of the hour is to popularise the use of 
Bio-fertilisers and Organic Farming to achieve  sustainable developm ent and also to tap 
overseas market of organic farm produces which is growing rapidly in the developed 
countries.  
Reply of the Government 
2.10 Organic farming is gaining gradual mo mentum.  Efforts are already there to 
popularize organic inputs including bio-fe rtilizer by organizing, training and field 
demonstration.  During 2004-2005 (since 1st October, 2004 to March, 2005) an amount of 
Rs.4.5 crore roughly has been expensed.  Various proposals are coming on organic 
farming which are under consideration.  The proposals include service provide 
appointment, setting up of bio-fertilizer unit, compost unit, vermiculture hatchery, human 
resource development, model farm set up etc.  Number of seminar, conference on organic 
farming have been organized at National/Regional level where participation from all 
concerned including State Governments, State Agricultural Universities, Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research, Non-Government Organisations, farmers, private entrepreneurs 
were made. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.16 
Road Map for Agricultural Diversification 
2.11 The Committee note that no significant h eadway has been made in diversification 
of our agriculture despite efforts by the Union and the State Government s.     A lot,  
therefore, needs  to be done for rejuvenating the agriculture sector which is the support 
base of more than 650 million people.  The  areas like production of fruits, vegetables, 
flowers, dairy, poultry, fisheries, pulses, oilsee ds, etc. need to be explored and dovetailed 
in a marketing network for the mutual benefit of the producers and the consumers 
culminating in acceleration of national growth.  The Committee take note of the intention 

 35
of the Government to prepare a road map for agricultural diversification which is possible 
only if an integrated appro ach is taken and coordinated efforts are made, by various 
Departments of the Government mandated to function in these areas.  The Committee, 
therefore, feel that the Government should consider to set up an Expert Group or Task 
Force to prepare a road map within a fi xed time frame for diversification of our 
agriculture. 
Reply of the Government 
2.12  In the country, most farmers, especially  small and marginal, still give primacy of 
place to cereals in their cropping system on th e consideration of f ood security, low risk 
and the easy market access.  This productio n system has helped in increasing the 
foodgrains production but has given rise to many problems re lating to deterioration of 
soil health, soil fertility, excessive exploita tion of underground water and huge stocks of 
foodgrains in the central reserve pool. 
Therefore, the Government has been emphasizing crop diversification from cereal 
centric cropping system to more remunerative/high value and less water demand crops.  
The emphasis is on promotion of oilseeds, pulses, fruits, vegetables floriculture and agro-
forestry, animal husbandry, dairying etc.  To encourage such activ ities development of 
infrastructure for post harvest handling and processing, storage, marketing, etc. would 
also be required. 
To give boost to horticu lture the developmental programmes are proposed to be 
implemented under National Mission on Hortic ulture.  Crop Diversification towards 
oilseeds and pulses is being promoted through programmes for the development oilseeds 
and pulses under the ‘Integrated Scheme fo r Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil palm and Maize 
(ISOPOM).   Besides a new scheme on Enha ncing Sustainability of Dry land Farming 
Systems is proposed to be launched this  year (2005-2006) through which, among others 

 36
agriculture diversification will also be enc ouraged which will include the activities such 
as animal rearing, dairy farming, agro-forestry, promotion of horticulture, etc. 
The Department of Agriculture & Coopera tion is preparing a road map for Crop 
Diversification in the country  in consultation with the In dian Council of Agriculture 
Research (ICAR). 

 37
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.8 
Price Support for farmers 
3.1 The Committee note that in order to provi de remunerative prices to farmers, the 
Government of India, on the recommenda tion of the Commission on Agricultural Cost 
and Prices (CACP), which is an autonomous body, announc es the  Minimum Support 
Price (MSP) for each crop season for 25 major agricultural commodities. 
 The Committee observe that MSP, which is instrumental in d eciding the fate of 
the crops  and the growers, is not being fixed keeping in view the real production cost and 
labour involved of the farmers.   The Comm ittee recommend that the Government should 
ensure that the MSP is fixed slightly highe r than  the cost price recommended by the 
State Governments which in turn  is based on the actual experience of  agriculturists as 
well as the considered views of   universities and e xperts so that the farming community,  
which gives employment to 60 per cent of the people of this country gets a fair deal. 
 The Committee also recomm end that adequate represen tation should be given in 
the CACP to the representative of farmers in order to have first hand information  about 
the cost of production of the Agriculture produce while fixing the MSP. 
 The Committee further desire the Govern ment to expedite the Report of Alagh 
Committee looking into the methodology, criter ia, and changes in parameters which 
determine MSP so that the farmers could be really benefited through the remunerative 
support prices of their produce.   Th e Committee further recommend that more 
agricultural commodities, particularly thos e recommended by the State Governments, 

 38
should be brought within the fold of MSP .  The Committee also desire that the 
procurement centers should start functioning by the time crop is ready. 
Reply of the Government 
3.2 The minimum support prices for select agricultural commodities are decided after 
taking into account the recommendations of the Commission for Agricultural Costs and 
Prices (CACP), the views of State Government s and Central Ministri es as well as such 
other relevant factors which, in the opinion of the Government, are important for fixation 
of support prices. 
(i) Apart from making a comprehensive overview of the entire structure of the 
economy of a particular commodity, the CACP, while formulating its 
recommendations on price polic y, takes into account such  factors as (i) Cost of 
production (ii) Changes in input prices, (iii) Input/Output price parity, (iv) Trends 
in Market prices at home and abroad, (v ) Demand and supply situation (vi) Inter-
crop price parity (vii) Effect on industrial cost structure (viii) Effect on general 
price level (ix) Intern ational market price situation; and (x) Parity between prices 
paid and prices received by farmers (Terms of Trade). 
The cost of production, as worked out by the CACP, on the basis of estimates 
furnished by the Directorate of Economics and Statistics, covers not only paid-out 
costs (actual expenses in cash and kind, incl uding rent for leased-in land) but also 
imputed value of wages of family, labour , rent for owned land, and interest on 
fixed capital.  As part of its exercise on price policy recommendations, CACP 
undertakes field visit in different parts of  the country for clos er interaction with 
the farming community, and also holds discussions with farmers and their 
representatives, Central and State Government officials, agricultural scientists and 
experts. 

 39
 However, in view of regional varia tions in costs, the MSP eventually 
recommended by the CACP attempts to cover actual expenses incurred in cash 
and kind, rent paid for leased-in land and imputed value of wages of family labour 
in case of States with high cost of production. 
 The CACP is composed of a Chairman, a Member Secretary, two official 
Members and three Non-official Members.  The Non-official Members are 
representatives of the farming communities.   They are usually persons with long 
field experience and active association wi th the farming activities.  Over the 
years, the Commission has also expanded th e scope of its regular  interaction with 
officials/experts to include farmers to get a direct feed back from them on various 
issues having a bearing on agriculture. 
 The Alagh Committee to Examine the Recommendations made by the 
National Seminar on Methodological issues  in Fixing Minimu m Support Prices 
has completed its deliberations and is expected to submit its Report shortly. 
 The terms of reference of CACP have been modified and expanded, from 
time to time, to keep pace w ith the changes in agriculture  scenario in the country.  
At the time of the CACP’s inception in  1965, eight agricultural commodities viz. 
paddy/rice, wheat, bajra, maize, sugarcan e, cotton and jute, and two commodities 
groups viz. gram and pulses and oilseeds were included in its Minimum Support 
Price Scheme.  During the year 1995- 96, Niger seed and Seasamum were 
included under the Minimum Support Price (MSP) Scheme of CACP, in addition 
to the edible oilseeds already covered unde r MSP.  Similarly, with effect from 
2001-2002, the Government added one more commodity, namely, lentil (Masur) 
to the list of crops under the MSP regime.  Currently, CACP makes 
recommendations in respect of 25 agricultural commodities under MSP Scheme.  

 40
However, the extension of MSP to all th e commodities for which MSP is desired 
by State Governments may not be tenable as the commodities covered under the 
MSP regime are of all India importance and are mostly items of mass 
consumption, necessary for food/nutri tion security.  The Government is 
implementing the Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) under which horticultural 
and other agricultural crops, wh ich are perishable in nature, are covered, in order 
to protect the growers of these commoditie s from distress sale in the event of 
bumper crop, MIS is implemented on the request of the individual State 
Government(s), which are ready to bear 50% loss (25% in case of North-Eastern 
States), if any, in its implementation. 
 The Government’s constant endeavour is to ensure that the procurement 
centers start functioning by the time crops are ready for market. 
 
 
 
 
 

 41
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.2 
Delay in implementation of Tenth Plan Schemes  
4.1 The Committee are distressed to find that  out of 10 new Schemes scheduled to be 
started in the Tenth Plan, only 3 Schemes are being implemented while 7 Schemes are 
still in the process of being approved.  The Committee were informed during the 
evidence that operationaliz ation of New Schemes involve s preparation of Detailed 
Project Report and getting ‘in principle’ approval from Planning Commission and other 
competent authorities.  The whole procedur e is very complicated and extremely time-
consuming.   
 The Committee are deeply concerned th at many important Schemes proposed to 
be launched at the start of the Tenth Plan have still not taken off though the Tenth Plan 
has ushered in the fourth year.  The Committee, therefore, feel  that the present system of 
obtaining approval, clearance from Expenditu re Finance Committee, Cabinet Committee 
for Economic Affairs, etc. leads to inordinate  delays in the implementation of Schemes.  
The Committee note that in many cases in tention of launching a new Scheme is 
announced in one Budget, implementation is announced in the subsequent year but the 
Schemes keep on pending for want of ‘in principle’ approval of the Planning 
Commission for years altogether and in some cases the Schemes even if implemented, are 
either fine tuned or retailored drastically or eventually dropped.   Such inordinate delays 
in obtaining ‘in principle’ approval to Schemes which are announced in Parliament with 
great fanfare appear at best mock-exercises.  

 42
The Committee, therefore, recommend that  the whole procedure prescribed for 
according Post-Budget approval  needs a sea change and it should be deemed that once a 
Scheme in announced in Parliament,  whether in Presidential Address or in the Budget 
Speech of the Finance Minister it has the approval of the Government.   The Committee 
see no reason as to why the Government s hould rush to announce in the Parliament 
launching of new Schemes before doing the necessary spade work, 
viz following 
departmental formalities and preparing the detailed modalities of the Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 After the Hon’ble Committee last met, two other new schemes ‘Monitoring of 
Pesticides Residues at Nationa l Level’ and ‘National Hortic ulture Mission’ have been 
cleared by the Government for implementation. 
 Nevertheless, there is a need to simplif y the procedures for obtaining the approval 
of the Government to the implementation of  new schemes so that delays could be 
avoided.  At the same time, this is a complex issue as the schemes involving huge 
financial outlays require to be carefully scru tinized and evaluated at various levels in 
different subject matter Departments, which makes it difficult to compress the processing 
time beyond a certain limit.   This Departme nt nonetheless gives a high priority to 
processing and finalizing such proposals in the shortest possible time. 
 It is further submitted that a new sche me cannot be launched unless a suitable 
budgetary provision has been made for its im plementation.   The declaration of the 
Government’s intention to launch such a ne w scheme at the time of presentation of 
budget before the Parliament cannot, therefore, be avoided.   The details of the scheme 
are accordingly worked out only after suitable financial allocation is allowed by the 
Parliament. 
 

 43
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.3 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No.1.6 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.10 
Rate of Interest on Agricultural Credit 
4.4 The Committee are unhappy to notice that most of the Cooperative Banks in the 
country are in a shambles.  As reported, six St ates/ Central Coopera tive Banks and 140 
District Central Cooperative  Banks do not comply with Section 11 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949.  They also have difficulty in accessing refinance for agricultural 
credit. 
 During the evidence, Chairman , NABARD admitted that Cooperative Banks are 
charging 14-15 per cent of interest from the farmers as these banks are taking a slice at 
each level.  The Committee desire the Gove rnment to look into the matter and ask 
NABARD to refinance the Cooperative Banks at lower rate of in terest because the 
cooperatives have a pivotal ro le to play in credit deliv ery to the farmers.  The 
Cooperative Banks should also be instructed to  reduce their share at each level so as to 
provide loans to farmers at reasonable rate of interest. 
 The Committee observe that the share of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) in 
institutional credit to Agriculture has been as low as 11 per cent in 2004-2005 and  9 per 
cent in 2003-2004, whereas RRBs are supposed to cat er to the credit needs of farmers, in 
their vicinity.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to streamline their 
structure and instruct them to increase the fl ow of rural credit so as to fulfil their rural 
mandate. 

 44
The Committee note that the extant ceiling of Rs.50,000 for Agricultural loans  at the rate 
of not more than 9 per cent interest to the fa rmers is just inadequate. Considering the cost 
of agricultural implements, machinery and the need for modernization of agricultural 
practices, the Committee strongl y recommend  that the ceiling of Rs.50,000 must  be  
reviewed  and  enhanced  upto Rs. 5 lakh  suitably to meet the growing needs of the 
farmers. 
Reply of the Government 
4.5 The Government of India has been ma king continuous endeavour to bring down 
rate of interest on agricultural loans keepi ng in view the massive development potential 
existing in agricultural sector  and its linkage with macro-economic development in the 
country. 
All the Public Sector banks have been advised to reduce their lending rate for 
agriculture to a single digit rate of not mo re than 9% per annum on crop loans upto a 
ceiling of Rs.50,000/-.  This rate will benefit most of the account holders and will cover 
almost all the small and marginal farmers.  The banks have been advised to ensure that 
the volume of credit to the agriculture sector does not decline  due to the reduction in the 
interest rate.  Further, in case of Commercial  Banks, there is a stipulation that the rate of 
interest charged from the ultimate borrower should not exceed the Prime Lending Rate 
(PLR) in case of loans upto Rs.2 lakh.  In order to bring down the rate of interest on loans 
from cooperatives,  NABARD has been allowed to extend refinance facility directly to 
the District Central Cooperative Banks. 
In order to improve the health of  State Cooperative Banks aznd DCCBs 
Government of India constituted a Task  Force under the Chairmanship of Prof. 
A.Vaidyanathan, which has since submitted its report.  The Government has accepted the 

 45
recommendation of the Task Force and has init iated steps to consult various stakeholders 
for finalizing the modalities for its implementation. 
Ministry of Agriculture has been pursuing with the Ministry of Finance the matter 
of streamlining the functioning of Regional Rura l Banks so as to improve their share in 
agriculture credit.  The Regional Banks so as to  improve their share in agricultural credit.  
The Regional Rural Banks have demonstrat ed positive performance in respect of 
agricultural credit flow growth  rate in the year  2004-05 and it is  proposed to fix 
agricultural credit flow growth rate of 40% for the RRBs in the year 2005-06. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.6 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Paragraph No.1.15 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.11 
Agriculture Extension 
4.7 The Committee find that Agriculture Exte nsion has scarcely made any significant 
impact on our agriculture, since not more than  25 per cent of Agriculture technology is 
reaching the farmers.  Though increased Mass Me dia Support to Agriculture Extension is 
being provided, the Committee feel that there is still a need for revamping the extension 
machinery to make it more farmer-oriented and accessible to them.  The village- level 
workers and community block based extens ion system should be revitalised and 
strengthened and made more responsive to the changing needs of the times.  Village 
Panchayats/Farmers’ organizations should be made  to play a critical role in the effective 
transfer of agricultural technology.  Th e Committee recommend the Department to 
disseminate the outcome of various successf ul researches made by ICAR and other 
agencies to the farmers and encourage them to properly utilise the same.  Otherwise the 

 46
fruits of long years spent in research for th e benefit  of the farmer are likely to remain 
confined to the laboratories.  
The Committee further recommend that n ecessary changes should be carried out 
by encouraging the Research Education and Ex tension Agencies to interact with the 
farmers to know their needs and problems and come out with demand driven solutions. 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 A number of initiatives taken by the Govern ment of India in this regard are listed 
here under:- 
The ITD component of NATP is under implementation with the support of  World 
Bank in seven States, namely, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Punj ab from 1998.  The project focused on 
bottom-up planning process for techno logy assessment, refinement and 
dissemination in order to make the whol e extension system farmer-driven and 
farmer accountable.  This has helped to strengthen research and extension 
capabilities, restructure public extension services and  test new institutional 
arrangements for technology transfer with involvement of all the stakeholders of 
Government and Non-Government agencies at the district level.  Linkage between 
research and extension has been strengthened by involving KVKs/ZRS 
(Institutions of ICAR/SAUs) and the development departments of State 
Governments at a platform called ‘Agr icultural Technology Management Agency 
(ATMA); established as a registered au tonomous body at district level under the 
above-mentioned project.  The outcome of  this project has been rated highly 
satisfactory by the World Bank Superv ision Mission (November-December 
2004). 
2. Support to State Extension Programmes for Extension Reforms 

 47
This new Scheme has been approved on 29 th March 2005.  The scheme aims at 
making extension system farmer driven  and farmer accountable by way of new 
institutional arrangements for technology dissemination in the form of an 
Agricultural Technology Management Agen cy (ATMA) at district level to  
operationalise the extension reforms.   The release of  funds will be based on State 
Extension Work Plans (SEWPs) prepared by the State Governments.  It is 
proposed to cover 252 districts across all the States/Uts in the country. 
3. Mass Media Support to Agriculture Extension   is focusing on two initiatives.  
The first is use of Doordarshan infrastructure for providing agriculture related 
information and knowledge to the fa rming community.  180 Narrow casting 
Centres, 18 Regional Centres and 1 Na tional Centre of Doordarshan Kendras 
would telecast agricultural programmes during specific hours.  The second 
component of the mass media initiative is  use of 96 FM Transmitter of AIR to 
broadcast area specific agricultural programme. 
4. Kisan Call Centre 
 These Centres operate through toll free lines throughout the c ountry and provide 
expert advise to the farmers.  A country wide common four digit number 1551 has 
been allocated to these Centers.  13 such centers located at different places cover 
farmer’s queries from all over the c ountry.  Around 8 lakh calls have been 
received in these centers since inception of the scheme in January, 2004. 
5. Farm Information Support Programmes 
 Farm Information Support is provided to supplement States/Agricultural 
Universities efforts.  These include organizations of regional fairs and exhibitions, 
support to State Agricultural Universitie s for print media and Kisan Melas and 

 48
support to National Productivity Council for productivity awards to agricultural 
and allied sectors. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.9 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Paragraph No.1.18 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
Budgetary  Allocation 
5.1 The Committee note that the Tenth Five Year  Plan target is to achieve an average 
annual growth rate of 4% in agricultural output and to achieve a production of 230 
million tonne of food grains by 2006-2007.   During the Ninth Plan, agricultural and 
allied sector registered an average annual growth rate of about 2.1 per cent and advance 
estimates for 2004-2005 projects to achieve Agricultural growth rate of 1.1 per cent only.  
During 2004-2005, the country could produce a bout 206.4 million tonne of food grains 
which projects the need to increase the pr oduction at least by 24 million tonne.  In order 
to meet these ambitious targets, the Committee were informed that the Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation had placed a demand of Rs.9,997.34 crore during 2005-
2006.  However, only an amount of Rs.4,589.83 crore (both Plan and Non-Plan) has been 
made available to them by the Planning Comm ission and the Ministry of Finance, which 
is around 45.91 per cent of the demand. 
 The Committee note that the percentage share of Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation vis-à-vis  Central Plan Outlay of Govern ment of India during 2005-2006 is 

 49
1.98 per cent which is a little more as compared to 1.62 per cent for the last year,  but 
pales into insignificance considering the fact  that the agrilculture contributes, by the 
admission of the Department one quarter of i ndia’s total GDP, its real contribution in the 
economic well being of the country goes much beyond – being his support and livelihood 
base for more than 650 million country men.  While the Committee are conscious of the 
fact that Agriculture is a State subject, the Un ion Government must perform the role  of a 
true catalyst so as to induce public and private investment in agriculture by taking 
suitable fiscal measures.  The Committee would like to be apprised of such measure in 
due course. 
  On the contrary, the Committee find that the Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation could never utilize the entire amounts allocated to it.  During the evidence 
the Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation  admitted that the Planning 
Commission and Finance Ministry has assured that if allocated money is fully spent, 
proposal for further increase in the outlays will be positively considered.  It is therefore, 
incumbent upon the Department to  first utiliz e the allocated funds so as to make strong 
case for enhanced outlays.  
The Committee wish to emphasize that the de velopment of agriculture is essential 
not only for providing food to increasing populati on of the country but also to ensure and 
improve the livelihood of the ru ral population.  Therefore, this  sector needs to be given 
high priority in all planned strategies of the Government.   The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Planning Commission and the Mi nistry of Finance should 
review the allocation of  funds to this Sector and make enhanced allocations keeping in 
view its importance and growth targets set by the Government. The policies and 
programmes aimed at improving agricultural production and productivity should not 
suffer due to resource crunch. 

 50
Reply of the Government 
5.2  A number of steps have been taken to ensure full, proper and even paced 
utlization of funds.  These include regular monitoring of the timely release of funds; 
review of progressive expenditure incurred on implementation of schemes; and follow up 
on obtaining of utilization certificates from the State Governments.  The Crop 
Directorates of the Department, which as sist and guide the State Governments in 
formulation, implementation and monitoring of production programmes, also monitor the 
utilization of funds by the St ate Governments.  A system of Area Officers has been 
evolved under which officers of the rank of Joint Secretary have been assigned the 
responsibility of continuously monitoring the state of agriculture in their allotted state(s).   
A comprehensive review of preparedness of the State Governments for undertaking Rabi 
and Kharif operations along w ith  a stock-taking of all the developmen t initiatives 
including utilization of funds is  taken up twice a year.  The Ag riculture Minister as well 
as Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation also review the performance 
from time to time both in Delhi and the States. 
In addition, the extant G overnment instructions, in accordance with which not 
more than 33 per cent of the annual allocations made, can be expended in the last quarter 
of the fiscal year, further strengthen the regulatory mechanism for ensuring release of 
funds in an even paced manner so that bunching  of expenditure toward the fag end of the 
fiscal year is avoided. 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) has emerged as one of the crucial areas in the 
field of agricultural extension and marketing in meeting the multifarious demands of the 
farming community.   The recently approve d scheme of “Support to State Extension 
Programmes for Extension Reforms” aims at making extension system farmer driven and 
farmer accountable by way of new decentralized institutional arrangements for 

 51
technology dissemination in the form of an  “Agricultural Technology Management 
Agency” (ATMA) at district level.  ATMA  is an autonomous institution providing 
flexible working environment involving all the key stake-hold ers in project planning and 
implementation.  These will be supported by similar bodies at the block level. 
Similarly the Scheme “Establishment of Agriculture Clinics & Agri.Business 
Centres by Agriculture Graduate s” is another good example of increasing public private 
participation in the agriculture sector.  Th e scheme aims at increasing self-employment 
opportunity for eligible agriculture gradua tes as well as to support agriculture 
development through economically viable vent ures.  The successful initiatives of the 
private sector like ITC e-Choupal, Chambal Fertilizer, Haryali Kisan Bazar, Pepsi Co. etc 
are expected to be replicated in several parts of the country. 
Agricultural Marketing is yet another area where PPP can play a vital role to 
promote growth, employment and economic pr osperity in rural areas.  The State 
monopoly over agricultural markets in order to  facilitate direct marketing, and contract 
farming and encourage private sector investments for the development of post harvest 
and cold chain infrastructure near to the fa rmers fields as also to establish effective 
linkage between farm production and the retail chain, including food processing industry.  
A reform-linked scheme of “Development/Str engthening of Agricultural Marketing 
Infrastructure, Grading and Standardization” is being implemented.  Under this scheme, 
funds would be provided to  those States/UTs which am end  their APMC Acts, for 
promoting direct marketing, contract farming and for setting up of markets in the private 
and cooperative sectors.  In the field of mark eting and storage the Scheme of (i) Gramin 
Bhandan Yojana ; and (ii) Construction of Cold Storages aim to promote the participation 
of private sector. 

 52
Private sector has also been encourag ed in supply of key inputs like seeds, 
pesticides etc.  Recently, the Department in collaboration with FICCI organized an 
Agriculture Summit to promote PPP in agriculture sector in general and in agricultural 
marketing and extension in particular. 
The recommendation made by the Hon’ ble Parliamentary Standing Committee 
regarding enhanced allocations of funds to Ag riculture Sector has been forwarded to the 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. 

 53
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
Amount spent by North Eastern States 
5.3 The Committee note that Rs.418 crore, repr esenting  10 per cent of the total Plan 
Outlay of the Departments have been allocated for implementation of Plan 
Schemes in North-Eastern States during 2005-2006.  While examining the 
detailed Demands for Grants of the Mi nistry, the Committee find that though the 
allocation is invariably reflected in the Demands for Grants, but there is no 
mention of actual expenditure on specific Schemes.  Though 10 per cent funds are 
allocated for the North-Eastern States in  accordance with the directions of the 
Government, the Committee have been furnished no information as regards the 
Schemes implemented in these States out of such funds.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Government to evolve some mechanism like adding  an 
annexure in the Detailed Demands fo r Grants book reflecting the actual 
expenditure incurred on implementation of  each Scheme in North-Eastern States, 
State-wise, so that the Parliament is sati sfied as to bona fide use of such special 
allocations. 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 The Hon’ble Committee have advised that  an annexure in the Detailed Demands 
for Grants book reflecting the actual expe nditure incurred on implementation of each 
scheme in North-Eastern States may be added.  This comes under the purview of 
Ministry of Finance.  The matter has been taken up with them.  The Committee would be 
apprised shortly. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 

 54
5.5 For comments of the Committee please re fer to Paragraph No.1.9  of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.4 
Subsidies in Agriculture  
5.6 The Committee note that the subsidy in th e Agriculture Sector in India constitutes 
less than 2 per cent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).   The Committee are informed 
that Input Subsidies, estimated at about Rs.36,000 crore are given to Agriculture Sector 
under three segments viz  Fertilizer, Water and Electric ity. The Committee, however, 
note that 54 per cent of  Fertilizer subsidy is actually going to industry and as regards 
‘water’ and ‘electricity’,  the subsidy is gi ven by the State Governments.   Moreover, in 
many States, there is tremendous shortage of water and electricity, which in turn has been 
adversely affecting our agriculture. 
 Referring to the view of the World Bank, the representatives of the Department 
deposed that the high rates of subsidy being pr ovided to agriculture in India is crowding 
out the investments.  The witness further testified that India is subsidizing input as well as 
output, but when asked by the Committee to explain the difference between the two 
figures, the witness assured to supply the figures after working out the same.  In the 
considered view of the Committee, the concept of notional subsidy makes no sense unless   
the loss caused to the farmers is quantified and compensated since we do not have access 
to the kind of referral market that the WTO alludes to. 
 The Committee are aware of the heavy subsidies being given by the developed 
countries to its agriculture. The Committee, ther efore, desire the Government to find out 

 55
a way to convert this negative agricultural subs idy into positive subsidy so as to provide 
level playing field to our farmers in the ne w WTO regime so that they could somewhat 
compete with the farmers of other developing and developed count ries.  The Committee 
also call upon  the Government to ensure that real benefit of the subsidies must percolate 
down to the small and marginal farmers, invest ment flows to agriculture and  agriculture 
becomes a paying proposition.   
Reply of the Government 
5.7 The issues raised in the recommendati on require consultation with different 
Ministries (like Water resources, Power etc.) and other institutions (like Indian Council 
for Agricultural Research etc.) DAC is in the process of finalizing reply of the 
Government in consultation with all conc erned and will report to Hon’ble Committee 
soon. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
5.8  For comments of the Committee pl ease refer to Paragraph No.1.12 of 
Chapter-I of the Report. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.12 
Financial Support to National Seeds Corporation 
5.9 The Committee are surprised  to note th at during 2004-05, Rs.4 crore provided as 
Budgetary Support for National Seeds Corporation (NSC), (Head of Development 12401) 
had been withdrawn at RE stage and now only Rs.30 lakh have been allocated for 2005-
2006.  The Committee are informed that since NSC was reluctant to receive this amount 
as a loan @ 15.5 per cent inte rest for implementation of VRS/VSS, the support was 
withdrawn at RE stage,  hence, the  less provision this time. 
The Department need to explain as to  why should NSC or any other agency take 
the loan from the Government at an exorbita nt interest rate of 15.5 per cent when it is 

 56
available at a much cheaper rate from the ba nks.  The Committee, therefore, desire  the 
Government to either reduce the rate of inte rest if it really inte nd to provide support to 
NSC or stop juggling with the budgetary allocations. 
Reply of the Government 
5.10 The rate of interest on government lo ans is fixed by the Mi nistry of Finance 
keeping in view various rele vant factors.  Though, at tim es, loans on cheaper rates are 
available from banks, but there may be certa in conditions which the public sector 
enterprises may not fulfill, particularly, the economic and financial condition of the 
organization may not allow access to bank loans.  In such circumstances, the  
Corporations may prefer getting government  loan for which some provision has been 
kept.  The matter of reducing the interest rate on government loan to the Corporations has 
been taken up by this Department with the Mini stry of Finance and a letter has been sent 
to them in this regard. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.14 
Tsunami Affected Farmers 
5.11 The Committee  express their deep c oncern over extensive devastation caused by 
the Tsunami waves in Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Tamil Nadu, Pondicherry and other 
affected areas of the country.   The Committee observe that besi des  the  irreparable  loss 
of  lives,  the  agricultural  land  is  likely  to  remain  
infertile/uncultivable for the next 5-6 years due to saline water which had inundated the 
agricultural land. 
 The Committee are of the view that part icular attention should be paid to the 
affected areas and farmers in Andaman and Nicobar Islands because they need special 
protection being in distress and far  away from the mainland.  Immediate measures 
should be taken to restore the fe rtility of land in the entire coastal areas affected by the 

 57
devastating waves including c onstruction of homes.  The Committee further desire that 
the extension machinery should make concer ted efforts to popularise salt tolerant 
varieties of different crops developed by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) and State Agriculture Universities  among the farmers in the region and help 
them in growing the produce with all the required technical know how. 
 The Committee further desire that al l preventive measures, including early 
warning system, should be installed to prevent such disaster in future. 
Reply of the Government 
5.12 The issues raised in the recommenda tion require consultation with different 
Ministries, State authorities and other bodies/institutions DAC is in the process of  
finalizing reply of the Government in consultation with all concerned and will report to 
Hon’ble Committee soon. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.15 
VAMNICOM 
5.13 The Committee are concerned to note th at the Vaikunth Mehta National Institute 
of Cooperative Management (VAMNICOM), Pune a premier Institute in the field of 
Cooperative Management Training has not been accorded the Deemed University status.   
The students who pass the P GDBM programme from the Inst itute suffer, for want of 
recognition by the UGC.  Moreover, the teaching   faculty has been deprived of the pay 
scales which are due to them. 
 The Committee observe that since VAMNIC OM is the only Centre for excellence 
in the field of Cooperative Management Training, the matter of according Deemed 
University status to the Institute should be reviewed expeditiously.  The Pay Scales of the 
faculty of the Institute should also be revised to avoid exodus of highly talented and 
experienced faculty members.  The Comm ittee further recommend that immediate 

 58
necessary steps need to be taken by the Depart ment for Brand Building of the Institute so 
that the students,  otherwise well-qualifie d and  well-trained by the Institute, get good 
placement commensurate with their real calib re.  The Committee also desire that  
renowned Institutions like VAMNICOM  must get a suitable mention in the Annual 
Report and other documents brought out by the Department. 
Reply of the Government 
5.14 VAMNICOM functions under th e administrative control of National Council for 
Cooperative Training (NCCT) which is a Co mmittee of the National Cooperative Union 
of India (NCUI).  The proposal for granting Deemed University status to VAMNICOM, 
Pune has been examined earlier.  The ma tter was taken up with the UGC through the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development.  Since the conditionalities imposed by UGC 
was not accepted by the NCUI, it was decided by the NCUI that VAMNICOM be 
developed as a Centre of Ex cellence within the cooperative system, instead of being 
converted into a University.  The Depart ment of Agriculture & Cooperation has not 
received any fresh proposal fr om NCCT  for granting Deem ed University status to 
VAMNICOM, Pune. 
 The matter of granting UGC pay scales to the faculty of VAMNICOM, Pune was 
taken up with the Department of Expenditure  twice in the past.  The Department of 
Expenditure did not approve the proposal as the UGC pay scales can be introduced only 
in Universities/Deemed Universities. 
 The Department of Agriculture and C ooperation has asked VAMNICOM, Pune to 
prepare a Report for positioning VAMNICOM, Pune as a Centre of Excellence in the 
Cooperative sector.  After receiving the repo rt, necessary steps would be taken by the 
Department for Brand Building of the Institute.  Details regarding the activities of 

 59
VAMNICOM and other Cooperative Training Ins titutes will be suitably incorporated in 
the Annual Report and other documents brought out by the Department. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
5.15 For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No.1.20 of Chapter-I of 
the Report. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.17 
Revitalisation of  Cooperatives 
5.16 The  Cooperatives in India, conceived to play an important role in shaping  our 
agricultural and rural economy, have emerged as one of the largest in the world with 
about five and-a-half lakh so cieties of various types w ith membership of about 23 
million.  The Committee note with concern that  despite almost all the villages being 
under the cooperative fold,  most of the cooperatives have become non-viable.  The three-
tier system, envisioned for the benefit of the fa rmers,  is in fact,  causing hinderance in 
the efficient  functioning of the cooperatives  now.   The representative of the Department 
conceded in her testimony  that  each tier is getting its own slice, insofa r as it concerns 
charging of interest from the farmers.   Cons idering the wide array of functions enjoined 
upon the cooperatives namely, disbursement of  credit, agricultural inputs, processing, 
marketing of farm produce, etc., the Committee are of the considered view that the 
management of cooperatives needs to be stre ngthened and, therefore, all possible efforts 
should be made for the revival of sick Coope ratives.  The Committee also feel that 
though in order to provide greater financial autonomy to the cooperatives, the Multi-State 
Cooperatives Act has been enacte d, yet a lot more needs to be done to remove structural 
weaknesses and regional imbalances in the Cooperatives.   The Committee would like to 

 60
be apprised of the efforts made to revitalis e the Cooperatives so that the farmers get the 
much required support and strength for their sustained development and prosperity. 
Reply of the Government 
5.17 To revitalize the Cooperative, Govern ment has undertaken several measures.  
These include, inter-alia, framing of a Natio nal Policy on cooperatives, enactment of 
Multi-State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002, initiatives for revitalization rural 
cooperative Credit institutions Department of Agriculture & Cooperation is also 
considering amendment to the Constitution in respect of C ooperatives.  A High Powered 
Committee to review the working of entire cooperative structure et c. has also been 
constituted. 
1. National Policy on Cooperatives 
The Union Government has formulated a National Policy on cooperatives in 
consultation with the States.   The objective of the national policy is to facilitate all round 
development of cooperatives in the country an d to work as guiding principles for action 
of the State towards in cooperatives.  The policy, envisages that cooperatives be provided 
necessary support, encouragement and assist ance and to ensure th at they work as 
autonomous, self-reliant and democratically  managed institutions accountable to their 
members. 
2. Multi-State Cooperative So cieties (MSCS) Act, 2002 
 The Central Government has taken a lead  in providing required autonomy to the 
cooperatives by enacting MSCS Act, 2002, repl acing the MSCS Act, 1984.  It aims at 
providing functional autonomy and democr atic management to the Multi-State 
Cooperative societies.  Though this Act is appli cable to National level cooperative 
societies/Federations and other Multi-State Cooperative societie s, it is expected that it 
will work as a model Act for reforms in State Cooperative Laws. 

 61
3. NCDC (Amendment) Act, 2002 
 NCDC Act, 1962 has been amended vi de NCDC (Amendme nt),2002 expanding 
the mandate of NCDC to include foodstuff, industrial goods, livestock and services in the 
programmes and activities in addition to the existing programmes.   The definition of 
agriculture produce has been amended to c over wider range of activities by including 
edible and non-edible oilseeds, cattle feed, produce of horticulture and animal husbandry, 
forestry, poultry farming, pisicult ure and other allied activities to agricu lture.   Vide the 
amendment  Act, definition of industrial goods and livestock have been elaborated 
covering the products of allied industries in the rural areas and in cludes any handicrafts 
or rural crafts.  The livestock includes all animals to be raised for milk, meat, fleece, skin, 
wool and other by products.  NCDC will be able to provide loan directly to the 
cooperatives without State/Central Government guarantee on furnishing of security to the 
satisfaction of the  NCDC.  So far activities concerning th e water conservation, animal 
care/health, disease prevention, agricultural insurance and agricultural credit, rural 
sanitation/drainage/sewerage have been notified as notified services. 
4. Amendment to the Constitution in respect of 
 Cooperative in spite of th e felt need for amendment in the State cooperative 
Societies Acts, the pace of  reforms in C ooperative legislation by the States is not 
encouraging.  Therefore, to ensure th e democratic autonomous and professional 
functioning of cooperatives, it has been deci ded to initiate a proposal for amendment to 
the Constitution for the purpose.  This decision has been taken after careful deliberations 
with the state in a conference of State Cooperative Ministers held on 7th December, 2004.  
The proposed amendment  to the constitution  is purported to address the key issues for 
empowerment of co-operatives through their voluntary formation, autonomous 
functioning, democratic control and professional management. 

 62
5. Constitution of High Powered Committee 
 To review the achievements of cooperative  movement during the last 100 years of 
cooperative movement and challenges before it,  and to suggest ways and means to face 
them and to give a new direction to the movement, high powered committee has been 
constituted with following Terms of Reference:- 
(1) To review the achievements of the co-operatives during the last 100 years. 
(2) To identify the challenges being fa ced by the co-operative sector and to 
suggest measures to address them to enable the movement to keep pace 
with the changing socio-economic environment. 
(3) To suggest an appropriate policy and legislative framework and changes 
required in the co-operative legislati on in the country with a view to 
ensure the democratic, autonomous and professional functioning of co-
operatives; Amendments in the Multi -State Co-operative Societies Act, 
2002. 
6. Revamping of cooperative Credit Structure 
 In order to improve the health of  rural cooperatives, Credit Institutions, 
Government of India constituted a Task  Force under the Chairmanship of Prof. 
A.Vaidyanathan for suggesting measures required for improving the efficiency and 
viability of Rural Cooperative Credit Institutions and to suggest an appropriate regulatory 
framework.  The Task Force has submitted it s report in respect of Short Term Credit 
Cooperative structure.  The Government has accepted the recommendation of the Task 
Force and has initiated steps to consult various stakeholders for finalizing the modalities 
for its implementation.   The same Task Force has been advised to look into the problems 
of Long Term Cooperative Credit structure and to suggest measures for its revitalization. 
 

 63
RECOMMENDATION NO.18 
Post Harvest and Processing Technology on Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize 
5.18 The Committee note that under the Scheme of ‘Research and Development for 
Post Harvest and Processing Technology on Oi lseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize’, no 
funds have been allocated during 2005- 2006 though the Revised Estimate for 2004-2005 
was Rs.17.75 crore.  The Committee have been in formed about the decision to weed  out 
the Scheme by the Planning Commission.   Th e Committee hardly wish to emphasize the 
importance of crops like Oilseeds, Pulses and Maize as the units based upon Post Harvest 
and Processing Technologies of these crops  provide ample employment opportunities 
besides remunerative prices to our farmers.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the assessment  of the Scheme made by the Expenditure Finance Committee and the 
considered views of the Department. 
 The Committee recommend the Government to continue this important Scheme 
and allocate the funds at Revised Estimates stage so that the rese arch work being done 
under the Scheme does not suffer due to reso urce crunch, particularly  when the country 
has to resort to import of edible oils  
Reply of the Government 
5.19 The Planning Commission in its review exercise of the Plan Schemes has 
identified the Central Sector Scheme on Research and Development on Post Harvest and 
Processing Technology in Oilseeds, Pulses an d Maize including TMOP headquarters 
(R&D in PHT Scheme) for weeding out as a consequence of which no budgetary 
allocation has been provided for under the scheme for 2005-06.  The R&D in PHT 
Scheme was re-structured during X Plan with an outlay of Rs.85.00 crores.  While 
Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize deals 
with the production and producti vity aspects of oilseeds, pulses, and maize, the R&D in 

 64
PHT Scheme was intended to deal with research, development and promotion of 
processing technologies for these crops.  A nu mber of technologies have been developed 
under this scheme by the CSIR Institutions and have been promoted in different parts of 
the country.  The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation is of the view that weeding 
out of the R&D in PHT Scheme, at this st age will adversely affect the promotion of 
oilseeds and pulses, which are extremely im portant crops for our import view point and 
also in the context of diversification programme that Government wish to persuade. 
Expenditure Finance Committee, while approving the scheme for implementation 
till September, 2004 observed th at an evaluation of the sche me be carried out by an 
independent agency and further continuation of  the scheme may be considered based on 
the evaluation.  The impact evaluation of the scheme has been carried out by an 
independent agency.  The impact evaluati on study while highlighting the achievements 
made under this scheme, has observed that the design of the R&D in PHT Scheme is 
good and the scheme may be fine tuned based on inputs. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
5.20  For comments of the Committee please refer to Paragraph No.1.23 of Chapter-I 
of the Report. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.19 
CROP INSURANCE 
5.21 The Committee are constrai ned to note that ‘Nationa l Agricultural Insurance 
Scheme being implemented through Agricult ure Insurance Company of India Ltd. (AIC) 
is not giving the satisfactory results.  During the various st udy visits the Committee were 
informed that the settlement of claims is not being made in time and due to undue delay 
in certain cases, the farmers  even committed  suicide due to frustration for want of funds 
at their disposal.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to ensure the speedy 

 65
settlement of claims before the next sowing season so that farmer has adequate money in 
hand to produce another crop.   
 The Committee have also experienced that  at the time of failure of crops due to 
some natural calamities like drought, etc. some farmers are deprived of the claims on the 
pretext that their area was normal.  The Commi ttee feel that the unit of area being taken 
presently into consider ation in assessing the da mage is not adequate.  Therefore, they 
recommend the Government to reduce the area unit upto village level so that affected 
farmers are judiciously compensated in the ev ent of crop failures and the purpose of crop 
insurance is justified. 
The Committee also recomm end that NAIS should be made easy for the farmers 
to understand and the implementation of the Scheme should be made smooth so that more 
and more farmers may come under the purview of the Scheme and be benefited 
therefrom. 
Reply of the Government 
5.22 The National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) envisages time bound 
settlement of claims.  It is Government’s endeavour that claims of a season, if any, are 
settled before the commencement of the same season next year.   Implementing 
States/UTs are requested from time to time to make adequate budget provision in their 
budget and for timely payment of their share towards financial liabilities.  Recently, 
Union Agriculture Minister has requested to  the Chief Ministers of all implementing 
States for expeditious payment of share of their financial liabilities under NAIS.  Besides, 
this, States are requested to make availabl e requisite yield data to the implementing 
Agency within stipulated time so that  ti mely processing of admissible claims may be 
made. 

 66
NAIS is an area based scheme and the implementing States/UTs are permitted to 
notify any unit area of insurance including Te hsil, Taluka, block, mandal, firka, Gram 
Panchayat keeping in view the capacity of the State to undertake requisite number of 
Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs). 
The implementing states face difficulties in  reducing the unit area of insurance 
because of large number of CCEs required to be undertaken for making assessment of 
yield. 
The Government has constituted a Joint Group to review the status position of 
existing Crop Insurance Schemes, improveme nt required in the National Agricultural 
Insurance Scheme (NAIS) and to develop broad parameters of an appropriate and farmers 
friendly crop insurance scheme.  The Group made in-depth study of the related issues and 
submitted its report on 20.12.2004.  The Group has made a number of important 
recommendations including reducing the unit area of insurance to Gram Panchayat for 
major crops and timely settlement of insurance claims.  As announced in the Budget 
speech for 2005-06, the Government, at present,  is in the process of consulting various 
stakeholders about the implementation of the recommendations of the Group.          
 
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
18 January, 2006                                                    Chairman, 
28 Pausa, 1927 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Agriculture  
    

 67
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 18 TH JANUARY, 2006 AT 1100 HRS. 
IN  ROOM, ‘139’, FIRST FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri Raghunath Jha 
7. Smt. Rupatai D.Patil Nilangekar 
8. Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy 
9. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
10. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
11. Shri Harish Rawat 
12. Dr.M.S.Gill 
13. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
14. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
15. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
16. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
4. Shri D.S. Malha    -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 68
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman, welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and requested them to deliberate on the first item of the agenda of that day, 
i.e., the consideration of the statement pr epared by the Committee Secretariat comprising 
the comments/suggestions received from vari ous organisations on ‘The Food Safety and 
Standards Bill, 2005’ and after some deliberation decided that the draft report on the said  
Bill may be prepared by the Secretariat and be circulated to the Committee for their 
consideration by the first week of February, 2006.   
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up Memoranda No. 2 containing draft 13 th 
Action Taken Report on the 9 th Report on Demands for Grants  (2005-06) of the Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture  and Cooperation) for consideration and 
adoption. 
[Smt. Mohsina Kidwai, MP in the chair.] 
 The Committee also took up Memoranda Nos. 3, 4 and 5 containing draft 
14th, 15th and 16 th Action Taken Reports on the 10 th, 11th and 12 th Reports on Demands 
for Grants relating to the Ministry of Agri culture (Department of Agricultural Research 
and Education); Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry Dairying and 
Fisheries); and Ministry of Food Processing Industries for consideration and adoption. 
3. The Committee then adopted the draf t Action Taken Reports with certain 
additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee. 
4. The Committee thereafter authorized the Chairman to present the above-
mentioned Reports to the House on a date and time convenient to him. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

 69
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE NINTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA) 
  
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     19 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Obser vations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Serial Nos. 5,6,7,9,13 and 16 
 
T o t a l          6  
 
Percentage        31.67   
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Serial No. 8 
 
T o t a l          1   
      
Percentage         5.2 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies 
Of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
Serial Nos.  2,10 and 11 
 
T o t a l          3    
 
Percentage        15.7 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which  
Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Serial No.  1,3,4,12,14,15,17,18 and 19 
 
T o t a l          9    
 
Percentage        47.36 
 
 