      
  26 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2006-07) 
                 
         
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
         
         
                 
MINISTRY OF  FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007) 
         
         
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Twenty-First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006)} 
         
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
  
                                                      
  
         
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
MARCH, 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (Saka) 
 
 
  

TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2006-07) 
          
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
 
         
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations  contained in the Twenty-First Report 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006] 
         
Presented to Lok Sabha on____________ 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ______________  
  
                                                     
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
           MARCH, 2007/, PHALGUNA 1928 (Saka) 

 
COA No  191 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price:  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
        © 2007 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha  (Eleventh Edition).  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
<CONTENTS> 
                   P A G E  
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………   
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations /Observations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendati ons/Observations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations /Observations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Obs ervations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee  
held on 08.03.2007 .      
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First 
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2005-2006) on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of  
Ministry of Food Processing Industries    
 
 
 
 

       
 
 
 
 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Ranen Barman 
3. Shri Anil Basu  
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava 
6. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
7. Shri Khagen Das 
8. Shri Dharmendra 
9. Shri GadakhTukaram Gangadhar 
10. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
11. Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah 
12. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad 
13. Shri Prabodh Panda 
14. Smt. Rupatai D iliprao Patil Nilangekar 
15. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
16. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
17. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
18. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
19.        Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
20.        Shri Baleshwar Yadav    
21.        Smt. Kalpana  Ramesh Narhire 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
22.    Shri Harish Rawat 
23.   Dr. M.S.Gill 
24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25. Shri Vikram Verma 
26. Shri  Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
28. Shri Datta Meghe 
29. Shri  Debabrata Biswas 
30. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
31.        Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K.Singh   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Hardev Singh   - Director 
4. Shri N.S.Hooda   - Deputy Secretary 
   5.       Ms. Amita Walia   - Under Secretary  

      6.       Shri M.D.Tuteja      - Committee Officer   
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
         
         
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on  Agriculture, [2006-2007] having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit th e Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Twenty-First Report of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture (2005-2006) (Fourteenth Lok Sa bha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries for the year 2006-2007. 
2. The Twenty-First Report of the Stan ding Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006) on 
Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Minist ry of Food Processing Industries was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 19.05.2006 and laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day.  The 
Ministry of Food Processing Indu stries was requested to furnis h action taken replies of the 
Government to the  recommendations contained in  the Twenty-First Report.  The replies of 
the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report  have been received. 
 
3. The Committee considered the action take n replies furnished by the Government at 
their sitting held on  08.3.2007, approved the draft comments and adopted the Twenty Sixth 
Report.  Minutes of the sitting are placed at Appendix I.  
 
4. An analysis of the Action Take n by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty-First Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
        
            
                                           
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
08  March, 2007                                 Chairman, 
17 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)                                         Standing Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
 

 8
 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Agricu lture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agri culture (2006-2007) on Demands for Grants 
(2006-2007) of the Ministry of Food Processi ng Industries which was presented to the Lok 
Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 19.5.2006. 
 
1.2 The Action Taken Replies have been recei ved from the Government and have been 
categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II of the Report) Recommendation Sl.No. 8 (Total –1) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s ac tion taken reply (Chapter III of the 
Report)  (Total –Nil) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which action taken replies of  
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV of the 
Report) Sl.Nos. 2 and 6   (Total-2) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited. (C hapter V) Recommendation Sl.Nos.1,3,4,5 
and 7  (Total –5) 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the ac tion taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations. 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Overview 
 
1.4 The Committee have been informed that th e Ministry of Food Processing Industry at 
first came into existence in 1988 and the food pr ocessing was called as sun-rise sector but 
even after 18 years of its existence, it has still not grown up.  Only 2.2% of the fruits and 
vegetables produced in India are processed and 60% of the produce go waste, processing 
level of milk is 35%, of meat is 21% and poultry product is 6% only and the reason being 
lack of basic facilities of food processing or food preserva tion such as food processing 

 9
industries, cold storages, cold -chain facilities, warehouses, st ringent and inte rnational food 
standards, test labs and export facilities. 
The farmers who produce the fruits, vege tables, and even cereals do not get 
remunerative price of their produce, because they are not able to sell whole of their produce 
for want of food processing facilities.  They continue to suffer due to immense fluctuation in 
prices of their produce.  The Ministry acts as  a catalyst for guiding, helping and creating a 
conducive environment for healthy growth of the food processing indu stries.  But it is 
facing difficulties for having inadequate infrastruc ture facilities, lack of quality control and 
testing facilities, seasonality of raw material and cultural preference for fresh food. 
The Committee have also noted that th e food processing industry is following the 
western path of processing food-items, such as biscuits, jams, sauces, breads, butter, milk, 
cold drinks, meat, Fish & Poultr y processing etc., but we do not have the test laboratories 
for these items for quality control for food standards of international level.  This is one 
major reason that we are not able to export our processed food items to the outside world 
and our share in world trade in respect of  processed food is about 1.6% only.  Committee 
observe that there is a need to have right ki nd of food processing models, keeping in view 
Indian way of food processing  in our households.  The Mini stry should have a ‘guidance 
centre’ to guide about the crops to be grow n, which factory to be  set up and where, 
availability of raw material throughout the year , seasonality of crops, where to sell, use or 
process the food items.  The Government will have  to look into these basic shortcomings in 
our quality control of food standards so that we may export the processed food items in the 
international market. 
The budgetary support of Rs.166.90 crore for 2006-07 for Plan Fund, given to the 
Ministry of Food Processing Indus try is very meagre when compared to other departments 
of the Government of India.  During 2005-06, the BE for Plan funds was fixed only at 

 10
Rs.180 crore and yet even this allocation was reduced to Rs.136 crore at revised estimates 
stage.  The Committee observe that reduction of budgetary support at RE stage would create 
problems for the on-going schemes which will be  affected for want of funds.  Committee 
expect the Government to plan the fund allocat ion at BE stage in such a way that no need 
should arise to reduce the budgetary support at RE stage and the on-going schemes of the 
Ministry do not suffer due to reduction of funds in the middle of the year. 
The Committee are perturbed to note that budgetary support to the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industry when compared to the Centra l Plan outlay which for the last four years 
is hovering around 0.5 to 0.6% at  Rs.167 crore which speaks volumes of non-attention 
being paid by the Government towards this Mini stry for sun-rise industry.  Even budgetary 
outlay of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution is Rs.205 crore 
and of Ministry of Communication & IT is Rs.1138.65 crore.  Th e Committee strongly 
recommend that the Budgetary out lay of the Ministry of FPI s hould be at le ast doubled for 
smooth running of its schemes. 
Committee also note with concern that the projected demands of the Ministry for 
Infrastructure Development Scheme for 2006-07 was Rs.63 crore but the outlay approved 
by Government is only Rs.22 crore and against the proposal of Rs .37 crore for Human 
Resources Development Scheme, the Government approved only Rs.16.90 crore, this shows 
that either the proposals were exaggerated or the Ministry could not convince the Planning 
Commission & Ministry of Finance about the veracity of their demands for these schemes. 
Committee have been informed that the Ministry has prepared a vision for growth of Food 
Processing Industries sector, which envisages increa se in processing level of perishable goods from 
6% to 20%; increase in value addition from the present level of 20% to 34%; share in global trade up 
from 1% to 3% by 2015.  This increase in processing will gene rate direct employment of 28 
lakh and indirect employment of 74 lakh persons. 

 11
The achievement of this vision will in turn commercialize the agriculture, enhance 
the income of farmers, generate employment and earn the foreign ex change through export 
of agro-food etc. and the vision 2015 can be achieved only if the requisite budgetary support 
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries fo r its various schemes and targets, is given 
by the Government. 
The Committee strongly r ecommend that budgetary proposals should be made 
judiciously with details of the funds require d under various heads an d the Ministry should 
make coordinated efforts for clearance of f unds for various schemes (new/old) at the 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance level. 
Committee also recommend that the Governme nt should approve the draft ‘National 
Food Processing Policy’ at their earliest so that the objectives of the policy such as 
infrastructure development, linkages with farm ing system, increase in level of processing, 
enhancement in value addition and generation of employment can be achieved on time. 
The domestic consumption of value added fruits and vegetable products is low 
compared to the primary processed food in general and fresh fruits & vegetables in 
particular. Lower capacity utilization, infrastructural constraints,  inadequate farmers 
processors linking, dependence upon intermediari es, smallness of units and their inability 
for market promotion are some of the reasons  for inadequate expansion of the domestic 
market.  The Government should look into these practical difficulties faced by the food-
processing sector and resolve them in a time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
1.5 The Government in their action taken re ply have stated that the food processing 
industry’s growth is retarded mainly on accoun t of factors such as –low affordability, high 
cost of inputs, poor infrastructure, cultural preference for fresh foods, low efficiency, 
multiple regulators, lack of brand image, short product life cycle globally, cost 

 12
competitiveness, low innovation and high taxation.  The Ministry proposes to address these 
problems during the 11th Plan period in a focused manner. 
As  regards quality control/food standards, the scheme for quality control and 
standards is proposed to be revamped in the 11 th Plan with the objective of motivating the 
food processing industry to adopt international food standards.   The Food Safety and  
Standards Act, 2006 has been enacted.   The Food Safety and  Standards Bill, 2006 was 
passed by the Parliament on 02.08.2006 and recei ved the assent of the President on 23 rd 
August, 2006.   The provisions of the Act shall come  into force from such date as the 
Central Government may notify in the official G azette.   The main objective of the Bill is to 
bring about a single statute relating to food and establish Food Safety and Standards 
Authority with a view to: 
(a) Lay down Food Standards based on science, transparency  and consultation, 
(b) Effective regulate manufacture, import, st orage, distribution a nd sale of food to 
ensure consumer safety and promote global trade, 
(c) Pool infrastructure, manpower and testing facilities for better standard fixation and 
enforcement through their proper re-deployment, and, 
(d) Rationalize and strengthen existing enforcement mechanism 
The Ministry also proposes to enhance  availability of technical and other 
information relating to food processing sector of  the Ministry which will enable prospective 
entrepreneurs to have access to  essential entrepreneurial in formation relating to the food 
processing sector. 
As regards enhanced Budgetary allo cation, in BE 2006-07, an allocation of 
Rs.166.90 crores has been provided.   In the  RE 2006-07s, the Ministry is seeking an 
allocation of Rs.181.70 crores.   Further, the Mi nistry proposes to achieve higher Budgetary 
expenditure through (i) revamping of its existing Plan Schemes based on review of 10th Plan 

 13
schemes (ii) energizing the F ood processing sector in the 11 th Plan with quantum jump in 
activities & outlay, paradigm sh ift in mode of implementation by adopting Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) mode to the extent feas ible and other supportiv e framework for which 
action has been already initiated. 
As regards the finalisation of the draft Food Processing Policy, a GOM  under the 
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Agricu lture and Consumer Af fairs, Food & Public 
Distribution has been set up to consider an Integrated Strategy for Promotion of Agri-
Business – Vision, Strategy and Action Plan for Food Processing  Sector  incorporating the 
draft Food Processing Policy.  The GOM has met twice so far. 
The installed capacity of fruit and vege table processing indu stry in 2005 was 2.12 
million tonnes only as against a total production of almost 140 million tonnes.    Over the 
last few years significant growth  has been seen in the ready to serve beverages, fruit juices 
and pulps, dehydrated and frozen fruits and ve getable products, toma to products, pickles, 
convenience foods, veg-spice pastes and processe d mushrooms.    However, the domestic 
consumption of value added fruits and vegetables remain low compared to primary 
processed foods in general and fresh vegetables and fruits in particular. 
Varietal constraint is one of the major f actors associated with several fruits and 
vegetables.   Many varieties of  fruits and vegetables are uns uitable for either export or 
processing.   Inadequate infras tructure has been identified as  a major constraint in the 
growth of fruit and vegetable processing industries.   Without a strong and  dependable cold 
chain, a vital sector like F&V processing industry, which is ba sed mostly on perishable 
products cannot survive and grow.   Even at currents level of production, wastage in F&V is 
estimated at 35%, major reasons being inade quate storage, transportation, cold chain 
facilities and other infrastructure support facilities.   The Ministry proposes to address these 
issues during the 11th Plan period. 

 14
Though there has been a substantial rationalization of taxes in fruit and vegetable 
processing sector in the count ry, notably since 2001-02 when Central Excise Tax (CET) on 
processed fruits and vegetables were reduced  from 16% to 0% high  taxes/duty on raw 
material for packaging, packaging machinery and raw materials is also affecting the growth 
of the food processing sector in general and F& V processing industry in  particular.   The 
Ministry’s Budget proposals for 2007-08 will convey its concerns on the need to address 
these issues to the Ministry of Finance. 
Government of India has been implemen ting several schemes for  facilitating 
creation of infrastructure for  food processi ng.   While revision in the Infrastructure 
Development Scheme during the 10 th Plan has been submitted to Planning Commission for 
its concurrence which is still awaited, it proposes to revamp the scheme during the 11th Plan 
with a view to make it more attractive to the entrepreneurs with enhanced outlay to provide 
greater level of assistance to meet the requirements of the industry. 
It is proposed to identify fruits and  vegetables with  potential for processing, in 
specific geographical areas.    The effort w ould be to put in place a model supply chain, 
which will try and address the supply chain constraints by bringing R&D institutes, 
extension machinery, farmers, traders and processors together.  This will enable the farmer 
to integrate production with market  demand  and ensuring that research and market 
information  and incentives reach the farm gate. 
It is proposed to strengthen R&D efforts through linkages between R&D 
institutions, farmers, extension machin ery and industry which will also focus on 
introductions of new varieties, stretching th e production season of ma ny fruit and vegetable 
crops.   This has the ability to increase availa bility of raw material over longer periods, 
resulting in utilizatio n of assets over longer season, an d resultant increa se in overall 

 15
profitability.   Other areas proposed to be given focused attention include revamping of 
infrastructure support to farm sector and tax incentives to the food processing sector. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.6 The  Committee have observed that th e Government have given evasive replies 
to most of the points raised by them in their report on DFG of the Ministry for the 
year 2006-07 by stating that the issues ra ised by the Committee will be addressed 
during the  11 th Plan period.    However, no  bl ue print has been put forth before the 
Committee as to how and when these issues  will be addressed.   For example, the 
Government has taken up the case of revision of the Infrastructure Development 
Scheme during the 11 th Plan Period with the  Planning Commission for its 
concurrence, but the  views of the Planning Commission in this regard are still 
awaited.   The Committee would like to be informed of the view taken by Planning 
Commission and also the Finance Ministry, as soon as these agencies furnish their 
views on revamping of infrastructure support to the sector to increase the installed 
capacity of Food and Vegetables Processing  Industry so as to reduce the wastage of 
fruits and vegetables to less than 10% which is presently estimated at 35%.   Similarly, 
revamping of the other existing Plan schemes based on  review of the 10 th Plan 
schemes should be done expeditiously.  
The Committee also note with concern th at the draft Food Processing Policy 
has not yet been finalised.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry should take 
immediate steps to finalise the Food Proces sing Policy for proper development of the 
food  processing sector and apprise the Committee of the same at the earliest. 

 16
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Budgetary Allocations 
1.7 The Committee have noted that the Mi nistry of Food Processing Industry was 
allocated Rs.650 crore against the projected demand of Rs.2800 crore for the whole of 10 th 
Plan period.  During last year i.e. 2005-06, even though the BE was at a lower side at 
Rs.180 crore but even that amount was reduced to  Rs.136 crore at RE stage, thus affecting 
the ongoing schemes of the Ministry badly.  India being an agricu ltural state, the food 
processing industry has the potential to transform the economic conditions of our farmers as 
well as our country where 60% of the fruits and vegetable production go waste for not being 
consumed in any form.  The abundant production of fruits and vegetable, if harnessed by 
processing it, can raise our share in international trade considerably, which is at present only 
negligible at 1.6% level.  But to raise our shar e in the international trade, we should be able 
to utilize the allotted budget optimally, which is  not the case at present and the Ministry is 
not able to utilize its allotted budget every year.  The Ministry has been able to utilize only 
Rs.361 crore during the first four years of 10
th Plan period, and Rs.289 crore still remain to 
be utilized during the last year of this pl an and the budget allotment for the last year 2006-
07 of the 10th Plan is only Rs.173.70 crore and more than Rs.100 crore has been surrendered 
for the simple reason that the Ministry is not having enough schemes to absorb their quota 
of budgetary support of Rs.650 crore allotted for 10th Plan.  It speaks vol umes of disinterest 
and callous attitude on the part of the Mi nistry which could not make enough viable 
schemes which could have utilized the a llotted budget.  Committee are not able to 
comprehend the situation that if the Government had sanc tioned the full demanded amount 
of Rs.2800 crore to the Ministry, how and where, they would have  utilized it.  It seems that 

 17
the Ministry even after 18 years of its existence, have not been able to play its role as a 
facilitator by providing proper basic infrastructure, international standards test labs and 
technological upgradations and training to the people who are in the field or are ready to set 
up food processing industries.  Had the Ministry taken interest in this direction, the industry 
could have reached the level of Rs.50,000/- cror e in the food processing sector and that 
would have transformed the economic conditions of our farmers and labour force in the 
rural India.  It seems to be nobody’s baby in the Government of India’s eyes and there are 
several agencies/departments working in this field but under different  Ministries and thus 
have no coordination among themselves to raise the level of Food processing in our country.  
Committee strongly recommend that  various Ministries and ot her agencies autonomous or 
in public sector or in privat e sector should make coordinate d efforts to raise the food 
processing industry to a greater height. 
Reply of the Government 
1.8 Two of the major schemes being implem ented by the  Ministry during the 10 th Plan 
have been the Scheme on Infrastructure  Development and scheme on Technology 
Upgradation/Modernisation/Establishment of Food Processing Industries.  Infrastructure 
schemes like food park is cost intensive and involves long gestation period.   Under the 10 th 
Plan the revised scheme provide s for grant of 25% of the proj ect cost with ceiling varying 
between Rs.75.00 lakhs and Rs.5 cr ores under  different component s.    Compared to this, 
9th Plan scheme was more liberal with a  gran t upto Rs.4 crore without restrictions in terms 
of percentage of project cost.   As a resu lt, while 41 food parks were sanctioned during the 
9th Plan, only 13 food parks have been sanctioned during the 10 th Plan period so far.   In 
view of the above, the utiliz ation under this scheme has been only Rs.73.89 crores (upto 
Sept.2006) against the total budget provi sion of Rs.163 crores during the 10 th Plan period.   
Some of the other schemes like Quality Assura nces have also not a ttracted much response 

 18
from the food processing industr ies.   A detailed review conducted by the Ministry has 
revealed that reasons for inadequate response have been. 
• Long gestation period involved. 
• Most of the projects being implemented by State Industrial Development 
Corporations who due to financial diffi culties are slow in bringing in ringing 
in their proportionate share. 
• Lack of dedicated Project Management Agencies. 
• Failure to build the supply chain. 
• Locational and linkage constraints –D evelopment of linkages and related 
infrastructure do not proceed hand in hand. 
Lack of interest among entrepreneurs to set up units in food parks as they do not see 
any special advantage. 
In the case of Quality Assurance and other schemes, Inadequate level of assistance 
and not covering all the components of the project are  among the reasons for  the poor 
response. 
Necessary amended proposals have been formulated for removal of these weakness 
in the infrastructure scheme and submitted to the planning Commission.  Pace of 
expenditure under the scheme is expected  to improve after the new proposals are 
implemented. 
Keeping in view the  expe rience gained during the 10 th Plan, the schemes are 
proposed to be revamped during the 11 th Plan with higher level of assistance, and 
appointment of  reputed and experienced co nsultants as Project Management Agencies 
(PMA), with experience in development and fina ncing of industrial cluster infrastructure on 
PPP basis, to be engaged by the MFPI, under  a suitable MOU indicating clear deliverables.   
The PMA’s role will be from conceptualization to commissioning of  the project.  It is also 

 19
propsed to decentralize the implementation of the programmes through financial institutions 
and State level agencies so that the entrepreneurs can access the assistance more easily. 
As regards coordination of other concerned Ministries, th e Ministry had involved all 
concerned Ministries and stake holde rs in the formulation of the 11 th Plan schemes.  As 
regards enhanced Budgetary allocation, in BE 2006-07, an allocation of Rs.166.90 crores 
has been provided.   In the RE 2006-07, the Ministry is s eeking an allocation of Rs.181.70 
crores. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.9 In their reply, the Government have st ated that 41 Food Parks were sanctioned 
during the 9 th Plan while only 13 Food Parks were sanctioned during the 10 th Plan 
period due to which only Rs.73.89 crores (upt o September, 2006) could be utilized out 
of the total budget provision of Rs.163 crores under the scheme during the 10 th Plan 
period.   Also, under the Quality Assurance and other schemes of the Ministry also, the 
funds could not be utilized fully.    The Mi nistry have acknowledged that according to 
the detailed review conducted by them, the reasons for inadequate response to their 
Schemes have been long gestation  period, lack of dedicated Project Management 
Agencies, failure to build the s upply chain, locational and linka ges constraints, etc.    
Committee observe that when the reasons for inadequate  response to the schemes 
were known to the Ministry, corrective steps should have been taken to make the 
schemes more attractive so that the sanctioned  funds could have been fully utilized.    
The Committee would also like to be inform ed of the reasons as to how the grant 
under the Food Parks under the 10 th Plan was revised to 25% of the project cost with 
ceiling varying between Rs.75 lakhs and Rs.5 crores, from Rs.4 crores without any 
restrictions in terms of percentage of project cost during the 9
th Plan. 

 20
The Ministry have also informed that in view of the experience gained during 
the 10 th Plan, the schemes are proposed  to be revamped during the 11 th Plan with 
higher level of assistance and appointment of  reputed and experienced consultants as 
Project Management Agencies.   The Co mmittee desire that the schemes may be 
finalized immediately and re quisite funds should be ob tained from the Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance.    Th e Committee also reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the Ministry should play  its role of facilitator more effectively 
for setting/upgradation of food processing  industries so that the wastage of fruits and 
vegetables produced in the country is prevented.    Various Ministries/agencies 
working in the field of food processing sh ould make concerted and coordinated efforts 
in this regard.    
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Scheme for Infrastructure Development 
1.10 The Committee have been informed that  the scheme for financial assistance for 
development of infrastructure facilities fo r food processing industry was approved by 
CCEA only in August 2003.  The grants-in-aid up to Rs.4 crore (up to 25% of the Project 
Cost) to set up common infrastructural facilities  is provided by the Government.  This basic 
requirement of food processing se ctor has not been taken care of even after 18 years of the 
existence of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries.  Committee have also noted that the 
budgetary provisions of Rs.49 crore at BE st age were reduced to  Rs.10 crore during 2005-
06 and for this current year of 2006-07, the budgetary support given is Rs.19.80 crore only.  
Though the budgetary support for assistance to set up food parks, packaging centers, 
modernization of Abattoirs, Integrated Cold Ch ain Facilities, irradiation facilities and value 
added centres is not full y granted and there is lot of scope for the Ministry to develop these 
facilities, yet even Budgeted grant of Rs.49 crore could not be properly schematized and 

 21
was reduced to Rs.10 crore at RE stage a nd the Committee are unable to comprehend the 
Government’s way of doing things as without providing basic infras tructure facilities, 
without a strong base, how the Government is thinking of making a strong presence in the 
food processing sector.  The small and medium  players in food processing business cannot 
create these basic facilities mentioned above a nd thus would be discouraged to enter this 
sector which has immense potential as they are getting the food items, fruits & vegetable at 
a very cheap rate.  Committee strongly recommend that the proposal to liberalize Food Park 
Scheme be cleared at their earliest and th e grants-in-aid assistance for setting up common 
infrastructural facilities of cold storage, f ood testing and analysis laboratories, effluent 
treatment plants, packaging centers etc. should be raised to 50% instead  of 25% at present, 
so as to attract more and more people to join the food processing sector. 
The Ministry should also coordinate and expedite the functioning of 52 food Parks 
already sanctioned in various States, out of which only 22 are at  present being functional.  
The remaining 30 food parks should be made functional during the current financial year 
itself and private-public partne rship should be encouraged in  addition to the assistance 
provided by the Government, by way of grants-in-aid, to expedite the setting up of basic 
infrastructure facilities for these food parks. 
The State Governments should be persuaded to  provide basic facilities of land, road, 
electricity, water and other linkages necessary for setting up of food parks, as the farmers of 
their States would be getting more financial be nefits by supplying their perishable goods to 
the units of food processing near their places.  Then only the vision-2015 of the food 
processing sector which envisage s to raise world trade share from 1.6% at present to 3%, 
processing of perishable goods from 6% to 20% present and direct and indirect employment 
to one crore people, could be achieved. 

 22
The Committee have noted with concer n that only Rs.2.00 crore have been 
earmarked for setting up of packaging centres for food processing industries and only one 
such centre has been sanctioned and that too in one corner of the country in Jammu & 
Kashmir.  The Committee feel that there should be a packaging centre near each of the food 
parks and the integrated approach is needed to link cold chain, value added centres, package 
centres and bright-light shin ing upon facilities at one place and the infrastructure providing 
schemes should be restructured accordingly. 
The Planning Commission should be appr oached for setting up of cold chain 
facilities from farm gate till consumers as a part of integrated approach for assistance in the 
form of grants-in-aid to food processing sector. 
The Committee also recommend that grants -in-aid @ 25% of the project cost in 
general area and 33.33% in difficult areas should be raised to 50% in general areas and 75% 
in hilly and difficult areas for irradiational f acilities to preserve fl our and sprouting from 
infestation and prevent change in chemical co mposition of the products like potato etc. as 
the food processing facilities are generally at far off places from their production centers. 
Reply of the Government 
1.11 The Government in their action taken reply  have stated that the Ministry has so far 
approved 54 Food  parks for assistance in th e country.   Though the  Ministry has been 
monitoring  the implementation of the sc heme with the State Governments, the 
implementation has been found to be generally slow due to a variety of reasons such as lack 
of focused Project Management Agencies at th e State level, financial difficulties of State 
Government Enterprises, sub-optimal funding provision under the existing scheme etc.   
Based on recommendations of the Conference of  State Food Processing Ministers, study 
conducted and experienced gained, a need has been felt to restructure the food park scheme 
and the same is under discussion with the Pl anning  Commission as a part of the Plan 

 23
formulation exercise for XI th Plan.    In this regard, the concept of Mega Food Parks has 
been mooted to provide for holistic infrastructu re development.   The restructured scheme 
envisages the following: 
1. To provide state of the art infrastruc ture for Food Processing in the country. 
2. Ensure value addition of agricultura l  commodities including poultry, meat, 
dairy, fisheries etc. 
3. Establish sustainable ra w material supply chain. 
4. Facilitate induction of latest technology. 
5. Fostering inter agency linkages for pooling of resources for activities, 
complementary to Food Processing. 
6. Quality assurance through better pr ocess control and capacity building. 
7. Address issues of small farm size and small & medium nature of  processing 
industries through cluster approach. 
8. Organising  the Stakeholders  to build the supply chain. 
9. Incentivise private investment. 
At present, there are separate components for packaging center, value added centers, 
cold chain and irraditation facilities center ha ving different patterns of assistance.  The 
above four components, are primarily, interventions aimed towards value addition, 
increasing shelf life of final/intermediate products and raw material.   The  component of 
Value Added Centre addresses creation of Post Harvest Infrastructure/Value addition etc.  
Experience shows that there is need for integration of the above individual components into 
a single scheme so as to allow greater flexibil ity in designing of projects and bring about 
integration of the various activi ties included in the above com ponents.    At present, the 
Ministry is handicapped in furthering the deve lopment of Cold Chain Infrastructure as only 
Cold Storages for non-horticultural produce and specialize type of cold  storages like 

 24
Controlled Atmosphere/Modified atmosphere co me within the ambit of the Ministry.   
Further, at present several components like reefer vans/refrigerate d transport cannot be 
assisted by the Ministry  which is a major hur dle in development of an integrated Cold 
Chain.   These issues have already been taken up by the Ministry  in the proposals for 
restructuring of the schemes, with the Planning Commission. 
It is also proposed to emphasise buildi ng of cooling, grading, packing and storing 
facilities close to the farm so that the farmer is  empowered to add va lue to the produce and 
demand better prices from processors and retailers. 
Factors like need for  greater coverage, mandate and flexibility in the existing 
schemes, sub-optimal funding, problems of  the cash strapped State Government 
Implementing Agencies etc, have been constr aining off-take of funds  which the Ministry 
hopes would be addressed through revamping of the schemes. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.12 On the issue of the con cept of the Mega Food Parks, the Committee desire the 
government to finalise the restructured scheme  expeditiously in a time bound manner.   
The Committee should be apprised of the steps taken to set up Mega Food Parks for 
holistic infrastructure development within th ree months of the presentation of this  
Report. 
Recommendation No. 4 
Technology Upgradation, Establishment and Modernization of Food Processing 
Industries 
1.13 Committee note that in addition to pr ovide policy and promotional support to 
potential entrepreneurs in the field of gr ain processing, meat poultry, egg, and fish 
processing; fruits and vegetable processing a nd consumer food industry, the Government is 
implementing the scheme for technology upgradation and establishment, expansion and 

 25
modernization of food processing industries by providing 25% of the cost in general areas 
and 33.33% in difficult areas, subject to  a maximum of Rs.50 lakh and Rs.75 lakh 
respectively.  The Committee are of the opini on that the technology upgradation can’t be 
done in a cheaper way and the assistance of 25% is too less for the budding entrepreneurs 
and even the old hands to make necessary tec hnological changes in their processing system.  
The assistance needs to be raised to 50% ke eping in view the cost of upgradation of 
technology which is changing at su ch a fast rate that it is ve ry difficult to catch up with the 
latest changes in processing technology.  The Committee also desire that the farmers should 
also be provided the basic technology so that  they can make base pulp of their fruits and 
vegetables grown in their fields and nearby areas so that their pe rishable goods do not go 
waste and they are also able to sell it in the nearby food processing industries and get 
remunerative prices of their produce. 
Reply of the Government 
1.14 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that the Scheme for 
Technology Upgradation/Modernization/Establishment is one of the most  popular schemes 
being implemented by the Ministry under 10th Plan.   The total outlay for the scheme during 
the 10th Plan is Rs.295 crores against the total Plan outlay of Rs.650 crores comprising 45% 
of the total Plan a llocation.  So far, Rs.218.67 crores ha ve been disbur sed (till 30.11.2006) 
under the above scheme.  Considering the current high levels of wastages of perishables, the 
capital intensive nature of Food Processing Industries based on agriculture and the potential 
of the sector for generating rural empl oyment and of encouraging adoption of 
internationally quality standards by these units, it is proposed that the level and quantum of 
assistance under the scheme be suitably increased during the 11 th Plan period.   With a view 
to provide for improvement of processing capa bilities, it is planned to implement the 

 26
scheme for Technology upgradation/expansion/ modernization/through a decentralized 
approach. 
With effect from the date of notification of the revised scheme, the applicants will be 
advised to submit their applications for assi stance to the identified Nodal Banks/PLIs who 
will disburse the grants directly and there will be  no need for the application to be sent  to 
the Ministry.   The MFPI will  place funds with the Nodal Ba nks towards reimbursement of 
grants to the units in advance.   The Government  shall constitute an Empowered Committee 
under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, MF PI to lay down norms and guidelines for 
operationalizing the scheme, providing direc tions for its effective implementation, 
periodically reviewing its functioning and taking necessary corrective measures/policy 
decisions.   Such guidelines will be in addi tion to those laid down by the Nodal Banks/PLIs 
for assessing the techno-economic feasibility, commercial viability and bank-ability of the 
proposals submitted by prospective units under the scheme. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.15 The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the revised scheme 
for increasing the level and quantum of assistance during the 11 th Plan for 
improvement of processing capabilities th rough a decentralized approach.    The 
norms and guidelines for operationalising th e scheme, etc. to be prepared by the 
Empowered Committee under the chairmanship of the Secretary, MFPI, may  also be 
furnished as soon as these are finalized. 
Recommendation No. 5 
Quality Control Labs 
1.16 Committee have been informed that to  ensure compliance with National Food 
Standards and to analyze the samples received from food processing industries and other 
stakeholders, the Government organizations, IITs and Agricu ltural Universities are helped 

 27
through grants-in-aids to set up quality control laboratories for the food processing sector.  
But the number of food processing laboratorie s is limited and they are at such a far off 
distances from the processing centres/units that it is not possible that every product which is 
locally processed, could be checked for its quality at Quality Control labs.  In Uttar Pradesh, 
for example, there are only four test labs and it is not possible to get every kind of processed 
food checked at these labs.  Moreover, all the labs do not comply fully with the International 
Food Standards which is must if we want to se ll our processed products in the international 
market.  Quality maintenance for meat and othe r exports must meet the international food 
standards.  So, our test labs should be of international standa rds and be recognized so in the 
international market.  There is also need to  open small test labs for a specific food product 
which may be an area-specific produce and for this purpose, our agri cultural Universities 
and agricultural colleges and Krishi Vigyan Kendras and local science colleges can be 
equipped and their technical sta ff can be trained in specified techniques for a specific food 
quality product.  Standards for these tests by these colleges/Universities should be fixed by 
the Government.  The science or agriculture colleges at taluka level can be allowed to 
charge specific fee for any test which will be an extra income for that  educational institute 
and they can do the testing without any extra financial burden.   Committee also recommend 
that the R&D base in food processing shou ld be increased by involving Agriculture 
Universities and private research organizations working in the field of food processing.  The 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries should organize workshops, seminars, exhibitions 
and agriculture-fairs to disseminate the latest research and technology developed in the food 
processing sector in India and the world over to the farmers. 
Reply of the Government 
1.17 The Government in their action taken reply ha ve stated that MFPI aims at setting up 
a network of laboratories to help in implem enting quality regime for processed food.   

 28
Further, to provide the common facilities to food processing  industries and consumers for 
testing of articles of food, the networking of  laboratories assumes importance, since these 
laboratories will be utilized  not only for carrying out analytical tests, but also for providing 
technical guidance and awareness creation on quali ty and safety aspects.   In order to 
provide the common facilities  to food processing industries and consumers for testing 
articles of food, Ministry of Food Processing  Industries is operating a Plan Scheme for 
setting up/up-gradation of quality control laboratories with the following objectives : : 
• To  ensure compliance with national food standards. 
• To assist industries in the food sect or to develop and implement quality 
management systems such as ISO 9000, HACCP etc. 
• To analyse the samples received from  food processing industries, and other 
stakeholders. 
• To impart training in areas relating to quality improvement. 
• To provide information on quality sta ndards and requirements of various 
markets on quality of products. 
• To reduce the time of analysis of samp les by reducing transportation time of 
samples. 
• To generate scientific data on levels of contaminants, pesticide residue etc.  
Under the  plan scheme approved for 10 th Plan, the Central/State Government 
organizations, IITs and Universities are eligible fo r grant-in-aid limited to entire cost of the 
capital equipments required for setting up/modernization of  laboratories.   All other 
implementing agencies are eligible for grant- in-aid limited to 33% of the cost of capital 
equipment required for setting up/up-gradation of  such laboratories for general areas and 
50% for difficult areas. 
During 9 th and 10 th Plan, the Ministry provide d financial assistance to 29 
stakeholders in Government as well as private sector.    This includes Central/State 
Government organizations, Agricultural Univer sities, Research institutions, Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras, Industry Associations, and other private sector orga nizations.   Ministry while 
approving the financial assistance emphasizes  on adoption of NABL accreditation so that 

 29
these labs comply with the International Standards and are r ecognized in the International 
Market. 
An Integrated Food Law i.e. The Food Sa fety and Standards Bill, 2005 has been 
passed by the parliament on 02.08.2006 and received the assent of the President on 23 rd 
August, 2006.   The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 has been notified on 24 th August, 
2006.   The provisions of the Act shall come in to force from such date as the Central 
Government may notify in the official Gazette.   The main objective of the Bill is to bring 
about a single statute relating to food and es tablish Food Safety and Standards Authority 
with a view to: 
(i) Lay down Food Standards based on scie nce, transparency and consultation,  
(ii) Effectively regulate manufacture, impor t, storage, distribution and sale of 
food to ensure consumer safety and promote global trade, 
(iii) Pool infrastructure, manpower, testi ng facilities for better standard fixation 
and enforcement through their proper re-deployment, and, 
(iv) Rationalise and strengthen  existing enforcement mechanism 
 
Presently, this Ministry has initiate d the process of preparing rules and 
organizational  structure of the Food Safety an d Standards Authority of  India.   The Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India proposed to be established under the above Act has 
been empowered to recognize the food testin g laboratories in Government and Private 
sector.    The proposed Food Authority may recognize  labs in each State/district and also 
lay down standards for testing of the food products. 
Moreover, MFPI has awarded a study to map the existing food testing laboratories in 
the country and assess their capab ilities and requirements.   This study may help the Food 
Authority in identification of locations for setting up new laboratories to ensure regional 
dispersal of food testing laboratories, prompt service to industry clusters/exports etc., and 
resources  required therefor.   Report of the study has been submitted in the first week of 
December, 2006. 

 30
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.18 The Committee have been in formed that the Government has awarded a study 
to map the existing food testing laboratories  in the country to assess their capabilities 
and requirements  and the report in th is regard has been submitted to the 
Government in December 2006.  The Committe e would like to be informed of the 
salient features of the report and further ac tion taken/proposed to be taken by the 
Government  to revamp and increase the number of food testing labs. 
Recommendation No. 6 
Backward and Forward Integration and other Promotional Activities 
1.19 Committee have been apprised that the Mini stry of F.P.I. is operating the Backward 
Linkages, Generic Advertisement & Promoti onal activities such as fairs/exhibitions, 
seminars/workshops/conferences/surveys etc.   However, the budgetary support for the 
current year 2006-07 is fixed at Rs.9 crores only which seems to be too meagre an amount 
keeping in view the purpose behind it.  The b ackward linkages, through contract farming to 
ensure regular supply of desired raw material to processors and to avoid the incidence of 
distress sale by the farmers, would rather ensu re remunerative prices of their agriculture 
produce.  The Committee are not convinced that with a budgetary support of Rs.1.00 crore 
for 2006-07 for backward linkages, the Government  will be able to cover a large number of 
farmers under this scheme, as the total number of farmers covered so far under this scheme, 
is 14926.  Presently, the scheme is meant to c over only 25 farmers for Rs.10 lakh assistance 
and even if the whole amount of rupees one cror e is utilized, the total farmers that could be 
covered under this scheme cannot exceed 250 farm ers this year.  In a country where 70% of 
the people are farmers or dependent on agriculture activities, covering only 250 farmers in a 

 31
year does not augur well and there is need to provide wide publicity and guidance to farmers 
through exhibitions, fairs, advertisements, pub licity material, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, and 
periodical meetings at village levels between di strict level officials, and with representative 
of food processing units.  The farmers should be  apprised about the be nefits of contract 
farming through such exhibitions/publicity/village fairs and village level meetings. 
Reply of the Government 
1.20 The Government in their action taken repl y have stated that under the scheme of 
Backward Linkages MFPI is providing financ ial assistance to fruits and vegetables 
processing units only and  not covering the entire  agriculture sector.   The total number of 
farmers covered under the scheme so far is 40,282.   There is a budgetary support of Rs.9.00 
crore for the year 2006-07 for the Scheme of backward and forward integration and other 
promotional activities.   Ther e is no individual cap  for any part of the scheme being 
implemented .   Rs.1 crore was set aside in the Outcome Budget for the backward linkage 
part of the Scheme.   The scheme prescribes  a minimum of 25 farmers to be covered under 
each application with a financial ceiling of Rs .10.0 lakhs.   However, there is no upper limit 
for farmers to be covered in each application.   In some cases the units have even more than 
5000 farmers under the scheme.   During the last three years the to tal amount of grant 
released under the B ackward Linkage scheme to proces sing units was Rs.1.38 crore and a 
total of 14,929 farmers benefited from the scheme.  Hence, even if Rs.1 crore is set-aside for 
the backward linkage part of the Scheme, we may cover approximately 11,000 farmers. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.21 The Committee are not convinced with th e reply of the Government that the 
backward and forward integration prescribe s a minimum of 25 farmers to be covered 
under each application for financial help  with a ceiling of Rs.10 lakh.  As the 
Government have informed the Committe e that under the scheme of backward 

 32
linkages, MFPI is providing financial assist ance to fruits and vegetables processing 
units only and not covering the entire agricultu re sector.   It does not seem to be in 
order that 25 or more farmers can be helped in the field of fruits and vegetable 
processing with this meager sum of Rs.10 lakh.  The Committee do not consider it 
possible that  with Rs.40,000/- any farmer can set up a fruit processing unit, though 
the Government expect to help more than 25  farmers also with the same amount of 
funds.     The Committee consider that th e amount fixed at Rs.9 crore for backward 
and forward linkages advertisements and prom otional activities a nd out of that only 
Rs.1 crore for backward linkages is only negligible and too small an amount and 
reiterate that the amount of backward linkages should be raised to an extent that each 
interested farmer could get a loan enough  to set up his own fruit and vegetable 
processing unit. 
Recommendation No. 7 
Forward Linkages 
1.22 The scheme for forward integration envisa ges assistance up to 50% of the cost of 
campaign for market survey, brand promotion and test marketing subject to maximum of 
Rs.50 lakh to industry association and repres entative bodies subject to maximum of 25 
small and medium enterprises participating in the campaign or survey.  Committee are 
surprised to note that the Mini stry has not got any application so far under this scheme.  
They have been informed that it does not seem possible that 25 of small and medium 
enterprises participate jointly in the campaign.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
this condition of number of 25 should be scrappe d, rather it could be made in a way that the 
entrepreneurs processing same kind of food and of a particular area may be clubbed together 
and the assistance for forward linkages may be given to them and amount of assistance may 

 33
differ from group to group depending upon the number of partic ipants coming together for 
this purpose. 
Reply of the Government 
1.23 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that  under the component of 
forward integration although some applications have been received under the scheme, these 
are only preliminary inquiries and no concre te proposals have  emerged.  The reason for 
non-receipt of viable proposals could be that the assistance under this scheme would be 
provided to industry associati ons and representatives bodies subject to a minimum of 25 
small and medium enterprises participating jo intly in the campaign/survey.    It is a 
possibility that 25 number of sm all and medium enterprises rare ly participate jointly in the 
campaign,and so there is lack of interest. 
The Scheme is under review, especially w ith the restriction being imposed on the 
number of joint participants, in the backdrop of the  discussions fo r the Eleventh Plan 
Schemes and is likely to be restructured. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.24 In their action taken repl y,  the Government have ad mitted the fact that to 
bring together a minimum of 25 small and me dium enterprises for joint campaign or 
survey for financial assistance under the fo rward linkages scheme is hardly possible, 
due to which there is lack of interest.   The Government have also informed that the 
scheme is under review especially with the restriction being imposed on the number of 
joint participants and is likely to be restructured.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the decision taken by Government to restructure the scheme. 
 
. 
 

 34
CHAPTER –II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation No. 8 
Generic Advertisement 
 
2.1 As there is not much knowledge among th e consumers about the advantages of 
processed food and their quality assurance m echanism and preference of people for fresh 
food and drinks, the Committee ar e of strong opinion that there is dire need of generic 
advertisement to highlight that processed f ood is nutritious, convenient, offer varieties, 
available throughout the year and saves time on cooking etc. and this publicity can be made 
through publicity material, journa ls, fairs, exhibitions, seminars, workshops, conferences or 
through studies and surveys and directly intera cting with people through documentary films 
of short duration in the local languages of th e area which may have direct impact on the 
consumers. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The Ministry has published advertisements highlighting the advantages of processed 
foods and their quality assurance mechan ism in various National/regional languages 
newspapers across India during the previous year.   During the current year also, the 
Ministry has been bringing out such advertis ement through print and electronic media.  The 
Ministry has produced T.V. spots/radio jingl es and short documentaries on the subject, 
which can  also subsequently be telecast and used in various workshops/conferences etc. 
 
 
 
. 
 

 35
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 

 36
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation No. 2 
Budgetary Allocations 
4.1 The Committee have noted that the Mi nistry of Food Proc essing Industry was 
allocated Rs.650 crore against the projected demand of Rs.2800 crore for the whole of 10 th 
Plan period.  During last year i.e. 2005-06, even though the BE was at a lower side at 
Rs.180 crore but even that amount was reduced to  Rs.136 crore at RE stage, thus affecting 
the ongoing schemes of the Ministry badly.  India being an agricu ltural state, the food 
processing industry has the potential to transform the economic conditions of our farmers as 
well as our country where 60% of the fruits and vegetable production go waste for not being 
consumed in any form.  The abundant production of fruits and vegetable, if harnessed by 
processing it, can raise our share in international trade considerably, which is at present only 
negligible at 1.6% level.  But to raise our shar e in the international trade, we should be able 
to utilize the allotted budget optimally, which is  not the case at present and the Ministry is 
not able to utilize its allotted budget every year.  The Ministry has been able to utilize only 
Rs.361 crore during the first four years of 10
th Plan period, and Rs.289 crore still remain to 
be utilized during the last year of this pl an and the budget allotment for the last year 2006-
07 of the 10th Plan is only Rs.173.70 crore and more than Rs.100 crore has been surrendered 
for the simple reason that the Ministry is not having enough schemes to absorb their quota 
of budgetary support of Rs.650 crore allotted for 10th Plan.  It speaks vol umes of disinterest 
and callous attitude on the part of the Mi nistry which could not make enough viable 
schemes which could have utilized the a llotted budget.  Committee are not able to 
comprehend the situation that if the Government had sanc tioned the full demanded amount 

 37
of Rs.2800 crore to the Ministry, how and where, they would have  utilized it.  It seems that 
the Ministry even after 18 years of its existence, have not been able to play its role as a 
facilitator by providing proper basic infrastructure, international standards test labs and 
technological upgradations and training to the people who are in the field or are ready to set 
up food processing industries.  Had the Ministry taken interest in this direction, the industry 
could have reached the level of Rs.50,000/- cror e in the food processing sector and that 
would have transformed the economic conditions of our farmers and labour force in the 
rural India.  It seems to be nobody’s baby in the Government of India’s eyes and there are 
several agencies/departments working in this field but under different  Ministries and thus 
have no coordination among themselves to raise the level of Food processing in our country.  
Committee strongly recommend that  various Ministries and ot her agencies autonomous or 
in public sector or in privat e sector should make coordinate d efforts to raise the food 
processing industry to a greater height. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 Two of the major schemes being impl emented by the  Ministry during the 10 th Plan 
have been the Scheme on Infrastructure  Development and scheme on Technology 
Upgradation/Modernisation/Establishment of Food Processing Industries.  Infrastructure 
schemes like food park is cost intensive and involves long gestation period.   Under the 10
th 
Plan the revised scheme provide s for grant of 25% of the proj ect cost with ceiling varying 
between Rs.75.00 lakhs and Rs.5 cr ores under  different component s.    Compared to this, 
9th Plan scheme was more liberal with a  gran t upto Rs.4 crore without restrictions in terms 
of percentage of project cost.   As a resu lt, while 41 food parks were sanctioned during the 
9th Plan, only 13 food parks have been sanctioned during the 10 th Plan period so far.   In 
view of the above, the utiliz ation under this scheme has been only Rs.73.89 crores (upto 
Sept.2006) against the total budget provi sion of Rs.163 crores during the 10 th Plan period.   

 38
Some of the other schemes like Quality Assura nces have also not a ttracted much response 
from the food processing industr ies.   A detailed review conducted by the Ministry has 
revealed that reasons for inadequate response have been. 
• Long gestation period involved. 
• Most of the projects being implemented by State Industrial 
Development Corporations who due to financial difficulties are slow 
in bringing in ringing in their proportionate share. 
• Lack of dedicated Project Management Agencies. 
• Failure to build the supply chain. 
• Locational and linkage constraint s –Development of linkages and 
related infrastructure do not proceed hand in hand. 
Lack of interest among entrepreneurs to set up units in food parks as they do not see any 
special advantage 
In the case of Quality Assurance and other schemes, Inadequate level of assistance 
and not covering all the components of the project are  among the reasons for  the poor 
response. 
Necessary amended proposals have been formulated for removal of these weakness 
in the infrastructure scheme and submitted to the planning Commission.  Pace of 
expenditure under the scheme is expected  to improve after the new proposals are 
implemented. 
Keeping in view the  expe rience gained during the 10 th Plan, the schemes are 
proposed to be revamped during the 11 th Plan with higher level of assistance, and 
appointment of  reputed and experienced co nsultants as Project Management Agencies 
(PMA), with experience in development and fina ncing of industrial cluster infrastructure on 
PPP basis, to be engaged by the MFPI, under  a suitable MOU indicating clear deliverables.   

 39
The PMA’s role will be from conceptualization to commissioning of  the project.  It is also 
propsed to decentralize the implementation of the programmes through financial institutions 
and State level agencies so that the entrepreneurs can access the assistance more easily. 
As regards coordination of other concerned Ministries, th e Ministry had involved all 
concerned Ministries and stake holde rs in the formulation of the 11 th Plan schemes.  As 
regards enhanced Budgetary allocation, in BE 2006-07, an allocation of Rs.166.90 crores 
has been provided.   In the RE 2006-07, the Ministry is s eeking an allocation of Rs.181.70 
crores. 
Comments of the Committee 
4.3 For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.9 of the Chapter I of the 
Report. 
Recommendation No. 6 
Backward and Forward Integration and other Promotional Activities 
4.4 Committee have been apprised that the Ministry of F.P.I. is operating the Backward 
Linkages, Generic Advertisement & Promoti onal activities such as fairs/exhibitions, 
seminars/workshops/conferences/surveys etc.   However, the budgetary support for the 
current year 2006-07 is fixed at Rs.9 crores only which seems to be too meagre an amount 
keeping in view the purpose behind it.  The b ackward linkages, through contract farming to 
ensure regular supply of desired raw material to processors and to avoid the incidence of 
distress sale by the farmers, would rather ensu re remunerative prices of their agriculture 
produce.  The Committee are not convinced that with a budgetary support of Rs.1.00 crore 
for 2006-07 for backward linkages, the Government  will be able to cover a large number of 
farmers under this scheme, as the total number of farmers covered so far under this scheme, 
is 14926.  Presently, the scheme is meant to c over only 25 farmers for Rs.10 lakh assistance 
and even if the whole amount of rupees one cror e is utilized, the total farmers that could be 

 40
covered under this scheme cannot exceed 250 farm ers this year.  In a country where 70% of 
the people are farmers or dependent on agriculture activities, covering only 250 farmers in a 
year does not augur well and there is need to provide wide publicity and guidance to farmers 
through exhibitions, fairs, advertisements, pub licity material, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, and 
periodical meetings at village levels between di strict level officials, and with representative 
of food processing units.  The farmers should be  apprised about the be nefits of contract 
farming through such exhibitions/publicity/village fairs and village level meetings. 
Reply of the Government 
4.5 Under the scheme of Backward Linkages MFPI is providing fi nancial assistance to 
fruits and vegetables processing  units only and  not covering th e entire agriculture sector.   
The total number of farmers covered under the scheme so far is 40,282.   There is a 
budgetary support of Rs.9.00 crore for the year  2006-07 for the Scheme of backward and 
forward integration and other pr omotional activities.   There is no individual cap  for any 
part of the scheme being implemented .   Rs.1 crore was set aside in the Outcome Budget 
for the backward linkage part of the Scheme .   The scheme prescribes a minimum of 25 
farmers to be covered under each application with a financial ceiling of Rs.10.0 lakhs.   
However, there is no upper limit for farmers to be covered in each application.   In some 
cases the units have even more than 5000 farm ers under the scheme.   During the last three 
years the total amount of gran t released under the Backward Linkage scheme to processing 
units was Rs.1.38 crore and a total of 14,929 farm ers benefited from the scheme.  Hence, 
even if Rs.1 crore is set-aside for the backwa rd linkage part of th e Scheme, we may cover 
approximately 11,000 farmers. 
Comments of the Committee 
4.6  For Comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.21   of Chapter I 
of the Report. 

 41
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation No. 1 
Overview 
 
5.1 The Committee have been informed that th e Ministry of Food Processing Industry at 
first came into existence in 1988 and the food pr ocessing was called as sun-rise sector but 
even after 18 years of its existence, it has still not grown up.  Only 2.2% of the fruits and 
vegetables produced in India are processed a nd 60% of these produce go waste, processing 
level of milk is 35%, of meat is 21% and poultry product is 6% only and the reason being 
lack of basic facilities of food processing or food preserva tion such as food processing 
industries, cold storages, cold-chain facilities, wa rehouses, stringent and international food 
standards, test labs and export facilities. 
The farmers who produce the fruits, vege tables, and even cereals do not get 
remunerative price of their produce because they  are not able to sell whole of their produce 
for want of food processing facilities.  They continue to suffer due to immense fluctuation in 
prices of their produce.  The Ministry acts as  a catalyst for guiding, helping and creating a 
conducive environment for healthy growth of the food processing indu stries.  But it is 
facing difficulties for having inadequate infrastruc ture facilities, lack of quality control and 
testing facilities, seasonality of raw material and cultural preference for fresh food. 
The Committee have also noted that th e food processing industry is following the 
western path of processing food-items, such as biscuits, jams, sauces, breads, butter, milk, 
cold drinks, meat, Fish & Poultr y processing etc., but we do not have the test laboratories 
for these items for quality control for food standards of international level.  This is one 
major reason that we are
 not able to export our processed food items to the outside world 

 42
and our share in world trade in respect of processed food is about 1.6% only.  Committee  
observe that there is a need to have right ki nd of food processing models, keeping in view 
Indian way of food processing  in our households.  The Mini stry should have a ‘guidance 
centre’ to guide about the crops to be grow n, which factory to be  set up and where, 
availability of raw material throughout the year , seasonality of crops, where to sell, use or 
process the food items.  The Government will have  to look into these basic shortcomings in 
our quality control of food standards so that we may export the processed food items in the 
international market. 
The budgetary support of Rs.166.90 crore for 2006-07 for Plan Fund, given to the 
Ministry of Food Processing Indus try is very meagre when compared to other departments 
of the Government of India.  During 2005-06, the BE for Plan funds was fixed only at 
Rs.180 crore and yet even this allocation was reduced to Rs.136 crore at revised estimates 
stage.  The Committee observe that reduction of budgetary support at RE stage would create 
problems for the on-going schemes which will be  affected for want of funds.  Committee 
expect the Government to plan the fund allocat ion at BE stage in such a way that no need 
should arise to reduce the budgetary support at RE stage and the on-going schemes of the 
Ministry do not suffer due to reduction of funds in the middle of the year. 
The Committee are perturbed to note that budgetary support to the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industry when compared to the Centra l Plan outlay which for the last four years 
is hovering around 0.5 to 0.6% at  Rs.167 crore which speaks volumes of non-attention 
being paid by the Government towards this Mini stry for sun-rise industry.  Even budgetary 
outlay of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution is Rs.205 crore 
and of Ministry of Communication & IT is Rs.1138.65 crore.  Th e Committee strongly 
recommend that the Budgetary out lay of the Ministry of FPI s hould be at le ast doubled for 
smooth running of its schemes. 

 43
Committee also note with concern that the projected demands of the Ministry for 
Infrastructure Development Scheme for 2006-07 was Rs.63 crore but the outlay approved 
by Government is only Rs.22 crore and against the proposal of Rs .37 crore for Human 
Resources Development Scheme, the Government approved only Rs.16.90 crore, this shows 
that either the proposals were ex aggerated or the Ministry could  not convince the Planning 
Commission & Ministry of Finance about the veracity of their demands for these schemes. 
Committee have been informed that the Ministry has prepared a vision for growth of Food 
Processing Industries sector, which envisages increa se in processing level of perishable goods from 
6% to 20%; increase in value addition from the present level of 20% to 34%; share in global trade up 
from 1% to 3% by 2015.  This increase in processing will gene rate direct employment of 28 
lakh and indirect employment of 74 lakh persons 
The achievement of this vision will in turn commercialize the agriculture, enhance 
the income of farmers, generate employment and earn the foreign ex change through export 
of agro-food etc. and the vision 2015 can be achieved only if the requisite budgetary support 
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries fo r its various schemes and targets, is given 
by the Government. 
The Committee strongly r ecommend that budgetary proposals should be made 
judiciously with details of the funds require d under various heads an d the Ministry should 
make coordinated efforts for clearance of f unds for various schemes (new/old) at the 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance level. 
Committee also recommend that the Governme nt should approve the draft ‘National 
Food Processing Policy’ at their earliest so that the objectives of the policy such as 
infrastructure development, linkages with farm ing system, increase in level of processing, 
enhancement in value addition and generation of employment can be achieved on time. 
The domestic consumption of value added fruits and vegetable products is low 
compared to the primary processed food in general and fresh fruits & vegetables in 

 44
particular. Lower capacity utilization, infrastructural constraints,  inadequate farmers 
processors linking, dependence upon intermediari es, smallness of units and their inability 
for market promotion are some of the reasons  for inadequate expansion of the domestic 
market.  The Government should look into these practical difficulties faced by the food-
processing sector and resolve them in a time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2  The food processing industry’s growth is retarded mainly on account of factors such 
as –low affordability, high cost of inputs, poor infrastructure, cultura l preference for fresh 
foods, low efficiency, multiple regulators, lack  of brand image, short product life cycle 
globally, cost competitiveness, low innovation a nd high taxation.  The Ministry proposes to 
address these problems during the 11th Plan period in a focused manner. 
As  regards quality control/food standards, the scheme for quality control and 
standards is proposed to be revamped in the 11 th Plan with the objective of motivating the 
food processing industry to adopt international food standards.   The Food Safety and  
Standards Act, 2006 has been enacted.   The Food Safety and  Standards Bill, 2006 was 
passed by the Parliament on 02.08.2006 and recei ved the assent of the President on 23
rd 
August, 2006.   The provisions of the Act shall come  into force from such date as the 
Central Government may notify in the official G azette.   The main objective of the Bill is to 
bring about a single statute relating to food and establish Food Safety and Standards 
Authority with a view to: 
(a) Lay down Food Standards based on science, transparency  and consultation, 
(e) Effective regulate manufacture, import, st orage, distribution a nd sale of food to 
ensure consumer safety and promote global trade, 
(f) Pool infrastructure, manpower and testi ng facilities for better standard fixation and 
enforcement through their proper re-deployment, and, 

 45
(g) Rationalize and strengthen existing enforcement mechanism 
The Ministry also proposes to enhance  avai lability of technical and other information 
relating to food processing sector of the Ministry which will enable prospective 
entrepreneurs to have access to  essential entrepreneurial in formation relating to the food 
processing sector. 
As regards enhanced Budgetary allocation, in BE 2006-07, an allocation of Rs.166.90 
crores has been provided.   In the  RE 2006-07s, the Ministry is seeking an allocation of 
Rs.181.70 crores.   Further, the Ministry propos es to achieve higher Budgetary expenditure 
through (i) revamping of its existing Plan Schemes based on review of 10 th Plan schemes 
(ii) energizing the Food processing sector in the 11th Plan with quantum jump in activities & 
outlay, paradigm shift in mode of implemen tation by adopting Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) mode to the extent feasible and other supportive framework for which action has been 
already initiated. 
As regards the finalisation of the draf t Food Processing Policy, a GOM  under the 
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Agricu lture and Consumer Af fairs, Food & Public 
Distribution has been set up to consider an Integrated Strategy for Promotion of Agri-
Business – Vision, Strategy and Action Plan for Food Processing  Sector  incorporating the 
draft Food Processing Policy.  The GOM has met twice so far. 
The installed capacity of fruit and vege table processing industry in 2005 was 2.12 
million tonnes only as against a total production of almost 140 million tonnes.    Over the 
last few years significant growth  has been seen in the ready to serve beverages, fruit juices 
and pulps, dehydrated and frozen fruits and ve getable products, toma to products, pickles, 
convenience foods, veg-spice pastes and processe d mushrooms.    However, the domestic 
consumption of value added fruits and vegetables remain low compared to primary 
processed foods in general and fresh vegetables and fruits in particular. 

 46
Varietal constraint is one of the major f actors associated with several fruits and 
vegetables.   Many varieties of  fruits and vegetables are uns uitable for either export or 
processing.   Inadequate infras tructure has been identified as  a major constraint in the 
growth of fruit and vegetable processing industries.   Without a strong and  dependable cold 
chain, a vital sector like F&V processing industry, which is ba sed mostly on perishable 
products cannot survive and grow.   Even at currents level of production, wastage in F&V is 
estimated at 35%, major reasons being inade quate storage, transportation, cold chain 
facilities and other infrastructure support facilities.   The Ministry proposes to address these 
issues during the 11th Plan period. 
Though there has been a substantial rationalization of taxe s in fruit and vegetable 
processing sector in the count ry, notably since 2001-02 when Central Excise Tax (CET) on 
processed fruits and vegetables were reduced  from 16% to 0% high  taxes/duty on raw 
material for packaging, packaging machinery and raw materials is also affecting the growth 
of the food processing sector in general and F& V processing industry in  particular.   The 
Ministry’s Budget proposals for 2007-08 will convey its concerns on the need to address 
these issues to the Ministry of Finance. 
Government of India has been implementing several schemes for  facilitating creation 
of infrastructure for  food processing.   While  revision in the Infrastructure Development 
Scheme during the 10 th Plan has been submitted to Planning Commission for its 
concurrence which is still awaited, it propo ses to revamp the scheme during the 11 th Plan 
with a view to make it more attractive to the entrepreneurs with enhanced outlay to provide 
greater level of assistance to meet the requirements of the industry. 
It is proposed to identify fruits and  ve getables with potential for processing, in 
specific geographical areas.    The effort w ould be to put in place a model supply chain, 
which will try and address the supply chain constraints by bringing R&D institutes, 

 47
extension machinery, farmers, traders and processors together.  This will enable the farmer 
to integrate production with market  demand  and ensuring that research and market 
information  and incentives reach the farm gate. 
It is proposed to strengthen  R&D efforts through linkages between R&D institutions, 
farmers, extension machinery and industry wh ich will also focus on introductions of new 
varieties, stretching the producti on season of many fruit and vegetable crops.   This has the 
ability to increase availability of raw material over longer periods, resulting in utilization of 
assets over longer season, and resultant increa se in overall profitability.   Other areas 
proposed to be given focused attention include revamping of infrastructure support to farm 
sector and tax incentives to the food processing sector. 
Comments of the Committee 
5.3 For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.6  of the Chapter I of the 
Report. 
Recommendation No. 3 
Scheme for Infrastructure Development 
5.4 The Committee have been informed that  the scheme for financial assistance for 
development of infrastructure facilities fo r food processing industry was approved by 
CCEA only in August 2003.  The grants-in-aid up to Rs.4 crore (up to 25% of the Project 
Cost) to set up common infrastructural facilities  is provided by the Government.  This basic 
requirement of food processing se ctor has not been taken care of even after 18 years of the 
existence of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries.  Committee have also noted that the 
budgetary provisions of Rs.49 crore at BE st age were reduced to  Rs.10 crore during 2005-
06 and for this current year of 2006-07, the budgetary support given is Rs.19.80 crore only.  
Though the budgetary support for assistance to set up food parks, packaging centers, 
modernization of Abattoirs, Integrated Cold Ch ain Facilities, irradiation facilities and value 

 48
added centres is not full y granted and there is lot of scope for the Ministry to develop these 
facilities, yet even Budgeted grant of Rs.49 crore could not be properly schematized and 
was reduced to Rs.10 crore at RE stage a nd the Committee are unable to comprehend the 
Government’s way of doing things as without providing basic infras tructure facilities, 
without a strong base, how the Government is thinking of making a strong presence in the 
food processing sector.  The small and medium  players in food processing business cannot 
create these basic facilities mentioned above a nd thus would be discouraged to enter this 
sector which has immense potential as they are getting the food items, fruits & vegetable at 
a very cheap rate.  Committee strongly recommend that the proposal to liberalize Food Park 
Scheme be cleared at their earliest and th e grants-in-aid assistance for setting up common 
infrastructural facilities of cold storage, f ood testing and analysis laboratories, effluent 
treatment plants, packaging centers etc. should be raised to 50% instead  of 25% at present, 
so as to attract more and more people to join the food processing sector. 
The Ministry should also coordinate and expedite the functioning of 52 food Parks 
already sanctioned in various States, out of which only 22 are at  present being functional.  
The remaining 30 food parks should be made functional during the current financial year 
itself and private-public partne rship should be encouraged in  addition to the assistance 
provided by the Government, by way of grants-in-aid, to expedite the setting up of basic 
infrastructure facilities for these food parks. 
The State Governments should be persuaded to  provide basic facilities of land, road, 
electricity, water and other linkages necessary for setting up of food parks, as the farmers of 
their States would be getting more financial be nefits by supplying their perishable goods to 
the units of food processing near their pla ces.  Then only the vision-2015 of the food 
processing sector which envisage s to raise world trade share from 1.6% at present to 3%, 

 49
processing of perishable goods from 6% to 20% present and direct and indirect employment 
to one crore people, could be achieved. 
The Committee have noted with concer n that only Rs.2.00 crore have been 
earmarked for setting up of packaging centres for food processing industries and only one 
such centre has been sanctioned and that too in one corner of the country in Jammu & 
Kashmir.  The Committee feel that there should be a packaging centre near each of the food 
parks and the integrated approach is needed to link cold chain, value added centres, package 
centres and bright-light shin ing upon facilities at one place and the infrastructure providing 
schemes should be restructured accordingly. 
The Planning Commission should be appr oached for setting up of cold chain 
facilities from farm gate till consumers as a part of integrated approach for assistance in the 
form of grants-in-aid to food processing sector. 
The Committee also recommend that grants -in-aid @ 25% of the project cost in 
general area and 33.33% in difficult areas should be raised to 50% in general areas and 75% 
in hilly and difficult areas for irradiational f acilities to preserve flour and sprouting from 
infestation and prevent change in chemical co mposition of the products like potato etc. as 
the food processing facilities are generally at far off places from their production centers. 
Reply of the Government 
5.5 The Ministry has so far approved 54 Food  parks for assistance in the country.   
Though the  Ministry has been monitoring  the implementation of the scheme with the State 
Governments, the implementation has been found to be generally slow due to a variety of 
reasons such as lack of focused Project Manage ment Agencies at the State level, financial 
difficulties of State Government Enterprise s, sub-optimal funding provision under the 
existing scheme etc.   Based on recommen dations of the Conference of State Food 
Processing Ministers, study conducted and experienced gaine d, a need has been felt to 

 50
restructure the food park scheme and the sa me is under discussion with the Planning  
Commission as a part of the Plan formulation exercise for XI th Plan.    In this regard, the 
concept of Mega Food Parks has been moot ed to provide for holistic infrastructure 
development.   The restructured scheme envisages the following: 
 
1. To provide state of the art infrastruc ture for Food Processing in the country. 
2. Ensure value addition of agricultura l  commodities including poultry, meat, 
dairy, fisheries etc. 
3. Establish sustainable ra w material supply chain. 
4. Facilitate induction of latest technology. 
5. Fostering inter agency linkages for pooling of resources for activities, 
complementary to Food Processing. 
6. Quality assurance through better pr ocess control and capacity building. 
7. Address issues of small farm size and small & medium nature of  processing 
industries through cluster approach. 
8. Organising  the Stakeholders  to build the supply chain. 
9. Incentivise private investment. 
At present, there are separate components for packaging center, value added centers, 
cold chain and irraditation facilities center ha ving different patterns of assistance.  The 
above four components, are primarily, interventions aimed towards value addition, 
increasing shelf life of final/intermediate products and raw material.   The  component of 
Value Added Centre addresses creation of Post Harvest Infrastructure/Value addition etc.  
Experience shows that there is need for integration of the above individual components into 
a single scheme so as to allow greater flexibil ity in designing of projects and bring about 
integration of the various activi ties included in the above com ponents.    At present, the 

 51
Ministry is handicapped in furthering the deve lopment of Cold Chain Infrastructure as only 
Cold Storages for non-horticultural produce and specialize type of cold  storages like 
Controlled Atmosphere/Modified atmosphere co me within the ambit of the Ministry.   
Further, at present several components like reefer vans/refrigerate d transport cannot be 
assisted by the Ministry  which is a major hur dle in development of an integrated Cold 
Chain.   These issues have already been taken up by the Ministry  in the proposals for 
restructuring of the schemes, with the Planning Commission. 
It is also proposed to emphasise buildi ng of cooling, grading, packing and storing 
facilities close to the farm so that the farmer is  empowered to add value to the produce and 
demand better prices from processors and retailers. 
Factors like need for  greater coverage, mandate and flexibility in the existing 
schemes, sub-optimal funding, problems of  the cash strapped State Government 
Implementing Agencies etc, have been constr aining off-take of funds  which the Ministry 
hopes would be addressed through revamping of the schemes. 
Comments of the Committee 
5.6 For comments of the Committee  please refe r to Para No. 1.12  of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
Recommendation No. 4 
Technology Upgradation, Establishment and Modernization of Food Processing 
Industries 
5.7 Committee note that in addition to pr ovide policy and promotional support to 
potential entrepreneurs in the field of gr ain processing, meat poultry, egg, and fish 
processing; fruits and vegetable processing a nd consumer food industry, the Government is 
implementing the scheme for technology upgradation and establishment, expansion and 
modernization of food processing industries by providing 25% of the cost in general areas 

 52
and 33.33% in difficult areas, subject to  a maximum of Rs.50 lakh and Rs.75 lakh 
respectively.  The Committee are of the opini on that the technology upgradation can’t be 
done in a cheaper way and the assistance of 25% is too less for the budding entrepreneurs 
and even the old hands to make necessary tec hnological changes in their processing system.  
The assistance needs to be raised to 50% ke eping in view the cost of upgradation of 
technology which is changing at su ch a fast rate that it is ve ry difficult to catch up with the 
latest changes in processing technology.  The Committee also desire that the farmers should 
also be provided the basic technology so that  they can make base pulp of their fruits and 
vegetables grown in their fields and nearby areas so that their pe rishable goods do not go 
waste and they are also able to sell it in the nearby food processing industries and get 
remunerative prices of their produce. 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 The Scheme for Technology Upgradation/Mode rnization/Establishment is one of the 
most  popular schemes being impl emented by the Ministry under 10 th Plan.   The total 
outlay for the scheme during the 10 th Plan is Rs.295 crores agains t the total Plan outlay of 
Rs.650 crores comprising 45% of the total Plan allocation.  So far, Rs.218.67 crores have 
been disbursed (till 30.11.2006) under the above scheme.  C onsidering the current high 
levels of wastages of perishab les, the capital intensive nature  of Food Processing Industries 
based on agriculture and the potential of the sector for generating rural employment and of 
encouraging adoption of interna tionally quality standards by th ese units, it is proposed that 
the level and quantum of assistance under th e scheme be suitably increased during the 11 th 
Plan period.   With a view to provide for improvement of processing capabilities, it is 
planned to implement the scheme for Technology 
upgradation/expansion/modernization/through a decentralized approach. 

 53
With effect from the date of notification of the revised scheme, the applicants will be 
advised to submit their applications for assi stance to the identified Nodal Banks/PLIs who 
will disburse the grants directly and there will be  no need for the application to be sent  to 
the Ministry.   The MFPI will  place funds with the Nodal Ba nks towards reimbursement of 
grants to the units in advance.   The Government  shall constitute an Empowered Committee 
under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, MF PI to lay down norms and guidelines for 
operationalizing the scheme, providing direc tions for its effective implementation, 
periodically reviewing its functioning and taking necessary corrective measures/policy 
decisions.   Such guidelines will be in addi tion to those laid down by the Nodal Banks/PLIs 
for assessing the techno-economic feasibility, commercial viability and bank-ability of the 
proposals submitted by prospective units under the scheme. 
Comments of the Committee 
5.9  For Comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.15  of  Chapter I of the 
Report. 
Recommendation No. 5 
Quality Control Labs 
5.10 Committee have been informed that to  ensure compliance with National Food 
Standards and to analyze the samples received from food processing industries and other 
stakeholders, the Government organizations, IITs and Agricu ltural Universities are helped 
through grants-in-aids to set up quality control laboratories for the food processing sector.  
But the number of food processing laboratorie s is limited and they are at such a far off 
distances from the processing centres/units that it is not possible that every product which is 
locally processed, could be checked for its quality at Quality Control labs.  In Uttar Pradesh, 
for example, there are only four test labs and it is not possible to get every kind of processed 
food checked at these labs.  Moreover, all the labs do not comply fully with the International 

 54
Food Standards which is must if we want to se ll our processed products in the international 
market.  Quality maintenance for meat and othe r exports must meet the international food 
standards.  So, our test labs should be of international standa rds and be recognized so in the 
international market.  There is also need to open small test labs for a specific food product 
which may be an area-specific produce and for this purpose, our agri cultural Universities 
and agricultural colleges and Krishi Vigyan Kendras and local science colleges can be 
equipped and their technical sta ff can be trained in specified techniques for a specific food 
quality product.  Standards for these tests by these colleges/Universities should be fixed by 
the Government.  The science or agriculture colleges at taluka level can be allowed to 
charge specific fee for any test which will be an extra income for that  educational institute 
and they can do the testing without any extra financial burden.   Committee also recommend 
that the R&D base in food processing shou ld be increased by involving Agriculture 
Universities and private research organizations working in the field of food processing.  The 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries should organize workshops, seminars, exhibitions 
and agriculture-fairs to disseminate the latest research and technology developed in the food 
processing sector in India and the world over to the farmers 
Reply of the Government 
5.11 MFPI aims at setting up a network of la boratories to help in implementing quality 
regime for processed food.   Further, to pr ovide the common faciliti es to food processing 
industries and consumers for te sting of articles of food, the networking of laboratories 
assumes importance, since these laboratories will be utilized  not only for carrying out 
analytical tests, but also fo r providing technical guidance an d awareness creation on quality 
and safety aspects.   In order to provide the common facilities to food processing industries 
and consumers for testing articles of food, Ministry of Food Processing Industries is 

 55
operating a Plan Scheme for setting up/up-gradation of quality control laboratories with the 
following objectives : 
• To  ensure compliance with national food standards. 
• To assist industries in the food sect or to develop and implement quality 
management systems such as ISO 9000, HACCP etc. 
• To analyse the samples received from  food processing industries, and other 
stakeholders. 
• To impart training in areas relating to quality improvement. 
• To provide information on quality sta ndards and requirements of various 
markets on quality of products. 
• To reduce the time of analysis of samp les by reducing transportation time of 
samples. 
• To generate scientific data on levels of contaminants, pesticide residue etc.  
Under the  plan scheme approved for 10 th Plan, the Central/State Government 
organizations, IITs and Universities are eligible fo r grant-in-aid limited to entire cost of the 
capital equipments required for setting up/modernization of  laboratories.   All other 
implementing agencies are eligible for grant- in-aid limited to 33% of the cost of capital 
equipment required for setting up/up-gradation of  such laboratories for general areas and 
50% for difficult areas. 
During 9 th and 10 th Plan, the Ministry provide d financial assistance to 29 
stakeholders in Government as well as private sector.    This includes Central/State 
Government organizations, Agricultural Univer sities, Research institutions, Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras, Industry Associations, and other private sector orga nizations.   Ministry while 
approving the financial assistan ce emphasizes on adoption of NABL accreditation so that 
these labs comply with the International Standards and are r ecognized in the International 
Market. 
An Integrated Food Law i.e. The Food Sa fety and Standards Bill, 2005 has been 
passed by the parliament on 02.08.2006 and received the assent of the President on 23 rd 
August, 2006.   The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 has been notified on 24 th August, 
2006.   The provisions of the Act shall come in to force from such date as the Central 

 56
Government may notify in the official Gazette.   The main objective of the Bill is to bring 
about a single statute relating to food and es tablish Food Safety and Standards Authority 
with a view to: 
(v) Lay down Food Standards based on scie nce, transparency and consultation,  
(vi) Effectively regulate manufacture, impor t, storage, distribution and sale of 
food to ensure consumer safety and promote global trade, 
(vii) Pool infrastructure, manpower, testi ng facilities for better standard fixation 
and enforcement through their proper re-deployment, and, 
(viii) Rationalise and strengthen existing enforcement mechanism 
 
Presently, this Ministry has initiate d the process of preparing rules and 
organizational  structure of the Food Safety an d Standards Authority of  India.   The Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India proposed to be established under the above Act has 
been empowered to recognize the food testin g laboratories in Government and Private 
sector.    The proposed Food Authority may recognize  labs in each State/district and also 
lay down standards for testing of the food products. 
Moreover, MFPI has awarded a study to map the existing food testing laboratories in 
the country and assess their capab ilities and requirements.   This study may help the Food 
Authority in identification of locations for setting up new laboratories to ensure regional 
dispersal of food testing laboratories, prompt service to industry clusters/exports etc., and 
resources  required therefor.   Report of the study has been submitted in the first week of 
December, 2006. 
Comments of the Committee 
5.12 For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.18 of the Chapter I of the 
Report. 
 
 
 

 57
Recommendation No. 7 
Forward Linkages 
5.13 The scheme for forward integration envisa ges assistance up to 50% of the cost of 
campaign for market survey, brand promotion and test marketing subject to maximum of 
Rs.50 lakh to industry association and repres entative bodies subject to maximum of 25 
small and medium enterprises participating in the campaign or survey.  Committee are 
surprised to note that the Mini stry has not got any application so far under this scheme.  
They have been informed that it does not seem possible that 25 of small and medium 
enterprises participate jointly in the campaign.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
this condition of number of 25 should be scrappe d, rather it could be made in a way that the 
entrepreneurs processing same kind of food and of a particular area may be clubbed together 
and the assistance for forward linkages may be given to them and amount of assistance may 
differ from group to group depending upon the number of partic ipants coming together for 
this purpose. 
Reply of the Government 
5.14 Under the component of forward integra tion although some applications have been 
received under the scheme, th ese are only preliminary inquiries and no concrete proposals 
have  emerged.  The reason for non-receipt of vi able proposals could be that the assistance 
under this scheme would be provided to indust ry associations and representatives bodies 
subject to a minimum of 25 small and medium  enterprises participating jointly in the 
campaign/survey.    It is a possibility that 25 number of small and medium enterprises rarely 
participate jointly in the campaign,and so there is lack of interest. 
The Scheme is under review, especially w ith the restriction being imposed on the 
number of joint participants, in the backdrop of the  discussions fo r the Eleventh Plan 
Schemes and is likely to be restructured. 

 58
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
5.15 For comments of the Committee Please refer to Para No.1.24  of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
                                                                                       
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
  08  March, 2007                                                   Chairman, 
 17    Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Agriculture  

 59
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 8TH MARCH, 2007 AT 1500 HRS. IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘B’, GROUND FLOOR,   PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, 
NEW DELHI 
 
    The Committee sat from 1500 HRS TO 1630 HRS 
                                                                                   
 
PRESENT 
 
       Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Shri  Manoranjan Bhakta 
3. Shri   Khagen Das 
4. Shri  Deepender Singh Hooda 
5. Shri  Hari Rama Jogaiah 
6. Shri  M.P.Veerendra Kumar 
7. Shri  Baleshwar Yadav 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
8. Shri Harish Rawat 
9. Shri Vikram Verma 
10. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed  
11. Shri Datta Meghe 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Director 
3. Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita  Walia   -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 60
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman, welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and requested them to take up th e following Memoranda on draft Action Taken 
Reports on  Demands for Grants  (2006-07) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries for consideration and adoption: 
(1) Memorandum No. 2 regarding 23 rd  Action Taken Report on recommendations 
contained in the 18 th Report on Demands for Grants (2006- 07) in respect of Ministry of 
Agriculture (Deptt. of Agriculture and Co-operation) 
 
(2) Memorandum No. 3 regarding 24th Action Taken Report on recommendations 
contained in the 19 h Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) in respect of Ministry of 
Agriculture (Deptt. of Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
(3) Memorandum No. 4 regarding 25th Action Taken Report on recommendations 
contained in the 20 th Report on Demands for Grants (2006- 07) in respect of Ministry of 
Agriculture (Deptt. of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) 
 
(4) Memorandum No. 5 regarding 26 th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained 
in the 21 st  Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) in respect of Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries. 
 
2 The Committee then considered and adopt ed the draft Action Taken Reports with 
minor additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, authorized the Chairman to present the above-mentioned 
Reports to the House on a date and time convenient to him. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 61
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE TWENTY-FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations      8 
(ii) Recommendations/Obser vations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Serial Nos. 8 
T o t a l           1  
Percentage         12.5%  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Serial No.  Nil 
T o t a l           N i l   
P e r c e n t a g e           N i l  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies 
Of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Serial Nos.2 and 6         2 
T o t a l           2   
P e r c e n t a g e          2 5 %  
(v) Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which  
           Final replies of the Government are still awaited  
 
Serial No. 1,3,4,5 and 7 
T o t a l           5   
Percentage         62.5 
 