1
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-07)
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Nineteenth Report of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006)}
FOURTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)
24

2
TWENTY FOURTH  REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
AND EDUCATION)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007)
[Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Nineteenth Report
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006)
Presented to Lok Sabha on --.03.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on --.03.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)

3
COA No.189
Price:  Rs.
            © 2007 By Lok Sabha Secretariat
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha
(Eleventh Edition) and Printed by

4
<CONTENTS>
                   PAGE
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………………………. (iii)
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………… (v)
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have
   been accepted by the Government ……………
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view
   of the Government’s replies …………………..
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect
   of  which replies of the Government have
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of
   which final replies of the Government are
   still awaited …………………………………….
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee
held on 8 March, 2007.
II. Analysis of Action Taken by  the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2005-2006) (14th Lok Sabha)

5
Composition of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2006-2007)
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Ranen Barman
3. Shri Anil Basu
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
6. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi
7. Shri Khagen Das
8. Shri Dharmendra
9. Shri GadakhTukaram Gangadhar
10. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
11. Shri Hari Rama Jogaiah
12. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
13. Shri Prabodh Panda
14. Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Patil Nilangekar
15. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
16. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy
17. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh
18. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar
19.   *   Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil
20.   #   Shri Baleshwar Yadav
21.   +   Smt. Kalpana  Ramesh Narhire
RAJYA SABHA
22.    Shri Harish Rawat
23.   Dr. M.S.Gill
24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
25. Shri Vikram Verma
26. Shri  Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed
28. Shri Datta Meghe
29. Shri  Debabrata Biswas
30. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
31.        Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy
* Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil has been nominated to this Committee Vice  Smt. Bhavana P.Gawali, who has
been nominated to Committee on Health and Family Welfare w.e.f. 31.8.2006 Vide LS Bulletin Part-II, Para
No.2847, dated 31.8.2006.
#  Shri Baleshwar Yadav has been nominated to this Committee on 8.9.2006 Vide LS Bulletin Part-II,  Para
No. 2863 dated 8.9.2006.
+  Smt. Kalpana  Ramesh Narhire has been nominated to this Committee on 25.9.2006 Vide  LS Bulletin
Part-II, dated 25.9.2006.

6
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K.Sharma   -  Additional Secretary
2.          Shri  A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary
3. Shri  Hardev Singh   -  Director
4.  Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Anil Kumar   -  Senior Executive Assistant

7
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture, [2006-2007] having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty
Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) for
the year 2006-2007.
2. The Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006) on
Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha on 19.5.2006 and laid
in Rajya Sabha on the same day.  The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) was requested to furnish action taken replies of the
Government to the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report.  The replies of
the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received.
3. The Committee considered the action taken replies furnished by the Government
at their sitting held on 8.3.2007, approved the draft comments and adopted the Twenty
Fourth Report.  Minutes of the sitting are placed at Appendix I.
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Nineteenth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of
the Committee is given in Appendix-II.
NEW DELHI;            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV
8 March, 2007 Chairman,
17 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Agriculture.

8
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON
THE NINETEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA)
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     9
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
Accepted by the Government
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 7
T o t a l         4
Percentage        44.45%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
Serial No. NIL
T o t a l         N I L
Percentage         0%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
 of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee
Serial Nos.  8 and 9
T o t a l         2
Percentage        22.22%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited
Serial Nos.  3, 5 and 6
T o t a l         3
Percentage        33.33%

9
CHAPTER I
Report
 This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2005-2006) on Demands for
Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research
& Education) which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on
19.05.2006.
1.2  The Action taken replies have been received from the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education) in respect of all the 9
recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government
(Chapter II of the Report)
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 7 (Total-4)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s action taken reply (Chapter III of the Report) -
NIL
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which action taken replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV of the
Report)
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 8 and 9 (Total-2)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited.  (Chapter V)
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 3,5 and 6 (Total-3)
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on all of
their 9 recommendations.

10
Recommendation No. 1
Urgent Need for increasing DARE/ICAR Outlay to at least 1 per cent of AGDP
1.4 The Committee noted that the Planning Commission had constituted the Tenth
Plan Working Group for the Department of Agricultural Research and Education
(DARE) and the Working Group had recommended that the DARE should be provided
one per cent of the Gross Domestic Product of Agriculture and Allied Sector (AGDP)
which amounted to approximately Rs. 25,000 crore at that time. As a matter of fact, this
recommendation of the Tenth Plan Working Group for DARE was in tune with the often
repeated recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture as
well as the Ninth Plan Working Group for DARE which had recommended that DARE
should be provided at least one per cent of AGDP initially, with a gradual increase up to
two per cent of AGDP in subsequent years. Against the most needed minimum one per
cent of AGDP outlay, the Department had proposed a minimum requirement of Rs.
15,000 crore, plus a one time catch up grant of Rs. 1,000 crore for the Tenth Plan.
However, the Planning Commission approved an amount of only Rs. 4,868 crore, which
was subsequently raised to Rs. 5,368 crore by providing Rs. 500 crore for setting up new
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).
The Committee also noted that Sri Lanka and Latin American countries spend
0.81 per cent and 0.98 per cent of AGDP on Agricultural Research, respectively.
Astonishingly, in comparison to some of the leading industrialized countries whose
spending on agricultural research ranges between 2.45 per cent and 4.02 per cent of
AGDP, India’s spending on agricultural R&D ranged between 0.17 and 0.32 per cent
during the last one decade which was even less than the average of all the developing
countries.
The Committee were unable to comprehend the constraints of the Planning
Commission why they could not earmark adequate resources for DARE based on the
recommendations of its own Working Group during the Ninth and Tenth Plans and the
recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture to increase the
Tenth Plan outlay to at least one per cent of AGDP for the DARE which should be
gradually increased to 2% of AGDP as has been happening in the case of agriculturally
advance countries. Considering the role of an applied research-based Department like
DARE and its potential to accelerate the growth of agriculture and allied sectors, the
Committee hope that the Government would earmark higher outlays for the Department
in accordance with its declared commitment to accord priority to agriculture and the
allied sectors so that India emerges a stronger, and gradually the strongest, global player
in the field of agricultural produces and exports. The Committee had also liked to know
from the Government/Planning Commission that how they could expect DARE/ICAR to
usher India into the long awaited Second Green Revolution and make India self-reliant in
all agrarian and allied produces, so as to feed the ever growing population for decades to
come with too meager public funding of about 0.3% AGDP?
However, the Committee were of the opinion that in view of the continuous funds
constraints for the R&D activities of DARE/ICAR, instead of always depending upon

11
Government funding for their agrarian and allied research institutions, DARE/ICAR
might consider the Mashelkar Committee formula for being financially self-reliant in
running in their R&D activities by earning from their research work. DARE/ICAR might
also consider the option of taking loans from public/private financial institutions, which
might be repaid from the earnings of their research work. This would fill up the gap of
low budgetary grants from the Government.
Reply of the Government
1.5 The Government in its action taken reply have stated that the Indian Agriculture
has already entered into an era of WTO regime and globalization. Mashelkar
Committee’s recommendations on  “Alternative Models for ICAR to pursue research on
commercial lines” have been considered.  Accordingly, ICAR’s draft guidelines on
“Intellectual Property Management and Technology Transfer / Commercialization” were
prepared and suggestions / comments invited to refine them further. Steps have also been
initiated to further enhance multi-lateral and bi-lateral resource generation. Since the Xth
Plan is in its last year, the resources available with the Department would be made use of
to optimize research output and bring the programmes to a logical conclusion. However,
the XIth Plan Working Group has already been constituted by Planning Commission to
critically review the agricultural research and education in a holistic way and give its
recommendations.
Comments of the Committee
1.6 The Committee would like to be apprised of (i) the detailed  ICAR’s draft
guidelines on “Intellectual Property Management and Technology
Transfer/Commercialisation” and the suggestions/comments invited/received from
various sources to refine those guidelines further; and (ii) the details of steps
initiated by ICAR  to further enhance multi-lateral and bi-lateral resource
generation along with the details of outcome of (i) and (ii) mentioned above, within a
month from the date of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
Recommendation No. 2
Insufficient allocation to DARE/ICAR in 2006-2007
1.7 The Committee noted that the Department proposed an outlay of Rs. 2,000 crore
for 2006-07 but has been allocated only Rs. 1,350 crore. Obviously, the reduced
allocation by Rs. 750 crore would hamper the functioning of the Department, particularly
in vital research areas. The Department had put up an additional demand of Rs. 5,000
crore for the Tenth Plan to address the research and developmental aspects related to
enhancement of productivity, input use, efficiency, modernization of infrastructure and
centres of excellence in State Agricultural Universities (SAUs). For the year 2006-07 also
the Department had taken up the issue at the highest level seeking additional funds for
priority areas.
The Committee were of the considered view that addressing of all the important
areas of agricultural research, development and education, practically require huge and

12
well planned funding. Unfortunately, the Planning Commission and the Ministry of
Finance seemed to have been ignoring the genuine and pressing demands of the
DARE/ICAR to provide higher amount of public funding than being provided at present
for the R&D activities of the DARE/ICAR to prove their talent. This will give them
encouragement to put in more dedicated efforts in making new strides in the Agriculture
sector and the benefits of which only reach to the common people of the country.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the Planning Commission
and the Ministry of Finance should reconsider the genuine requirement of funds for
DARE/ICAR during the terminal year of the Tenth Plan as an additionality over and
above Rs. 5,368 crore already allocated for this Plan. The Committee also recommended
that for the year 2006-07, as part of Department’s proposal of Rs. 2000 crore, as
discussed earlier, Rs. 650 crore should be provided at RE stage to the Department in
addition to the BE of Rs. 1,350 crore already provided, so that the research and
educational activities of the Department could get a real thrust and impetus in the
emerging global agrarian scenario.
Reply of the Government
1.8 The Government in its action taken reply have stated that the recommendation of
the Committee has already been forwarded to Ministry of Finance, which communicates
RE budget of the Department. The Department made a request to Planning Commission
at the highest level seeking additional allocation to meet demands of important initiatives.
The Planning Commission responded that uncovered additionalities and other
requirements would be considered for augmentation at RE/Supplementary stage.
Comments of the Committee
1.9 The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the request made
by the Department to the Planning Commission seeking additional allocation to
meet demands of important initiatives and the outcome of the assurance given by
the Planning Commission for augmentation of funds at RE/Supplementary stage
within a month from the date when RE are communicated to the Department.
Recommendation No. 3
Entire Budgetary Process requires Reformative Changes
1.10 While examining DFG (2006-07) of the DARE, the Committee again looked into
the actual implementation aspect of the recommendation No. 5 and recommendation No.
4 of their 2nd Report (2004-05) and 10th Report (2004-05) (14th Lok Sabha)
respectively. There were two aspects of these recommendations, i.e., the first aspect was
that the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance should be able to clear and
convey/make available RE/BE grants/funds to the concerned Department sometime in the
month of December or little earlier every year by reforming the tardy Budgetary Process.
And, the second aspect was that as soon as the concerned Department has been
conveyed/provided the funds it should be able to convey the same to the concerned

13
institutes/divisions immediately and expeditiously in the month of December or a little
earlier so that the institutes/divisions have sufficient time at their disposal for the
optimum utilization of the scarce public funding provided to them for the ultimate
welfare of the nation.
The Department in its Action Taken Reply on the Second Report of the Committee had stated
that “the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture is
valuable. The above recommendation of the Committee was forwarded to Ministry of
Finance and Planning Commission. The Ministry of Finance has intimated that they have
noted the recommendation and that all efforts will be made by them to comply with the
recommendation. The Planning Commission also communicated that the budget
allocations for the ongoing schemes/projects are being made on the basis of approved
Annual Plan outlays, which allows a degree of certainty about the availability of funds to
the Department and its lower formation.”
The Department in its Action Taken Reply on the Tenth Report of the Committee
had stated, “the recommendation of the Committee for streamlining the budgetary
process for ensuring that the final Plan and Non-Plan allocations are conveyed to the
concerned Institutes/Divisions by the month of December every year, was referred to
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. The Planning Commission responded
that it would support any step that may speed up the budgetary process’. The Ministry of
Finance responded that ‘As far as the Budgetary process is concerned, pre-budget
meetings are held during October and November to finalize ceilings after taking into
consideration the expenditure trend till September. Subsequently, the ceilings for RE
(both Plan and Non- Plan) for the current year and BE (Non-Plan) for the next year are
communicated to the respective Ministries towards the end of December and latest by 1st
week of January. It is the endeavor of Ministry of Finance that ceilings be communicated
at the earliest so that the Ministries are able to utilize their funds in an optimal manner’.
In the light of the recommendation of the Committee, the Department would take expeditious
steps to distribute and communicate the allocated funds on the receipt of Plan and Non-
Plan budgetary communication from Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.”
The Committee were, however, perturbed to note that the RE (2004-05) and RE
(2005-06) allocations were received from the Ministry of Finance on 3rd January 2005
and 16 January, 2006 respectively, which not only was in contradiction to the crux of the
recommendations of the Committee in this regard but also was in contradiction to the
repeated positive assurances given by the Department/Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance in this matter. Evidently, for all practical purposes, all the three major parties
involved in the entire budgetary process, namely, the Department, Planning Commission
and the Ministry of Finance have failed to bring about any positive change or reform in
their entire budgetary process during 2004-2005 and 2005-2006 despite their assurances.
The Committee are still sanguine that if all the three parties, namely, the
Department, Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance sit together and seriously
resolve to bring in positive reformative changes in the entire tardy budgetary process,
then only they will actually be successful in bringing in positive and definite reforms in
this regard.

14
The Committee, therefore, once again emphatically urged the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance/Department to seriously consider the recommendation
of the Committee about the importance of the need to reform the entire tardy budgetary
process to the extent that the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance provide RE
funds to the concerned Institutes/Divisions within the Department in the month of
December or little earlier every year for optimal utilization of scarcely available financial
resources/public money by the concerned Department.
Reply of the Government
1.11 The Government in its action taken reply have stated that the recommendation of
the Committee expressing the concerns about the entire tardy budgetary process have
been sent to Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. The Department will utilize
the opportunity at the finalization of RE 2006-07, wherein the representatives of Ministry
of Finance and Planning Commission participate, to plead for reformative changes in the
entire process.
Comments of the Committee
1.12 The Committee note from the reply of the Government that the Department
would utilize the opportunity at finalization of RE 2006-07, wherein the
representatives of Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission participate, to
plead for reformative changes to be made in the entire tardy budgetary process.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the final outcome of the pleading
made by the Department in this regard.
Recommendation No. 4
Unsatisfactory performance/functioning of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)
1.13 The Committee noted that DARE/ICAR were doing their best to achieve the long
awaited target of opening/having at least one Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) in each of the
rural Districts of India. As there are 575 rural districts in India and so far DARE/ICAR
has already sanctioned/opened 524 KVKs in various rural districts. The remaining 54
rural districts are planned to be covered during 2006-07.
The Committee also noted that whenever the Department was asked to give the
details of fully functional/semi or partially functional/non-functional KVKs already
opened by the Department, the Department has always made very high claims about the
full functionality of all the KVKs except for 6 KVKs which have been declared non-

15
functional and efforts are said to be made to make them functional again by entrusting
these to some other better agencies/organizations.
The Committee were of the firm opinion that the ground reality is different from
the high claims made by the Department in respect of fully functional KVKs, as many of
the KVKs sanctioned/opened 2 to 5 years ago, and even earlier, in many States of the
country, were reported to be sanctioned and fully-functional on papers only and for all
practical purposes, those KVKs were far away from the desired fully-functional status in
terms of their infrastructure, scientific and technical manpower, equipment and other
required facilities and satisfactory output/performance, etc.
The Committee, therefore, once again not only recommended to the Department
to complete the target of having at least one KVK in all the rural districts of India but also
unanimously urged the Department to have a serious look into the issues of
malfunctioning/ unsatisfactory functioning of many KVKs especially in Bihar, Uttar
Pradesh, Maharashtra, North East Region, J&K-Leh region, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh and other States, as have been repeatedly brought to the notice of the Department
by the elected representatives of the people, i.e. Members of Parliament and Members of
the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture during Committee meeting held on
12.04.2006 and also during such meetings held in the previous years.
The Committee hoped that the Department would pay special attention to these
issues and for this purpose, might create a special task force with the task of surveying
and reviewing the actual/ground-level reality functional status of each of the KVKs
opened so far and submit its Report to the Department to enable them to furnish the same
to the Committee within 6 months from the date of presentation of this Report to the
Parliament.
Reply of the Government
1.14 The Government in its action taken reply have stated that the Department was
fully seized of the constraints faced by the KVKs. The Department was endeavoring to
meet the target of having one KVK in each of the rural districts of India by the end of
March, 2007. Till date, 537 KVKs have been sanctioned. Establishment and effective
operation of KVK requires adequate infrastructure development, recruitment of scientific
and technical manpower, procurement of equipment, and creation of the required farm
and lab facilities.
The Department has initiated a number of measures for further improvement of
KVK,  which includes :
(i) A Quinquennial Review Team under the Chairmanship of Shri J.N.L.
Srivastava, former Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation to
review the functioning of the KVKs and suggest measures for enhancing their
efficiency.  The first meeting of the Committee was held on 31.7.2006. The
Committee is expected to give its report within 6 months.

16
(ii) It has been decided to link each SAU with the KVKs in its area of operation
for knowledge empowerment, technological backstopping and overseeing
their activities.
(iii) All the host organizations (SAUs, ICAR Institutes, NGOs, other
Organizations) have been requested for filling up the vacant posts.
(iv)  Quarterly monitoring of the activities of the KVKs against its annual target
are being regularly undertaken.
(v) Monitoring the progress of implementations of action plan by the Scientific
Advisory Committee of each KVK to ensure the fulfillment of the mandate
vested in each of the KVKs.
Comments of the Committee
1.15 The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the measures
initiated by the Department for further improvement of KVKs as mentioned from
(i) to (v) in their Action Taken Reply to the recommendation No. 4 of the 19 th
Report of the Committee (2005-06), within 3 months time from the presentation of
this Report to the Parliament.
The Committee also refer to the further action taken replies of the
Department to the Comments of the Committee contained in their 14 th Report
(2005-06) based on 10 th Report (2004-05) wherein on the recommendation of the
Committee, the Department had proposed the following time schedule/frame to take
action on the complaints received by them and recommend some
modifications/revision in the proposed time schedule for conducting various
activities involved in taking final action by the competent authorities on the fact
finding enquiry report.
The Committee are of the opinion that the time schedule proposed by the
Department is too long and should be reduced, as indicated below, for expeditious
action on the complaints.
Activity Proposed time schedule by
the Department
Time schedule
recommended by the
Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Agriculture
Initiating a fact finding
enquiry
Within 30 days from the
date of receipt of the
complaint in case there is
a prima facie case for
conducting a fact-finding
enquiry.
Within 15 days from the
date of receipt of the
complaint in case there is
a prima facie case for
conducting a fact finding
enquiry.
Submitting the report by
the fact finding
Committee
Three months from the
date of constitution of the
fact-finding Committee.
45 days from the date of
constitution of the fact-
finding Committee.
Final action taken by the
competent authorities on
that report.
Two months from the date
of submission of the
report.
One month from the date
of submission of the
report.

17
Recommendation No. 5
Planning Commission has been ignoring the Genuine Requirement of One-Time
Catch Up Grant of DARE/ICAR
1.16 The Committee noted that the DARE has a number of institutions/laboratories,
which were more than twenty years old. In order to have excellent academic standards in
the State Agricultural Universities and to have globally competitive research working
environment, the Eighth Plan and Ninth Plan Working Groups had recommended Rs.300
crore and Rs. 500 crore respectively, one time catch up grant to meet the critical need for
upgrading laboratory equipment, pilot plants, farm and laboratory facilities, class rooms
and audio visual facilities in these institutions.
The Committee also noted that during the Eighth Plan Period, Planning Commission did
not provide any catch up grant. During the Ninth Plan, the Planning Commission had
communicated a total outlay of Rs. 3,376.95 crore including Externally Aided Projects
(EAPs) out of which Rs. 400 crore was indicated as one time catch-up grant but no
separate allocations were made for catch up grant, though the Department had proposed
an allocation of Rs.100 crore, Rs.200 crore, Rs. 250 crore and Rs.306.81 crore for the
year 1998-99, 1999-2000, 2000-2001 and 2001-02 respectively for the purpose.
Committee had further been apprised that Planning Commission had communicated that
the amounts indicated for annual plans, also included the amount for one time catch-up
grant, i.e., the Department could meet its requirement of catch up grant out of their
Annual Plan budgets only. Accordingly, the Department had taken a decision in the year
1999-2000 that the Institutes could spend up to a maximum of 20 per cent of their
respective Plan; during 2000-2001 that percentage limit was raised to 30 per cent and for
2001-2002, it was decided that the Institutes could incur expenditure under one time
catch up grant to the extent to which they could spare the money after meeting their other
essential research requirements. For State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), these
percentages were 30 per cent for 1999-2000, 40 per cent for 2000-01 and for 2001-02 it
was allowed at par with institutes.
However, the decision of the Department regarding earmarked 20, 30 or 40% of the budget
during 1999-2000 to 2001-02 (end of the Ninth Plan) was not found feasibly practical and
could not be implemented by any Institute/SAU and thus remained only on paper.
With no solution in hand and unable to comply with the direction of the Planning
Commission to spend all the required amounts from their annual plans for changing the
old age infrastructure for research system to the latest state-of-the-art infrastructure and
research system, the Department projected a requirement of Rs. 1000 crore as One Time
Catch up Grant for the entire Tenth Plan Period. The Planning Commission did not make
any provision for the same in the Tenth Plan outlay of the Department, which was pegged
at Rs. 5368 crore. Thereafter, the Department consistently proposed a requirement of Rs.
200 crore as Catch up Grant in each year i.e. 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 but the
response of the Planning Commission to these proposals was ‘ the catch up grant which
was meant for upgrading the research facility of ICAR ¶s institutions had already been
taken care of while approving the proposals during Tenth Five Year Plan ¶. Due to the

18
clear-cut stand taken by Planning Commission on this issue, the Department did not
pursue the matter further.
The Committee took a serious view of the adamant and rigid stand taken by the
Planning Commission on this issue of One time Catch-up-Grant demanded for the
Department’s requirement of latest State-of-the-art technology for research system and to
provide modern infrastructure for the same and they were also not happy about the
callous/pessimistic attitude of the Department in this matter as for the last two years they
have stopped pursuing the matter with the Planning Commission and they desired the
Department to put an end to their passive attitude and pursue the matter more vigorously
and emphatically giving detailed reasons, with the Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance till the issue of One time Catch-up-Grant was resolved in favour of the
DARE/ICAR.
The Committee, further, unanimously opined that unless the Government was
actually willing and come forward to support DARE/ICAR with this direly needed One-
Time Catch-Up grant to change the obsolete equipments, age old infrastructure, including
laboratories and other related research facilities, as the Scientists and Researchers of
ICAR and all their related institutes/SAUs will continue to suffer for want of latest state-
of-the art equipments and research infrastructure/laboratories as this change over from
old to new technology requires additional funding.
The Committee also felt that although the Government and the people have great
expectations from our agricultural scientists to usher India into Second Green Revolution
and to achieve major breakthroughs in finding out solutions for problems faced by
farmers and people engaged in agrarian and allied sectors apart from bringing total food
and fodder security and overall prosperity and growth, yet the fulfillment of these great
expectations would not be possible unless the Government provide the much desired and
direly needed funds and incentives to ICAR to make it a real apex organization and the
hub of the most talented scientists of the nation.
The Committee once again strongly urged the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance to provide much needed one time catch up grant of Rs. 1000 crore
over and above the annual allocations, in a phased manner to ICAR given its track record
of service to the nation and being privy to agricultural revolution in the country.
Reply of the Government
1.17 The Government in its action taken reply have stated that the Recommendations
have been sent to Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. The Government have
approved an allocation of Rs.200 crore, in June, 2006, to strengthen agricultural
education in the country, over and above Rs. 720 crore provided earlier for the Xth Plan
period. Further, the Government have also approved another Rs. 200 crore approximately
for development of seed infrastructure in SAUs/ ICAR which would ensure the
availability of quality seed, planting material and fish seed beside generating internal
resource.

19
Comments of the Committee
1.18 The Committee would like to be apprised of the pursuing efforts made by the
Department and final response of the Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance with regard to the recommendation of the Committee regarding one time
catch up grant of     Rs. 1000 crore over and above the annual allocations to ICAR.
Recommendation No. 6
Suffering of Plan Schemes of DARE/ICAR owing to 3 to 4 years time taken in
SFC/EFC/CCEA Approval
1.19 The Committee noted that as a follow up of directives of the Government of
India, the Department in consultation with Planning Commission applied Zero Base
Budgeting (ZBB) scrutiny to all Plan schemes for their continuation in Tenth Plan with
the primary objective of reducing the number of Plan Schemes for expeditious Clearance
of Tenth Five Year Plan proposals. In this exercise, original 235 Plan projects, viz. ICAR
Institutes, National Research Centres (NRCs), Project Directorates (PDs), All India
Coordinated Research Projects (AICRPs) etc. have been brought together/integrated into
71 main Plan projects. Out of 71 major Plan Schemes, 25 Plan Schemes were approved
by the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) and 46 Plan Schemes were approved by the
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).
As per the instructions issued by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of
Finance, Plan Schemes/projects costing up to Rs.5 crore could be considered for approval
by the Department itself, i.e. without referring to SFC/EFC. Schemes costing more than
Rs.5 crore and less than Rs.25 crore pertain to SFC, Rs.25 crore and above but less than
Rs. 100 crore pertain to EFC, Rs.100 crore pertain to main EFC and those Rs.200 crore
and above to Public Investment/ main EFC. The respective jurisdiction with respect to
SFC/EFC/CCEA is determined on the basis of total cost of the main project schemes
including its sub-schemes for the entire five-year plan. Any scheme costing Rs.100 crore
and above requires approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).
The Committee observed that the primary objective of reducing the number of
235 plan schemes into 71 main schemes for expeditious clearance, have been defeated to
a large extent as the Department took about 14 months’ time, i.e. from April 2002 to May
2003, for preparation of their SFC/EFC/CCEA proposals. In another 10 months, i.e. from
May 2003 to March 2004, SFC/EFC clearance was obtained and for 6 main schemes,
comprising 33 sub-schemes, costing more than Rs. 100.00 crore, requiring CCEA
clearance/approval, time taken for submitting Agenda Note to Cabinet Secretariat ranged
between 3 months 11 days to 13 months 7 days, and for taking CCEA final approval,
time ranging between 8 days to 4 months, that means, in all, another 14 months time, i.e.
March 2004 to May 2005 were taken for CCEA approval for 5 main schemes and in 1
main schemes said to be new activity, the CCEA approval came in as late as December,
2005.
The Committee, therefore, expressed their serious concern over such inordinate
delays in which about 2 to 4 years’ precious time out of total 5 years period has been

20
wasted in getting and providing SFC/EFC/CCEA clearance to the Plan Schemes of the
Tenth Five Year Plan which will come to an end on 31 March 2007 viz. after another 10
months.
The Committee saw no justification in such a situation wherein many
schemes/plan projects of the Department have an outlay for a period of 5 years mentioned
on paper only but actually could not be utilised on their major work of planned activities
for a period of 2 to 4 years out of a total 5 year Plan period, till the approval of
SFC/EFC/CCEA remains pending. The Committee urged the Department as well as the
concerned Appraisal Agencies to seriously introspect over the delays, which are so
detrimental for the progressive functioning of a Department like DARE/ICAR.
The Committee also desired that serious and well contemplated steps should be
taken well in time by the Department/Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance/CCEA
to avoid any such recurrences in the forthcoming five year plans and a limited stipulated
time frame should be fixed for each step and stage involved in the entire Budgetary
exercise for the Department as well as for the Planning Commission and
SFC/EFC/CCEA approval.
Reply of the Government
1.20 The Government in its action taken reply have stated that the recommendation of
the Committee has been sent to appraisal agencies viz. Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission. The preparation of XIth Plan SFC/EFC proposal would depend on many
pre-requisites such as constitution and subsequent recommendations of the XIth Plan
Working Group; finalization of the Approach Paper to XIth Plan by Planning
Commission and other related instructions; the communication of XIth Plan outlay of the
Department; in-principle approval of the new initiatives by the Planning Commission etc.
Thus, this is a long process of getting cleared the SFC/EFC proposals, however, the
Department will put its maximum efforts to get the SFC/EFC/CCEA proposals cleared on
expeditious basis.
Comments of the Committee
1.21 The Committee note from the reply of the Government that although the
process of getting the SFC/EFC proposals cleared is a long one, however, the
Department would put its maximum efforts to get the SFC/EFC/CCEA proposals
cleared on expeditious basis.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the positive outcome of the
efforts  made by the Department in this regard.
Recommendation No. 7
Urgent Need for Greater Inter-Ministerial Coordination among all the
Ministries/Departments related to/Responsible for uplifting Indian Agriculture

21
1.22 The Committee were well aware that the overall welfare, prosperity and growth of
Farmers and Agriculture and allied sectors is dependent on many factors put together
such as, water, power (electricity) for irrigation, financial credit, good quality seeds, good
quality fertilizers and pesticides, efficient tools and machinery, availability of latest
technology, roads and transportation facilities, storage and marketing facilities, etc.
The Committee were of unanimous view that since all these factors are directly
related to the jurisdiction of many Ministries/Departments of Government of India, it
would be more than essential for all these Ministries/Departments to have the best of ever
growing inter-ministerial coordination among themselves with a single-minded zeal to
achieve the same objective/goal of agrarian growth and prosperity.
The Committee, therefore, unanimously and emphatically urged all the
Ministries/Departments concerned/responsible for the overall welfare, prosperity of
Indian farmers and growth of agriculture and allied sectors to have the best possible and
regular inter-ministerial coordination with each other, so that the desired and coveted
goal of agrarian growth/prosperity can be achieved in a better way.
Reply of the Government
1.23 The Government in its action taken reply have stated that the Government have
constituted the Agricultural Coordination Committee under the Chairmanship of Prime
Minister and Minister of Agriculture, Group of concerned Ministers as Members
including Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, Chairman, National Commission on
Farmers, to evolve a systematic approach to Policy formulation in all issues pertaining to
agriculture and to promote inter-sectoral and inter-departmental coordination in planning
and implementation.
Since the issues raised above, are developmental in nature and the Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation is the Nodal/ Developmental Department in Agriculture
Ministry, the DAC would need to refer these issues to the above said Agricultural
Coordination Committee.
Comments of the Committee
1.24 The Committee are of the view that the issues to be referred to the
Agricultural Coordination Committee constituted by the Government to promote
inter-sectoral and inter-departmental coordination in planning and implementation,
should be referred to the Agricultural Coordination Committee without any further
delay so that goal of agrarian growth/prosperity can be achieved in a given time
frame.  The Committee would appreciate if they are also apprised periodically of the
issues discussed in the Agricultural Coordination Committee and the final outcome
of such discussions.
Recommendation No. 8

22
DARE/ICAR lagging behind to bring in the much awaited Second Green Revolution in
the Country
1.25 The Committee noted that the First Green Revolution generally missed the less
resource endowed rainfed areas. One of the most important aspects of First Green
Revolution was pursuing intensive agriculture leading to substantial natural resource
degradation particularly soil and water. There is a general fatigue of the Green
Revolution areas/pockets leading to deceleration in the rate of growth of total factor
productivity.
The Committee observed that the country needs the Second Green Revolution that
would benefit small and marginal farmers in rain-fed and drought prone regions besides
addressing the second generation problems of intensive irrigated agriculture. The
Committee strongly felt that the focus of the research conducted by DARE/ICAR should
include interalia:
(i) enhancement in agricultural productivity; (ii) integration of crops, horticulture,
animal science and fisheries in holistic manner; (iii) increasing the use efficiency of
nutrient, energy and water; (iv) improving use/efficiency of all agricultural inputs; (v)
integrated pest management; (vi) application of science and bio-technology to the
improvement of seeds; (vii) conserving disappearing food or reducing post-harvest
losses; (viii) promotion of labour using efficient and relevant technologies in-farm/non-
farm business; (ix) expanding food basket; and (x) socio-economic research to identify
constraints in technology adoption.
The Committee being well aware of the ground realities, were not satisfied with
the high claims made by DARE/ICAR, that they have generated the relevant technologies
to usher the Second Green Revolution and feel that for successful Second Green
Revolution, the policy initiatives such as ensuring the timely availability of inputs such as
quality seeds, water, fertilizers/other agri. chemicals, marketing and appropriate price
support, value addition, and development of agro processing industries, appropriate
storage, extension services, credit availability, development of irrigation and appropriate
water harvesting structures, enhanced investment, proactive role on the part of all the
stakeholders; etc. will be required.
The Committee, therefore, emphatically recommended that DARE/ICAR being
the apex nodal agency/Council responsible for R&D in agrarian and allied sectors must
do the needful, not only to tackle/combat with the shortcomings/problems of the First
Green Revolution but also to address the issues observed above on top priority, in order
to bring much needed and awaited Second Green Revolution/Evergreen Revolution to the
nation.
Reply of the Government
1.26 The Government in its action taken reply have stated that the Department has
initiated a few network projects, which deal with basic and strategic research.  The
research findings of these projects will help in developing new crop varieties / hybrids,

23
methodologies and technologies to improve yield from the current level and bring in
stability in agricultural production.
Sustainability of Agriculture and improving the profitability and competitiveness
of the Indian farmer is the major focus of research under the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR). This includes development of hybrids and high yielding
varieties alongwith associated production and protection technology, improving soil
health and enhancing input use efficiency. Recently, ICAR has launched the National
Agricultural Innovative Project with an outlay of about Rs. 1200 crores. Further, a project
on “Seed Production in Agricultural Crops and Fisheries” with an outlay of Rs. 198.89
crores is in operation to enhance the production of quality seeds, planting materials etc.
For development of transgenics in crops, initiatives have been taken through launching a
Network Project with an outlay of Rs. 32.85 crores. Efforts has also been made for
conducting basic and strategic research through a number of network projects such as
gene pyramiding, molecular breeding, diagnostics etc. In addition, a National Fund for
basic and strategic research in agricultural sciences to build capacity and for supporting
research has also been launched.
Breeder Seed Production is the mandate of ICAR, which is being produced
through different centres at ICAR Institutes and State Agricultural universities.  It is a
demand driven process where different States are submitting their indent to Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation after compilation, which is being forwarded to ICAR for
production of breeder seed of different crops.  The breeder seed is used to produce
foundation seed then certified seed which is being supplied to the farmers.  The statement
of breeder seed produced during last 5 years is given below:-
(qtls)
S.No. Year Indent Production
1. 2000-01 23983.80 23793.27
2. 2001-02 22670.51 30643.67
3. 2002-03 26140.26 30670.98
4. 2003-04 25316.80 40228.86
5. 2004-05 29491.75 43413.05

24
In addition to above, more than 10,000 quintals breeder seed is produced yearly for State
released Varieties directly by centres as per indent of their respective States.
Comments of the Committee
1.27 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Department and
strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation that DARE/ICAR being the apex
nodal agency/council responsible for R&D in agrarian and allied sectors must do
the needful, not only to tackle/combat the shortcomings / problems of the First
Green Revolution but also to address the issues observed in their original
Recommendation on top priority, in order to bring the much needed and awaited
Second Green Revolution/Evergreen Revolution to the nation.
Recommendation No. 9
DARE/ICAR to take Urgent Action to Enhance Productivity of Foodgrains, especially
Wheat
1.28 The Committee were informed during the oral evidence by the Secretary (DAC)
that it has been observed that in all the major wheat growing States, the production of
Wheat is stagnant and the overall wheat production is not going up from 71 and 72 m.t.
She further stated that this production level is a very slim line because if we look at our
evergrowing demand and per capita consumption, it is very uncomfortable position as to
where the wheat is going to come from. Our buffers are completely depleted. It is also a
fact that we do not have much in store and for wheat, it is certainly a very anxious
situation for the country. Five lakh metric tones of wheat already being imported from
Australia and Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) is also
thinking to import another 30 lakh metric tones of wheat. She further added critically that
inspite of the fact that about 26 plus million hectare area is under wheat cultivation and
this year about 2-3 lakh m.h. area has also come under wheat cultivation, area is not so
much of a problem but productivity is really becoming an issue and is a matter of serious
concern and DARE/ICAR has to do something about it.
The Committee had the similar observations as reflected by Secretary, Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) and were fully aware about the
stagnant/low/fluctuating productivity level of foodgrains, especially, wheat and pulses
and therefore, strongly urged the DARE/ICAR to interact with Secretary, Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) on these issues/suggestions they
might have to share to increase the wheat production in the country and do all the needful
to rejuvenate their (ICAR) entire team of Scientists to do more hard work with more
dedication to increase the productivity of foodgrains especially wheat, pulses, coarse
grains and also fodder etc. not only to make India self-reliant in foodgrains and agrarian
products but also to help the country to save precious and scarce foreign exchange/public
money being spent on importing wheat and other agrarian produces.
Reply of the Government
1.29 The Government in its action taken reply have stated that the wheat production
and productivity peaked during 1999-2000 being 76.37 million tonnes and 27.78 quintals

25
per hectare.  Since then, the production could not reach the same level and fluctuated
around 70-72 million tonnes, although the productivity level was around 27 quintals per
hectare. The area under wheat cultivation during 1999-2000 was 27.49 million hectares
and declined by about 1 million hectares since then.  The stagnant production and
productivity could be attributed to late sowing, rising temperature, deteriorating soil
health including low carbon content and organic matter, imbalanced use of fertilizers,
declining factor productivity, etc.   Among various States, imbalanced use of fertilizer is
highest in the States of Haryana and Punjab and multiple nutrient both major and minor
deficiencies are appearing due to repeated cultivation of rice and wheat in rotation and
non-adoption of Integrated Plant Nutrient Management System.  Nitrogen phosphorus
and potash are required to be given in a 4:2:1 ratio.  But in certain part of these two
States, it is almost 35:9:1.    The micro-nutrients, the deficiency of which occurs
particularly in those areas where crop intensity is very high.    The farmers have to add
more fertilizers inputs for attaining the yield level of 1990s indicating a decline in total
factor productivity.  Similarly, the carbon content in the soil has gone very low and the
organics are not being applied.  The burning of agro waste and residues is also adding to
the problem and consequently, the soil health is adversely affected.    The rotation of
crops followed in a particular area also have a bearing on the production.  Hence massive
extension efforts and appropriate input support is considered vital.
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has developed a number of high
yielding varieties suitable for different agro-climatic regions.  Some of the important and
popular varieties are: PBW 343, PBW502, Raj 3765, HD2733, WH 283, WH 542.
Varieties for late sown division has also been developed such as PBW-373 UP 2338, UP
245, Raj 3077, Raj 3765, HW2025. For enhancing production and productivities in
rainfed areas, high yielding varieties have been evolved Some of them are:  HDR-77, K-
8972, K-9465, K-8027, NEPZ, PBW-299, WH-533, PBW-396, NWPZ; VL-738, HPW-
42, HS-365,VL-829, VL-616, VL-832, NHZ; HW-2004, JWS-17, HI-1500, HD-4674(d)-
CZ; K-9644, HD-2781-PZ. For sodic soil also, the varieties have been evolved such as
Raj 3077, KRL -19.  For summer sowing in northern hill zone, variety like HS - 375 has
also been developed.   For normal sown conditions for hill areas, the varieties such as VL
738, VL 804, HS 240 have been developed.  Similarly,  for rainfed areas in northern hills,
varieties such as VL -738, HPW-42, HS-365, VL-829, DT-46 are evolved.  For southern
hill zone also, high yielding varieties have been developed such as HUW - 318, SW-
1085, HW2044.  For enhancing the productivity in Central Zone under the rainfed area,
the varieties such as GW 322, GW 173, HW 200, HD4672 have been developed.
Product specific varieties suited for bread, biscuit, pasta and for chapattis has been
identified for use by the various industries/stakeholders. Raj 3765, NIAW-34 Halna and
WH-730 have been characterized as potential donors of heat tolerance in wheat. To
enhance the availability of quality seeds, all the indents for the breeder seed from the
Department of Agri. & Cooperation (DAC) have been fully met and the Council is
capable of meeting the additional demand for breeder seed.
There is a need to further demonstrate and popularize resource conservation
technologies like Zero Tillage. The zero tillage technology of seeding wheat without any
field preparation has several advantages over conventional tillage. It reduces the cost of
cultivation (about Rs.2500/ha), advances the time of wheat sowing, requires less water

26
for the first irrigation and results in less infestation of Phalaris minor, which is a serious
problem in northwest India. The Furrow Irrigated Raised Bed-planting System(FIRBS) is
another resource conservation tillage technology, which saves seed and fertilizer
nitrogen(25 per cent)  as well as scare water resource(25-35 per cent).
For enhancing yield productivity further efforts for developing hybrid Wheat are
also being made in terms of identification of better restorers, high heterosis and
standardizing commercially viable seed production technologies.  Winter X Spring
Wheat Hybridization Programme is also taken up to bring in new yield and resistant
genes into Spring Wheat.  The use of biotechnological tools such as marker aided
selection, identification of quantitative traits loci, genetic transformations for transfer of
important gene and to improve yield potential stability, efficiency of bio-mass production
and biological nitrogen fixation are also undertaken.   For management of Karnal Bunt, a
variety PBW-502 has been developed with yield at par with PBW-343.  A Network
Project has also been initiated to manage the Karnal Bunt disease.  Similarly, a Network
Projects on Gene Pyramiding has been initiated to combine the various gene sources for
different rust into popular varieties for longer stability.
The frontline demonstrations conducted has found a clear yield gaps of about 1
tonne per hectare which can be easily met by the appropriate transfer of technologies and
input delivery/other policy resources.
Hybrid rice technology has shown the potential to increase the productivity by
about 1 tonne per hectare.  Research efforts in ICAR have resulted into development of
widely adopted hybrids such as KRH2, Pant Shankar Dhan 1, Pant Shanker Dhan 3,
DRRH-2, Sahayadri etc.  Hybrid seed production technology has also been developed
and refined.  Promotion and development of hybrid rice will result into higher production
of rice.
Maize is a versatile crop and is grown for food, feed and industrial purposes.
Quality Protein maize hybrids such as Shaktiman 1, Shaktiman 2, Shaktiman 3,
Shaktiman 4 contains higher amount of lysine and tryptophan which have better nutritive
value.  A number of hybrids suitable for different zones have been developed. Production
of winter maize has good potential for increasing the productivity of maize.  Demand for
maize is likely to increase for its uses for food, feed, industrial use, hence, developmental
efforts are needed to enhance the production and productivity of Maize.
Sorghum is staple food crop for large section of people and also a main source of feed for
cattle.  For kharif and also for Rabi a number of High Yielding Hybrids have been
developed such as CSH-16, CSH -18, CSV-16, etc. Parbhani Sweta has been developed
as a grain mold tolerant variety.   Phule Yasoda, has been released for Rabi Sorghum
growing areas.  Sorghum need to be promoted also for starch, baking industry, alcohol,
pop-sorghum, malt and for feed industry.
 In pulses, 12 crops including 4 arid legumes are grown in different parts of the
country. Among these pigeonpea, mungbean, urdbean and chickpea are grown on large
area with maximum share in the total production. ICAR/ SAUs have developed several
hybrids (Arhar) and varieties in pulse crops.  Noteworthy research achievements are :

27
• Development of short duration varieties in pigeonpea (having tolerance/resistance to
disease and pest) providing the scope for crop diversification and double cropping.
The hybrids of pigeonpea have proved an increase in the productivity by 25 percent
and are being popularized.
• Several long duration varieties of pigeonpea have been replaced by short
duration/mid late varieties with good degree of resistance to fusarium wilt and
sterility mosaic.
• Bold seeded kabuli varieties in Bengal gram has a potential as high value crop.  The
varieties viz Kak-2, Pusa 1003, BG 1053 K, JGK-1 are becoming popular among the
farmers.
• In Lathyrus the ODAP (Oxide Diamino Propionic Acid) content in seed has been
reduced by using biotechnology and the varieties developed like Bio 302, Bio 212
(Ratar) are safe for consumption.
• The FLDs on pulse crops conducted on farmers’ fields have shown the potential of
productivity to the tune of 2.0 tones/ha.
• The short duration mung varieties maturing in 55-60 days has further provided
potential for crop diversification and double cropping.
• Several efficient Rhizobium strains have been developed for different pulse crops
having good potential for nitrogen fixation and thereby improvement in the soil
fertility.  This has also helped in increase of yield vis-Ã -vis  improvement of soil
fertility and reduction in the cost of cultivation.
For efficient and effective delivery of technologies this Department interacts with
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, on a regular basis, through DAC-ICAR
Interface, organized before the National Conference on rabi and kharif crops. During
these interface which are co-chaired by Secretary  DAC and Secretary DARE, the
package of practices are finalized and related issues are discussed threadbare.
 The creation of infrastructure through public investment is crucial for long term
growth and development agriculture sector. Beginning of 1980s witnessed a very
significant change in policy of resource allocation to agriculture. It marked the beginning
of decline in public investment in agriculture. In early 1980s more than 4 percent of GDP
agriculture was used in public investments. In the recent years this has fallen to 1.54
percent. The decline in public investments in agriculture is believed to be causing adverse
impact on creation of infrastructure in agriculture and on long term growth of farm
output.
Comments of the Committee

28
1.30 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Department as the
reply mainly speaks about what has already  been done by the Department and does
not mention anything about what is still required to be done by the DARE/ICAR
and how they propose to take urgent action to enhance productivity of foodgrains,
especially wheat to bring the nation out of the anxious situation of shortage in wheat
production.
The Committee note from the reply of the Government the following points,
namely, (i) massive extension efforts and appropriate input support is considered
vital to overcome/remove the factors causing decline/stagnation in wheat
production/productivity; (ii) there is a need to further demonstrate and popularize
resource conservation technologies like Zero Tillage and the Furrow Irrigated
Raised Bed-planting System (FIRBS), etc; (iii) developmental efforts are needed to
enhance the production and productivity of maize; (iv) the frontline demonstration
conducted has found earlier wheat production gaps of about 1 tonne per hectare
which can be easily met by the appropriate transfer of technologies and input
delivery/other policy resources; (v) The promotion and development of Hybrid rice
will result in higher production of rice by about one tonne per hectare; (vi) the
decline in public investments in agriculture is causing adverse impact on creation of
infrastructure in agriculture and on long term growth of farm input.
The Committee desire a detailed note from the Department on each of the points
mentioned in (i) to (vi) above as to how the Department proposes to get the needful
done so that these issues {mentioned in (i) to (vi) above} do not remain
pending/unattended any longer and get resolved at the earliest.
The Committee appreciate the work already undertaken by the DARE/ICAR
for enhancing the production and productivity of foodgrains and other agricultural
produces but at the same time reiterate their earlier recommendation and wish to
place on record that it is high time that DARE/ICAR should reorient their research
programmes to overcome the lacunae and short-comings in their working and also
make all out vigorous efforts to make our country self-reliant in foodgrains and
other agrarian products, so that there is no need to import the wheat and other
foodgrains including pulses, etc.

29
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation No.1
Urgent Need for increasing DARE/ICAR Outlay to at least 1 per cent of AGDP
2.1 The Committee note that the Planning Commission had constituted the
Tenth Plan Working Group for the Department of Agricultural Research and Education
(DARE) and the Working Group had recommended that the DARE should be provided
one per cent of the Gross Domestic Product of Agriculture and Allied Sector (AGDP)
which amounted to approximately Rs. 25,000 crore at that time. As a matter of fact, this
recommendation of the Tenth Plan Working Group for DARE was in tune with the often
repeated recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture as
well as the Ninth Plan Working Group for DARE which had recommended that DARE
should be provided at least one per cent of AGDP initially, with a gradual increase up to
two per cent of AGDP in subsequent years. Against the most needed minimum one per
cent of AGDP outlay, the Department had proposed a minimum requirement of Rs.
15,000 crore, plus a one time catch up grant of Rs. 1,000 crore for the Tenth Plan.
However, the Planning Commission approved an amount of only Rs. 4,868 crore, which
was subsequently raised to Rs. 5,368 crore by providing Rs. 500 crore for setting up new
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).
The Committee note that Sri Lanka and Latin American countries spend 0.81 per
cent and 0.98 per cent of AGDP on Agricultural Research, respectively. Astonishingly, in
comparison to some of the leading industrialized countries whose spending on
agricultural research ranges between 2.45 per cent and 4.02 per cent of AGDP, India’s
spending on agricultural R&D ranged between 0.17 and 0.32 per cent during the last one
decade which was even less than the average of all the developing countries.
The Committee are unable to comprehend the constraints of the Planning
Commission why they could not earmark adequate resources for DARE based on the
recommendations of its own Working Group during the Ninth and Tenth Plans and the
recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture to increase the
Tenth Plan outlay to at least one per cent of AGDP for the DARE which should be
gradually increased to 2% of AGDP as has been happening in the case of agriculturally
advance Countries. Considering the role of an applied research-based Department like
DARE and its potential to accelerate the growth of agriculture and allied sectors, the
Committee hope that the Government will earmark higher outlays for the Department in
accordance with its declared commitment to accord priority to agriculture and the allied
sectors so that India emerges a stronger, and gradually the strongest, global player in the
field of agricultural produces and exports. The Committee would also like to know from
the Government/Planning Commission that how they can expect DARE/ICAR to usher
India into the long awaited Second Green Revolution and make India self-reliant in all

30
agrarian and allied produces, so as to feed the ever growing population for decades to
come with too meager public funding of about 0.3% AGDP?
However, the Committee are of the opinion that in view of the continuous funds
constraints for the R&D activities of DARE/ICAR, instead of always depending upon
Government funding for their agrarian and allied research institutions, DARE/ICAR may
consider the Mashelkar Committee formula for being financially self-reliant in running in
their R&D activities by earning from their research work. DARE/ICAR may also
consider the option of taking loans from public/private financial institutions which may
be repaid from the earnings of their research work. This will fill up the gap of low
budgetary grants from the Government.
Reply of the Government
2.2 Indian Agriculture has already entered into an era of WTO regime and
globalization. Mashelkar Committee’s recommendations on  “Alternative Models for
ICAR to pursue research on commercial lines “ have been considered.  Accordingly,
ICAR’s draft guidelines on “Intellectual Property Management and Technology Transfer
/ Commercialization” were prepared and suggestions / comments invited to refine them
further. Steps have also been initiated to further enhance multi-lateral and by-lateral
resource generation. Since the Xth Plan is in its last year, the resources available with the
Department would be made use of to optimize research output and bring the programmes
to a logical conclusion. However, the XIth Plan Working Group has already been
constituted by Planning Commission to critically review the agricultural research and
education in a holistic way and give its recommendations.
Comments of the Committee
2.3 For comments of the Committee please see Para No.1.6 of Chapter I of this Report.
Recommendation No.2
Insufficient allocation to DARE/ICAR in 2006-2007
2.4 The Committee note that the Department proposed an outlay of Rs. 2,000
crore for 2006-07 but has been allocated only Rs. 1,350 crore. Obviously, the reduced
allocation by Rs. 750 crore will hamper the functioning of the Department, particularly in

31
vital research areas. The Department has put up an additional demand of Rs. 5,000 crore
for the Tenth Plan to address the research and developmental aspects related to
enhancement of productivity, input use, efficiency, modernization of infrastructure and
centres of excellence in State Agricultural Universities (SAUs). For the year 2006-07 also
the Department had taken up the issue at the highest level seeking additional funds for
priority areas.
The Committee are of the considered view that addressing of all the important
areas of agricultural research, development and education, practically require huge and
well planned funding. Unfortunately, the Planning Commission and the Ministry of
Finance seem to have been ignoring the genuine and pressing demands of the
DARE/ICAR to provide higher amount of public funding than being provided at present
for the R&D activities of the DARE/ICAR to prove their talent. This will give them
encouragement to put in more dedicated efforts in making new strides in the Agriculture
sector and the benefits of which only reach to the common people of the country.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Planning Commission
and the Ministry of Finance should reconsider the genuine requirement of funds for
DARE/ICAR during the terminal year of the Tenth Plan as an additionality over and
above Rs. 5,368 crore already allocated for this Plan. The Committee also recommend
that for the year 2006-07, as part of Department’s proposal of Rs. 2000 crore, as
discussed earlier, Rs. 750 crore should be provided at RE stage to the Department in
addition to the BE of Rs. 1,350 crore already provided, so that the research and
educational activities of the Department get a real thrust and impetus in the emerging
global agrarian scenario.
Reply of the Government
2.5 The recommendation of the Committee has already been forwarded to
Ministry of Finance, which communicates RE budget of the Department. The Department
made a request to Planning Commission at the highest level seeking additional allocation
to meet demands of important initiatives. The Planning Commission responded that
uncovered additionalities and other requirements would be considered for augmentation
at RE/Supplementary stage.
Comments of the Committee
2.6 For comments of the Committee please see Para No.1.9 of Chapter I of this Report.
Recommendation No.4
Unsatisfactory performance/functioning of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)
2.7 The Committee note that DARE/ICAR are doing their best to achieve the
long awaited target of opening/having at least one Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) in each
of the rural District of India. As there are 575 rural districts in India and so far

32
DARE/ICAR has already sanctioned/opened 524 KVKs in various rural districts. The
remaining 54 rural districts are planned to be covered during 2006-07.
The Committee also note that whenever the Department was asked to give the
details of fully functional/semi or partially functional/non-functional KVKs already
opened by the Department, the Department has always made very high claims about the
full functionality of all the KVKs except for 6 KVKs which have been declared non-
functional and efforts are said to be made to make them functional again by entrusting
these to some other better agencies/organizations.
The Committee are of the firm opinion that the ground reality is different from the
high claims made by the Department in respect of fully functional KVKs, as many of the
KVKs sanctioned/opened 2 to 5 years ago, and even earlier, in many States of the
country, are reported to be sanctioned and fully-functional on papers only and for all
practical purposes, those KVKs are far away from the desired fully-functional status in
terms of their infrastructure, scientific and technical manpower, equipment and other
required facilities and satisfactory output/performance, etc.
The Committee, therefore, once again not only recommend to the Department to
complete the target of having at least one KVK in all the rural districts of India but also
unanimously urge the Department to have a serious look into the issues of
malfunctioning/ unsatisfactory functioning of many KVKs especially in Bihar, Uttar
Pradesh, Maharashtra, North East Region, J&K-Leh region, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh and other States, as have been repeatedly brought to the notice of the Department
by the elected representatives of the people, i.e. Members of Parliament and Members of
the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture during Committee meeting held on
12.04.2006 and also during such meetings held in the previous years.
The Committee hope that the Department would pay special attention to these
issues and for this purpose, may create a special task force with the task of surveying and
reviewing the actual/ground-level reality functional status of each of the KVKs opened so
far and submit its Report to the Department to enable them to furnish the same to the
Committee within 6 months from the date of presentation of this Report to the
Parliament.
Reply of the Government
2.8 The Department is fully seized of the constraints faced by the KVKs. The
Department is endeavoring to meet the target of having one KVK in each of the rural
districts of India by the end of March, 2007. Till date, 537 KVKs have been sanctioned.
Establishment and effective operation of KVK requires adequate infrastructure
development, recruitment of scientific and technical manpower, procurement of
equipment, and creation of the required farm and lab facilities.
The Department has initiated a number of measures for further improvement of
KVK,  which includes :

33
i) A Quinquennial Review Team under the Chairmanship of Shri J.N.L.
Srivastava, Former Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation to
review the functioning of the KVKs and suggest measures for enhancing their
efficiency.  The first meeting of the Committee was held on 31.7.2006. The
Committee is expected to give its report within 6 months.
ii) It has been decided to link each SAU with the KVKs in its area of operation
for knowledge empowerment, technological backstopping and overseeing
their activities.
iii) All the host organizations (SAUs, ICAR Institutes, NGOs, other
Organizations) have been requested for filling up the vacant posts.
iv)  Quarterly monitoring of the activities of the KVKs against its annual target
are being regularly undertaken.
v) Monitoring the progress of implementations of action plan by the Scientific
Advisory committee of each KVK to ensure the fulfillment of the mandate
vested in each of the KVKs.
Comments of the Committee
2.9 For comments of the Committee please see Para No.1.15 of Chapter I of
this Report.
Recommendation No.7
Urgent Need for Greater Inter-Ministerial Coordination among all the
Ministries/Departments related to/Responsible for uplifting Indian Agriculture
2.10 The Committee are well aware that the overall welfare, prosperity and
growth of Farmers and Agriculture and allied sectors is dependent on many factors put
together such as, water, power (electricity) for irrigation, financial credit, good quality
seeds, good quality fertilizers and pesticides, efficient tools and machinery, availability of
latest technology, roads and transportation facilities, storage and marketing facilities, etc.
The Committee are of unanimous view that since all these factors are directly
related to the jurisdiction of many Ministries/Departments of Government of India, it
would be more than essential for all these Ministries/Departments to have the best of ever
growing inter-ministerial coordination among themselves with a single-minded zeal to
achieve the same objective/goal of agrarian growth and prosperity.
The Committee, therefore, unanimously and emphatically urge all the
Ministries/Departments concerned/responsible for the overall welfare, prosperity of
Indian farmers and growth of agriculture and allied sectors to have the best possible and
regular inter-ministerial coordination with each other, so that the desired and coveted
goal of agrarian growth/prosperity can be achieved in a better way.
Reply of the Government

34
 2.11 The Government have constituted the Agricultural Coordination
Committee under the Chairmanship of Prime Minister and Minister of Agriculture, Group
of concerned Ministers as Members including Deputy Chairman Planning Commission,
Chairman, National Commission on Farmers, to evolve a systematic approach to Policy
formulation in all issues pertaining to agriculture and to promote inter-sectoral and inter-
departmental coordination in planning and implementation.
Since the issues raised above, are developmental in nature and the Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation is the Nodal/ Developmental Department in Agriculture
Ministry, the DAC would need to refer these issues to the above said Agricultural
Coordination Committee.
Comments of the Committee
2.12 For comments of the Committee please see Para No.1.24 of Chapter I of
this Report.
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

35
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVRNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation No.8
DARE/ICAR lagging behind to bring in the much awaited Second Green Revolution in
the Country
4.1 The Committee note that the First Green Revolution generally missed the
less resource endowed rainfed areas. One of the most important aspects of First Green
Revolution was pursuing intensive agriculture leading to substantial natural resource
degradation particularly soil and water. There is a general fatigue of the Green
Revolution areas/pockets leading to deceleration in the rate of growth of total factor
productivity.
The Committee observe that the country needs the Second Green Revolution that
would benefit small and marginal farmers in rain-fed and drought prone regions besides
addressing the second generation problems of intensive irrigated agriculture. The
Committee strongly feel that the focus of the research conducted by DARE/ICAR should
include interalia:
(i) enhancement in agricultural productivity; (ii) integration of crops, horticulture,
animal science and fisheries in holistic manner; (iii) increasing the use efficiency of
nutrient, energy and water; (iv) improving use/efficiency of all agricultural inputs; (v)
integrated pest management; (vi) application of science and bio-technology to the
improvement of seeds; (vii) Conserving disappearing food or reducing post-harvest
losses; (viii) promotion of labour using efficient and relevant technologies in-farm/non-
farm business; (ix) Expanding food basket; and (x) Socio-economic Research to identify
constraints in technology adoption.
The Committee being well aware of the Ground realities, are not satisfied with the
high claims made by DARE/ICAR, that they have generated the relevant technologies to
usher the second green revolution and feel that for successful Second Green Revolution,
the policy initiatives such as ensuring the timely availability of inputs such as quality
seeds, water, fertilizers/other agri. chemicals, marketing and appropriate price support,
value addition, and development of agro processing industries, appropriate storage,
extension services, credit availability, development of irrigation and appropriate water
harvesting structures, enhanced investment, proactive role on the part of all the
stakeholders; etc. will be required.
The Committee, therefore, emphatically recommend that DARE/ICAR being the
apex nodal agency/Council responsible for R&D in agrarian and allied sectors must do
the needful, not only to tackle/combat with the shortcomings/problems of the First Green
Revolution but also to address the issues observed above on top priority, in order to bring
much needed and awaited Second Green Revolution/Evergreen Revolution to the nation.

36
Reply of the Government
4.2 The Department has initiated a few network projects, which deal with basic and strategic
research.  The research findings of these projects will help in developing new crop
varieties / hybrids, methodologies and technologies to improve yield from the current
level and bring in stability in agricultural production.
Sustainability of Agriculture and improving the profitability and competitiveness
of the Indian farmer is the major focus of research under the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR). This includes development of hybrids and high yielding
varieties alongwith associated production and protection technology, improving soil
health and enhancing input use efficiency. Recently, ICAR has launched the National
Agricultural Innovative Project with an outlay of about Rs. 1200 crores. Further, a project
on “Seed Production in Agricultural Crops and Fisheries” with an outlay of Rs. 198.89
crores is in operation to enhance the production of quality seeds, planting materials etc.
For development of transgenics in crops, initiatives have been taken through launching a
Network Projects with an outlay of Rs. 32.85 crores. Efforts has also been made for
conducting basic and strategic research through a number of network projects such as
gene pyramiding, molecular breeding, diagnostics etc. In addition, a National fund for
basic and strategic research in agricultural sciences to build capacity and for supporting
research has also been launched.
Breeder Seed Production is the mandate of ICAR, which is being produced
through different centres at ICAR Institutes and State Agricultural universities.  It is a
demand driven process where different States are submitting their indent to department of
Agriculture and Cooperation after compilation, which is being forwarded to ICAR for
production of breeder seed of different crops.  The breeder seed is used to produce
foundation seed than certified seed which is being supplied to the farmers.  The statement
of breeder seed produced during last 5 years is given below:-
(qtls)
S.No. Year Indent Production
1. 2000-01 23983.80 23793.27
2. 2001-02 22670.51 30643.67
3. 2002-03 26140.26 30670.98

37
4. 2003-04 25316.80 40228.86
5. 2004-05 29491.75 43413.05
In addition to above, more than 10,000 quintals breeder seed is produced yearly
for State released Varieties directly by centres as per indent of their respective States.
Comments of the Committee
4.3 For comments of the Committee please see Para No.1.27 of Chapter I of
this Report.
Recommendation No.9
DARE/ICAR to take Urgent Action to Enhance Productivity of Foodgrains, especially
Wheat
4.4 The Committee were informed during the oral Evidence by the Secretary
(DAC) that it has been observed that in all the major wheat growing States, the
production of Wheat is stagnant and the overall wheat production is not going up from 71
and 72 m.t. She further stated that this production level is a very slim line because if we
look at our evergrowing demand and per capita consumption, it is very uncomfortable
position as to where the wheat is going to come from. Our buffers are completely
depleted. It is also a fact that we do not have much in store and for wheat, it is certainly a
very anxious situation for the country. Five lakh metric tones of wheat already being
imported from Australia and Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation) is also thinking to import another 30 lakh metric tones of wheat. She further
added critically that inspite of the fact that about 26 plus million hectare area is under
wheat cultivation and this year about 2-3 lakh m.h. area has also come under wheat
cultivation, area is not so much of a problem but productivity is really becoming an issue
and is a matter of serious concern and DARE/ICAR has to do something about it.
The Committee have the similar observations as reflected by Secretary, Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) and are fully aware about the
stagnant/low/fluctuating productivity level of foodgrains, especially, wheat and pulses
and therefore, strongly urge the DARE/ICAR to interact with Secretary, Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) on these issues/suggestions they
might have to share to increase the wheat production in the country and do all the needful
to rejuvenate their (ICAR) entire team of Scientists to do more hard work with more
dedication to increase the productivity of foodgrains especially wheat, pulses, coarse

38
grains and also fodder etc. not only to make India self-reliant in foodgrains and agrarian
products but also to help the country to save precious and scarce foreign exchange/public
money being spent on importing wheat and other agrarian produces.
Reply of the Government
4.5 The wheat production and productivity peaked during 1999-2000 being
76.37 million tonnes and 27.78 quintals per hectare.  Since then, the production could not
reach the same level and fluctuated around 70-72 million tonnes, although the
productivity level was around 27 quintals per hectare. The area under wheat cultivation
during 1999-2000 was 27.49 million hectares and declined by about 1 million hectares
since then.  The stagnant production and productivity could be attributed to late sowing,
rising temperature, deteriorating soil health including low carbon content and organic
matter, imbalanced use of fertilizers, declining factor productivity, etc.   Among various
States, imbalanced use of fertilizer is highest in the States of Haryana and Punjab and
multiple nutrient both major and minor deficiencies are appearing due to repeated
cultivation of rice and wheat in rotation and non-adoption of Integrated Plant Nutrient
Management System.  Nitrogen phosphorus and potash are required to be given in a 4:2:1
ratio.  But in certain part of these two States, it is almost 35:9:1.    The micro-nutrients,
the deficiency of which occurs particularly in those areas where crop intensity is very
high.    The farmers have to add more fertilizers inputs for attaining the yield level of
1990s indicating a decline in total factor productivity.  Similarly, the carbon content in
the soil has gone very low and the organics are not being applied.  The burning of agro
waste and residues is also adding to the problem and consequently, the soil health is
adversely affected.    The rotation of crops followed in a particular area also have a
bearing on the production.  Hence massive extension efforts and appropriate input
support is considered vital.
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has developed a number of high
yielding varieties suitable for different agro-climatic regions.  Some of the important and
popular varieties are: PBW 343, PBW502, Raj 3765, HD2733, WH 283, WH 542.
Varieties for late sown division has also been developed such as PBW-373 UP 2338, UP
245, Raj 3077, Raj 3765, HW2025. For enhancing production and productivities in
rainfed areas, high yielding varieties have been evolved Some of them are:  HDR-77, K-
8972, K-9465, K-8027, NEPZ, PBW-299, WH-533, PBW-396, NWPZ; VL-738, HPW-
42, HS-365,VL-829, VL-616, VL-832, NHZ; HW-2004, JWS-17, HI-1500, HD-4674(d)-
CZ; K-9644, HD-2781-PZ. For sodic soil also, the varieties have been evolved such as
Raj 3077, KRL -19.  For summer sowing in northern hill zone, variety like HS - 375 has
also been developed.   For normal sown conditions for hill areas, the varieties such as VL
738, VL 804, HS 240 have been developed.  Similarly,  for rainfed areas in northern hills,
varieties such as VL -738, HPW-42, HS-365, VL-829, DT-46 are evolved.  For southern
hill zone also, high yielding varieties have been developed such as HUW - 318, SW-
1085, HW2044.  For enhancing the productivity in Central Zone under the rainfed area,
the varieties such as GW 322, GW 173, HW 200, HD4672 have been developed.
Product specific varieties suited for bread, biscuit, pasta and for chapattis has been
identified for use by the various industries/stakeholders. Raj 3765, NIAW-34 Halna and
WH-730 have been characterized as potential donors of heat tolerance in wheat. To

39
enhance the availability of quality seeds, all the indents for the breeder seed from the
Department of Agri. & Cooperation (DAC) have been fully met and the Council is
capable of meeting the additional demand for breeder seed.
There is a need to further demonstrate and popularize resource conservation
technologies like Zero Tillage. The zero tillage technology of seeding wheat without any
field preparation has several advantages over conventional tillage. It reduces the cost of
cultivation (about Rs.2500/ha), advances the time of wheat sowing, requires less water
for the first irrigation and results in less infestation of Phalaris minor, which is a serious
problem in northwest India. The Furrow Irrigated Raised Bed-planting System(FIRBS) is
another resource conservation tillage technology, which saves seed and fertilizer
nitrogen(25 per cent)  as well as scare water resource(25-35 per cent).
For enhancing yield productivity further efforts for developing hybrid Wheat are
also being made in terms of identification of better restorers, high heterosis and
standardizing commercially viable seed production technologies.  Winter X Spring
Wheat Hybridization Programme is also taken up to bring in new yield and resistant
genes into Spring Wheat.  The use of biotechnological tools such as marker aided
selection, identification of quantitative traits loci, genetic transformations for transfer of
important gene and to improve yield potential stability, efficiency of bio-mass production
and biological nitrogen fixation are also undertaken.   For management of Karnal Bunt, a
variety PBW-502 has been developed with yield at par with PBW-343.  A Network
Project has also been initiated to manage the Karnal Bunt disease.  Similarly, a Network
Projects on Gene Pyramiding has been initiated to combine the various gene sources for
different rust into popular varieties for longer stability.
The frontline demonstrations conducted has found a clear yield gaps of about 1
tonne per hectare which can be easily met by the appropriate transfer of technologies and
input delivery/other policy resources.
Hybrid rice technology has shown the potential to increase the productivity by
about 1 tonne per hectare.  Research efforts in ICAR have resulted into development of
widely adopted hybrids such as KRH2, Pant Shankar Dhan 1, Pant Shanker Dhan 3,
DRRH-2, Sahayadri etc.  Hybrid seed production technology has also been developed
and refined.  Promotion and development of hybrid rice will result into higher production
of rice.
Maize is a versatile crop and is grown for food, feed and industrial purposes.
Quality Protein maize hybrids such as Shaktiman 1, Shaktiman 2, Shaktiman 3,
Shaktiman 4 contains higher amount of lysine and tryptophan which have better nutritive
value.  A number of hybrids suitable for different zones have been developed. Production
of winter maize has good potential for increasing the productivity of maize.  Demand for
maize is likely to increase for its uses for  food, feed,  industrial use, hence,
developmental efforts are needed to enhance the production and productivity of Maize.
Sorghum is staple food crop for large section of people and also a main source of
feed for cattle.  For kharif and also for Rabi a number of High Yielding Hybrids have
been developed such as CSH-16, CSH -18, CSV-16, etc. Parbhani Sweta has been

40
developed as a grain mold tolerant variety.   Phule Yasoda, has been released for Rabi
Sorghum growing areas.  Sorghum need to be promoted also for starch, baking industry,
alcohol, pop-sorghum, malt and for feed industry.
In pulses, 12 crops including 4 arid legumes are grown in different parts of the
country. Among these pigeonpea, mungbean, urdbean and chickpea are grown on large
area with maximum share in the total production. ICAR/ SAUs have developed several
hybrids (Arhar) and varieties in pulse crops.  Noteworthy research achievements are :
• Development of short duration varieties in pigeonpea (having tolerance/resistance
to disease and pest) providing the scope for crop diversification and double
cropping.  The hybrids of pigeonpea have proved an increase in the productivity
by 25 percent and are being popularized.
• Several long duration varieties of pigeonpea have been replaced by short
duration/mid late varieties with good degree of resistance to fusarium wilt and
sterility mosaic.
• Bold seeded kabuli varieties in Bengal gram has a potential as high value crop.
The varieties viz Kak-2, Pusa 1003, BG 1053 K, JGK-1 are becoming popular
among the farmers.
• In Lathyrus the ODAP (Oxide Diamino Propionic Acid) content in seed has been
reduced by using biotechnology and the varieties developed like Bio 302, Bio 212
(Ratar) are safe for consumption.
• The FLDs on pulse crops conducted on farmers’ fields have shown the potential
of productivity to the tune of 2.0 tones/ha.
• The short duration mung varieties maturing in 55-60 days has further provided
potential for crop diversification and double cropping.
• Several efficient Rhizobium strains have been developed for different pulse crops
having good potential for nitrogen fixation and thereby improvement in the soil
fertility.  This has also helped in increase of yield vis-Ã -vis  improvement of soil
fertility and reduction in the cost of cultivation.
For efficient and effective delivery of technologies this Department interacts with
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, on a regular basis, through DAC-ICAR
Interface, organized before the National Conference on rabi and kharif crops. During
these interface which are co-chaired by Secretary  DAC and Secretary DARE, the
package of practices are finalized and related issues are discussed threadbare.
 The creation of infrastructure through public investment is crucial for long term
growth and development agriculture sector. Beginning of 1980s witnessed a very
significant change in policy of resource allocation to agriculture. It marked the beginning
of decline in public investment in agriculture. In early 1980s more than 4 percent of GDP
agriculture was used in public investments. In the recent years this has fallen to 1.54

41
percent. The decline in public investments in agriculture is believed to be causing adverse
impact on creation of infrastructure in agriculture and on long term growth of farm
output.
Comments of the Committee
4.6 For comments of the Committee please see Para No.1.30 of Chapter I of
this Report.

42
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation No.3
Entire Budgetary Process requires Reformative Changes
5.1 While examining DFG (2006-07) of the DARE, the Committee again
looked into the actual implementation aspect of the recommendation No. 5 and
recommendation No. 4 of their 2nd Report (2004-05) and 10th Report (2004-05) (14th
Lok Sabha) respectively. There were two aspects of these recommendations, i.e., the first
aspect was that the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance should be able to clear
and convey/make available RE/BE grants/funds to the concerned Department sometime
in the month of December or little earlier every year by reforming the tardy Budgetary
Process. And, the second aspect was that as soon as the concerned Department has been
conveyed/provided the funds it should be able to convey the same to the concerned
institutes/divisions immediately and expeditiously in the month of December or a little
earlier so that the institutes/divisions have sufficient time at their disposal for the
optimum utilization of the scarce public funding provided to them for the ultimate
welfare of the nation.
The Department in its Action Taken Reply on the Second Report of the
Committee has stated that “the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Agriculture is valuable. The above recommendation of the Committee was
forwarded to Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. The Ministry of Finance has
intimated that they have noted the recommendation and that all efforts will be made by
them to comply with the recommendation. The Planning Commission also communicated
that the budget allocations for the ongoing schemes/projects are being made on the basis
of approved Annual Plan outlays, which allows a degree of certainty about the
availability of funds to the Department and its lower formation.”
The Department in its Action Taken Reply on the Tenth Report of the Committee
has stated, “the recommendation of the Committee for streamlining the budgetary process
for ensuring that the final Plan and Non-Plan allocations are conveyed to the concerned
Institutes/Divisions by the month of December every year, was referred to Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance. The Planning Commission responded that it will
support any step that may speed up the budgetary process’. The Ministry of Finance
responded that ‘As far as the Budgetary process is concerned, pre-budget meetings are
held during October and November to finalize ceilings after taking into consideration the
expenditure trend till September. Subsequently, the ceilings for RE (both Plan and Non-
Plan) for the current year and BE (Non-Plan) for the next year are communicated to the
respective Ministries towards the end of December and latest by 1st week of January. It is
the endeavor of Ministry of Finance that ceilings be communicated at the earliest so that
the Ministries are able to utilize their funds in an optimal manner’.

43
In the light of the recommendation of the Committee, the Department would take
expeditious steps to distribute and communicate the allocated funds on the receipt of Plan
and Non-Plan budgetary communication from Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance.”
The Committee are, however, perturbed to note that the RE (2004-05) and RE
(2005-06) allocations were received from the Ministry of Finance on 3rd January 2005
and 16 January, 2006 respectively, which not only is in contradiction to the crux of the
recommendations of the Committee in this regard but also is in contradiction to the
repeated positive assurances given by the Department/Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance in this matter. Evidently, for all practical purposes, all the three major parties
involved in the entire budgetary process, namely, the Department, Planning Commission
and the Ministry of Finance have failed to bring about any positive change or reform in
their entire budgetary process during 2004-2005 and 2005-2006 despite their assurances.
The Committee are still sanguine that if all the three parties, namely, the
Department, Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance sit together and seriously
resolve to bring in positive reformative changes in the entire tardy budgetary process,
then only they will actually be successful in bringing in positive and definite reforms in
this regard.
The Committee, therefore, once again emphatically urge the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance/Department to seriously consider the recommendation
of the Committee about the importance of the need to reform the entire tardy budgetary
process to the extent that the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance provide RE
funds to the concerned Institutes/Divisions within the Department in the month of
December or little earlier every year for optimal utilization of scarcely available financial
resources/public money by the concerned Department.
Reply of the Government
5.2 The recommendation of the Committee expressing the concerns about the entire tardy
budgetary process have been sent to Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. The
Department will utilize the opportunity at the finalization of RE 2006-07, wherein the
representatives of Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission participate, to plead for
reformative changes in the entire process.
Comments of the Committee
5.3 For comments of the Committee please see Para No.1.12 of Chapter I of
this Report.
Recommendation No.5
Planning Commission has been ignoring the Genuine Requirement of One-Time
Catch Up Grant of DARE/ICAR

44
5.4 The Committee note that the DARE has a number of
institutions/laboratories, which are more than twenty years old. In order to have excellent
academic standards in the State Agricultural Universities and to have globally
competitive research working environment, the Eighth Plan and Ninth Plan Working
Groups had recommended Rs.300 crore and Rs. 500 crore respectively, one time catch up
grant to meet the critical need for upgrading laboratory equipment, pilot plants, farm and
laboratory facilities, class rooms and audio visual facilities in these institutions.
The Committee also note that during the Eighth Plan Period, Planning
Commission did not provide any catch up grant. During the Ninth Plan, the Planning
Commission had communicated a total outlay of Rs. 3,376.95 crore including Externally
Aided Projects (EAPs) out of which Rs. 400 crore was indicated as one time catch-up
grant but no separate allocations were made for catch up grant, though the Department
had proposed an allocation of Rs.100 crore, Rs.200 crore, Rs. 250 crore and Rs.306.81
crore for the year 1998-99, 1999-2000, 2000-2001 and 2001-02 respectively for the
purpose.
Committee have further been apprised that Planning Commission had
communicated that the amounts indicated for annual plans, also included the amount for
one time catch-up grant, i.e., the Department could meet its requirement of catch up grant
out of their Annual Plan budgets only. Accordingly, the Department had taken a decision
in the year 1999-2000 that the Institutes could spend up to a maximum of 20 per cent of
their respective Plan; during 2000-2001 this percentage limit was raised to 30 per cent
and for 2001-2002, it was decided that the Institutes could incur expenditure under one
time catch up grant to the extent to which they could spare the money after meeting their
other essential research requirements. For State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), these
percentages were 30 per cent for 1999-2000, 40 per cent for 2000-01 and for 2001-02 it
was allowed at par with institutes.
However, the decision of the Department regarding earmarked 20, 30 or 40% of
the budget during 1999-2000 to 2001-02 (end of the Ninth Plan) was not found feasibly
practical and could not be implemented by any Institute/SAU and thus remained only on
paper.
With no solution in hand and unable to comply with the direction of the Planning
Commission to spend all the required amounts from their annual plans for changing the
old age infrastructure for research system to the latest state-of-the-art infrastructure and
research system, the Department projected a requirement of Rs. 1000 crore as One Time
Catch up Grant for the entire Tenth Plan Period. The Planning Commission did not made
any provision for the same in the Tenth Plan outlay of the Department, which was pegged
at Rs. 5368 crore. Thereafter, the Department consistently proposed a requirement of Rs.
200 crore as Catch up Grant in each year i.e. 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 but the
response of the Planning Commission to these proposals was ‘ the catch up grant which
was meant for upgrading the research facility of ICAR ¶s institutions had already been
taken care of while approving the proposals during Tenth Five Year Plan ¶. Due to the
clear-cut stand taken by Planning Commission on this issue, the Department did not
pursue the matter further.

45
The Committee take a serious view of the adamant and rigid stand taken by the
Planning Commission on this issue of One time Catch-up-Grant demanded for the
Department’s requirement of latest State-of-the-art technology for research system and to
provide modern infrastructure for the same and they are also not happy about the
callous/pessimistic attitude of the Department in this matter as for the last two years they
have stopped pursuing the matter with the Planning Commission and they desire the
Department to put an end to their passive attitude and pursue the matter more vigorously
and emphatically giving detailed reasons, with the Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance till the issue of One time Catch-up-Grant is resolved in favour of the
DARE/ICAR.
The Committee, further, unanimously opine that unless the Government is
actually willing and come forward to support DARE/ICAR with this direly needed One-
Time Catch-Up grant to change the obsolete equipments, age old infrastructure, including
laboratories and other related research facilities, as the Scientists and Researchers of
ICAR and all their related institutes/SAUs will continue to suffer for want of latest state-
of-the art equipments and research infrastructure/laboratories as this change over from
old to new technology requires additional funding.
The Committee also feel that although the Government and the people have great
expectations from our agricultural scientists to usher India into Second Green Revolution
and to achieve major breakthroughs in finding out solutions for problems faced by
farmers and people engaged in agrarian and allied sectors apart from bringing total food
and fodder security and overall prosperity and growth, yet the fulfillment of these great
expectations will not be possible unless the Government provide the much desired and
directly needed funds and incentives to ICAR to make it a real apex organization and the
hub of the most talented scientists of the nation.
The Committee once again strongly urge the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance to provide much needed one time catch up grant of Rs. 1000 crore
over and above the annual allocations, in a phased manner to ICAR given its track record
of service to the nation and being privy to agricultural revolution in the country.
Reply of the Government
5.5 The Recommendations have been sent to Planning Commission and
Ministry of Finance. The Government have approved an allocation of Rs.200 crore, in
June, 2006, to strengthen agricultural education in the country, over and above Rs. 720
crore provided earlier for the Xth Plan period. Further, the Government have also
approved another Rs. 200 crore approximately for development of seed infrastructure in
SAUs/ ICAR which will ensure the availability of quality seed, planting material and fish
seed beside generating internal resource.
Comments of the Committee
5.6 For comments of the Committee please see Para No.1.18 of Chapter I of
this Report.

46
Recommendation No.6
Suffering of Plan Schemes of DARE/ICAR owing to 3 to 4 years time taken in
SFC/EFC/CCEA Approval
5.7 The Committee note that as a follow up of directives of the Government of
India, the Department in consultation with Planning Commission applied Zero Base
Budgeting (ZBB) scrutiny to all Plan schemes for their continuation in Tenth Plan with
the Primary objective of reducing the number of Plan Schemes for expeditious Clearance
of Tenth Five Year Plan proposals. In this exercise, original 235 Plan projects, viz. ICAR
Institutes, National Research Centres (NRCs), Project Directorates (PDs), (All India
Coordinated Research Projects) AICRPs etc. have been brought together/integrated into
71 main Plan projects. Out of 71 major Plan Schemes, 25 Plan Schemes were approved
by the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) and 46 Plan Schemes were approved by the
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).
As per the instructions issued by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of
Finance, Plan Schemes/projects costing up to Rs.5 crore could be considered for approval
by the Department itself, i.e. without referring to SFC/EFC. Schemes costing more than
Rs.5 crore and less than Rs.25 crore pertain to SFC, Rs.25 crore and above but less than
Rs. 100 crore pertain to EFC, Rs.100 crore pertain to main EFC and those Rs.200 crore
and above to Public Investment/ main EFC. The respective jurisdiction with respect to
SFC/EFC/CCEA is determined on the basis of total cost of the main project schemes
including its sub-schemes for the entire five-year plan. Any scheme costing Rs.100 crore
and above requires approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).
The Committee observe that the primary objective of reducing the number of 235
plan schemes into 71 main schemes for expeditious clearance, have been defeated to a
large extent as the Department took about 14 months’ time, i.e. from April 2002 to May
2003, for preparation of their SFC/EFC/CCEA proposals. In another 10 months, i.e. from
May 2003 to March 2004, SFC/EFC clearance was obtained and for 6 main schemes,
comprising 33 sub-schemes, costing more than Rs. 100.00 crore, requiring CCEA
clearance/approval, time taken for submitting Agenda Note to Cabinet Secretariat ranged
between 3 months 11 days to 13 months 7 days, and for taking CCEA final approval,
time ranging between 8 days to 4 months, that means, in all, another 14 months time, i.e.
March 2004 to May 2005 were taken for CCEA approval for 5 main schemes and in 1
main schemes said to be new activity, the CCEA approval came in as late as December,
2005.
The Committee, therefore, express their serious concern over such inordinate
delays in which about 2 to 4 years’ precious time out of total 5 years period has been
wasted in getting and providing SFC/EFC/CCEA clearance to the Plan Schemes of the
Tenth Five Year Plan which will come to an end on 31 March 2007 viz. after another 10
months.
The Committee see no justification in such a situation wherein many
schemes/plan projects of the Department have an outlay for a period of 5 years mentioned

47
on paper only but actually cannot be utilised on their major work of planned activities for
a period of 2 to 4 years out of a total 5 year Plan period, till the approval of
SFC/EFC/CCEA remains pending. The Committee urge the Department as well as the
concerned Appraisal Agencies to seriously introspect over the delays, which are so
detrimental for the progressive functioning of a Department like DARE/ICAR.
The Committee also desire that serious and well contemplated steps should be
taken well in time by the Department/Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance/CCEA
to avoid any such recurrences in the forthcoming five year plans and a limited stipulated
time frame should be fixed for each step and stage involved in the entire Budgetary
exercise for the Department as well as for the Planning Commission and
SFC/EFC/CCEA approval.
Reply of the Government
5.8 The recommendation of the Committee has been sent to appraisal agencies
viz. Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. The preparation of XIth Plan
SFC/EFC proposal would depend on many pre-requisites such as constitution and
subsequent recommendations of the XIth Plan Working Group; finalization of the
Approach Paper to XIth Plan by Planning Commission and other related instructions; the
communication of XIth Plan outlay of the Department; in-principle approval of the new
initiatives by the Planning commission etc. Thus, this is a long process of getting cleared
the SFC/EFC proposals, however, the Department will put its maximum efforts to get the
SFC/EFC/CCEA proposals cleared on expeditious basis.
Comments of the Committee
5.9 For comments of the Committee please see Para No.1.21 of Chapter I of
this Report.
NEW DELHI;                 PROF. RAM GOPAL
YADAV
8 March, 2007
Chairman,
17 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on
Agriculture.

48
APPENDIX-I
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE HELD ON THURSDAY, THE 8 TH MARCH, 2007 AT 1500
HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM ¶%·, GROUND FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT
HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
    The Committee sat from 1500 HRS TO 1630 HRS
PRESENT
       Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri  Manoranjan Bhakta
3. Shri   Khagen Das
4. Shri  Deepender Singh Hooda
5. Shri  Hari Rama Jogaiah
6. Shri  M.P.Veerendra Kumar
7. Shri  Baleshwar Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
8. Shri Harish Rawat
9. Shri Vikram Verma
10. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed
11. Shri Datta Meghe
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K.Singh    -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri Hardev Singh   -  Director
3. Shri N.S.Hooda    -  Deputy Secretary
4. Ms. Amita  Walia   -  Under Secretary

49
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman, welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee and requested them to take up the following Memoranda on draft Action
Taken Reports on  Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Agriculture and
Ministry of Food Processing Industries for consideration and adoption:
(1) Memorandum No. 2 regarding 23 rd  Action Taken Report on recommendations
contained in the 18th Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) in respect of Ministry
of Agriculture (Deptt. of Agriculture and Co-operation)
(2) Memorandum No. 3 regarding 24th Action Taken Report on recommendations
contained in the 19h Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) in respect of Ministry
of Agriculture (Deptt. of Agricultural Research and Education)
(3) Memorandum No. 4 regarding 25th Action Taken Report on recommendations
contained in the 20th Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) in respect of Ministry
of Agriculture (Deptt. of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
(4) Memorandum No. 5 regarding 26 th Action Taken Report on recommendations
contained in the 21st  Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) in respect of Ministry
of Food Processing Industries.
2 The Committee then considered and adopted the draft Action Taken Reports with
minor additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee.
3. The Committee, thereafter, authorized the Chairman to present the above-
mentioned Reports to the House on a date and time convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.

50
APPENDIX-II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON
THE NINETEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA)
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     9
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
Accepted by the Government
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 7
T o t a l         4
Percentage        44.45%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
Serial No. NIL
T o t a l         N I L
Percentage         0%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
 of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee
Serial Nos.  8 and 9
T o t a l         2
Percentage        22.22%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited
Serial Nos.  3, 5 and 6
T o t a l         3
Percentage        33.33%