STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2004) 
7
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005)  
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004)} 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
February, 2005/Phalguna, 1925 (Saka) 
 

 2
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
 
(2004) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005) 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
the Third Report of the Standing Committee On Agriculture (2004) 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 2.3.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  3.3.2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2005/Phalguna, 1925 (Saka) 

 4
CONTENTS 
  
           
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
CHAPTER I   Report  
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have   
   Been accepted by the Government  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the   
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   Of the Government’s replies  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect   
   Of  which replies of the Government have  
   Not been accepted by the Committee  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of   
   Which final replies of the Government are  
   Still awaited  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee    
            held on 25th January , 2005 
 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the   
  Recommendations contained in the Third Report 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2004). 
 

 5
 COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE  
(2004-2005) 
 
    Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri G.L. Bhargava 
5. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7. Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan 
8. Shri Lalchand Kol 
9. Shri Khagen Das 
10. Shri Dharmendra 
11. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
12. Shri Raghunath Jha 
13. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
14. Shri Prakash V. Patil 
15. Shri A. Ravichandran 
16. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
17. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
18. Shri Harihar Swain 
19. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
20. Shri Mahboob Zahedi 
21. # Smt. Anuradha Choudhary 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
23. Shri Harish Rawat 
24. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
25. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
26. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
27. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
28. Shri Datta Meghe 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
30. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
31. *Dr. M.S.Gill 
 
 

 6
Chaudhary Munawwar Hassan  ceased to be the Member of this Committee 
owing to his nomination to  the Sta nding  Committee  on Labour  w.e.f.16.8.04 
vide  L.S. Bt.Pt.-II dt.16.8.04 
 
# Smt. Anuradha Choudhary  has been nominated to this Committee  w.e.f. 
30.8.2004 
vide  L.S. Bt.Pt-II, dt. 30.8.2004 
 
Shri Raashid Alvi ceased to be the Me mber of this Committee owing to his 
nomination  to the Committee on Personnel,  Public Grievances, Law & Justice 
w.e.f  31.8.2004 vide  R.S.  Bt Pt-II  dt. 31.8.2004 
 
*Dr. M.S. Gill has been nominated to this Committee w.e.f 31.8.2004 vide R. S. 
Bt  Pt-II  dt. 31.8.2004 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Devender Singh   - Director 
 3. Shri K.D.Muley   - Under Secretary 
4. Smt. Ratna Bhagwani   - Assistant Director 

 7
   
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-
2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, present this Seventh Report on Action Taken by Government 
on the recommendations/observations contained in the Third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005) on Demands for Grants 
(2004-2005) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying).  
 
2. The Third Report of the Sta nding Committee on Agriculture 
(2004-2005) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of 
Agriculture, (Department of Anim al Husbandry and Dairying) was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 17.8.2004 and la id in Rajya Sabha on the same 
day.  The Department of Animal Hu sbandry and Dairying was requested 
to furnish action taken replies of the Government to recommendations 
contained in the Third Report.  The replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received. 
 
3. The Committee considered the ac tion taken replies furnished by 
the Government, approved the draft comments and adopted the Seventh 
Report at their sitting held on 25
th January, 2005.  Minutes  of the sittings 
are placed in Appendix-I. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Third Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
February, 2005             Chairman 
Phalguna, 1925(Saka)        Standing Committee on Agriculture. 
  
  

 8
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on recommendations contained in  the Third Report (T hirteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005) on Demands for Grants (2004-
2005) of the Ministry of Agri culture (Department of Anim al Husbandry and Dairying) 
which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on  17.8.2004. 
 
1.2 Action taken replies have been received fr om the Government in respect of all the 
21 recommendations contained in the Report.   These have been categorized as 
follows :- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II of the Report) 
 
Recommendations Sl. Nos.  1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,12,13,16 and 18  
(Total-14) 
 
  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III of the Report) 
 
Recommendations Sl. No. 11, 20 and 21  (Total - 3) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV of the 
Report to be commented upon in Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 17 and 19  (Total-2) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 14 and 15   (Total-2) 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
other recommendations. 
 
 
 
 

 9
  
RECOMMENDATION  SERIAL NO.1 
 
Plan allocation for the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
 
1.4 The Committee note that the Department  of Animal Husbandry and Dairying has 
been provided Rs.2,500 crore for the Tenth Plan.  Keeping in view the avowed 
commitment of the Government to double the food production by the year 2007, there is 
a stronger need to increase the production of  livestock, fish and fishery products.  
Needless to say, this calls for sustained and concerted efforts on the part of the 
Department for rapid genetic upgradation of cattle and buffaloes considering the 
enormous potential contribution of this sector  to the food basket in the form of milk, 
eggs, meat and fish and the obvious capacity to  meet the animal protein requirement of 
ever growing human population. 
 The Committee note that the Tenth Plan outlay of Rs.2500 crore for the 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Da irying constitutes a meagre 0.28 per cent 
compared to 0.48 per cent of the total plan as  in Ninth Five Year Plan period.  The value 
output from Livestock and Fisheries Sector was 28.8 per cent of the total Agriculture and 
Allied Sectors whereas the contribution of these Sectors in the total GDP during 2002-03 
was 6.5 per cent. 
 To achieve the goals of the Tenth Plan, the Committee recommend that the 
Planning Commission should make higher allo cation to the Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying for implementation of various schemes and programmes which 
are spread across the country and are capable  of regenerating the economy specially the 
rural economy.  The Committee also expect the Department to utilise 100 per cent of Plan 
funds during the remaining years of 10 th Plan demonstrating their sincerity and 

 10
commitment which will certainly go a long way in uplifting the rural economy and bring 
about a new economic resurgence and extend  its benefits to th e rural populace with 
spread of prosperity. 
Reply of the Government 
1.5 The Plan allocation of the Department  of Animal Husba ndry and Dairying has 
been enhanced from Rs.500.00 crore to Rs.600.00 crore for the year 2004-05 by the 
Planning Commission.  The Department is taking all possible steps for full utilization of 
the Plan Outlay.  Out of the total outlay of Rs.2,500.00 crore for the Tenth Plan, about 
Rs.512.00 crore has been spent in the first two years of the Tenth Plan.  Current year’s 
outlay of Rs.600.00 crore is expected to be almost fully utilized.  All efforts will be made 
to utilize balance amount of about Rs.1400.00 crores in the remaining two years of Tenth 
Plan. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.6 The Committee are happy to note that th e plan allocation of the Department 
of Animal Husbandry and Dairying has been enhanced from Rs. 500.00 crore to Rs. 
600.00 crore for the year 2004-2005.  The Commi ttee, however, intend to watch the 
performance of the Department earnestly with a view to ensure that the enhanced 
allocation of Rs. 600.00 crore is gainfully  utilized during the year 2004-05, thus 
paving the way for proper utilization of the balance of about Rs. 1,400 crore of the 
allocated funds during the last two years of the Tenth Plan. 
 
 
 
 
 

 11
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.4 
 
Assistance to State Poultry Duck Farms 
 
1.7 The Committee note that earlier the Sche me of “Assistance to State Poultry Farm” 
was implemented in the North Eastern States  including Sikkim and eight other States as 
pilot project scheme during 9 th Plan.  On the recommendation of the Committee in their 
20th Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of  the Department, the Scheme is now 
being implemented in all the States / UT s from the year 2002-03.  The Committee find 
that during 2002-03, the Department spent as much as Rs.10.67 crore against the Budget 
Estimates of Rs.5.00 crore by re-appropriating th e allocations for other schemes as more 
proposals than expected were received from the State Governments during 2002-03, 
Furthermore, the Committee observe with satisfaction that as against the target of 
assisting 8 farms during 2002-03, the Department assisted 15 farms in the North Eastern 
States and during 2003-04, the Department also assisted 15 farms partially. 
The Committee feel that in order to achie ve the target of fully assisting 15 farms 
during 2003-04 and also to achieve the target  fixed for 2004-05, more funds are required.  
The funds earmarked for 2003-04 and 2004-05 app ear far from adequate to achieve the 
target fixed. 
  
Taking note of the fact that the scheme aims at socio-economic development of 
the poorest of the poor in rura l areas specially women, the Committee, feel, that suitable 
higher allocation may be made at RE stage of  the year 2004-05 as well as BE for coming 
years of 10th Plan period for the Scheme. 
 

 12
Reply of the Government 
1.8 The Department is making concerted effo rts for making necessary provisions for 
the scheme as suggested by the Committee.  Slight additional allocation for the scheme 
has been sought for RE 2004-05 and the Department will make efforts to ensure higher 
allocation for BE for coming years of Tenth Plan period. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.9 The Committee would like to be apprised of the response received by the 
Department from the Planning Commission for enhancement of funds. 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.7 
 
Alternative site for Central Sheep Breeding Farm,  Hissar 
 
1.10 The Committee note that the long pending i ssue of lease rent with regard to the 
Central Sheep Breeding Farm at Hissar has not yet been resolved with the Government of 
Haryana.  The Committee note that the Department is not able to achieve the targets laid 
down due to shortage of land.  The Committee in their 20 th Report on Demands for 
Grants (1999-2000) of the Department r ecommended that the Central Sheep Breeding 
Farm should be immediately shifted to another suitable place so that the farm could carry 
on its activities so as to realize the inte nded objectives.  The Co mmittee were earlier 
informed in the 3rd Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000) that in case 
the Government of Haryana did not accept the terms and conditions of lease rent, the 
farm may be closed down.  Since the availa bility of alternative suitable location was 
doubtful, it was decided to locate a suitable place preferably in th e hilly region of the 
country comprising the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttaranchal 

 13
for breeding sheep for fine work.  However, due to the prevailing drought situation, the 
shifting of the farm could not materialize.  The Committee, therefore, again recommend 
that the Government should review the situat ion and take steps to shift the farm to 
another suitable place within 6 months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament 
to achieve the objectives of the Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
1.11 The Department is trying vigorously to  resolve the issue of long pending lease 
rent with the Government of Ha ryana.  This issue has also been taken up at the level of 
Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana.  Consultation with the hilly States of 
Uttaranchal, Himachal and Jammu & Kashmi r was also initiated for finding a way for 
transferring the exotic sheep at Central Sheep Breeding Farm, Hissar to these hilly States.  
However, due to the lukewarm response of the hilly States, the Expert Committee, 
constituted to assess the need of rams/buc ks for the States, has suggested that the 
breeding programme of the farm be synchroniz ed with the programme s in the States of 
Rajasthan, Karnataka or other States intere sted in Rambouillet X Nali or Corriedale  X 
Sonadi crosses.  The Department is also tr ying to achieve the targ et during the current 
financial year by following up the matter strongly with major sheep rearing States.   
Comments of the Committee 
1.12 The Committee are distressed to note that the Central Sheep Breeding Farm 
at Hissar is yet to be made fully operational due to certai n bottlenecks in finalizing 
the lease rent with the Government of Ha ryana.  The Committee also note that the 
efforts made by the Department to explore suitable land elsewhere has also not 
borne fruit due to various reasons. Cons idering the suggestions of the Expert 

 14
Committee constituted by the Department to  assess the need of rams/bucks in the 
country for synchronization of the breeding programmes with certain other 
programmes of the States, the Committee feel that the target for sheep breeding can 
certainly be achieved if vigorous, sustai ned and coordinated steps are made.  The 
Committee would, therefore, like the Depar tment to take up the matter again with 
the State of Haryana at highest level.  Since considerable time has elapsed and the 
matter cannot brook further delay, the Commi ttee expect the Government to decide  
the fate of Central Sheep Breeding Farm at Hissar within six months of presentation 
of this report.   
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.8 
 
Assistance to States for Integrated Piggery Development 
 
1.13 The Department of Animal Husbandr y and Dairying implemented the Piggery 
Development upto the Ninth Pl an.  The Scheme aims at strengthening Government Pig 
Breeding Farms for development of piggery  by providing 100 per cent grants-in-aid.  
However, the Department of Animal Husb andry and Dairying informed the Committee 
during examination of Demands for Grants (2003-04) that due to huge unspent amount 
during the 9 th Plan, the Planning Commission reco mmended the discontinuation of the 
scheme.  In reply to the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Agriculture in their 42 nd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)  for revival of the 
scheme, the Committee were informed th at evaluation of Integrated Piggery 
Development Scheme is yet to be received from National Agricultural Bank of Rural 
Development (NABARD).  The Committee note that the Draft Report has already been 
discussed in depth by the Department with  NABARD and the concerned States on 12 th 

 15
July, 2004.  The Committee would like to point  out that in North Eastern Region, pig 
meat is the staple food and every household re ars pigs for its dairy requirements.  They, 
therefore, recommend that the Department shoul d make tangible efforts to get the final 
report from NABARD and start this very impor tant scheme during the current financial 
year at least in the high demand areas including the North Eastern States. 
Reply of the Government 
1.14 The Department has received the final evaluation report on Integrated Piggery 
Development Scheme from NABARD on 16 th August, 2004.  A copy of the report has 
also been submitted to th e Planning Commission on 31 st August, 2004 with a request to 
accord in-principle approval for the proposed scheme on Piggery Development.  
Realizing the importance of this scheme in  North-Eastern region,  the Department is 
making all efforts to initiate a new scheme on piggery development 
Comments of the Committee 
1.15 The Committee desire that the matter sh ould be vigorously pursued by the 
Department and the Committee apprised of the time schedule for implementation of 
the proposed Integrated Piggery Development Scheme. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
 
Conservation of Threatened Breed 
1.16 The Committee note that the Departme nt has started a new scheme for the 
conservation of threatened breed, i.e. those breeds whose popul ation has come below 
10,000.  It has been observed that during the year 2002-03 the Budget allocated by the 
Department for the scheme was Rs. 50 lakh against an expenditure of Rs. 2.96 crore.  The 
reason for the excess expenditure was that the Department had many proposals from 

 16
different States for the above scheme.  According to the Department, since utilisation 
certificates were not received fr om the States/UTs, the allocations was scaled  down to 
Rs. 50 lakh for the period 2003-04.  The Co mmittee note that the Department has 
sanctioned Rs. 6 crore during 2004-05 for conservation of the threatened breeds. The 
Committee would specifically like to draw the attention of the Ministry to the vanishing 
species of `Chakarnagari’ goat, and `Bhadwari’ buffalo in the Yamuna -Chambal basin so 
as to save them from extinction.  The Committee, therefore, recommed that the 
Department should consider the proposals of all the interested States having the breeding 
tract of the threatened breeds.  The Committee desire and ensure that the funds allocated 
during 2004-05 are utilised fruitfully to realise the intended objectives by making special 
efforts. 
Reply of the Government 
1.17 Out of an allocation of Rs.600.00 la kh for the year 2004-05, an amount of 
Rs.170.70 lakh has been released till 30 th  September, 2004.  Also, proposals worth 
Rs.414.74 lakh are in various stag es of examination and proc essing.  More proposals are 
being invited. The Department, though,  has not received any proposal for conservation 
of Chakarnagari goat.  It is, however, likely that Chakarnagari is synonym of one of the 
existing breeds, as the name does not figure in the book on Animal Genetic Resources of 
India – Sheep & Goat, published by National Bureau of Animal Resources. 
 
 In so far as Bhadwari buffaloes are conc erned, it is clarified that the breeds of 
buffaloes are not being covered under this scheme. 
 
 

 17
Comments of the Committee 
1.18 The Committee deplore the casual ma nner in which the Department has 
furnished their Action Taken Reply with regard to preservation of `Chakarnagari’ 
goat and Bhadwari’ buffaloes, the twin vanis hing species of animals in the Genetic 
plane.  It is all the more distressing that the Department did not even consider it 
appropriate enough to take up the matter with the ICAR responsible for compiling 
and updating the Animal Genetic Resou rces of India.  The Committee would 
specifically like the Department to have a detailed survey done in this behalf in 
consultation with the ICAR and take suitable measures for the preservation of these 
threatened species. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.13 
 
Integrated Dairy Development Project in Non Operation Flood, Backward and Hilly 
Areas 
 
1.19 As the name of the scheme suggests the project is being implemented in 
backward, hilly and tribal areas which were  left out of Operation Flood Programme 
because they were not considered suitable for development of dairying.  In order to bring 
the states and regions left out within the be neficial fold of the scheme, the Government 
launched Integrated Dairying Development Pr oject (IDDP).  Under the IDDP scheme, 
those areas are covered which have very low or no infrastr ucture for Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying. 
 The main objectives of the IDDP are to  increase milk production, to procure, 
process and market milk in a cost effective manner and to ensure remunerative prices to 
milk producers, generate additional employ ment opportunities, improve social economic 
and nutritional status of resi dents living in these areas.  For the implementation of this 

 18
project, the Government allocated Rs.175 cr ore, out of which only just Rs.16.32 crore 
was spent in the first year  2002-03 and Rs.16.43 crore in th e year 2003-04 which comes 
to a total of Rs.32.75 crore.  The Committee are unhappy to note the dismal performance 
of the scheme and apprehend that at the given pace of expenditure the funds may have to 
be surrendered.  The Committee feel that the scheme has not been sufficiently 
popularized among the State Governments. 
 The Committee, therefore, desire that st eps should be made to persuade the State 
Governments to come up with more proposal s in the coming years with a view to 
improving the socio-economic and nutritional status of the people.  The Committee 
expect the Department to give specific attention to North-Eastern States, hilly regions and 
the remote areas, for the balanced and harmonious development and growth of all regions 
of the country.  
Reply of the Government 
1.20 The Department has been making concerted efforts to monitor the projects 
sanctioned to various States and persuade th e State Governments to come up with more 
proposals under this Centrally Sponsored Scheme.  In the meetings held by the Technical 
Management Committees set up under the scheme in the States, the State Governments 
are impressed upon the importance of implementation of the scheme and the benefits that 
would accrue in terms of improvement in so cio-economic and nutritional status of the 
backward areas of the country.  The Departme nt has been paying specific attention to 
North Eastern States, hilly regions and remo te areas as suggested by the Committee and 
has sanctioned 16 projects for the North East ern States, including Sikkim.  Also, projects 

 19
for hilly areas like Jammu & Ka shmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal and tribal areas of 
Madhya Pradesh and Chattisgarh have been approved under the scheme. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.21 The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation, the Department 
has sanctioned certain projects for the remot e, backward and hilly regions of the 
country.  The Committee expect that the im plementation of these projects would be 
strictly monitored so that the benefits of the projects reach the targeted population 
and the Department make all out integrated efforts including sanction of additional 
projects for these areas with a view to bringing about balanced and harmonious 
development of the country.  The Committee also note that the Department has been 
conspicuously silent about the extremely tardy pace of expenditure under the 
scheme fuelling their apprehension whether the total allo cation of Rs. 175 crore will 
be utilized during the remaining years of the 10
th Plan. 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.17 
 
Strengthening of Database and Information Networking for Fisheries Sector 
 
1.22 The Committee note that the scheme Stre ngthening of Database and Information 
Networking for Fisheries Sector  was launched in December 2003 at an estimated cost of 
Rs.24.50 crore.  The Department has informed th at the earlier Central Sector Scheme on 
Development of Inland Fisheries Statistics was initially prepared with a total outlay of 
Rs.45.00 crore.  The Committee note that the earlier Scheme on Development of Inland 
Fisheries Statistics had only one component  on Catch Assessment Survey of Inland 

 20
Fisheries which was in operation in 19 States  while the new scheme consists of Catch 
Assessment of the earlier scheme along w ith the six new components on information 
networking, Geographical Information System  using satellite data , training Census on 
important attributes on inland and mari ne fisheries and strengthening of Catch 
Assessment Surveys for estimation of marine fish production. 
 The Committee are surprised to note that  when the earlier scheme had only one 
component, it was formulated with an outlay of Rs.45.00 crore for 10 th Plan and on the 
other hand when the Scheme was restructured with additional components in consultation 
with the Planning Commission and Standing Committee on Finance outlay for its was 
lowered down to Rs.24.5 crore for the Tenth Plan. 
 The Committee further note that an a llocation of Rs.15.00 crore has been made as 
BE for 2004-05.  The Department proposes to  spend the money for procurement of 
computers under the component of IT and pr ocurement of satellite images and gas 
equipment by GIS besides conduct of fisheries census.  The Committee visualize that all 
these activities can be completed within th e time frame of the financial year 2004-05.  
They expect that the amount earmarked for the current financial year should be fully 
utilized leaving no scope for under-utilization of funds.  Th e Committee also desire that 
budget allocation for this scheme should also be increased in the coming years of 10 th 
Plan period so that the targets set for the revised scheme comprising 7 components 
covering the inland as well as marine fisheries are achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
1.23 The Department, till the Ninth Plan, was implementing a Central Sector Scheme 
on Development of Inland Fisheries Statis tics, which was modified as Centrally 

 21
Sponsored Scheme on Strengthening of Data base and Information Networking  for the 
Fisheries Sector involving total financial implication of Rs.45.00 crore for the entire 
Tenth Plan period. But late r on, it was revised in cons ultation with the Planning 
Commission and finally approved by the St anding Finance Committee in December, 
2003 at an outlay of Rs.24.50 crore for the Tenth Plan.  However, the Planning 
Commission approved continuation of the ear lier scheme on Development of Inland 
Fisheries Statistics till the new scheme is approved by the competent authority for 
implementation during the Tenth Plan.   
 To persuade the States / other implemen ting agencies to implement the scheme in 
a time bound manner four video conferences have been organized during the current 
financial year so far.  In order to monitor an d to sort out technical issues related to the 
scheme, a Technical Monitoring Committee (TMC) has been constituted.  TMC has 
decided that modifications in the met hodology are needed taking into account its 
technical as well as financial feasibility.  Moreover, the representatives from different 
State Governments stated that due to delay in creation of post under the scheme, it is not 
possible to submit economically viable an d technically feasible proposal seeking 
financial assistance for IT and other compone nts during this financial year.  The Budget 
provision for the year 2004-05 has been pr oposed to be revised from Rs.15.00 crore to 
Rs.6.20 crore.  However, the Department e xpects to fully utilize the overall outlay 
approved for the scheme during Tenth Plan by the terminal year of the Plan (2006-07). 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.24 The Committee are unhappy to note that  Budget provision made for 2004-05 
for procurement of computers and satell ite images and gas equipment has been 

 22
proposed to be drastically reduced  from Rs. 15.00 crore to Rs. 6.26 crore.  
Apparently, such a drastic reduction w ill adversely affect the programme of 
Database and Information Networking for the Fisheries S ector. The Committee 
hope that the Department will streamlin e its planning and the methodology of 
projecting requirement of funds and fulfil it s assurance to fully utilize the overall 
plan outlay for the scheme by the terminal year of the 10th Plan.  
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.19 
 
Setting up of a Separate Ministry of Animal Husbandry and Dairying and Fisheries 
 
1.25 The Committee, during the examination of Demands for Grants (2004-05), noted 
the declining trend of allocati on of utlisation of funds year  after year and huge unspent 
amount surrendered by the Department.  It  hardly needs reite ration that Animal 
Husbandry is such a vital sector of our economy whic h has enormous potential of 
generating income and to improve the economic status of the people by providing gainful 
employment especially to small and marginal  farmers and the weaker sections including 
poor women. 
 The Committee have been repeatedly r ecommending in their earlier Reports for 
creation of an Independent Ministry of An imal Husbandry and Dairying  The Committee 
find that most of the States have a separate  Ministry for Animal Husbandry/Fisheries.  
The Committee have been informed (47 th Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 
(2003-04) that the Department has again considered this proposal but has not found it 
appropriate to moves this proposal again at this stage. 
 Having regard to the fact the animal husbandry has vast potential to bring a new 
economic resurgence by generating countle ss job opportunities, the Committee reiterate 

 23
that the Government should consider to create  a separate Ministry of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries for the development of  this extremely important sector of our 
economy. 
Reply of the Government 
1.26 The Department fully agrees with th e view of the Committee that animal 
husbandry has vast potential to improve th e economic status of people by generating 
considerable job opportunities.  However, the animal husbandry and agriculture sectors 
are complementary to each other and require constant coordination between Department 
of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and 
DARE, which are all part of Agriculture Ministry.  Therefore, it may not be feasible to 
create a separate Ministry for Animal Husbandry / Fisheries.  The issue of upgradation of 
the Department to a full fledged Ministry was also considered at the level of Hon’ble 
Agriculture Minister in the light of recommendation of the Committee, but adequate 
justification was not found for the upgradation.   
Comments of the Committee 
1.27 The Committee note that the proposal for a separate Ministry of Animal 
Husbandry has not been well received by the Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying.  The reasons are understandable. The Committee, howev er, feel that in 
order to make the proposal feasible the s ubjects like Dairy, milk processing, waste 
utilization and organic-farming should be transferred to a new Ministry which may 
be called Ministry of Animal Husbandry, Fisheries and Organic Farming.  This will 
send the right signal about th e importance of organic farm ing, particularly in the 
context of the WTO regime. 
 

 24
CHAPTER II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION  SERIAL NO.1 
 
Plan allocation for the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
 
2.1 The Committee note that the Department  of Animal Husbandry and Dairying has 
been provided Rs.2500 crore for the Tenth Plan.  Keeping in view the avowed 
commitment of the Government to double the food production by the year 2007, there is 
a stronger need to increase the production of  livestock, fish and fishery products.  
Needless to say, this calls for sustained and concerted efforts on the part of the 
Department for rapid genetic upgradation of cattle and buffaloes considering the 
enormous potential contribution of this sector  to the food basket in the form of milk, 
eggs, meat and fish and the obvious capacity to  meet the animal protein requirement of 
ever growing human population. 
 The Committee note that the Tenth Plan outlay of Rs.2500 crore for the 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Da irying constitutes a meagre 0.28 per cent 
compared to 0.48 per cent of the total plan as  in Ninth Five Year Plan period.  The value 
output from Livestock and Fisheries Sector was 28.8 per cent of the total Agriculture and 
Allied Sectors whereas the contribution of these Sectors in the total GDP during 2002-03 
was 6.5 per cent. 
 To achieve the goals of the Tenth Plan, the Committee recommend that the 
Planning Commission should make higher allo cation to the Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying for implementation of various schemes and programmes which 
are spread across the country and are capable  of regenerating the economy specially the 
rural economy.  The Committee also expect th e Department to 100 per cent utilization of 

 25
Plan funds during the remaining years of 10 th Plan demonstrating their sincerity and 
commitment which will certainly go a long way in uplifting the rural economy and bring 
about a new economic resurgence and extend its benefits to the rural polulace spread of 
prosperity. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
2.2 The Plan allocation of the Department  of Animal Husba ndry and Dairying has 
been enhanced from Rs.500.00 crore to Rs.600.00 crore for the year 2004-05 by the 
Planning Commission.  The Department is taking all possible steps for full utilization of 
the Plan Outlay.  Out of the total outlay of Rs.2500.00 crore for the Tenth Plan, about 
Rs.512.00 crore has been spent in the first two years of the Tenth Plan.  Current year’s 
outlay of Rs.600.00 crore is expected to be almost fully utilized.  All efforts will be made 
to utilize balance amount of about Rs.1400.00 crores in the remaining two years of Tenth 
Plan. 
2.3 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.6 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.2 
Production and Supply of Bulls by Central Cattle Breeding Farm 
2.4 It has been stated in the Performan ce Budget (2004-05) that Cattle and Buffalo 
bulls produced at the Central  Cattle Breeding Farms are supplied to the State Cattle and 
Buffalo Breeding agencies for their artificial breeding programmes.  Out of the total bulls 
produced, only selected bull calfs are supp lied to State Breeding Agencies.  The 
Committee observe that the Department ta rgeted to supply 765 bulls during 2001-2004 
but it could supply only 423 bulls to the States. 

 26
 The Committee recommend that the targ et for bull calves production should be 
increased so that sufficient number of bull calv es of high genetic merit can be distributed 
to the States as per target fixed.  The Comm ittee further note that plan allocations during 
2004-05 has been increased to Rs.8.60 crore ag ainst BE of Rs.6.00 crore during 2003-04.  
The Department in reply to a question raised by the Committee informed that the 
enhanced allocation for Central Cattle Breedi ng Farm is primarily towards infrastructural 
development necessary for production of hi gh quality bulls.  The Committee hope that 
the enhanced allocation will help the Department required number of high quality-bulls. 
 The Committee also desire that the enhanced funds for the purpose should be 
fully utlised and all activities regarding in frastructure development for production of 
bulls should be completed within the timeframe of this year. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
2.5 The Department runs seven cattle breeding farms at Alamadhi (Tamil Nadu), 
Andesh Nagar (Uttar Pradesh), Chiplima & Sunabeda (Orissa), Dhamrod (Gujarat), 
Hessarghatta (Karnataka) and Suratgarh (Rajasthan).  These farms have been set up 
primarily with the objective of producing and distributing high quality bulls for breeding 
purposes.  The details of the bull calves production targets and achievements by the cattle 
breeding farms are as below: 
Year Target Achievement 
2000-01 350 362 
2001-02 350 370 
2002-03 350 351 
2003-04 275 307 

 27
 The targets of bull-calf production are  decided keeping in view the demand of the 
States in line with the implementation of  National Project for Cattle and Buffalo 
Breeding and taking into account the ability of  the State Governments participating in 
this programme to use the bull calves in their breeding programmes.    
The Department expects to complete the developmental work within the financial 
year 2004-05, as desired by the Committee.   
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.3 
Under Performance of Central Cattle Breeding Farms (CCBFs) 
2.6 The Committee note that seven Cent ral Cattle Breeding Farms (CCBFs) are 
located in different agro climatic regions for maintaining herds of some important 
indigenous and exotic cattle breeds, production and distribu tion of superior pedigreed 
bulls for breeding programme in various States.  The Committee note that out of the total 
10th Plan outlay of Rs.70 crore for the Central Cattle Development Organisations, the 
Department could utlilse only Rs.15.89 crore in the first two years of 10 th Plan which is 
22 per cent of the total outlay.  One of the reasons put forth by the Department for under-
utilisation of funds was under performance of three farms namely CCBF, Suratgarh, 
Alamadhi and Chiplima. 
 The Committee had recommended in their 42 nd Report on Demands for Grants 
(2003-04) that immediate steps should be taken by the Department to improve the 
working of CCBFs.  In response to th e recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department constituted a Management Committee and Advisory Committee towards 
formulation of appropriate technical program me, better investment Planning and higher 

 28
utilization of funds.  The Expert Committee after examining the possibilities of revival of 
farms, declared these units fit for closure. 
The Committee are pained to note that the Department has not succeeded in 
improving the performance of these three farm s up to a satisfactory level.  However, 
considering the laudable objectives for which these cattle breeding farms were set up and 
also considering the greater need for produc tion and distribution of superior pedigreed 
bulls, the Committee feel strongl y that all out efforts should  be made to revive the 
functioning of these farms.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
2.7 The Department shares the concern of the Committee regarding the under-
performance of the cattle breeding farms and is making all possible efforts to improve the 
functioning of the farms.  The Management Committee and Advisory Committee 
constituted by the Department  are regularly  meeting to assess the performance of the 
farms and take decisions for in itiation of efforts for improvement. Apart from this, these 
farms are also being frequently visited by th e technical officers of the Department  for 
monitoring their performance.
  
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.4 
Assistance to State Poultry Duck Farms 
2.8 The Committee note that earlier the Sche me of “Assistance to State Poultry Farm” 
was implemented in the North Eastern States  including Sikkim and eight other States as 
pilot project scheme during 9 th Plan.  On the recommendation of the Committee in their 
20th Report on Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of  the Department, the Scheme is now 
being implemented in all the States / UT s from the year 2002-03.  The Committee find 

 29
that during 2002-03, the Department spent as much as Rs.10.67 crore against the Budget 
Estimates of Rs.5.00 crore by re-appropriating th e allocations for other schemes as more 
proposals than expected were received from the State Governments during 2002-03,  
Furthermore, the Committee observe with satisfaction that as against the target of 
assisting 8 farms during 2002-03, the Department assisted 15 farms in the North Eastern 
States and during 2003-04, the Department also assisted 15 farms partially. 
The Committee feel that in order to achie ve the target of fully assisting 15 farms 
during 2003-04 and also to achieve the target  fixed for 2004-05, more funds are required.  
The funds earmarked for 2003-04 and 2004-05 app ear far from adequate to achieve the 
target fixed. 
  
Taking note of the fact that the scheme aims at socio-economic development of 
the poorest of the poor in rura l areas specially women, the Committee, feel, that suitable 
higher allocation may be made at RE stage of  the year 2004-05 as well as BE for coming 
years of 10th Plan period for the Scheme. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
2.9 The Department is making concerted effo rts for making necessary provisions for 
the scheme as suggested by the Committee.  Slight additional allocation for the scheme 
has been sought for RE 2004-05 and the Department will make efforts to ensure higher 
allocation for BE for coming years of Tenth Plan period. 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.9 of Chapter I of the 
report. 

 30
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.5 
Foot and Mouth-Disease Control Programme 
2.10 During the Ninth Plan, the Programme for Foot and Mouth Control envisaged 
vaccination of high yielding indigenous cross breed and exotic cattle owned by people of 
weaker sections by sharing the cost of vaccination by Government of India, State 
Governments/UTs and the Beneficiaries on a 25:25:50 basis.  The Committee in their 
earlier Reports recommended fo r changing the funding pattern so as to make it 100 per 
cent centrally funded.  However, the Co mmittee find that the schemes now being 
implemented  on75:25 basis between the Centre and the States as a component of macro-
management centrally sponsored scheme Assistance to States for Control of Animal 
Disease (ASCAD) in which immunization ag ainst economically important livestock 
disease, including FMD has been envisaged as the main activity.  On the other hand, the 
Committee find that the Department has initia ted a new programme in the second year of 
10th Plan on Foot and Mouth Dise ase in order to  gives thrust to Foot and Mouth Disease 
Control Programme in specific areas by making it 100 per cent Centrally funded. 
 The Committee further note that no separate targets are fixed for these two 
programmes.  Against the 9
th Plan physical target of  130 million vaccinations, the 
Department could achieve only of 105 million v accinations which is 87 per cent of the 
target.  Now, the Department is imple menting two programmes on Foot and Mouth 
Disease.  The 10 th Plan target is to carry out 140 million lakh doses.  Since the 
programme is valuable for the protection of high yielding indigenous crossbred and 
exotic livestock, the Department should s eek higher budgetary allocations instead of 
slashing down the 10 th Plan targets for two programme s.  The Committee, therefore, 

 31
recommend that physical target for 10 th Plan be stepped up a nd that the Department 
should come up with higher budget estimate in the coming years of 10 th Plan to control 
the Foot and Mouth Disease which poses serious danger to our livestock. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
2.11 The Department has noted the concern of the Committee regarding the need to 
enhance the allocation of the scheme for effective control of  this livestock disease and 
will make all possible efforts to step up the budgetary allocation and physical target of 
this scheme.  Based on the Annual Action Plan (2004-05) submitted by the States, 40 
million FMD vaccinations have been proposed.  In the remaining years of the Tenth Plan, 
the targets are likely to be hi gher as more and more States  have started opting for FMD 
vaccination programme. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.6 
National Veterinary Biological Quality Control Centre 
 
2.12 The Committee note that the National/Veterinary Biological Products Quality 
Control Centre Scheme was approved during th e Sixth Five Year Plan.  This National 
Centre, after its establishment, would approve  the manufacturing methods of vaccine and 
inspect and control the final products including the imported products.  This would also 
encourage export of vaccine and biologicals to the neighbouring countries and thus help 
earning foreign exchange.  After a lapse of so many years, the Government have now 
acquired a tract of land in Baghpat District where the civil work had started during 2002-
03.  The Committee have been informed in the 42 nd Report on Demands for Grants 
(2002-03) of the Department that Civil work  on the Institute is in progress and the 
laboratory is likely to be completed by 2005-06 and testing of vaccine will start by 2006-

 32
07.  The Committee are disappointed to note that only Rs.653.47 have been spent so far 
on the scheme as against the project cost of Rs.21.10 crore.  Appa rently, the project 
seems to be a non-starter and the Committee wonder how the Department will utilize 
such a huge amount in setting the laboratory by 2006-07 given the pace of expenditure 
during first two years.  The Committee, th erefore, recommend that vigorous efforts 
should be made by the Department to get th e Centre established at the earliest.  The 
Committee also desire that a quarterly progress of the Institute be sent for the information 
of the Committee for its periodic review. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
2.13 The actual amount spent so far on th e scheme by the Department is Rs.653.47 
lakhs.  The Department has prepared a list of various activities  connected with setting up 
of the Institute with target dates for each a nd is regularly monitoring the progress. Apart 
from the Testing Laboratory for which the cons truction work is already in progress, the 
plan for the animal house facilities has also been approved.  The quarterly progress of the 
Institute shall be sent to the Committee regularly for review.   
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.7 
Alternative site for Central Sheep Breeding Farm,  Hissar 
2.14 The Committee note that the long pending i ssue of lease rent the with regard to 
the Central Sheep Breeding Farm at Hissa r has not yet been resolved with the 
Government of Haryana.  The Committee note that the Department is not able to achieve 
the targets laid down due to shortage  of land.  The Committee in their 20
th Report on 
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Department recommended that the Central Sheep 
Breeding Farm should be immediately shifted to  another suitable plac e so that the farm 

 33
could carry on its activities so as to reali ze the intended objectives.  The Committee were 
earlier informed in the 3 rd Action Taken Report on Demands  for Grants (1999-2000) that 
in case the Government of Haryana did not a ccept the terms and condi tions of lease rent, 
the farm may be closed down.  Since the avai lability of alternative suitable location was 
doubtful, it was decided to locate a suitable place preferably in th e hilly region of the 
country comprising the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttaranchal 
for breeding sheep for fine work.  However, due to the prevailing drought situation, the 
shifting of the farm could not materialize.  The Committee, therefore, again recommend 
that the Government should review the situat ion and take steps to shift the farm to 
another suitable place within 6 months of the presentation of the Report to the Parliament 
to achieve the objectives of the Scheme. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
2.15 The Department is trying vigorously to  resolve the issue of long pending lease 
rent with the Government of Ha ryana.  This issue has also been taken up at the level of 
Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana.  Consultation with the hilly States of 
Uttaranchal, Himachal and Jammu & Kashmi r was also initiated for finding a way for 
transferring the exotic sheep at Central Sheep Breeding Farm, Hissar to these hilly States.  
However, due to the lukewarm response of the hilly States, the Expert Committee, 
constituted to assess the need  of rams/bucks for the States,  has suggested that the 
breeding programme of the farm be synchroniz ed with the programme s in the States of 
Rajasthan, Karnataka or other States intere sted in Rambouillet X Nali or Corriedale  X 
Sonadi crosses.  The Department is also tr ying to achieve the targ et during the current 
financial year by following up the matter strongly with major sheep rearing States.   

 34
2.16 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.12 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.8 
Assistance to States for Integrated Piggery Development 
2.17 The Department of Animal Husbandr y and Dairying implemented the Piggery 
Development upto the Ninth Pl an.  The Scheme aims at strengthening Government Pig 
Breeding Farms for development of piggery  by providing 100 per cent grants-in-aid.  
However, the Department of Animal Husb andry and Dairying informed the Committee 
during examination of Demands for Grants (2003-04) that due to huge unspent amount 
during the 9 th Plan, the Planning Commission reco mmended the discontinuation of the 
scheme.  In reply to the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Agriculture in their 42 nd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)  for revival of the 
scheme, the Committee were informed th at evaluation of Integrated Piggery 
Development Scheme is yet to be received from National Agricultural Bank of Rural 
Development (NABARD).  The Committee note that the Draft Report has already been 
discussed in depth by the Department with  NABARD and the concerned States on 12 th 
July, 2004.  The Committee would like to point  out that in North Eastern Region, pig 
meat is the staple food and every household re ars pigs for its dairy requirements.  They, 
therefore, recommend that the Department shoul d make tangible efforts to get the final 
report from NABARD and start this very impor tant scheme during the current financial 
year at least in the high demand areas including the North Eastern States. 
 
 

 35
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.18 The Department has received the final evaluation report on Integrated Piggery 
Development Scheme from NABARD on 16 th August, 2004.  A copy of the report has 
also been submitted to th e Planning Commission on 31 st August, 2004 with a request to 
accord in-principle approval for the proposed scheme on Piggery Development.  
Realizing the importance of this scheme in  North-Eastern region,  the Department is 
making all efforts to initiate a new scheme on piggery development. 
2.19 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.15 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.9 
Conservation of Threatened Breed 
2.20 The Committee note that the Departme nt has started a new scheme for the 
conservation of threatened breed, i.e. t hose breeds whose population has come below 
10,000.  It has been observed that during th e year 2002-03 the budget allocated by the 
Department for the scheme was Rs.50 lakh ag ainst an expenditure of Rs.2.96 crore.  The 
reason for the excess expenditure was that the Department had many proposals from 
different States for the above scheme.  Acco rding to the Departme nt, since utilization 
certificates were not received fr om the States /UTs, the allocation were scaled down to 
Rs.50 lakh for the period of 2003-04.  The Co mmittee note that the Department has 
sanctioned Rs.6 crore during 2004 -05 for conservation of the threatened breeds.  The 
Committee would specifically like to draw the attention of the Ministry to the vanishing 
species of ‘Chakarnagari’ goat ‘Bhadwari’ buffalo in the Yamuna-Chambal basis so as to 
save them from extinction.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department 

 36
should consider the proposals of all the intere sted States having the breeding tract of the 
threatened breeds.  The Committee desire an d ensure that the funds allocated during 
2004-05 are utilized fruitfully to realize the intended objectives by making special efforts. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.21 Out of an allocation of Rs.600.00 la kh for the year 2004-05, an amount of 
Rs.170.70 lakh has been released till 30 th  September, 2004.  Also, proposals worth 
Rs.414.74 lakh are in various stag es of examination and proc essing.  More proposals are 
being invited. The Department, though,  has not received any proposal for conservation 
of Chakarnagari goat.  It is, however, likely that Chakarnagari is synonym of one of the 
existing breeds, as the name does not figure in the book on Animal Genetic Resources of 
India – Sheep & Goat, published by National Bureau of Animal Resources. 
 
 In so far as Bhadwari buffaloes are conc erned, it is clarified that the breeds of 
buffaloes are not being covered under this scheme. 
2.22 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.18 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.10 
Livestock Census 
2.23 The Committee note that th e Livestock population of diffe rent species is worked 
out on the basis of livestock census whic h is conducted quinquennia lly.  It has been 
observed that the Department of Animal  Husbandry and Dairying gives 16 Census 
figures of livestock population for the years 1992 and 1997 only in the Annual Report 
document and the latest  quinquennial census  figure of 1997 to 2002 are not available.  
The Committee note that till 16 th livestock census conducted in 1997, the scheme was 

 37
implemented by the Department of Agricu lture and Cooperation and now, beginning 
from the 17 th Census, the work has been transfe rred to the Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying. 
 The Committee have been informed that most of the States/UTs have completed 
the 17th Livestock census work and some provisional results of 17 th Livestock have been 
received from States/UTs.  The Committee desire that the State Governments/UTs should 
be asked to complete the census work immediately so that final issue of the publication 
on 17
th All India Livestock Census is brought out within the stipulated time. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.24 The 17 th Livestock Census was conducted in the year 2003 with reference period 
15th October, 2003 in all States , except Tamil Nadu, where it  was conducted in August, 
2004.  The provisional report of the census has already been released barring the 
information for Tamil Nadu and some district s in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh.  However, 
final report of the census is expected to be released within the stipulated time. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.12 
Dairy Development 
2.25 The Committee are happy to note that India is the largest producer of milk and 
milk products in the world.  With the changi ng times, the production of Dairy products is 
also increasing in our country.  Dairying sector  has played an important role in providing 
employment and income to the people in the rural areas.  However, the per capita 
availability of milk in India vis-à-vis that of the developed nations is, however, very low.  
The per capita availability of  milk in India is 226 gms. per day whereas in of the 
developed nations it is 285 gms. per day.  One of the reasons for low per-capita 

 38
availability of milk is that India’s population is more compared to that of the developed 
nations. 
The Committee recommend that a long term  action plan should be drawn up and 
concerted efforts made to increase in the production of milk and milk products in our 
country leading to increase in the per capita  availability of m ilk and milk products 
making them accessible and affordable to all sections of the society. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.26 The Indian Dairy Industry acquired substa ntial growth from Eighth Plan onwards. 
India’s milk output during the year 2003-04 is  estimated to be about 90 million tons.  
This has not only placed the industry first in  the world, but also represents sustained 
growth in the availability of milk and milk products for the increa sing population of the 
country.  The per capita availabi lity of milk has increased to  a level of about 238 gm per 
day from 124 gm per day in 1950 but this is still low as compared to the world average of 
285 gm per day. 
 The Department has been implementing many schemes from time to time to 
supplement the efforts of the State Governme nts and other agencies in increasing the 
milk production which will in turn result in hi gher per capita availabi lity of milk in the 
country. 
Operation Flood I, II and III was implemented in the country from 1971 to 1996 
to increase the milk production.  At presen t, the following major schemes are being 
implemented by the Department to increase the milk production: 
I. Integrated Dairy Development Projects in Non Operation Flood, Hilly and 
Backward Areas (IDDP) 

 39
II. Strengthening of Infrastructure for Quality and Clean Milk Production 
III. Assistance to Cooperatives 
IV. National Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding 
V. Assistance to States for Fodder Development 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.13 
Integrated Dairy Development Project in Non Operation Flood, Backward and Hilly 
Areas 
2.27 As the name of the scheme suggests the project is being implemented in 
backward, hilly and tribal areas which were  left out of Operation Flood Programme 
because they were not considered suitable for development of dairying.  In order to bring 
the states and regions left out within the be neficial fold of the scheme, the Government 
launched Integrated Dairying Development Pr oject (IDDP).  Under the IDDP scheme, 
those areas are covered which have very low or no infrastr ucture for Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying. 
 The main objectives of the IDDP are to  increase milk production, to procure, 
process and market milk in a cost effective manner and to ensure remunerative prices to 
milk producers, generate additional employ ment opportunities, improve social economic 
and nutritional status of resi dents living in these areas.  For the implementation of this 
project, the Government allocated Rs.175 cr ore, out of which only just Rs.16.32 crore 
was spent in the first year  2002-03 and Rs.16.43 crore in th e year 2003-04 which comes 
to a total of Rs.32.75 crore.  The Committee are unhappy to note the dismal performance 
of the scheme and apprehend that at the given pace of expenditure the funds may have to 
be surrendered.  The Committee feel that the scheme has not been sufficiently 
popularized among the State Governments. 

 40
 The Committee, therefore, desire that st eps should be made to persuade the State 
Governments to come up with more proposal s in the coming years with a view to 
improving the socio-economic and nutritional status of the people.  The Committee 
expect the Department to give specific attention to North-Eastern States, hilly regions and 
the remote areas, for the balanced and harmonious development and growth of all regions 
of the country.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.28 The Department has been making concerted efforts to monitor the projects 
sanctioned to various States and persuade th e State Governments to come up with more 
proposals under this Centrally Sponsored Scheme.  In the meetings held by the Technical 
Management Committees set up under the scheme in the States, the State Governments 
are impressed upon the importance of implementation of the scheme and the benefits that 
would accrue in terms of improvement in so cio-economic and nutritional status of the 
backward areas of the country.  The Departme nt has been paying specific attention to 
North Eastern States, hilly regions and remo te areas as suggested by the Committee and 
has sanctioned 16 projects for the North East ern States, including Sikkim.  Also, projects 
for hilly areas like Jammu & Ka shmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal and tribal areas of 
Madhya Pradesh and Chattisgarh have been approved under the scheme. 
2.29 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.21 of Chapter I of the 
report. 

 41
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.16 
Synthetic Milk 
2.30 The Committee are shocked that Syntheti c Milk is being supplied in many parts 
of the country by unscrupulous suppliers.  The adulterated milk, it hardly needs to be 
emphasized, constitutes a grave danger to  the lives of unsuspecting consumers 
particularly the young children. 
 The Committee, therefore, desire th at the Department should take up the 
immediately with the Ministry of Health a nd other concerned enforcement agencies so 
that stringent measures are put in place and enforced rigorously without fail to prevent 
adulteration of the milk. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
2.31 The Department, while sharing the c oncern of the Committee regarding the 
supply of synthetic milk and its effect on the consumers,  has been taking up the issue 
with the Ministry of Health and Family We lfare at various levels as and when such 
reports of adulteration of milk come to its notice.  The Minister for Health and Family 
Welfare has also been requested by the Depart ment to advice all PFA authorities in the 
States to crack unscrupulous traders and thus prevent adulteration of milk and milk 
products.   
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.18 
Aquaculture Authority Bill, 2000 
2.32 The Aquaculture Authority Bill, 2000 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 28 
February, 2000 and referred to the Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Agriculture on 
6 March, 2000.  The Committee presented a Re port to Parliament on 4 December, 2000 

 42
suggesting some amendments in the provisions of the Bill.  The Bill was supposed to be 
reintroduced in the House.  During the evidence on Demand s for Grants (2003-04), the 
Department assured the Comm ittee about introduction of the Bill by the end of the 
Budget Session during 2003.  However, even af ter a lapse of more than four years the 
Committee find that bill has not yet been re introduced in the Hous e.  In reply to a 
question during evidence session on Demands fo r Grants (2004-05), the Committee have 
been informed that the Cabinet note along with the Bill was sent for the Cabinet[s 
approved in February, 2004 but , due to dissolution of 13 th Lok Sabha, the Cabinet 
Secretariat returned the note stating that a fresh proposal may again be submitted after 
formation of Fourteenth Lok Sabha.  The Department had now furnished the latest status 
of the Bill stating that the comments from the concerned Departments/Ministries have 
been obtained and the finalized note has been  submitted to the Cabinet on 22 July, 2004.  
After its approval, the Bill wi ll be reintroduced in Parliament, most probably by the end 
of the Budget Session. 
 The Committee hope that the Bill incor porating the recommendation as contained 
in their 11 th Report will be introduced in current Session of Parliament so that 
Aquaculture Authority is established without further loss of time. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
2.33 The Aquaculture Authority Bill, 2000, introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 
28.02.2000 has been modified as s uggested by Ministry of Law, Justice and Company 
Affairs.  The Cabinet has approved the revised Bill. As per the direction of the Cabinet, 
the Department will withdraw the earlier Bill and introduce the revised Bill in the Rajya 
Sabha in the coming session of the Parliament. 

 43
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.11 
Target for Growth in Animal Population 
3.1 According to the livestock census th e population of animals in 1992 was 470.86 
million whereas in 1997 at was 485.36 million.  The Committee observe that the growth 
of population of various kinds of animals in  the country has been rather tardy.  The 
reason is that the Union Government has not set any specific target for the growth and the 
Department too seems to be without any direction or in a state of aimlessness. 
 Since the human population is increasing at a rapid pace, it is important that the 
population of various types of animals should also have commensurate increase as human 
beings are dependent directly or indirectly upon animals fo r their various needs.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that a su itable action plan should be drawn up 
expeditiously the Department set the goal for itself for proper planning and realiz ation of 
animal growth. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
3.2 While realizing the importance of the livestock population for the human 
population, the Department also feels that it may not be advisable to have a programme 
for increasing all animal popula tion.  Instead, efforts may be concentrated on increasing 
the productivity of animals, thus, improving th e quality of the lives tock rather than 
increasing their numbers.  Concerted effort s are being made by the Department to 
increase the population of cross-bred cattle and other high yielding varieties. 

 44
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.20 
Setting up of Indian Council of Veterinary Research 
3.3 The Committee have been repeatedly recommending in their earlier Reports on 
Demands for Grants 1997-98, 1998-99, 2000-01 , 2001-02 and 2003-04 for Setting up of 
an Indian Council of Veterinary Research on the lin es of ICAR.  The Department in their 
further Action Taken Reply on 47 th Action Taken Report have informed that the 
Government is not willing to create a separate ICVR from Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR). 
 The Committee are not convinced with th e Government’s reply and feel that the 
subject in Veterinary Research should more appropriately handled by the Department of 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying given the constraints of ICAR engaged in 
multidisciplinary research.   The Committee are of the considered view that the setting of 
an independent national institute for conducting applied research in the field of veterinary 
and animal livestock.  The Co mmittee, therefore, feel stro ngly that an ICVR should be 
created as a separate unit under the Department  of Animal Husbandry and Dairying so as 
to give impetus to research in the area of Animal Husbandry and Fisheries. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
3.4 The Department has carefully considered the issue of setting up of Indian Council 
of Veterinary Research and feels that keeping in view the need for an integrated approach 
to farming encompassing agriculture, livestock and fisheries sector, the creation of a 
separate Council of Veterinary Research  by separation from Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research may not be desirable.  However, for an effective and satisfactory 
mechanism of coordination between the Department and Indian Council of Agriculture 

 45
Research (ICAR), steps have been initiate d and a close liaison with ICAR is being 
maintained so as to get the benefits of the research / services of the latter, whenever 
required.  
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.21 
Medical Aid to the Livestock during floods 
3.5 The Committee are pained to note that re curring floods play havoc with the cattle 
population in certain parts of the country.  With  the advent of floods, animals fall prey to 
various diseases in the absence of any con tingency plan to meet the grave emergent 
situation.  The Committee also note that during devast ating flood the Government’s 
attention naturally zeroes on protection of human lives leaving the animals to the mercy 
of nature.  The Committee, therefore, desire  that special action plan should be chalked 
out by the Department to provid e suitable medical attention / facilities to the livestock 
who fall prey to disease in the wake of fl oods.  The Department should certainly draw 
contingency plans to play a proactive role in  times of flood and, even drought, as part of 
calamity relief measures. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
3.6 Realizing the need to pr otect the livestock population during the times of floods 
and droughts, the Department has been extending necessary help to State Governments 
by coordinating with State Governments an d other agencies.  During the natural 
calamities, the concerned States could also avail the benefit of Calamity Relief Fund 
(CRF), operational in the States, under Clause-11 of the CRF guidelines “medical care 
for cattle and poultry against ep idemics”.  The Department al so actively facilitates the 
procurement of vaccines or medicines by the States on receipt of latter’s request by 

 46
contacting other States or suitable agencies from where the vaccines / medicines could be 
procured. For eg., after the recent floods, Bihar was helped to get essential vaccines from 
Jharkhand.     

 47
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.17 
Strengthening of Database and Information Networking for Fisheries Sector 
4.1 The Committee note that the scheme Stre ngthening of Database and Information 
Networking for Fisheries Sector was launched in December, 2003 at an estimated cost of 
Rs.24.50 crore.  The Department has informed that the earlier Central Sector Scheme 
Development of Inland Fisheries Statistics was initially prepared with a total outlay of 
Rs.45.00 crore.  The Committee note that the earlier Scheme on Development of Inland 
Fisheries Statistics had only one component  on Catch Assessment Survey of Inland 
Fisheries which was in operation in 19 States  while the new scheme consists of Catch 
Assessment of the earlier scheme alongwith  the six new components on information 
networking, Geographical Information System  using satellite data , training Census on 
important attributes on inland and mari ne fisheries and strengthening of Catch 
Assessment Surveys for estimation of marine fish production. 
 The Committee are surprised to note that  when the earlier scheme had only one 
component, it was formulated with an outlay of Rs.45.00 crore for 10 th Plan and on the 
other hand when the Scheme was restructured with additional components in consultation 
with the Planning Commission and Standing Committee on Finance outlay for its was 
lowered down to Rs.24.5 crore for the Tenth Plan. 
 The Committee further note that an a llocation of Rs.15.00 crore has been made as 
BE for 2004-05.  The Department proposes to  spend the money for procurement of 
computers under the component of IT and pr ocurement of satellite images and gas 
equipment by GIS besides conduct of fisheries census.  The Committee visualize that all 

 48
these activities can be completed within th e time frame of the financial year 2004-05.  
They expect that the amount earmarked for the current financial year should be fully 
utilized leaving no scope for under-utilization of funds.  Th e Committee also desire that 
budget allocation for this scheme should also be increased in the coming years of 10 th 
Plan period so that the targets set for the revised scheme comprising 7 components 
covering the inland as well as marine fisheries are achieved. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.2 The Department, till the Ninth Plan, was implementing a Central Sector Scheme 
on Development of Inland Fisheries Statis tics, which was modified as Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme on Strengthening of Data base and Information Networking  for the 
Fisheries Sector involving total financial implication of Rs.45.00 crore for the entire 
Tenth Plan period. But late r on, it was revised in cons ultation with the Planning 
Commission and finally approved by the St anding Finance Committee in December, 
2003 at an outlay of Rs.24.50 crore for the Tenth Plan.  However, the Planning 
Commission approved continuation of the ear lier scheme on Development of Inland 
Fisheries Statistics till the new scheme is approved by the competent authority for 
implementation during the Tenth Plan.   
 To persuade the States / other implemen ting agencies to implement the scheme in 
a time bound manner four video conferences have been organized during the current 
financial year so far.  In order to monitor an d to sort out technical issues related to the 
scheme, a Technical Monitoring Committee (TMC) has been constituted.  TMC has 
decided that modifications in the met hodology are needed taking into account its 
technical as well as financial feasibility.  Moreover, the representatives from different 

 49
State Governments stated that due to delay in creation of post under the scheme, it is not 
possible to submit economically viable an d technically feasible proposal seeking 
financial assistance for IT and other compone nts during this financial year.  The Budget 
provision for the year 2004-05 has been pr oposed to be revised from Rs.15.00 crore to 
Rs.6.20 crore.  However, the Department e xpects to fully utilize the overall outlay 
approved for the scheme during Tenth Plan by the terminal year of the Plan (2006-07). 
4.3 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.24 of Chapter I of the 
report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.19 
Setting up of a Separate Ministry of Animal Husbandry and Dairying and Fisheries 
4.4 The Committee, during the examination of Demands for Grants (2004-05), noted 
the declining trend of allocati on of utlisation of funds year  after year and huge unspent 
amount surrendered by the Department.  It  hardly needs reite ration that Animal 
Husbandry is such a vital sector of our economy whic h has enormous potential of 
generating income and to improve the economic status of the people by providing gainful 
employment especially to small and marginal  farmers and the weaker sections including 
poor women. 
 The Committee have been repeatedly r ecommending in their earlier Reports for 
creation of an Independent Ministry of An imal Husbandry and Dairying  The Committee 
find that most of the States have a separate  Ministry for Animal Husbandry/Fisheries.  
The Committee have been informed (47 th Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 
(2003-04) that the Department has again considered this proposal but has not found it 
appropriate to moves this proposal again at this stage. 

 50
 Having regard to the fact the animal husbandry has vast potential to bring a new 
economic resurgence by generating countle ss job opportunities, the Committee reiterate 
that the Government should consider to create  a separate Ministry of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries for the development of  this extremely important sector of our 
economy. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.5 The Department fully agrees with th e view of the Committee that animal 
husbandry has vast potential to improve th e economic status of people by generating 
considerable job opportunities.  However, the animal husbandry and agriculture sectors 
are complementary to each other and require constant coordination between Department 
of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and 
DARE, which are all part of Agriculture Ministry.  Therefore, it may not be feasible to 
create a separate Ministry for Animal Husbandry / Fisheries.  The issue of upgradation of 
the Department to a full fledged Ministry was also considered at the level of Hon’ble 
Agriculture Minister in the light of recommendation of the Committee, but adequate 
justification was not found for the upgradation.   
4.6 For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1.27 of Chapter I of the 
report. 

 51
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.14 
Delhi Milk Scheme 
5.1 It has been observed by the Committee that DMS has incurred heavy recurring 
losses during the past few years.  In the year 2003-04, the Department under the Non plan 
Budget had allocated a total budget of Rs.206.90 crore for DMS.  But at the end of the 
year, it was observed that DMS could realize Rs.162.63 crore only as against the 
expenditure of Rs.206.90 crore.  In order to overcome the losse s, the Ministry of Finance 
gave an additional budgetary support of Rs.20 crore to DMS for the Non-plan budget.  
The Committee note that the Department has failed to run and operate the DMS 
successfully and has requested the National Capital Territory (NCT) to take over DMS 
and run it.  The NCT is yet to send its resp onse in this regard.   The Committee would, 
therefore, like the Department to decide the fate of loss making DMS without any further 
delay. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
5.2 The management of DMS has taken measures  to contain the losses of DMS.    It 
may be noted here that the yearly loss figures  include the depreciation value of plant and 
machinery.  As the plant and machinery of DMS are quite old, it is not possible to utilize 
it to the maximum level of its capacity, i.e. 5 lakh litres per day.  Th e non-utilization of 
the plant’s full capacity is adding to the loss of the organization. 
 The Government of NCT has informed that they do not favour the proposal of 
taking over DMS unless the Government of India decides unequivocally to:  
 
a. accept all up to date liabilities of DMS; 

 52
b. grant adequate funds for moderni zation of plant and machinery; and 
c. re-deploy the surplus staff of DMS to reduce its workin g strength to 800 
employees as recommended by the NDDB Committee of experts. 
The Department is examining various options including recommendation of the 
Management Committee of the DMS to upgrade plant of DMS with a total outlay of 
Rs.23.00 crore. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.15 
Assistance to Cooperatives 
5.3 The Scheme Assistance to Cooperativ es was approved in January, 2000.  The 
Scheme aims at revitalizing the Sick Dairy C ooperatives unions at the district level and 
co-operative federations at the State level.  The scheme is to be implemented on matching 
basis between the concerned State Government  and Union Government.  The scheme is 
expected to assist in the rehabilitation of  around 70 sick unions located in different parts 
of the country and aims to provide a fillip  to milk production in the country.  The 
Committee note that out of the total outlay of  Rs.130 crore, the Department could barely 
spend Rs.19.41 crore during the first two years of the 10 th Plan period.  Keeping in view 
the important role played by Dairy Co-ope rative in boosting the milk production in the 
country, the Committee strongly feel that sick co-operative milk unions should be given 
an opportunity to rehabilitate themselves with assistance from Central and State 
Governments.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should focus 
if attention on this very important scheme and institute necessary measures for further 
increasing the milk production in the country. 

 53
 The Committee would also like the Government to consider to change the funding 
pattern of the Scheme by making it more attractive to the fund-starved States.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
5.4 The Department has taken number of m easures to streamline the implementation 
of the scheme which has been sluggish main ly due to lower scale of operation of some 
milk unions with high per litre cost on procurement, transport, processing and distribution 
(variable expenses) coupled with lower sa les realization resulting in insufficient 
contribution margin to cover the otherwise hi gh fixed costs.  Excessive staff and low 
manpower productivity are other factors for unsatisfactory performance of these unions. 
Regular meetings are being held with the officers of concerned State Government / 
NDDB to monitor the implementation of scheme  and to persuade the State Government 
to release their matching share of 50% in time. 
 The scheme has been in operation for more than four years and it has been 
decided now to get the scheme evaluated so  that improvements / modifications in the 
scheme could be made on the basis of the recommendations of the evaluation study.  The 
suggestion of the Parliamentary Standing Committee regarding changing the funding 
pattern of the scheme has been noted and will be considered at the time of revision of the 
scheme. 

 54
APPENDIX – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 25 TH JANUARY, 2005 AT 1100 HRS. IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW 
DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1240 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri G.L. Bhargava 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri Dharmendra 
7. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
8. Shri A. Ravichandran 
9. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
10. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
11. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
12. Shri Mahboob Zahedi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13 Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
14 Shri Harish Rawat 
15 Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
16 Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
17 Shri Bhagwati Singh 
18 Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
19 Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh   -  Director 
2.  Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
3. Smt. Ratna Bhagwani   -  Assistant Director  
 
     

 55
 At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman , welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and requested them to take up me moranda Nos. 2, 3 & 4 containing draft 
Action Taken Reports on 2nd, 3rd and 4th Reports on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agri cultural Research and Education); Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husb andry & Dairying) and Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries, respectively for consideration and adoption. 
2. The Committee then considered and adopt ed the draft Action Taken Reports with 
certain additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter authorized the Chairman to present the above-
mentioned Report to the House on a date and time convenient to him. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 56
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations    21   
  
(ii) Recommendations/Obser vations which have been 
Accepted by the Government       
 
Serial Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,12,13,16 & 18 
 
T o t a l         1 4    
       
 
Percentage       66.66%  
       
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Serial No. 11,20 & 21 
 
T o t a l         3    
     
 
Percentage         14.28%  
       
(iv) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
Serial No.  17 and 18 
 
T o t a l          2    
    
Percentage       9.52%   
     
(v) Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Serial Nos.  14 and 15 
 
T o t a l         2     
 
Percentage       9.52%  