STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2008-09)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND
EDUCATION)
IMPACT OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE ON
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED SECTORS IN INDIA
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2009/PHALGUNA, 1930 (Saka)
47
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2008-09)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND
EDUCATION)
IMPACT OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE ON
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED SECTORS IN INDIA
     Presented to Lok Sabha on  25.02.2009.
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on  25.02.2009.
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2009/PHALGUNA, 1930 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COA No 223
Price:  Rs. 102.00
© 2009 By Lok Sabha Secretariat
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha  (Twelfth Edition).
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

<CONTENTS>
                   PAGE
Composition of the Committee ……………………………………… (iii)
Preface…… ……………………………………………………………. (v)
REPORT
PART I Introduction…………………………………………. 1
PART II Observations/Recommendations…  ……………..…. 66
APPENDICES
 I Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the
Committee  (2007-08) held on 6th February, 2008…………..  94
II Minutes of the Second Sitting of the
Committee (2008-09) held on 27th August, 2008…………..  97
III Minutes of the Third Sitting of the
Committee (2008-09) held on 8th September, 2008…………..  101
IV Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the
Committee (2008-09) held on 30th September, 2008…………..  104
V Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the
Committee (2008-09) held on 25th February, 2009…………..  109
(i)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMPOSITION OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2008-2009)
@ Shri Mohan Singh – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Ranen Barman
3. Shri Anil Basu
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
6. Shri Khagen Das
7. Shri Dharmendra
8. Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
10. Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire
11. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
12. Shri Prabodh Panda
13. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil
14. Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Nilangekar Patil
15. Shri K.J.S.P.Reddy
16. Shri Y.S.Vivekananda Reddy
17. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh
18. Shri M.P.Veerendra kumar
19. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
*20. Vacant
#21. Vacant
RAJYA SABHA
22. Shri Ishwar Singh
23. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
24. Shri Vikram Verma
25. Shri Vinay Katiyar
26. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
27. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
28. Prof. M.S.Swaminathan
29. Shri M.Rajasekara Murthy
$30. Shri Kore Prabhakara
%31. Vacant
@ Shri Mohan Singh has been appointed Chairman of the Committee by Hon’ble Speaker, w.e.f. 5 December, 2008  vice
Prof.
    Ram Gopal Yadav elected to the Rajya Sabha, w.e.f. 14.11.2008.
*   Sh. Kuldeep Bishnoi ceased to be the Member of this Committee owing to disqualification under 10 th Schedule by
Hon’ble
    Speaker w.e.f. 10th September, 2008.
# Sh. Hari Rama Jogaiah ceased to be the Member of the Committee owing to his Resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f.
6 November,  2008.
$   Sh. Kore Prabhakara was nominated by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f.
    1st September, 2008.
%  Shri Harish Rawat ceased to be the Member of the Committee due to retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008.
(iii)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Veena Sharma   -  Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda   -  Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Anil Kumar   -  Senior Executive Assistant
(iv)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Forty-Seventh Report
on ‘Impact of Global Climate Change on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in India’ of the
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education).
2. The Committee took a briefing on the subject from the representatives of the
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) on 6 th
February, 2008 and their oral evidence was taken separately on 8 th September, 2008 and
jointly with Ministries of Environment & Forests, Earth Sciences, Water Resources,
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying & Fisheries and Planning Commission on 30 th September, 2008 in order to
know about their collective efforts put in to tackle the impacts of global climate change
on Indian agriculture and allied sectors.
3. The Committee also heard the views of the following experts/scientists and
discussed with them on various aspects of the Subject on 27 th August, 2008:
(i) Prof. Sulochana Gadgil Honorary Professor & Former Chairman
Centre for Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore;
(ii) Dr. Suhas Wani Principal Scientist & Regional Coordinator for
Asia International Crops Research Institute for
the Semi-Arid -Tropics, Andhra Pradesh; and
(iii) Dr. A.A.Nambi Project Director (Climate Change)
M.S. Swaminathan Research Foundation,
Chennai.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 25 th
February, 2009.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministries of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education & Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries),
(v)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Environment & Forests, Earth Sciences, Water Resources and Planning
Commission for tendering evidence and also for placing before the Committee
the study material and information desired in connection with the examination
of the Subject.
6. The Committee express their thanks to the experts/associations
who gave their valuable suggestions/views to enable the Committee to
understand the various dimensions of the Subject.
7. The Committee would also like to place on record their
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the
Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
8. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters and placed at Part II of the Report.
NEW DELHI;
25  February, 2009
6 Phalguna, 1930 (Saka)
                           MOHAN SINGH
                                     Chairman,
    Standing Committee on Agriculture.
(vi)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

REPORT
PART I
INTRODUCTION
1. Global warming is progressive gradual rise of the earth ¶s surface temperature
thought to be caused by the greenhouse effect and responsible for changes in global
climate patterns. Global warming has occurred in the distant past as a result of natural
influences, but the term is most used to refer to the warming predicted to occur as a
result of increased emissions of greenhouse gases.
2. The Earth ¶s atmosphere is composed of Nitrogen 78%, Oxygen 21%, trace
gases 1% (argon 0.9%, 0.1% includes neon, krypton, xenon, hydrogen, water vapour
and Greenhouse Gases (GHGs) (approx 0.04%).  Trace Gases are called so because
they are present in very small quantities.  Among GHGs, nitrous oxide 6%, methane
13%, fluorocarbons 5%, and carbon dioxide 76%. These gases are also called
greenhouse gases because they act as a blanket and trap heat radiating from the
earth and make the atmosphere warm.  The atmospheric composition remains same
across the globe.
3. Increase in atmospheric temperature affects the various aspects of global
hydrological cycle. As a result, we can expect changes in rainfall, evaporation, and
runoff. These changes in temperature and hydrology have considerable impact on
different aspects of life including crops, livestock, fisheries, insects, microbes, etc.
THE ROLE OF OZONE LAYER IN EARTH¶S ATMOSPHERE
4. Ozone layer in earth ¶s atmosphere (stratosphere) absorbs the harmful UV-B
radiation from sun and acts as protective shield for earth. A variety of biological
consequences such as increase in skin cancer, damage to plants, and reduction of
plankton populations in the oceans may result from the increased UV exposure due to
ozone depletion.
Ozone layer at the top of atmosphere is depleted by an increase in concentration
of GHGs, especially, nitrous oxide.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

HOW AND WHY THE CLIMATE IS CHANGING
5. Climate Change is any long-term significant change in the ³average weather´ that
a given region experiences.  Average weather may include average temperature,
precipitation and wind patterns.  Climate Change may be due to natural internal
processes or human actions.
6. In recent usage, Climate Change is often linked to changes in modern Climate of
which one of the major causes is human activities. Though human beings have always
influenced their environment, it is only since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution
mid 18th century that the impact of human activities has begun to extend globally. As
per Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), anthropogenic activities,
such as those involving combustion of fossil fuels leading to increase in greenhouse
gases (GHGs), are considered to be the prime anthropogenic cause leading to
Climate Change. The increase concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere results in
enhanced greenhouse effect. Some of the key GHGs contributing to Climate Change
include: carbon dioxide (CO 2), methane (CH 4) nitrous oxide (N 2O), hydro
fluorocarbons (HFCs), per fluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur hexafluoride (SF 6). IPCC
Fourth Assessment Report states that it is ³very likely´ that emissions of heat-trapping
gases from human activities have caused most of the observed increase in globally
averaged temperatures since the mid 20th century.
7. There is now a consensus that the Climate is changing due to increased
emissions of greenhouse gases. Increased human activities in the last century,
especially increased fossil fuel usage, industrialization, and land use changes, have
caused the buildup of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in atmosphere.
These gases in turn, are causing changes in the Climate of the earth. The global
mean annual temperature at the end of the 20 th century was 0.70ºC above those
recorded at the end of the 19 th century. The 12 warmest years over globally in the
instrumental record have occurred after 1990. Climate extremes such as droughts,
floods, rainfall distribution and snowmelt have increased at several places. There are
reports that Himalayan glaciers are receding, and pace of this is increasing with time.
The rate of change in climatic parameters is projected to be faster in the coming
decades. The globally averaged temperature of the air above the earth's surface is
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

expected to rise by 1.4 - 5.8ºC over the next 100 years. CO 2 is rising currently at the
rated 1.8 ppm.
GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE CURRENT SCENARIO
8 (i) Global average sea level rose at an average rate of 1.8 mm per year over 1961
to 2003. This rate was faster over 1993 to 2003, about 3.1 mm per year.
(ii) Analyses done by the Indian Meteorology Department and the Indian Institute of
Tropical Meteorology generally show the same trends for temperature, heat waves,
glaciers, droughts and floods, and sea level rise as by the Inter-Governmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) of United Nations. Magnitude of the change varies in some
cases.
(iii) There are evidences that glaciers in Himalayas are receding.
(iv) The rainfall is also likely to become more uncertain.
(v) The projected global, mean annual temperature increase by the end of this
century is likely to be in the range 2 to 4.5°C. Values substantially higher than 4.5°C
cannot be excluded. For south Asia (Indian region), the IPCC has projected 0.5 to
1.2oC rise in temperature by 2020, 0.88 to 3.16 oC by 2050 and 1.56 to 5.44 oC by
2080, depending on the scenario of future development (Table 1; IPCC 2007b).
Overall, the temperature increases are likely to be much higher in winter (rabi) season
than in rainy season (kharif). Precipitation is likely to increase in all time slices in all
months, except during December-February when it is likely to decrease.
(vi) It is likely that future tropical cyclones will become more intense, with larger peak
wind speeds and more heavy precipitation. Himalayan glaciers and snow cover are
projected to contract. It is very likely that hot extremes, heat waves, and heavy
precipitation events will continue to become more frequent.  For the next two decades,
a warming of about 0.2°C per decade is projected. Even if all future emissions were
stopped now, a further warming of about 0.1°C per decade would be expected.  The
projected sea level rise by the end of this century is likely to be 0.18 to 0.59 meters.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(vii) Table 1. Projected changes in surface air temperature and precipitation for South
Asia under SRES A1FI (highest future emission trajectory) and B1 (lowest future
emission trajectory) pathways for three time slices, viz. 2020s, 2050s and 2080s.
Source: IPCC (2007).
2020 2050 2080
Season Temperature
°C
Precipitation
%
Temperature
°C
Precipitation
%
Temperature
°C
Precipitation
%
A1F1 B1 A1F1 B1 A1F1 B1 A1F1 B1 A1F1 B1 A1F1 B1
Dec-
Feb
1.17 1.11 -3 4 3.16 1.97 0 0 5.44 2.93 -16 -6
Mar-
May
1.18 1.07 7 8 2.97 1.81 26 24 5.22 2.71 31 20
Jun-
Aug
0.54 0.55 5 7 1.71 0.88 13 11 3.14 1.56 26 15
Sept-
Nov
0.78 0.83 1 3 2.41 1.49 8 6 4.19 2.17 26 10
INTER-GOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE (IPCC)
9. Climate Change is a very complex issue: policymakers need an objective source
of information about the causes of Climate Change, its potential environmental and
socio-economic consequences and the adaptation and mitigation options to respond
to it. This is why WMO and UNEP established the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) in 1988.  Ministry of Environment and Forests is the nodal agency
from India for the IPCC.  Membership of IPCC is open to all member countries of
WMO & UNEP. The IPCC does not conduct any research nor does it monitor climate
related data or parameters. Its role is to assess on a comprehensive, objective, open
and transparent basis the latest scientific, technical and socio-economic literature
produced worldwide relevant to the understanding of the risk of human-induced
Climate Change, its observed and projected impacts and options for adaptation and
mitigation. IPCC reports should be neutral with respect to policy, although they need
to deal objectively with policy relevant scientific, technical and socio economic factors.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

They should be of high scientific and technical standards, and aim to reflect a range of
views, expertise and wide geographical coverage.
Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Reports
10. In accordance with its mandate and as reaffirmed in various decisions by the
Panel, the IPCC prepares at regular intervals comprehensive Assessment Reports of
scientific, technical and socio-economic information relevant for the understanding of
human induced Climate Change, potential impacts of Climate Change and options for
mitigation and adaptation. Four Assessment Reports have been completed in 1990,
1995, 2001 and 2007.
11. The findings of the first IPCC Assessment Report of 1990 played a decisive role
in leading to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC), which was opened for signature in the Rio de Janeiro Summit in 1992 and
entered into force in 1994. It provides the overall policy framework for addressing the
Climate Change issue. The IPCC Second Assessment Report of 1995 provided key
input for the negotiations of the Kyoto Protocol in 1997 and the Third Assessment
Report of 2001 as well as Special and Methodology Reports provided further
information relevant for the development of the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol. The
IPCC continues to be a major source of information for the negotiations under the
UNFCCC.  IPCC in its latest Fourth Assessment Report ( ³Climate Change 2007´) has
mentioned about µAgriculture¶ in Chapter 8.
FUTURE GLOBAL TRENDS
12. Agricultural Nitrous Oxide (N 2O) green house gas emissions are projected to
increase by 35-60% up to 2030 due to increased nitrogen fertilizer use and increased
animal manure production (FAO, 2003).
13. If CH 4 emissions grow in direct proportion to increases in livestock numbers, then
global livestock-related methane production is expected to increase by 60% up to
2030 (FAO, 2003).
14. The area of rice grown globally is forecast to increase by 4.5% to 2030 (FAO,
2003), so methane emissions from rice production would not be expected to increase
substantially. There may even be reductions if less rice is grown under continuous
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

flooding (causing anaerobic soil conditions) as a result of scarcity of water, or if new
rice cultivars that emit less methane are developed and adopted.  The future evolution
of CO2 emissions from agriculture is uncertain. Due to stable or declining deforestation
rates (FAO, 2003), and increased adoption of conservation tillage practices (FAO,
2001), these emissions are likely to decrease or remain at low levels.
15. The Committee desired to know about the major findings and recommendations
with reference to Indian sub-continent ¶s agricultural and allied sectors (present &
future scenario).  To this point, the DARE/ICAR replied as under:
 ³ The major findings and recommendations of IPCC are as follows:
• In mid- to high-latitude regions, moderate to medium local increases in
temperature (1-3ºC), along with associated carbon dioxide (CO 2) increase
and rainfall changes can have small beneficial impacts on crop yields. In low-
latitude regions, even moderate temperature increases (1-2°C) are likely to
have negative yield impacts for major cereals. Further warming has
increasingly negative impacts in all regions (medium to low confidence).
• About 2.5 to 10% decrease in crop yield is projected for parts of Asia in 2020s
and 5 to 30% decrease in 2050s compared with 1990 levels without CO 2
effects (medium confidence).
• Projected changes in the frequency and severity of extreme Climate events
have significant consequences for food production, and food insecurity, in
addition to impacts of projected mean Climate (high confidence).
• Smallholder and subsistence farmers, pastoralists and artisanal fisherfolk will
suffer complex, localised impacts of Climate Change (high confidence).
• Food trade is projected to increase in response to Climate Change, with
increased dependence on food imports for most developing countries
(medium to low confidence).
• The marginal increase in the number of people at risk of hunger due to
Climate Change must be viewed within the overall large reductions due to
socio-economic development (medium confidence).
• Simulations suggest rising relative benefits of adaptation with low to moderate
warming (medium confidence), although adaptation stresses water and
environmental resources as warming increases (low confidence). On
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

average, in cereal cropping systems worldwide, adaptations such as
changing varieties and planting times enable avoidance of a 10-15%
reduction in yield corresponding to 1-2°C local temperature increase.
Adaptive capacity in low latitudes is exceeded at 3°C local temperature
increase.´
16. The Committee were informed by the Secretary, DARE that ³in 1997 Government
of India signed the Kyoto Protocol where all the nations have agreed that by 2008-
2012 at least 5 per cent minimum cut should be there in the emission level as it was in
1990 and specific targets were given; for USA-7 per cent, Japan-6 per cent and
European Union-8 per cent.  I would like to bring to your kind attention that Kyoto
Protocol as on date has not been ratified by the USA and in the same vein I would like
to bring to your kind attention that on this issue Australia was also part and parcel
along with the USA «´ we need to press hard so that the Kyoto Protocol is religiously
followed and monitored.
INDIAN SCENARIO OF CLIMATE CHANGE
17. (i) At all India level, there is no trend in monsoon rainfall during last 100 years,
but there are some regional patterns. Areas of increasing trend in monsoon rainfall are
found along the west coast, north Andhra Pradesh and north-west India, and those of
decreasing trend over east Madhya Pradesh and adjoining areas, north-east India and
parts of Gujarat and Kerala (-6 to -8% of normal over 100 years).
(ii) Rainfall analysis of data of 1140 stations in the country indicated that greater
than 70 per cent of the stations showed a short term fluctuations in annual rainfall for
less than 10 years period.
(iii) Surface air temperature for the period 1901-2000 indicates a significant
warming of 0.4 °C for 100 years. The spatial distribution of temperature changes
indicated a significant warming trend has been observed along the west coast, central
India, and interior Peninsula and over northeast India. However, cooling trend has
been observed in northwest and some parts in southern India.
(iv) Season wise temperature trends indicated that maximum increase in
temperature was observed in post monsoon (0.7°C) followed by winter (0.67°C) and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

premonsoon (0.5°C) and monsoon (0.3°C)
(v) Instrumental records over the past 130 years do not show any significant
long-term trend in the frequencies of large-scale droughts or floods in the summer
monsoon season.
(vi) The total frequency of cyclonic storms that form over Bay of Bengal has
remained almost constant over the period 1887-1997.
(vii) There are evidences that glaciers in Himalayas are receding at a rapid pace.
18. There is considerable uncertainty in rainfall projections for future. It is projected
that by the end of the 21st century rainfall will increase by 15-31%, and the mean
annual temperature will increase by 3°C to 6°C. All regions will not be similarly
affected. The warming will be more pronounced over land areas, with the maximum
increase over northern India. The warming is also projected to be relatively greater in
winter and post-monsoon seasons.
CONTRIBUTION OF INDIAN AGRICULTURE TO CLIMATE CHANGE
19. The Committee have been informed that agriculture sector contributes 28% of
the total GHG emissions from India (as per the data of 1994; Ministry of Environment
and Forest, this estimate does not include emissions from fossil fuels used in running
agricultural machines). The emissions are primarily due to methane emission from rice
paddies, enteric fermentation in ruminant animals, and nitrous oxides from application
of manures and fertilizers to agricultural soils.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

20. The emissions from Indian agriculture are likely to increase significantly in future
due to our need to increase food production. The latter would require greater
emphasis on fertilizer application of fertilizers and other inputs.  This, in a globally
warm environment, leads to increased emissions of nitrous oxides and other GHGs.
Increased temperatures would lead to higher emissions even at the current level of
fertilizer consumption.
Rice cultivatio n
23%
Manure
m anagem ent
5%
Em is s io n fro m
s o ils
12%
Ente r ic
ferm entati on
59%
Crop residues
1%
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

AGRO-CLIMATIC ZONES IN INDIA
21. There are 15 agro-climatic zones in India as delineated by Planning Commission
which are as follows:
1. Western Himalayan Region: J&K, HP, UP, Uttrakhand
2.  Eastern Himalayan Region: Assam Sikkim, W. Bengal & all North-
      Eastern States
3. Lower Gangetic Plains Region: W. Bengal
4. Middle Gangetic Plains Region: UP, Bihar
5. Upper Gangetic Plains Region: UP
6. Trans-Gangetic Plains Region: Punjab, Haryana, Delhi & Rajasthan
7. Eastern Plateau and Hills Region: Maharashtra, UP, Orissa & W. Bengal
8. Central Plateau and Hills Region: MP, Rajasthan, UP
9. Western Plateau and Hills Region: Maharashtra, MP & Rajasthan
10. Southern Plateau and Hills Region: AP, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu
11. East Coast Plains and Hills Region: Orissa, AP, TN, & Puducherry
12. West Coast Plains and Ghat Region : TN, Kerala, Goa, Karnataka,
Maharashtra
13. Gujarat Plains and Hills Region: Gujarat
14. Western Dry Region: Rajasthan
15. The Islands Region: Andaman & Nicobar, Lakshadweep
22. Although detailed zone wise analysis has not been done, broadly, the wheat
production in the Indo-Gangetic plain zones is likely to be affected negatively while the
crops in coastal and Island zones are likely to suffer from sea water inundation.
Productivity of fruit crops will be affected in the hill zones due to rise in temperature
and precipitation. ´
CLIMATE CHANGE RESEARCHES, SOME PROJECTED IMPACTS OF CLIMATE
CHANGE ON CROPS/HORTICULTURAL CROPS SECTOR.
23. The Committee have been informed that Department of Agricultural Research &
Education (DARE) and Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) are jointly
preparing the Mission Document on the National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture.
There were four issues of dryland agriculture, risk management, access to
information, and use of bio-technology.  In addition to that, ICAR has initiated a Project
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

on Climate Change since 2004.  In the current plan, ICAR have initiated projects
which deal with the methane production and mitigation strategies in livestock, shelter
management, food and fodder quality issues.  Then, they are also looking at how to
convert C 3 plants to C 4 plants, and coastal area management.  They have also
initiated a project which deals with eline mining.  They are looking at drought
submergence salinity and terminal heat tolerance.  They are planning to set up three
institutes which will be focusing on these very aspects on A-biotic, biotic and bio-
terminals.
24. The Committee were informed about the factors to maintain the temperature at
lower level, as under:
³One is carbon sequestration by residue management, restoration of rigged
soils, and conservation of agriculture; agro forestry, focussing on the modification of
feeding strategy, scientific water and nutrition management with a special focus on
rice paddies and then specific nutrition management strategies.  So, these are some
of the measures.  If we take these measures, we can probably keep this scenario at
the lower level.´
25. On the water quality aspects, the ICAR has an All India coordinated project which
looks at the use of poor quality water, saline water for crop production.  Then, they
also have aquaculture as a technique for trying to use these waste waters or poor
quality waters.  They are also looking at bio-remediation aspects as to how they can
make these waters fit for irrigation.  However, ICAR is basically looking at irrigation
water, and do not look at potable water.
26. As far as resource conservation technologies are concerned, ICAR has been
addressing this problem for a very long time.  A zero tillage technology, laser levelling,
which has really spread in the north part of the country, has really contributed in this
resource conservation, increasing the efficiency and also saving the cost of inputs to
the farmer.
27. During evidence Prof. Sulochna Gadgil, an expert in meteorological and
agriculture sectors explained about monsoon behaviours in India that:
³If you look at rainfall over our region from June to September, about slightly
more than half the IPCC assessment models say that the rainfall will increase and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

slightly less than half of the models say that the rainfall will decrease. So, in some
sense, what is going to happen to the total rainfall is as yet in the area of uncertainty.
We cannot rely on the estimates on what is going to happen to the rainfall over our
region. But I should also mention that one robust feature about rainfall that is coming
out is that the extreme events frequency is going to change. Perhaps, frequency of
droughts will change; perhaps, frequency of very heavy rainfall will change and so on.
This is a robust result that has come.
My suggestion is that we have to mitigate against or adapt our strategies for the
variability of the Climate between droughts and very good monsoon years and so on. ´
28. She further explained that µI have worked with a set of farmers, as you know, in
the semi-arid region and also tried to read up on what is done. I am not happy with
what we have done to adapt to Climate variability so far in agriculture. I think in
comparison with irrigated regions, for example, our rain-fed regions have not
prospered at all. I think we have not taken Climate variability into account sufficiently
to adapt properly to take care of the strategies. One result of this we found in a very
recent study in which we tried to see what is the component of change in the food
grain production during excess monsoon years versus deficit monsoon years, and we
found to our surprise that in deficit monsoon years, of course, the production goes
down very much, whether you are in 2002 or 1965 and so on. It is not made up in
excess monsoon years. Normally, you have excess and deficit in cycles and if the
production is not sufficiently higher in excess monsoon years, then you do not make
up the production and this is a very serious thing. This kind of asymmetry is even
more in the present era after 1980. I think there is a lot more work to be done to adapt
to Climate variability. Part of the problem has been that not enough attention has been
paid to the economics, cost benefit ratios that the farmers actually have to operate
under in deriving the strategies. ¶
29. To a specific question whether she was satisfied with the present relationship
between agro-meteorologists, agronomists and production experts because you are a
very eminent agro-meteorologist, the witness replied as under:
³I think a lot more needs to be done and in particular there are new areas in
which we need the genuinely inter-disciplinary effort. Development of good crop
models are needed because only with crop models we can assess the impact of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

different strategies for various rainfall regions. That kind of a thing has to be given
emphasis. I think certainly more work is required in promoting inter-disciplinary
research. Indian Meteorological Department is  very, very rich in data, but
meteorologists traditionally always have this attitude that they will analyze what they
want and you take it or leave it. I am not blaming particularly IMD or anybody else.
This is all over the world.  So, we scientists have also not delivered the way we should
have because we did not have an end-to-end approach. We said, µOkay, this is the
information and prediction on rainfall and you do what you can ¶.  So, I think all of us,
scientists, have to go to the farmers and the agricultural experts and say what sort of
information on variability is critical and wanted and accordingly generate that and
generate the predictions. ´
LIKELY IMPACT OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE ON INDIAN AGRICULTURE
SECTOR
30. Climate Change is likely to impact negatively many aspects of agriculture
including irrigation availability, soil health, pests, and crop and livestock production.
Preliminary calculations to quantify the decrease in production of wheat suggest a
likely decrease of 4 to 5 million tonnes with an increase of 1 o C increase in
temperature throughout the growing season. Work on other crops is being done. At
present, comprehensive estimates of costs of abating them are lacking.
31. When asked about the sectors of agriculture in India contributing to Climate
Change and to what extent when compared to other sectors, the Department replied
as under:
³Agriculture sector contributes 28% of the total GHG emissions from India (as
per the data of 1994; Ministry of Environment and Forests). The emissions are
primarily due to methane emission from rice paddies, enteric fermentation in ruminant
animals, and nitrous oxides from application of manures and fertilizers to agricultural
soils.´
IMPACT ON CROP SCIENCE SECTOR
32. (i) Changes in Climate are expected to create both positive as well as
negative impacts on rice yield of Tamil Nadu. Impact is more during Kharif
season (Southwest monsoon) than in Rabi (Northeast monsoon) season.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

During Kharif season in 2020, 10 to 15 per cent reduction in rice yield is
expected due to increase in temperature and change in rainfall.  In 2050,
30 to 35 per cent yield reduction and in 2080, up to 80 per cent yield
reduction is expected in Tamil Nadu.
(ii) High temperature around flowering, increased pollen sterility in rice and
reduced pollen germination on stigma. Aromatic rice was more sensitive
than non-aromatic rice. High temperature also reduced test weight, grain
elongation and aroma in basmati rice.
(iii) Yields of onion & tomato have shown response to elevated concentration
of CO 2 (550 ppm). GIS studies on prediction of suitability of growing
ginger in Orissa and West Bengal now a highly suitable region have
shown that these areas would be less suitable with rising in temperature
by about 1.5 to 2 oC. Research has shown that Grape cv. Cabernet
Sauvignon differs in maturity in different growing conditions, which can
be used to increase our adaptive capacity to Climate Change. Studies
are also being done to characterize environmental response of other
crops as well. Low temperature (4.0-11.5 oC), high humidity (more than
80%) and cloudy weather delayed panicle emergence in mango.
Coconut productivity increased fast during the last 50 years in Ratnagiri
district of Maharashtra, Maidan Karnataka and Coimbatore of Tamil
Nadu, except recent declining trends due to consecutive droughts.
(iv) Analysis of recent weather data in Himachal Pradesh indicated that the
maximum temperature is showing an increasing trend during November
to April. This has resulted in a possible shift of apple belt upwards (and
thus limited fulfilment of chilling hour ¶s requirements of the crop) and
increasing area of apple in higher elevations. The new areas of apple
cultivation have appeared in Lahaul and Spiti and upper reaches of
Kinnaur district of Himachal Pradesh. Trend predicted apple productivity
in Kullu, Shimla as well as overall average productivity of the State has
shown declining trend. Average State productivity in 1980-81 was 7.06
tons ha that decreased to 4.65 tons ha in 2004-05.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(v) Coconut yields are likely to be affected by Global Climate Change. Plains
of Karnataka, Eastern TN, coastal AP, Pondicherry, WB and Assam
were found to be hotspots as per HadCM3 model scenarios of climate
change; No change in productivity was projected due to Climate Change
in coastal Karnataka and Kerala.
(vi) Two generations of castor crop showed significant response under
elevated CO 2 levels (700 & 550 ppm) in terms of growth, biomass and
yield. The growth characters viz., root and shoot lengths, root shoot
ratios, leaf area, root, stem, and leaf dry weights and specific leaf area
were found to be significant at higher at 550 and 700ppm CO 2 in both the
generations.
(vii) Inventory of greenhouse gases emissions from rice and wheat
production systems was developed for all India based on InfoCrop
model. It indicated higher emissions in intensely cultivated regions of
Indo-Gangetic plains, Coastal Andhra Pradesh & Orissa. No tillage
mitigated emissions to a limited extent in upland cropping.
(viii) Annual C sequestration in coconut above ground biomass varies from 15
CERs to 35 CERs depending on cultivar, agro-climatic zone, soil type
and management; Annually sequestered carbon stocked into stem in the
range of 0.3 to 2.3 CERs; Standing C stocks in 16 year old coconut
cultivars in different agro-climatic zones varied from 15 CERs to 60
CERs; Annual C sequestration by coconut plantation is higher in red
sandy loam soils and lowest in littoral sandy soils.
(ix) Regional climatic zone-wise carbon inventory of agroforestry systems of
Himachal Pradesh based on revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National
Greenhouse Gas Inventory has been prepared. The agroforestry
systems inventories were agri-silviculture, agri-horti-silviculture, agri-
horticulture and silvi-pasture systems under the business as usual
scenario i.e. current management scenario agri-silviculture and silvi-
pasture systems were evaluated to contribute positively towards carbon
sequestration whereas agri-horticulture and agri-horti-silviculture
systems were found to release more carbon to the atmosphere.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

33. The Committee pointed out that as per projected impacts of Climate Change on
Indian agriculture, productivity of cereals would decrease due to increase in
temperature and decrease in water availability, especially, in Indo-Gangetic plains and
asked ICAR¶s projections about decrease in production of foodgrains/cereals and the
remedial measures they would suggest to increase the production and productivity of
foodgrains/cereals in spite of Global Climate Change.  To this point, the Department in
their written reply stated as under:
³Remedial measures include development of heat tolerant varieties. In addition,
there are several other options:
• Augment production
• Improve land-use management
• Improve land-use and natural resource management policies
• Improve risk management through early warning system and crop insurance
• Establish regional food security programmes
• Raise capacity in Global Climate Change assessments
• Recycle waste water and solid wastes in agriculture
In the specific case of wheat, simple adaptations such as change in planting
dates and crop varieties could help in reducing impacts of Climate Change to some
extent. For example, the losses in wheat production can be reduced from 4-5 million
tons to 1-2 million tons if a large percentage of farmers could change to timely
planting. This may, however, not be easy to implement due to constraints associated
with wheat planting time in rice-based cropping systems. ´
34.  ICAR considers that the changes which are taking place, probably transgenic
technology is likely to pay much needed dividends be it drought or be it salinity or be it
varying biotic and abiotic stresses.  So, they believe this is probably the area which
would be receiving pinpointed attention and therefore for insulating crops to weather
vagaries including that in agriculture, horticulture, livestock and fishery.
35. When enquired about which food crops would be benefited by increased CO 2
presence in the atmosphere and which other crops would face loss in their production
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and whether any study has been made in this regard and the progress made to
mitigate the loss of food crops production, the representative of DARE/ICAR replied as
under:
³With increase in CO 2 concentration, all the food crops will be benefited with
higher biomass.  No reduction in the crop growth is reported so far in the literature.
The benefits are more prominent with C3 photosynthetic pathway crops compared with
C4 pathway crops. The major food crops like rice, wheat, all the pulse and oilseed
crops fall under C 3 category, whereas maize, sorghum, pearlmillet and sugarcane are
C4 crops.  However, under moisture stress condition increased CO 2 was found to be
more beneficial even to C4 crops.
The impact of increased CO 2 on the growth and yield of different food crops is in
progress under Network Project on Climate Change (NPCC) at different ICAR
Institutes. The major options like scientific water and nutrient management, site
specific nutrient management, residue management, restoration of degraded soils,
conservation agriculture, and agroforestry can help in reducing the impact of Climate
Change.´
36. On a point, as to why there is so much variation and the reasons for this and to
what extent this variation will change the crop pattern and their production across the
country, the DARE/ICAR replied as under:
³ The variation in response of different food crops to increase CO 2 is basically
due to the difference in photosynthetic pathways (C 3 and C 4).  The response is also
depends upon the fertilizer, irrigation and temperature.  The temperature rise in wheat
belt in the central India resulted in the shift of wheat growing area towards north.  The
similar trend was found with shift in apple cultivation towards higher altitudes in
Himachal Pradesh.´
37. The Committee further enquired about the factors which can keep the rise in
temperature at lower level of 1.5°C  instead  higher level of 4.5°C.  To this point, the
representative of DARE/ICAR responded as under:
³The increased level of Green House Gas (GHG) emissions, deforestation and
changing land use patterns are the major factors for rise in temperature.  The energy
sector is the major contributor of GHGs and agriculture sector comes next.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

By reducing the GHG emissions from all the sectors, viz., energy, transport,
industries and agriculture globally it is possible to keep the rise in temperature at lower
levels of 1.5°C.  However, this requires designing energy efficient systems and
following the International guidelines in reducing GHG emissions. ´
METHANE EMISSION FROM RICE
38. The Committee also asked the Department to confirm that the rice cultivation in
India alone contributes about 23% of total agricultural sector contribution to Climate
Change and their opinion, as to what can be done to reduce or minimize this 23%
contribution of emissions from rice cultivation.  To this point, the Department in a
written reply stated as under:
³As per the recent inventory made by the Ministry of Environment and Forests,
rice contributes almost 23% of the total emissions from agriculture.  Recent research,
using better characterization of agro-ecosystem properties, indicates that this fraction
could be even lower.
Minimizing the emissions from rice paddies: A significant proportion of emission
is inevitable from rice fields, which remain flooded. There is a limited scope of
reducing emissions from irrigated rice fields by midseason drainage or alternate drying
instead of continuous flooding, use of nitrification inhibitors, such as neem-coated
urea, and fertilizer placement practices. ´
39. The Committee wanted to know about reasons for the claims made by ICAR-IARI
that Methane emissions from rice is much smaller than estimated by Western
agencies, the Department in their written reply stated as under:
³Yes, Methane emissions from rice fields in India are much smaller than
estimated by western agencies. This was due to the fact that estimates given by
western agencies were based on a very limited study conducted in Europe and USA,
and extrapolated to India and other tropical regions.  Emission factors in these studies
were high due to higher soil organic carbon content of their soils, large use of organic
manure and continuous flooded conditions.
There are several studies done in India, which have indicated low emission
factors from Indian paddies due to our low soil organic matter content, limited addition
of organic materials, and intermittent flooding conditions of large areas of rice fields.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

To produce, one kilogram of rice today about 3000 litres of water is required.
This is the average at the global level with a range of 2200 to 5200 litres of water to
produce one kilogram of rice.  India is only having 4.2 per cent water of the whole
world and 17 per cent of the population of the world.  That is the reason, Sir, if we go
for intermittent drying and wetting same amount of yield can be had rather than with
impounding of water and the greenhouse gas emission would also be reduced.  So,
we are very clear what is precisely required to be done.
Based on research, Dr. N.K. Singh team from IARI have clearly demonstrated
that in 12 chromosome of rice as well as A, B and D genome of wheat there is
synteny.  This very clearly indicates that the characteristic of rice could be transferred
to wheat.´
SOME PROJECTED IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON SOIL, STREAM FLOWS
AND PEST
40. (i) In future, soil conservation efforts would need greater focus in
Peninsular and central India because of their projected high runoff and soil
losses associated with global climate change. A decreasing trend of
runoff and soil loss is ordered when we move from tropics to temperate
region.
(ii) Simulation results indicated an increase in mean annual
streamflow at several places in 2020 and 2050 under PRECIS RCM
scenarios. Though there is increase in annual streamflow, a decrease in
monthly streamflow, particularly during summer months (February ±
June) was projected.
(iii) Pest prediction equations in relation to temperature were
developed for thrips population in horticultural crops. It was observed
that thrips on rose required 265 and aphids 119 thermal day degrees
(TDD) for development under field conditions.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SOME PROJECTED IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON ANIMALS
HUSBANDRY SECTOR
41. (i) A rise of 2-6°C due to global warming (time slices 2040-2069 and
2070-2099) will negatively impact growth, puberty and maturity of
crossbreds and buffaloes and time to attain puberty of crossbreds and
buffaloes will increase by one to two weeks due to their higher sensitivity
to temperature than indigenous cattle.
(ii) Global warming is likely to lead to a loss of 1.8 million tonnes in
milk production by 2020 and 15 million tonnes by 2050. High producing
crossbred cows and buffaloes will be affected more by Climate Change.
Based on temperature-humidity index (THI), the estimated annual loss in
milk production at the all-India level is 1.8 million tonnes by 2020(valued
at Rs. 2661.62 crores at current prices). The economic losses were
highest in UP followed by Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan and W. Bengal.
(iii) An inventory of enteric methane emission for 2006 was prepared
following IPCC guidelines on good practice guidance and uncertainty
reduction and using Tier 2 methodology of IPCC. Tier 1 methodology
and default factors of IPCC have been used for estimating enteric
methane emissions for Sheep, Goats, Equines, Pigs and other animals.
The emissions for the year 2006 were estimated at 9.39 Tg/annum from
both enteric emissions and manure management. The contribution of
indigenous cattle to enteric emission was 38% and that of buffaloes 43%.
42. The Department was asked whether they have started any research on the likely
impact of Global Climate Change on imported as well as pure Indian breeds of various
livestock and their products in all the agro-climatic zones of India and the details of the
research conducted so far, future plans and cost of R&D involved in this regard. To
these points, they replied as under:
³The ICAR has proposed research programmes in the XI plan through network
mode involving SAUs, NGOs, State Departments in different agro-eco regions for both
adaptation and mitigation strategies in livestock.   Some of the programmes focus on:
§ Shelter management.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

§ Biotechnological approaches on rumen manipulation.
§ Allele mining for better adaptive traits.
§ Reducing methane due to enteric fermentation through feeding strategies.
§ Surveillance and monitoring of livestock and poultry diseases in different
agro-climatic zones of the country.
A modest funding of about Rs. 30.00 crore is proposed during the XI Plan for
the various R&D activities concerning Climate Change and livestock.
 The assessment of qualitative and quantitative changes in livestock production
is difficult to project due to variable factors associated.  However, few studies on
impact of heat stress on dairy cattle in terms of temperature humidity index (THI) have
shown that a THI less than 72 has no stress effect; at THI between 72 to 79; there is
slight effect on milk production; at THI between 80 to 89, there is 7-8 per cent
decrease in milk production.  The annual loss is projected to be 1832 million litres as
per the study conducted by NDRI, Karnal.
ICAR has taken up studies to know the affect of temperature humidity index on
physiological parameters and on production in collaboration with Department of
Animal Husbandry Dairying & Fisheries for developing a database on this aspect.
ICAR has also proposed several programmes in a network mode for adaptation
and mitigation strategies that include:
• Assessment of methane production under different production systems.
• Methane mitigation strategies through nutritional and biotechnological
approaches.
• Shelter management studies for different species of livestock.
• Allele mining for biotic stress and development of biochemical markers like
HSP.
• Development of data base on animal response to different THI. ´
43. The Department was further asked to determine the optimal size of livestock
population for the present and future times, considering milk requirement, diet,
greenhouse gas emissions, and social issues and also to suggest to integrate
livestock rearing with fodder and crop farming.  To these points, the Department in a
reply stated as under:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³The optimal size of livestock population of the country is to be determined
based on the projected requirement of livestock products, availability of feed and
fodder resources, land resource availability and environmental sustainability. The
estimated requirement of milk, meat and egg by 2020 would be about 160.0 million
tonnes, 10.58 million tonnes and 90 billion, respectively.  The strategies for regulating
the cattle population without affecting the overall production target are (a) selecting
high producing animals using marker assisted selection for developing elite herds (b)
improving the production potential of animal genetic resources (c) increasing per
animal productivity through improved breeding, feeding and health care, (d) enhancing
the supply of quality fodder seeds, (e) integrating and strengthening the linkages
between the Departments of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Environment &
Forest.´
44. The Committee enquired about the enteric fermentation and emissions from soils
respectively, out of the total contribution of agricultural sector to Climate Change in
India, and their proposal to minimize these emissions, the Department replied as
under:
³As per the recent inventory made by the Ministry of Environment and Forests,
enteric fermentation and emissions from soils contribute about 59% and 12%
respectively of the total agricultural sector ¶s contributions to Climate Change. A large
fraction of these emissions are inevitable due to the importance of livestock for our
food and livelihood security, and need to fertilize soils to raise production.
There are several options to reduce emissions but these need greater research
for estimating their practical effectiveness, and associated costs: benefits. Enteric
fermentation of methane emission can be reduced by feeding strategies (balancing of
nutrients through complete feed blocks, total mixed rations, use of feed additives, use
of plants secondary metabolites and manipulation of rumen microbes through
biotechnological approaches).
Soil carbon sequestration is considered the main mechanism responsible for
mitigation potential from soils. There are several approaches to increase carbon
sequestration in soils of South Asia. These include scientific water and nutrient
management, minimal tillage, and agroforestry.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING & FISHERIES
45. The Secretary, DAHDF, during evidence explained the effects of Climate Change
as under:
³«Like other sectors, the Global Climate Change will have some impacts on
the lifestock sector and also on the fisheries sector.  Basically, what we anticipate is
that the heat stress and increase in temperature may have adverse impact on the
productivity of the animals, which will lead to an adverse influence on total milk
production.
The second likely impact may be on the availability of fodder. There is already
severe deficit of green fodder and feed for the animals which is having an adverse
impact on the productivity of the animals.  It is because of the more incidences of
floods or droughts or weather pattern, the area under fodder is already coming down
and it will have an adverse impact on the total area under fodder.  Second will be the
impact in terms of availability of feed and fodder.
The third impact is that there may be increase in the vector-borne diseases.
Animal disease is a serious problem already.  We anticipate that this Climate Change
will have an adverse impact on animal disease and animal health.
Then, another likely impact is that with the increase in the sea level, the coastal
areas will get inundated and there may be adverse impact on the mangroves and also
bleaching of coral reefs.  These are very important breeding grounds for many
important breeds of fishes.  This will also have an adverse impact on the biodiversity
as far as fishery resources are concerned. ´
46. To offset these above impacts of global warming, the Department of AHD&F is
doing the following:
³Firstly, the R&D is going to play a very important role in various areas whether
it is improvement of productivity or tackling the problem of disease or raising the
productivity of fishery resources etc.  We have identified certain priority areas where
we want to collaborate with the ICAR and undertake research in those areas.
We have a major programme which is called the National Project for Cattle and
Buffalo Breeding.  The basic idea is how we increase the productivity of the animal.
We have a very large animal population whether it is cattle, buffaloes, goats or sheep.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

But the productivity is very low.  Our productivity is less than half of the world average
and almost about 10 per cent of what we achieve in a country like Israel.  So, a major
focus is that we want to stabilise the population of animals to be in line with the
carrying capacity of the land.  Our focus is on artificial insemination especially of the
non-descript cattle where if we can improve the productivity, the milk productivity will
certainly rise.  Our indigenous breeds in cattle especially have the capacity to bear
stress whether it is heat stress or humidity stress or fighting the diseases.
Another focus area for the Department is that we want to improve the
infrastructure and the condition of veterinary services which really are in a very bad
shape in various States.  We are trying to improve the condition of infrastructure
whether it is hospitals or dispensaries or artificial insemination centres etc.
Technically trained manpower is another constrains which we are trying to tackle.
As far as control of animal diseases is concerned, India has got freedom from
rinderpest.  Our major focus now is on control of foot and mouth disease which is
causing severe economic losses to the country.  We are running the programme of
FMD in 54 districts but we need to take up the whole region in a compact manner.
Like for Pulse Polio Campaign, we need very large amount of resources.  We have
prepared a Concept Paper which we will be posing to the World Bank and also to the
NABARD for funding this Programme for Control of Animal Diseases.
I submitted for consideration that fodder availability is already a problem and
this problem may get further aggravated.  So, we are trying to work in various
directions to improve the availability of fodder.   For example, one area could be if we
could utilise the wastelands or the common property resources for growing some
fodder crops.
Another promising area which we have discussed is the treatment of de-oiled
cakes, what we call bypass protein, which will help increasing the yield of animals.
There are a number of areas in the fodder which we think will improve the availability
of fodder.´
SOME PROJECTED IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON FISHERIES SECTOR
47. (i) A rise in temperature as small as 1°C could have important and rapid
effects on the mortality of fish and their geographical distributions. Oil sardine
fishery did not exist before 1976 in the northern latitudes and along the east
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

coast as the resource was not available/and sea surface temperature (SST) were
not congenial. With warming of sea surface, the oil sardine is able to find
temperature to its preference especially in the northern latitudes and eastern
longitudes, thereby extending the distributional boundaries and establishing
fisheries in larger coastal areas.
(ii) The dominant demersal fish, the threadfin breams have responded to
increase in SST by shifting the spawning season off Chennai. Whereas 35.3%
of the spawners of  Nemipterus japonicus  occurred during the warm months
(April - September) in 1980, the number of spawners gradually reduced and
only 5.0% of the spawners occurred during the same season in 2004. During
this period, the spawning activity reduced in summer months and shifted
towards cooler months. A similar trend was observed in  Nemipterus mesoprion
too.
(iii) Recent Climatic patterns have brought about hydrological changes in the
flow pattern of river Ganga. This has been one major factor resulting in erratic
breeding and decline in fish spawn availability. As a result the total average fish
landing in the Ganga river system declined from 85.21 tonnes during 1959 to
62.48 tonnes during 2004. In the middle and lower Ganga, sixty genera of
phytoplankton was recorded during 1959, which declined to 44 numbers by
1996. In case of Zooplankton during the same period the number diminished
from 38 to 26. A number of fish species, which were predominantly only
available in the lower and middle Ganga in 1950s, are now recorded from the
upper cold-water stretch upto Tehri.
(iv) In recent years the phenomenon of Indian Major Carps maturing and
spawning as early as March is observed in West Bengal with its breeding
season extending from 110-120 days (Pre1980-85) to 160-170 days
(2000-2005). As a result it has been possible to breed them twice in a year at
an interval ranging from 30-60 days. A prime factor influencing this trend is
elevated temperature, which stimulate the endocrine glands and help in the
maturation of the gonads of Indian major carp. The average minimum and
maximum temperature throughout the State has increased in the range of
0.1 to 0.9ºC.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(v) Corals in Indian Ocean will be soon exposed to summer temperatures
that will exceed the thermal thresholds observed over the last 20 years. Annual
bleaching of corals will become almost a certainty from 2050. Given the
implication that reefs will not be able to sustain catastrophic events more than 3
times a decade, reef building corals are likely to start disappear as dominant
organisms on coral reefs between 2030 and 2040 and the reefs are likely to
become remnant between 2050 and 2060 in the Gulf of Mannar.
48. The Committee pointed out that the United Nations Climate Panel estimates that
modern global warming could melt glaciers and raise world sea level up to two feet by
2100 and asked about the anticipated impact of rise of sea level in Indian sub-
continent, especially with reference to agriculture and allied sectors and socio-
economic life of Indian people.  To these points, the Department of Agricultural
Research and Education stated as under:
³Researches on these aspects fall in the area domain of the Ministry of Earth
Sciences and National Institute of Oceanography, Goa, which conduct such
studies. IPCC recently synthesized all available global information on this
aspect in its recent assessment, and concluded that sea level will rise by 0.18
to 0.59 meters by 2100.
If such sea level rise takes place in India, impacts on the livelihood of coastal
communities will be considerable. From agricultural perspectives, not many
studies have been done in India. However, we can expect vast stretches of
coastal lands to get submerged, making them unsuitable for upland crops;
increased salinity in aquifers may lead to reduced crop production in coastal
lands, and fish production will also get affected.
Increase in seawater temperature will affect the distribution, growth and
reproductive cycle of marine fishes. The increase will be beneficial with likely
positive effects on major pelagic fishery such as oil sardine, mackerel and
Bombay duck. It is likely that the abundance and catch of adaptable fish
species will increase. It is expected that there will be changes in the species
composition of fish catch. Coral reefs will be affected and will indirectly affect
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the reef-dependent fisheries. Sea level rise may inundate the coastal areas
leading to salinization. The coastal aquaculture activities can be practiced in
such areas.
For sustaining production and productivity, the fisheries sector may be able to
adapt to Climate Change (i) by designing fuel efficient fishing craft & gear, (ii)
by developing resources specific fish harvesting techniques for emerging new
fishery, (iii) acclimatization of commercially available cultivable species to the
Climate Change in freshwater, coastal and marine ecosystems, and (iv)
identifying new candidate species for aquaculture having more adaptability
towards changes in salinity and temperature regime. ´
49. When asked whether ICAR has started any research on the likely impact of
Global Climate Change on marine and inland fisheries quantitatively and qualitatively
along with the details of cost involved in all the agro-climatic zones/coastal zones of
India, they replied as under:
³Research studies on the possible impacts of Climate Change on fisheries and
aquaculture are in progress in the Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute
(CMFRI), Kochi and Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute (CIFRI),
Barrackpore, as collaborating centres under the ICAR Network Project on
µImpact, Adaptation and Vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to Climate Change.
CMFRI is conducting research on the impact of Climate Change on marine
fisheries. Further, the CMFRI has also taken up research programme on the
impact and yield study of environmental changes on distribution shifts in small
pelagics along the Indian coast.
Under the Network Project, CIFRI is conducting research on the impact
assessment of Climate Change on Inland Fisheries covering 14 major river
systems flowing through 13 agro-climatic zones of India. Further, the impact of
Climate Change on fish breeding and aquaculture is in progress in the States of
West Bengal and Orissa.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Pilot trials on advanced maturation and breeding of Indian major carps in the
context of temperature rise are also being conducted. ´
50. During evidence, the Committee were apprised that as temperature increases,
some fish start migrating. For example, all sardines, instead of being restricted to
Kerala coast, are now all over eastern coast and western coast. Similarly, their
reproductive cycle gets affected and they start producing much faster. So, some of
them could also be beneficial aspects which we have still to characterise adequately.
51. The Secretary,  DAHD&F, further explained about their priorities as under:
³So far on fishery sector is concerned, our priority is for the inland fishery
because we want to promote inland aquaculture.  The productivity in various
water bodies is very low.  We are trying to tackle the problem of increasing the
productivity in reservoirs, canals, tanks and ponds.  You may be aware that we
have set up a National Fisheries Development Board which will undertake a
major programme for improving productivity in various inland areas.
The second focus area is this.  You are aware that while the coastal areas have
been over-exploited, there is hardly any exploitation of deep sea marine
resources.  We are trying to see what changes are required in our deep sea
marine fishing policy so that we can exploit our Exclusive Economic Zone to a
much better extent.  We are undertaking various programmes.  For example,
tuna is a major priority area for us for exploitation of marine resources.  We have
embarked upon a programme of conversion of the traditional craft into long-line
tuna vessels.  It is because tuna will give us much better economic returns.
There are many other schemes for the welfare of fishermen and also for
promoting both marine fishery and the inland fishery. ´
REMEDIAL STEPS TAKEN PROPOSED BY ICAR TO MITIGATE THE NEGATIVE
IMPACTS OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE
52. (i) ³ICAR launched in 2004 a National Network entitled µImpacts, Adaptation
and Vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to Climate Change ¶. The major
objectives of this Network are to quantify the sensitivity of crops including
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

horticultural crops and plantations, soils, water, fish and livestock to Global
Climatic Changes.  This project had 15 partner institutes during the Xth plan:
Indian Agricultural Research Institute (New Delhi), Central Research Institute
for Dryland Agriculture (Hyderabad), Central Soil and Water Conservation
Research Institute (Dehradun), HP Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya (Palampur), ND
University for Agricultural and Technology (Faizabad), Indian Institute of Soil
Science (Bhopal), Tamilnadu Agricultural University (Coimbatore), University
of Horticulture and Forestry (Solan), ICAR Research Complex for Eastern
Region (Patna), Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute (Kochi), Central
Inland Fisheries Research Institute (Barrackpore), JN Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya
(Jabalpur), National Dairy Research Institute (Karnal), Central Plantations
Crops Research Institute (Kasargod), and Indian Institute of Horticultural
Research (Bangalore).
(ii) Several new centers are proposed to be added to this Network in the 11 th
plan. The objectives have been expanded to analyze options for adaptation and
mitigation.
(iii) A Multi-Disciplinary Expert Group has been established in the ICAR to
continuously review and monitor developments in Global Climate Change and to
advise on issues relevant to agriculture.
(iv)  Climate Change has been identified as a priority area under National
Agricultural Innovations Project (NAIP).  Grants are especially available for
climate change related research and development projects. ´
53. During evidence when asked about the development of various varieties of food
item, the Secretary, DARE stated as under:
³Our Varietal Development Programme year after year has been developing
varieties, breeds, and livestock befitting the climatic requirements, but it is
much more pronounced now. Hon. Prime Minister has released documents on
Management on Climate Change and has mentioned in the document, C 3 plant
could be converted to C 4 plant which simply means that because carbon
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

dioxide is increasing in the environment and rice, which is being cultivated in 44
million hectares, is a C3 plant and takes less carbon dioxide and converts it into
photosynthets. Sugarcane is there which is a C 4 plant. It uses lot more carbon
dioxide. If maize is there, it is a C 4 plant and takes lot of carbon dioxide. If we
convert rice from C 3 plant to C 4, then adversities could be converted into
opportunities. If we convert wheat, which is a C 3 plant, to C 4 plant, it will help.
So, it is not that it is being talked about, but a strategy has also been thought
about. But results cannot be had in one year or five years; results will come
after ten years or so because this is something which is indeed something
basic and lot more efforts would be required. ´
54. About extension and the information dissemination on Climate Change to
farmers level, the witness stated:
³Virtual extension is essentially called for and total revamping in the extension
system in this context is required not only with respect to Climate Change but
taking technology to the doorstep of the farmers also is absolutely essential so
that knowledge and technology can be judiciously and effectively utilised. ´
55. The Committee asked about the adaptation strategies can help minimize
negative impacts of Global Climate Change on Indian agriculture and allied sectors
and the Department replied as under:
³There are several options that can help in increasing our adaptive capacity to
Climate Change. The key ones are:
§ Augment production
§ Improve land-use management
§ Improve land-use and natural resource management policies
§ Improve risk management through early warning system and crop
insurance
§ Establish regional food security programmes
§ Raise capacity in Global Climate Change assessments
§ Recycle waste water and solid wastes in agriculture. ´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SOME RESULTS OF THE ICAR RESEARCH ON CLIMATE CHANGE
56. (i) Several varieties with tolerance to heat, drought, cold and salinity have
been developed in different crops. Superior genotypes possessing high
temperature tolerance have been identified and are being used in breeding
programmes for high temperature environments. In wheat, recently WH 730 has
been registered as heat tolerant genetic stock and this variety has been
distributed to different wheat breeding centres. DBW 14, a recently release
genotype is gaining popularity for late sown environments because of thermal
tolerance and productivity. In addition to this, popular varieties such as NIAW 34,
RAJ 3765 and RAJ 4037 have also been found to have thermal tolerance.
(ii) A set of advance genotypes of various crops are being screened at
different locations to evaluate them for thermal tolerance. Controlled
environmental facilities are being strengthened for investigations on thermal
tolerance. Molecular marker approaches are being developed for this purpose.
POLICY SUPPORT FROM GOVERNMENT OF INDIA NEEDED TO COUNTER THE
NEGATIVE IMPACT OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE
57. When the Government was asked to give their opinion as to what policy support
from the Government of India is needed to counter the negative impact of Global
Climate Change on agriculture & allied sectors in India, the Department in their written
reply stated as under:
³There are several areas where policy support from the Government of India
will help in increasing our adaptive capacity. These include:
• Increased support for agriculture research.
• Climate change impacts and adaptations should be considered in all major
developmental planning activities.
• Enhance investment in water harvesting and conservation options; and
promote small farm mechanization and efficient water use technologies.
• Adoption of scientific and economic pricing policies, especially for water,
land, energy, and other resources.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

• Financial incentives and package for improved land management including
resource conservation/ enhancement (water, carbon, energy), and fertilizer
use efficiency.
• Establish µGreen Research Fund ¶ for strengthening research on adaptation,
mitigation and impact assessment on agriculture. ´
MANAGING CLIMATE VARIABILITY TO DEVELOP AGRICULTURAL
STRATEGIES
58. The Committee asked the Department to elaborate as to how we can take care
of Climate variability so as to develop agricultural strategies.  To this point, they stated
as under:
³The agricultural strategies to manage Climate variability should consist of both
short term and long term strategies.  The short term strategies include the use
of available drought/ heat tolerant varieties, water harvesting and efficient use
of rain water and irrigation water and proven agronomic practices that release
minimum greenhouse gases, etc. The long term strategies include development
of varieties of crops and improved breeds tolerant to extreme weather
situations through use of frontier technologies, development of resource
conservation technologies for different agro-climatic zones that use less water
and energy and evolving socio-economic safety nets like weather insurance. In
addition, an early warning system of climatic risks, and prior development of
region specific responses will be useful. ´
59. The Committee wanted to know the opinion of the Department for creating a
force of µClimate Risk Managers ¶ at village level and in small towns and what kind of
training should be provided to them.  To this point, the Department replied as under:
³Climate Risk Managers are needed at all levels. At the village level/block level,
they should be able to communicate the strategies required to manage climatic
risks on a real-time basis to the farmers. At the same time they should be able
to liaise with other related functionaries, including National Disaster
Management Authority, Indian Meteorology Department and Department of
Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, and insurance officials. He/she should be
trained in these aspects by the NDMA.  Such Climate Risk Managers would
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

also be useful at district and State levels to liaise with Government officials and
other donor/relief agencies. ´
60. On the impact of Climate Change on crossbred and indigenous milch animals,
the representative of DARE/ICAR stated:
³Crossbreds were there; they were high productive; but they required a different
kind of management and situations. There are a number of indigenous breeds
which are indeed extremely tolerant to heat and extremely tolerant to different
biotic stresses. Not only in case of cattle but in case of buffalo also it is there.
Buffalo is one which is indeed extremely suitable for urban conditions and the
consequent result is that it is not in the Indo-Gangetic alluvian but even in
Rajasthan there are certain districts where buffalo population is increasing. ´
61. As regards the importance of carbon credit, the Committee were apprised as
under:
³Yes, carbon credit is indeed extremely important. But the farmer is not as
much aware. Hardly a few people are aware about this carbon credits. Even
educated people, a number of people are not much more aware of. But this is,
indeed, extremely important ± a plant species like bamboo is indeed extremely
important. If you talk of carbon credit, a bamboo would be much more effective
and the same could be true for forests, could be true for agro forestry and the
same could be true for many other crops and commodities and probably we
can capitalise on this. ´
62. As regards the action plan for fertiliser and sustainable development, the
Secretary, DARE submitted that:
³There is an action plan and it is in this action plan that the Government of India
for the first time took some monumental decision. The first was that there would
be nutrient-based subsidy. What is its implication? What ratio of fertilisers is
essentially required to be applied is 4:2:1 of Nitrogen:Phosphate:Potash, but
there in Punjab and Haryana today. It is almost 34:9:1. In certain cases, it is
47:13:1. It is because subsidy was tuned much more towards nitrogenous
fertilisers. So, this monumental historic decision will correct the imbalances.
Government¶s second monumental decision was regarding fortification of
fertilisers. The micro-nutrients like zinc, boron and sulphur were deficient and in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

fortification, now these fertilisers could be enriched. Productivity is not declining.
What is declining is rate of growth and what is declining is total factor
productivity. You apply the same amount of fertiliser, but you will not get same
response.  It is because the ratio of 4:2:1 has become 34:9:1. So, this
monumental decision was taken by the Government.
About neem-coated urea, it was stated that if you apply neem-coated urea, there
will be slow release of the nitrogen and consequently better utilisation of that
nitrogen. Whatever nitrogen we apply today, hardly 40 per cent of that is utilised
by the plant and 60 per cent goes into environment and becomes a pollutant and
the greenhouse gas emission takes place. Therefore, neem-coated urea is a
right step in that direction.
As regards development of a sector-wise and crop-wise strategy, it was
mentioned that there are 15 agro-climatic zones in the country.  That is the
reason that we are intensifying our efforts. That is the reason that in the Tenth
Plan what we started at 15 or 16 centres, we are going to now undertake at
about 26 centres so that we are able to have precise information befitting
different regions, situations and systems so that we can respond to the likely
Climate Change.
Sometimes adversities to the crop become helpful to other regions in the country.
For example, wheat rust Ug99 came as a new race in Uganda in the year 1999,
and 80 per cent of the wheat -- which is currently grown in the whole world -- was
susceptible to that race. This race started moving to Kenya and came down to
Iran last year, and we were expecting that next year it would be in India. But the
temperature abruptly went up, and consequently the inoculum building up of rust
was reduced. Therefore, something that was disadvantageous because of the
temperature became advantageous because of inoculum load being less. On the
other hand, for example, in the year 2003, when our estimate for wheat
production were coming to about 70-73 million tonnes, it went to 69 million
tonnes. The reason being the temperature went up in the month of March, and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

consequently, productivity was considerably reduced. Almost, 4-5 million tonnes
was the reduction in the country.
As regards poor technology dissemination, this is important and far more efforts
are required to be made in it. Further, improved land use management is
absolutely essential.
Shortage of water and water management, it is crucial. 16 tonnes of soil per
hectare per annum is getting eroded. Out of this, 29 per cent is going to the sea,
and the rest is getting deposited in the river beds/fields. This siltation is creating a
problem. I think we will have to address this. I am much more worried not about
this but the soil which goes to the sea ±- 29 per cent of the soil, 16 tonnes per
hectare, and the fertilisers, nutrients along with the soil which goes to the sea ± is
mind-boggling. We have almost 324 million hectares of land in this country.
When we multiply 324 million by 16 tonnes per hectare per annum, out of which
29 per cent of the soil going into the sea along with the nutrients, it is a colossal
loss.
About indigenous breeds, it was mentioned, particularly with respect to cows and
buffaloes, and indigenous breed, yes, this is important. On 29 th and 30 th of
August, 2008, we had a national conference on this.
I am in total agreement with concrete suggestions.  If we are given an
opportunity, we are crystal clear as to what is to be done.  For example, at the
moment we say conservation agriculture.  I am quite conscious that if we go for
zero-tillage for instance, seven to eight years back when we started there was
zero hectarage in this country.  Today, there is 3 million hectare in the Indo-
gangetic region alone.  If you follow zero tillage and immediately after the harvest
of rice, if you go for sowing of wheat, not only you save time but also diesel and
water. Also, per hectare you save Rs.2000.  In Haryana, it is virtually a revolution
and Dr. Malik of the Haryana Agriculture University paid a pivotal role in this
endeavour.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

When I say conservation agriculture, I am also quite conscious of laser levelling.
Now, there is an attempt right in the Western U.P. where last year there were 22
laser levellers each costing about Rs.4 lakh.  Farmers were going on custom
hiring basis.  Once you go for laser levelling of the land then saving in water is to
the tune of about 30 per cent.  There is more efficient utilisation of water.  Also,
actual crop area goes up by about 3%.  So, laser levelling is another thing in
conservation agriculture.  Raised beds have been very-very important.  If you go
on the raised beds you save water, fertiliser and who knows better than the
Haryana farmers that if you go on raised beds, Pha Paris Minor, which is a
menace weed, because of the less moisture at the top of the seed will not
germinate.  So, weed menace will also be reduced.  As about 80 per cent of the
total weedicide of this country is used in Punjab, Haryana and Western Uttar
Pradesh to control Pha Paris Minor.  So, there will not only be water saving but
also fertiliser saving and weed management will be effective.  There are a large
number of such technologies available. ´
63. To a query about the behaviour pattern of clouds/rain as it is often talked about
that it rains where the moisture is in the soil/vegetation and it does not rain where it is
dry/deforested and crops like soybean also decreasing the moisture content in the soil
and thus the clouds passes by the area without rain « and whether any study has
been done to establish the same phenomenon.  To this, the Witness replied as under:
³It can have a very large impact on Climate.  It is like desertification.  If you
have less water in the soil or if you remove all the vegetation from the soil, then
the rainfall tends to decrease.  These are very small changes which occur over
centuries scale.  You will not see that if you have deforested a large patch, the
rainfall will decrease in the next five years over that.  There will be no
discernable change at all.  While as a problem in physics of atmosphere, it is
known that this will lead to successive desertification and so on, as far as
changes on the scale of five years, ten years and so on is concerned, you
should not be able to see it.  But it may be true that the rain distribution within a
region may change.  If you have a bigger water body, the cloud may tend to get
attracted there vis-a-vis this.   I think there have not been enough studies on
this.  We are in fact having a major programme of studying the soil as well as
atmosphere.  This is under the Indian Climate Research Programme.  A major
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

five-year observational campaign is going to be launched to try and understand
the links between land, vegetation and rainfall from small scale to large scale.
It is again under frontier of science.  We still cannot give you the answer. ´
64. Dr. Suhas Wani, another expert Principal Scientist and Regional Coordinator for
Asia, International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics, Patancheru,
Andhra Pradesh called by the Committee stated that:
³Main aim of our Institute is basically to improve the livelihood of the rural poor in
the dryland agricultural areas and to enable them to cope with the climatic
variability what we get because of the increased frequency of occurrence of
drought and also scarcity of water which is looming over the world.  As we know,
by 2025 one-third of the developing countries will have the physical scarcity of
water.  Taking that into consideration, when we look at the climate change
impacts which have been estimated by the IPCC, which are predicting that the
main impact in the country like India is going to be under the
scenario ±- maximum temperature can rise by 4.5 degree centigrade and with
the 50 per cent probability the temperature may rise by around two degree
Celsius which brings in a lot of impact on our agriculture.  Its soils are prone to
severe degradation, and water scarcity which is there and that will be
accentuated because of the impact of the Climate Change.
Although the problem is global, we need the local solutions, and particularly they
are very important for a country like India where food security is a prime concern
for our large population of one billion which already we are, and in the next few
years our population will continue to be growing and we would be basically
depending more on agriculture for achieving our food security.
Another impact which is going to come is the change in the pattern of rainfall.
We are already experiencing it.  For example, the drought year of 2002 was the
very unusual year for the country, and the month of July which is supposed to be
the wettest month in the country was the driest during that particular month in
2002.  And since 1987 it had not occurred like that.  In this year, most parts of
the southern India had quite good rains in the month of April.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Looking at this impact, what we are expecting is that if the temperature
increases, as we are saying that with 50 per cent probability by 1.5 degree
temperature, the rice yield can go down by almost 15 to 20 per cent, by .75
tonnes per hectare, and in the winter when the minimum temperature goes it will
have a major impact on the yields of wheat, chickpea.  The impact will not only
be in terms of change in the growing pattern but the length of growing period
may also be cut down which will reduce the yield because of advancing of the
physiological stages of the crop, the new insects, pests and diseases will come,
which we need to tackle along with fighting the impact of Climate Change on the
reduction on yield.  Moreover, the frequency of drought will increase, and that
affects us quite drastically because at the current levels, 60 per cent of our
agriculture is rain-fed agriculture. Even when we reach our full potential, almost
50 per cent agriculture will remain rain-fed agriculture, and more occurrence of
drought will affect us adversely.
Secondly, the rain-fed areas are the hotspots of poverty.  More poor people are
in the dryland areas or in the rain-fed areas.  Malnutrition is prevalent in these
regions. The lands which are there in these regions are more prone to
degradation because of the nutrient depletion; erosion; water logging; and these
impacts will be aggravated because of the Climate Change.
The technologies, which are there, clearly demonstrate that if we can take the
available technologies on to the farmers ¶ field, we can definitely double the
agricultural productivity, enhance the water use efficiency, enhance the nutrient
use efficiency; and this will give the resilience to the community as well as the
resilience for our natural resources to bring in the efficiency so that our
requirement for agriculture water will be minimum.
As an example, we have looked into the watershed approach in this country,
which we have found, for your kind information, that only one per cent of the
Watershed Programmes in the country are not beneficial economically. That
means, if we are investing Rs. 100, we are not able to get Rs.100 back only from
one per cent of the Watershed Programmes.  However, only 35 per cent of the
Watershed Programmes are performing above average; and we need to lift the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

performance of 65 per cent of the Watershed Programmes  and bring in the
changes in the Watershed Programmes. But if the village has not developed
watershed, then the share of total income from agriculture was reduced from
41 per cent to 18 per cent.
As regards glaciers, we can say that melting of glaciers, reduction in area or
mass depletion is a fact. We will really have to manage the situation of excess
water that will be coming in for some time, and then we will be facing water
shortage in those areas. This is the point that the Climate Change is bringing in.
As we have looked into Andhra Pradesh and some of the watershed analysis,
we found that the areas that are semi-arid are really turned into arid areas. It
means that the length of growing period of a crop has decreased from 120 days
to about 90 days.
If this is happening in South, then similar type of situation will happen in other
areas in the country, which we need to really assess and get ourselves and our
researchers prepared for in the area of breeding saying that these are the areas
that are going to change now. We need to change our crops, which will fit it into
that system whether it is same crop different varieties or different appropriate
crops. For example, maize may fail when there is less water, but there are other
crops like sorghum, pearl millet, etc., which can give higher yield with the same
rainfall. One can get higher grain production with less duration of the crop.
Therefore, we need to look at those sorts of strategies.
I am worried about the mindset of the researchers, development workers and the
policy makers. It is because everyone looks at his area as the most important
area, and other areas as not so important. If I work on fertiliser supply, then I
think that if I can supply maximum fertiliser then my job is best done. But when
the farmer does not have the seeds of the improved variety, if he does not know
how to protect his crops from insects and pests, and he does not know how to
cope up with the shortage of water. Thereafter, this fertiliser supply does not
help. Therefore, there is a need to bring in convergence of research instead of
individual research.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

I have worked in more than 350-400 villages in different States of India along
with other countries, but I find that the farmers are one category of people who
have no access to any new knowledge about rainfed agriculture. This is the most
primary responsibility for all of us including researchers, development workers,
extension workers and the policy makers, namely, to see that how we can take
this knowledge that is available, and double the productivity with the existing
research. We do not need to undertake anything new at this stage. We can
definitely double it if we can increase the productivity.
The farmers basically lack the skills, I was dealing with the researchers,
development workers and the departments which are working. If µ[¶ department
deals with productivity, µ\¶ department deals with rural employment and µ]¶
department deals with water availability, there is no coordination at the ground
level. One department does the policy which will undo the impact of another
department¶s work. That is where we really need to bring in the convergence at
least in the planning and execution at the district level. With yojanas like RKVY
as well as the food security mission, we have a really good scope to put centrally
coordinated mechanism to assess the impact and cope up with the impact of the
Climate Change.
Cost of production with import technologies, as I have indicated, with an
investment of Rs. 2000, a farmer can get Rs. 6000 extra. For that reason, when
we have recommended the micro-nutrients, we have recommended at half the
level than what the research plots are recommending so that farmer can invest
small amounts and get the benefit. Once he gets the income, in the next two
years, he can then go a level further up. Slowly, we need to build his capacity to
invest in the agriculture. We have seen that if the farmers have the assurance of
the water availability, that they will not lose their investment in agriculture, private
investments come far, far more than what the Government does through the
watershed programme.´
65. Dr. A.A.Nambi, Project Director (Climate Change), Research Foundation,
Chennai gave his point of views and shared his experiences with the Committee as
under:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³We all know that Climate Change is a reality and it is happening. There are
very limited response options available ± one is mitigation, and the other one is
adaptation. While the whole world is obsessed with mitigation, India is no
exception. What we need is adaptation to a larger extent because India is a
country where we have a total of 141 million hectares of cultivable land out of
which 85 million hectares, that is, 60 per cent falls under the rain-fed and
dryland area category.
We have different kinds of adaptation. Majorly there are four kinds of
adaptations ±- farm level adaptation, technological adaptation, social
adaptation and institutional adaptation. All these are to be taken care of in their
own way. They have important roles to play in their own way.
My proposal for managing drought situation falls into some five larger
categories. The first one is community food security measures by which I mean
establishment of seed banks, water banks, grain banks and fodder banks.
Another important issue is cropping systems and agronomic interventions like
soil conservation, crop rotation, intercropping, and zero tillage. We have to
promote less water demanding crops. That is one of the important things
particularly drought-tolerant crops or saline tolerant varieties have to be
promoted depending on the kind of area where we work.
Livestock is another important thing. We know that India has one of the largest
cattle populations in the world.  What happens to humans also happens to
livestock as well in terms of its health. We have wonderful breeds. But due to
crossbreeding the local germplasm is really vanishing fast. So, it is important to
save them. We have to have germplasm repository and also some fodder
banks.
With regard to water management, under Climate Change situations we know
that water is affected both qualitatively and quantitatively. Water storage
structures should come handy. Rainwater harvesting is one of the traditional
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

methods of saving water which should be revived in a larger scale. Micro
irrigation practices like drip irrigation and sprinkler irrigation will also come
handy. When we talk about water another important thing is the problem of salt
intrusion as a result of aggressive depletion of water table. It is important such
a thing as well. This could be done through Pani Panchayats or such other
institutions. The idea is to save water.
The next one is local level capacity building. We are in a situation where we
need to go in for weather-based farming systems. We have set up the agro-
meteorological labs in four or five villages where we are working. It is a small
set up. It does not need big science to handle this. It just requires a small rain
gauge, light intensity monitor and three or four such gadgets. A tenth class
pass person could be trained in the use of those gadgets. That is what we have
done and it has paid very rich dividends.
We also have set up groups called smart farmers clubs. It is just a kind of
pooling up existing committees within village under one umbrella to discuss
their own problems and come out with their own solutions. This is really working
very effectively.
Those kinds of set up should be promoted.  Education, training and social
mobilisation are the key.  Again, awareness is very critical at the rural level.
Today, awareness is going up in India.  Media is really focused on it. Everyday,
you find something or the other reported on climate change. Climate risk
managers should be empowered and should be playing different roles,
particularly in training community in coping mechanism and in the context of
different defects of Climate Change and managing local weather stations and
early warning systems.  Particularly, community level disaster management
plans and promoting community food security systems.  Again from the
backward Climate Change perspective, what is happening at our own backyard
that has to be strengthened first.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

If we look into the ICAR structure again, it is wonderful institute  we have a very
good resources, knowledge.  There is no dearth for knowledge, certainly.
Research capabilities are also high but what is missing is, in our country, we
have islands of excellence. There is no kind of synergy. The convergence
should happen. Unless what we have demonstrated at our own level, at the
village level, we cannot blame the Government.  We can demonstrate certain
things but those have to be taken up in a bigger way.  For that, research
institutes and the Government should come forward to handle this.   When it
comes to research priority, vulnerability assessment is one of the key areas.
Unless we know as to what kind of people and how they are vulnerable and to
what degree they are affected, it is impossible to come out with a good plan.
The beginning point is the vulnerability assessment. So, one has to focus on
that.´
BENEFICIAL IMPACTS OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE ON AGRICULTURE
SECTOR
66. The Government ¶s point of view on beneficial as well as negative impacts on
agriculture sector is that there are likely to be some beneficial impacts on Indian
agriculture. These are reduced frequency of frost damage in crops such as potato,
peas, and mustard; possibly higher yields of coconut in west coast, and some
improvement in chickpea, mustard, and rabi maize, sorghum and millets. However,
these are preliminary results and need to be quantified with more research.
67. It is true that increase in CO 2 leads to higher photosynthesis in crops such as
wheat, rice, legumes and oilseeds. An increase of CO 2 to 450 ppm leads to a 5-8%
and increase in CO 2 to 550 ppm leads to a 10-15% increase in grain yields of cereal
crops. These effects are still smaller when crops are grown in sub-optimal
environments.
68. These small gains are neutralized by increase in temperature in wheat due to
reduction in grain filling duration, and increase in crop respiration and
evapotranspiration. Thus, the net effect of global warming is a reduction in wheat
production.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

FERTILISER REQUIREMENT IN GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE
69. The Committee further pointed out that increasing temperature would increase
fertilizer requirement for the same production targets; and result in higher greenhouse
gas emissions and desired to know as to what can be done to tackle such situations.
The Department in their reply stated as under:
³With increase in temperature N use efficiency decreases. The possible
reasons are:
• Rate of hydrolysis of urea increases resulting into ammonical ±N, which is
lost by volatilization.
• Rate of nitrification and denitrification also increases resulting into gaseous
N loses.
Site-specific precision nutrient application, and use of slow release fertilizers
and some nitrification inhibitors could assist in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. ´
CLIMATE CHANGE AND CHANGE IN POPULATION DYNAMICS OF PATHOZENS
& INSECTS
70. The Committee pointed out the Department in their background note, have stated
that the increase in temperature and humidity will change the population dynamics of
pathogens and insect population resulting in yield loss; and greater research is
needed to understand this in relation to Climate Change and enquired about the steps
ICAR has taken or propose to take and the expected cost-involved to have required
greater research on this aspect at the earliest.  To these points, the Department
replied as under:
³ICAR is aware of the issues of the anticipated influences of various weather
parameters on population dynamics and insects due to Climate Change and
have taken several steps to address this issue:
• In order to strengthen the potentials of the existing plant protection
research, during XIth five year plan, it is proposed to establish new institutes
on biotic stress management. This institute is expected to take up research
on basic and applied aspects of crop health management.
• It is also proposed to modify the mandate of the Project Directorate for
Biological Control and make it National Bureau of Agriculturally Important
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Insects. This Bureau along with the National Bureau of Agriculturally
Important Micro organisms addresses the issue of bio-resource databank.
• Establishment of exhaustive data bank on pestilence in crops has been
taken up by National Centre for Integrated Pest Management. This
databank could carry out a comparative analyses between the historical as
well as current trends in pestilence in crop fields.
• Ground-truth monitoring and surveillance of pests in All India Co-ordinated
Crop Improvement Projects as well as by crop institutes would provide first-
hand information on the trends of pestilence.
• Influence of weather on the variations in populations of pollinators including
honeybees and emerging biotic stresses in commercial beekeeping to
enable crop pollination is being carried out.
• A Network programme on various aspects of Blue Tongue including its
epidemiology has been established.  Further, a pentavalent vaccine
covering all the major serotypes prevalent in India has been developed and
undergoing field validation. The studies on ecto and endo parasites are also
being undertaken.
• Surveillance and monitoring of livestock diseases on real time mode in
different agro-climatic zone is also being strengthened. ´
FINDING FOODS/FEED & FODDER TO REDUCE THE IMPACT OF HEAT STRESS
ON HUMANS/ANIMALS/AVIANS
71. The Committee pointed out that ICAR in their note ³Climate Change and
Agriculture´ has stated that increase in temperature leads to higher distress in animals
and also reduces feed and fodder availability.  Similarly, higher distress levels are also
experienced by the human due to increase in temperature. There is a common belief
that Barley made beer is having cooling effects on consumers of it and wanted to
know whether ICAR has done any research on cool effects giving
foodgrains/foods/feed and fodder on humans/animals/avians/Aquarians and sought
their suggestions with regard to foods to be consumed to counter effect the negative
impacts of Global Climate Change.  To these points, the Department in their written
reply stated as under:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³Supplementing feeds which can provide readily fermentable carbohydrates
(maize, molasses), providing salt and minerals, and provisioning shelter can
reduce the impact of heat stress on animals.
No studies on the food mediated heat alleviation in humans have been done in
ICAR.´
THE ACTION TAKEN/PROPOSED TO BE TAKEN BY VARIOUS MINISTRIES &
PLANNING COMMISSION
72. The Committee also had evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Earth
Sciences.   The Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences explained about the work done
to offset the impacts of Climatic Change as under:
³«The Ministry of Earth Sciences basically looks at the collection of a large
amount of data specifically related to ocean atmosphere and certain aspects of
the cryosphere in the Arctic and Antarctica areas and try to integrate all these
observations into a model about a couple of models for ocean atmosphere as
well as a separate ocean atmosphere model at the various institutes.
Our institute looks into three different aspects of the modelling. One is to
scientific enquiry. Basically, modelling is one for lot of enquiries about the
understanding of the physics of our ocean or atmosphere, etc. This is being
done at our place. The second is to understand the prediction or the forecast.
Both the aspects are being done and also models are used in some cases We
do not have sufficient observation on the ocean which we started only around
10 years or so. The long climatological record of the ocean is not available. But,
at the same time, we have extremely good data available on the atmosphere.
So, models are also used to understand the scarce data on the ocean to further
prediction.
The second thing is that this Ministry has also a major mandate to provide
various services like the weather, agro-climate for aviation, for fisheries ± a
variety of services which we provide. Our idea is that we will also need to
develop services in future about the climate services based on the models
which we will be developing. This has to get integrated into the existing
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

services. For example, like our agro-meteorological services which we have
been doing along with the Ministry of Agriculture, ICAR and Agriculture
Universities which provide next five days ¶ forecast of the weather and what kind
of agriculture practice would be adopted. This would be extremely useful in
future when we introduce the climate services. Wherever we will be able to
predict the extreme weathers, this is likely to happen. This will help the
agriculture people.
So, our whole programme is ultimately guided towards providing services to the
society. For that we have been making observations of the ocean and
atmosphere, integrate them and modelling to provide services «´
73. The Commissioner, Policy and Planning, Water Resources during evidence
briefed the Committee on Climate Change and water management as under:
³«.The effect of Climate Change in the form of rising temperature is more or
less studied. The temperature has a definite effect on various components of
hydrologic cycle, particularly the process of evaporation from sea, the water
bodies land masses or transformation from trees, etc. The process of
condensation of water vapour into water drops, the process of formation of ice
and the process of melting of snow and glaciers are there. Therefore, it is very
likely that Climate Change would affect the water availability, particularly its
feature in respect of variation in time and space.
Most of these studies indicate the impact of climate change on water resources
qualitatively. Very reliable, quantitative projections of nature of change that
could take place in respect of water and its features are yet to be fully
established. This is more so when we talk in terms of river basin or sub-basin.
We are fully aware that there is considerable temporal and special variation in
rainfall in our country.  Almost 80 per cent of the rainfall occurs during the
monsoon period. Further, there is considerable variation in the rainfall from one
region to another. The average annual rainfall of India is about 1,170
millimetres; but it varies from less than 100 millimetres in the western part of
Rajasthan to over 10,000 millimetres near Cherapunji in Meghalaya.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The various studies and the reports indicate that the Climate Change could
result in further intensification of already considerable temporal and special
variations. Such a scenario would require a more focused effort towards
conservation of water resources with due emphasis on efficient management
practices and efficient use of water and also improving the efficiency of the
existing water resources facilities that have been created for utilisation of water
resources.
The first and foremost task for us is to have a reliable assessment of the water
resources, particularly its features as a result of impact of Climate Change. The
Ministry of Water Resources has already initiated appropriate measures in this
regard.
The Ministry of Water Resources has been assigned with the responsibility in
respect of institutionalisation of National Water Mission envisaged under the
National Action Plan on Climate Change.
I would like to specifically mention about the measures that have been taken in
respect of the inter-linking of rivers.  In August 1990, the then Ministry of
Irrigation, now as Water Resources, formulated a national perspective plan for
water resource development.  National Water Development Agency was
established in 1982 for carrying forward this work.  The national perspective
plan comprises of two components, namely, Himalayan River Development and
Peninsular River Development.
The Himalayan River Development envisages construction of storages on the
principal tributaries of Ganga and Brahmaputra of India, Nepal and Bhutan
along with linking canal trans-system apart from linking the main Brahmaputra
and its tributaries with Ganga and Ganga with Mahanadi.
The Peninsular River Development primarily comprises of four components,
namely, inter-linking of Mahanadi, Krishna, Godavari Rivers and building sites
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

in this basin; second, inter-linking of west flowing rivers; third inter-linking of
Kain-Betwa, Chambal Rivers; and fourth diversion of other west flowing rivers.
So far the feasibility reports of 16 links are under Peninsular component and
two links under Himalayan component.  All feasibility reports have been
circulated to the concerned State Governments.  Presently, the Minister of
Water Resources is actively pursuing five links «´
74. Representative of Ministry of Water Resources gave further reply on the
Members for Flood Management particularly in respect of the recent Kosi & Hirakud
Floods as under:
³All measures in respect of flood management are implemented by respective
State Governments. However, in view of importance of the issue, Ministry of
Water Resources provides technical and limited financial assistance to the
State Governments. Central Water Commission (CWC) a network of flood
forecasting stations which provides valuable information about incoming flood,
to enable the State Government and project authorities in taking advances
preventive measures and also issuing appropriate flood warning.
Government of India provides financial assistance to the State Governments in
respect of flood management through following Central schemes:
a. Central Sector Schemes for µRiver Management Activities and work
related to Border Areas¶, and
b. State Sector Scheme for µFlood Management programme¶
Central sector scheme for µRiver Management Activities and Works
Related to Border Rivers ¶ has provision for supporting Ganga Flood Control
Commission and Brahmaputra Board for specific studies and preparation of
master plan for flood management. Support is also provided to States for
undertaking emergent flood management works on Border Rivers. Similarly,
investigations of projects such as Pancheshwar, Sun Kosi and Sapt Kosi are
also supported through the scheme. An allocation of Rs. 891 crore has been
made for this scheme during XI Plan, Government of India has approved a
state sector scheme µFlood Management Programme (FMP) ¶ for
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

implementation during XI Plan. Under the scheme, Central assistance is
provided to the States in critical flood management and anti-sea erosion
measures. Detailed guidelines for providing Central assistance to the State
Governments have been issued in December 2007 and an Empowered
Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of
Finance has been constituted for examining and approving the proposals
submitted by State Governments to ensure cost effective solutions. Rs. 2715
crore have been allocated for the scheme during XI Plan. So far 266 proposals
from 14 States with a total estimated cost of Rs. 1652 crore has been included
under this scheme for providing central assistance to States. So far, Central
assistance amounting to Rs. 353 crore have been released to 14 States. ´
75. When asked about the effects of Climate Change on ground water due to
changes in precipitation and evaporation, the Ministry of Water Resources replied as
under:
³Changing climate is expected to influence both evaporation and precipitation in
most areas of the world. While the quantum of observed annual monsoon
rainfall at all-India level does not show any significant trend, regional monsoon
variations have been recorded. Increasing/decreasing trends of seasonal
monsoon rainfall have been shown in different areas of the country. Instrument
records over the last 130 years, however, do not indicate any marked long-term
trend in the frequencies of large scale droughts and floods.
Rainfall is the major source of ground water recharge in India. Hence, changes
in precipitation and evaporation are likely to affect the soil moisture, ground
water recharge and consequently, the ground water availability in different parts
of the country. The magnitude of these effects will depend on the regional
geomorphologic, hydrologic and hydro-geologic settings. As the studies carried
out so far indicate changes in the intensity and duration of precipitation rather
than the total quantum of rainfall, these may not result in significant changes in
the ground water resources at the national level, but may alter the existing
spatial and temporal distribution of ground water resources in the country to
some extent for which studies have been undertaken. ´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

76. The Committee were keen to know about the effect of Climate Change on ground
water quality due to saline intrusion in coastal & island aquifers in view of the
projected sea level rise and due to projected increased frequency in severity of floods
in alluvial aquifer.  To these points, the representatives of Ministry of Water Resources
replied as under:
³The impact of global warming-induced sea level rise due to thermal expansion
of near-surface ocean water has great significance to India. The anticipated
sea-level rise is likely to affect the dynamic fresh-saline water equilibrium in the
coastal and island aquifer systems and may result in the extension of saline
intrusion and ground water contamination. The effect is likely to be more in
coastal areas like parts of Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Puducherry which are
already under threat of saline water intrusion. This is likely to result in problems
related to supply of water for drinking/irrigation/industrial uses in coastal areas
of the country.
Island areas of the Indian sub-continent are mostly dependent on ground water
for meeting various requirements. Fresh water, in such islandic aquifers, occurs
as lenses floating on saline water. In the event of sea level rise, the availability
of fresh water in such aquifers is expected to get affected which could lead to
scarcity of fresh water resources.
Increased precipitation and the consequent increase in runoff, resulting in
floods is likely to result in the deterioration of surface water quality due to the
increased load of nutrients, pathogens and pollutants. Projected increased
frequency in the severity of floods due to Climate Change is likely to result in
prolonged inundation of low lying alluvial areas and flood plains of major rivers
in the country. These flood waters, recharging the aquifers in such areas, is
likely to result in the deterioration of ambient quality of ground water stored in
these aquifers. However, in areas where the alluvial aquifers are already
saturated at the time of flooding, leaving little or no scope for recharge, the
quality of ground water is not likely to be affected by the flooding. ´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

77. Regarding decline in ground water table and measures for checking it, the
Ministry of Water Resources replied as under:
³Decline in ground water levels, reflecting depletion of ground water resources
in aquifers has been observed in parts of the country as per analysis of data
collected from a network of about 15500 observation wells being monitored by
the Central Ground Water Board. As per the latest assessment of ground water
resources carried out jointly by CGWB and the State Government Departments
in 2004, out of 5723 assessment units (blocks/talukas/watersheds) in the
country, 839 units are µOver-exploited¶ where the stage of ground water
development is more than 100% and there is significant decline in ground water
levels during either pre or post-monsoon period. 226 units have been
categorized as µCritical¶, where ground water development is between 90 and
100% and significant decline of water levels is observed both in pre-and
post±monsoon periods. There are 550 µSemi-Critical¶ units where the ground
water development is between 70 and 100 % and significant decline in ground
water levels either in pre or post-monsoon period.
78. Several measures have been initiated by the Ministry of Water Resources to
check the decline of ground water levels through augmentation of ground water
resources. These include:
(i) Preparation of manuals & guides on various aspects of artificial recharge
to ground water.
(ii) Preparation of concept report entitled µMaster Plan for Artificial Recharge
to Ground Water ¶- An area of about 4.5 lakh sq. Kms. has been identified
as suitable for artificial recharge to recharge about 36500 million cubic
meters of ground water.
(iii) Implementation of 165 demonstrative artificial recharge schemes in
27 States/UTs during 9 th  Plan aimed at popularizing cost-effective
recharge techniques suitable for different hydrologic/hydro-geological
settings in the country.
(iv) Demonstrative scheme on µRainwater Harvesting and Artificial Recharge
to Ground Water ¶ under implementation in identified areas in the States of
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(v) Artificial recharge studies being taken up in the 9 th  Plan in priority areas
such as over-exploited and critical assessment units, urban areas, etc.
(vi) Scheme for Artificial recharge through dug wells in 1180 over-
exploited/critical/semi-critical areas in the States of Andhra Pradesh,
Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and
Rajasthan to provide sustainability to the dug wells.
(vii) Institutions of µNational Water Award and Bhoomijal Samvardhan
Puraskars aimed at encouraging local bodies/non-governmental
institutions for adoption of innovative practices of ground water
augmentation through rainwater harvesting/artificial recharge through
peoples participation. ´
79. As over one crore hectares of additional land is to be brought under irrigation
under Bharat Nirman, whether there is any progress and what strategy MoWR has to
bring that one crore hectares of land under irrigation.  To this point, the MoWR replied
as under:
³Irrigation is one of the six components for development of rural infrastructure
under Bharat Nirman. The irrigation component of Bharat Nirman aims at
creation of irrigation potential of 10 million hectare (Mha) in four years, cital i.e.,
from 2005-06 to 2008-09. The projects/schemes for creation of irrigation potential
are taken up by State Governments from their own resources according to their
priorities. Government of India has enhanced allocation for grants under
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) to provide support to State
Governments. Keeping in view the present status, the target for creation of
irrigation potential under µBharat Nirman ¶ has been proposed to be met largely
through completion of on going major and medium irrigation projects. Due
emphasis has also been given to enhancing the utilization of completed
projects/schemes. The targets of various activities under Bharat Nirman are
shown in Table ±1 and the State-wise progress for the year 2007-08 is shown in
Table±2:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Table 1 : Physical targets for various activities identified under Bharat Nirman for
                creation of Irrigation Potential
(Irrigation Potential in million hectare)
Components 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 Total
I Major & Medium Irrigation
   Completion of on-going Projects 0.90 1.10 1.10 1.10 4.20
     Extension, Renovation.
Modernisation of Major & Medium
Irrigation Projects 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 1.00
Major & Medium Irrigation Total 1.15 1.35 1.35 1.35 5.20
Minor Irrigation
  Surface Water 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 1.00
  Ground Water 0.45 0.75 0.80 0.80 2.80
II
  Repair, Renovation &Restoration
of Water bodies/ERM of MI
Schemes 0.05 0.05 0.45 0.45 1.00
Minor Irrigation Total 0.75 1.05 1.50 1.50 4.80
Grand Total 1.90 2.40 2.85 2.85 10.00
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Table 2:   Bharat Nirman ± Irrigation
The State-wise progress for the years 2007-08 is given below:
Unit in Thousand Hectare
Sl.No. State Name Achievement
upto March 2008
1. Andhra Pradesh 271.433
2. Arunachal Pradesh 7.000
3. Assam* 15.212
4. Bihar 31.750
5. Chhattisgarh 36.273
6. Goa 6.384
7. Gujarat 119.632
8. Haryana 10.356
9. Himachal Pradesh 5.845
10. J&K 19.443
11. Jharkhand 8.482
12. Karnataka 51.735
13. Kerala 7.064
14. Madhya Pradesh 126.200
15. Maharashtra NR
16. Manipur 12.000
17. Meghalaya 0.932
18. Mizoram* 3.031
19. Nagaland 4.195
20. Orissa 63.427
21. Punjab 26.202
22. Rajasthan 93.590
23. Sikkim 1.080
24. Tamil Nadu 16.730
25. Tripura 2.706
26. Uttar Pradesh 544.503
27. Uttaranchal 29.506
28. West Bengal 7.683
TOTAL 1522.394
NR : Not Reported
* For the period April-September´
80. When Committee enquired from Principal Adviser (Agriculture, Environment and
Forests), Planning Commission on impact of Climate Change in agriculture and action
the Planning Commission is taking to mitigate these adverse impact, he gave his
views as under:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³«.Sir, we, in the Planning Commission, are very much concerned at the
adverse effect of the Climate Change which is going to have an effect on
various sectors of development in our country.  More particularly, we are
concerned at three aspects, and three spheres.  This adverse Climate Change
is going to affect in a greater dimension than the others in these three spheres.
We have land, which is going to be affected adversely.  We have rivers and
water.  The third one is the frequency or the adverse effect that may come out
from the natural calamities like drought and flood.
Most vulnerable section in all these will be the poor man in the country side.
On the one hand, when we talk of economic growth that this country is
achieving at a very fast rate of almost eight per cent from 2004 to 2008 but still
we have this large size population today of about 27.5 per cent, which is still
below the poverty line.  These are the people most vulnerable and adversely
affected by Climate Change.  The women, the ladies, are going to be very
adversely affected by the Climate Change, whether in terms of increase in
scarcity of water, reduction in yield, mal-nutrition that comes up because of low
productivity in the soil. ´
81. The Committee were keen to know whether there was any interaction among the
Ministries as to what was the mechanism by which this important challenge can be
dealt within its totality.  To this point, the Ministry of Environment & Forests replied as
under:
³Under the aegis of PM Council on Climate Change eight Missions of the
National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) envisage inter-sectoral
consultation with a large number of Stakeholders including the relevant Ministries
of Government.  The Ministry of Environment & Forests has the role of
coordinating these Missions. Each Nodal Ministry entrusted with the Mission is to
report the progress to the PM¶s Council on Climate Change.´
82. When the Committee pointed out that Climate Change may increase the
frequency of extreme weather events and enquired about the preparation for tackling
floods and various other things that have been learnt from the experience of this
year¶s flood and drought and high temperature, etc. and how are the Missions under
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

NAPCC addressing to these issues, the representative of Environment & Forests
replied as under:
³Indiaµs agriculture is subject to Climate variability which is likely to be
exacerbated by Climate Change.  Presently, extreme weather events such as
floods and droughts are tackled by district authorities and Centre provides the
additional relief.  The Ministry has commissioned modelling studies on various
aspects related to Climate Change with a view to assess the vulnerability of the
various sectors to Climate Change and integrate these concerns in the planning
system for tackling extreme weather events.  Besides, the National Water
Mission shall revisit the National Water Policy in consultation with the States
with a view to conceive basin level management strategies that can deal with
variability in rainfall and river flows due to Climate Change. ´
83. On a query about our preparation to tackle sea level rise or more frequent
coastal storms adequate, the representative of Environment & Forests replied as
under:
³The Government of India has been implementing various adaptation related
programmes as a part of planned economic development.  Specific measures
taken include coastal protection infrastructure and cyclone shelters, plantation
of coastal forests and mangroves.  Further, in coastal regions, restrictions have
been imposed in the area between 200m and 500m of the high tide line while
special restrictions have been imposed in the area up to 200m to protect the
sensitive coastal ecosystems and prevent their exploitation.
The National Action Plan on Climate Change envisages, among many other
actions, effective disaster management strategies, strengthening
communication networks and disaster management facilities at all levels and
protection of coastal areas through focusing on coastal protection and early
warning system.´
84. When the Committee pointed out that Climate Change will impact adversely
agriculture, animal husbandry and food security and enquired whether there is
anything under consideration of the Eight National Mission constituted under the
Prime Minister¶s Council, the representative of E&F replied as under:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³The National Mission on Agriculture would devise strategies to make Indian
agriculture more resilient to Climate Change.  It would identify and develop new
varieties of crops, and especially thermal resistant crops and alternative
cropping patterns, capable of withstanding extremes of weather, long dry
spells, flooding, and variable moisture availability.
Agriculture will need to be progressively adapted to projected climate change
and our agricultural research systems must be oriented to monitor and evaluate
Climate Change and recommend changes in agricultural practices accordingly.
This will be supported by the convergence and integration of traditional
knowledge and practice system, information technology, geospatial
technologies and biotechnology.  New credit and insurance mechanisms will be
devised to facilitate adoption of desired practices.
Focus would be on improving productivity of rainfed agriculture.  India will
spearhead efforts at the international level to work towards an ecologically
sustainable green revolution. ´
85. On a point, why so many agencies are involved in the preparation of National
Action Plan on Climate Change, the Environment & Forests Ministry clarified as under:
³The preparation of National Action Plan on Climate Change was mandated by
the Prime Minister ¶s Council on Climate Change.  The PM ¶s Council decided
that a draft of National Action Plan on Climate Change be prepared by a three
member group consisting of Dr. R. Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Adviser to
the Government of India, Dr. R.K. Pachauri, IPCC Chairman and DG, TERI and
the Secretary (Environment and Forests) and submit it to the Prime Minister ¶s
Council on Climate Change for consideration.  The Three-Member Group
submitted the draft National Action Plan on Climate Change in April, 2008.  The
Technical Document for preparing the National Action Plan was prepared by
the Ministry of Environment & Forests.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The National Action Plan on Climate Change envisages a broad range of
activities focused at adaptation to and mitigation of climate change.  These are
eight National Missions on specific areas of concern. ´
86. On a point about the terms of reference of the Eight Missions under National
Action Plan on Climate Change and the target set before them and the funding pattern
of each and every Mission, the representative of Environment & Forests stated as
under:
³There are Eight National Missions which form the core of the National Action
Plan, representing multi-pronged, long-term and integrated strategies for
achieving key goals in the context of Climate Change.  The Missions are
National Solar Mission; National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency;
National Mission on Sustainable Habitat; National Water Mission; National
Mission for Sustaining the Himalayan Eco System; National Mission for Green
India; National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture; and the National Mission for
Strategic Knowledge for Climate Change.
The objective of the Missions is to enable the nation to adapt to Climate
Change and enhance the ecological sustainability of our development path.
While several of these programmes are already part of our current actions, they
may need a change in direction, enhancement of scope and effectiveness and
accelerated implementation of time-bound plans.
The Mission details in respect of specific targets and funding pattern are being
firmed up by the relevant Ministries.  The Ministries would assess the
requirement of funds and the ways and means of obtaining the necessary
resources for implementation of the Missions in consultation with the Planning
Commission.´
87. The Committee were keen to know whether any assessment has been with
regard to impact of global warming on production of food, agriculture, livestock, fishery
and also with regard to flood, drought, etc in the country.  To this point, the nodal
Ministry (E&F) replied as under:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³Few assessment studies were conducted under India ¶s Initial National
Communication (NATCOM-I) to the UNFCCC and further studies are being
made under an Expert Committee headed by Dr. R. Chidambaram, Principal
Scientific Adviser to the Government.  Indian Council of Agricultural Research
in its report on µGlobal Climate Change and Indian Agriculture ¶ stated that there
is likely to be direct and indirect impacts on crops, soils, livestock and pests.
There may be a loss of 4-5 million tonnes in wheat production with every rise of
1 degree C temperature.  The likely loss is uncertain but smaller for Kharif
crops.  The yield loss from potato, peas, mustard in North-western India is likely
to decrease due to reduction in the occurrence of frost events.  The apple yield
is likely to decrease at lower elevations and coconut yields are likely to be
affected in plains of Karnataka, Eastern TN, coastal AP, Pondicherry, WB and
Assam.  Further the milk production is likely to decline by 1.5-2.0 million tonnes
by 2020 and 15 million tonnes by 2050.
The projected Climate Change scenarios indicate increase in the variable trend
of both rainfall and temperature into 21 st centaury.  It is projected that quality of
surface run off due to Climate Change would reduce and vary across the river
basins as well as sub basins.  The initial analysis has revealed that climate
change scenario may have adverse effects in terms of severity of droughts and
intensity of floods in various parts of the country.  Forest biomass in India
seems to be highly vulnerable to the projected change in Climate.  Coastal
areas are also vulnerable to Climate variability in varying degrees. ´
88. When enquired about the role of States in Climate Change management, the
representative of Environment & Forests replied as under:
³State Governments have been assigned an important role under the National
Action Plan for Climate Change for building capacity and involving the local
institutions in managing the Climate Change.  Para 4.6 of the NAPCC deals with
various steps envisaged to create appropriate capacity at different levels of
Government.  Ministry of Environment & Forests has already addressed the
State Governments in this regard and requested them to initiate actions as per
the NAPCC.´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

89. The Committee also enquired about any scheme for tackling climate change in
the Himalayan States.  To this point, the Ministry of Environment & Forests replied as
under:
³National Action Plan on Climate Change envisages a National Mission for
sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem to evolve management measures for
sustaining and safeguarding the Himalayan glacier and mountain eco-system.
An observational and monitoring network for the Himalayan environment will
also be established to assess freshwater resources and health of the
ecosystem.  Cooperation with neighbouring countries will be sought to make
the network comprehensive in its coverage.
The Himalayan ecosystem has 51 million people who practice hill agriculture
and whose vulnerability is expected to increase on account of Climate Change.
Community-based management of these ecosystems will be promoted with
incentives to community organizations and Panchayats for protection and
enhancement of forested lands.  In mountainous regions, the aim will be to
maintain two-thirds of the area under forest cover in order to prevent erosion
and land degradation and ensure the stability of the fragile eco-system. ´
90. On a point, whether the present inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee is
performing satisfactorily or it needs to be strengthened, the representative of
Environment & Forests stated as under:
³The Ministry considers the current coordination mechanism satisfactory. With a
view to enhance the knowledge of the impacts of Climate Change on India, and
particularly to identify the measures necessary to address the vulnerability of
the various sectors, an µExpert Committee on Impacts of Climate Change ¶ was
set up by the Ministry of Environment and Forests under the Chairmanship of
Dr. R. Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of India in
May, 2007. Representatives of several concerned Ministries including the
Ministry of Agriculture are the members of this Committee.  In June, 2007, The
Prime Minister ¶s Council on Climate Change was set up under the
chairmanship of Prime Minister himself to evolve a focused and coordinated
response to the issue of Climate Change.  The Council has broad based
representation from key-stake-holders including the Government (including the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Minister of Agriculture, Minister of Water Resources, Minister of Science and
Technology, Minister of Finance), Industry, Eminent persons, Media and the
Civil Society. The PM¶s Council sets out broad directions for National Actions in
respect of Climate Change which involves several agencies and the Ministries
of the Government.
The Ministries entrusted with various Missions are in constant communication
with each other and other stakeholders for preparation of the National Missions.
These Mission documents are to be submitted to the PM ¶s Council by
December 2008 for approval.´
91. The Committee wanted to know as to what strategy is going to be adopted to
reduce emission of Greenhouse Gases in a developing country like India and whether
India specific climate model will be developed to mitigate the Greenhouse Gases
emissions also and whether any ocean atmosphere modeling strategy is being
developed to study the temperature rise in sea surface and coastal region.  To these
points, the representative of DARE/ICAR replied as under:
³Options to reduce emissions from agriculture include:
• Carbon sequestration by residue management, restoration of degraded
soils, conservation agriculture and agroforestry
• Modification of feeding strategies of ruminants
• Scientific water and nutrient management with special focus on rice
paddies
• Site Specific Nutrient Management strategies.
The above mentioned technologies are promoting through different network
programmes of the crop, horticulture, livestock and fisheries. ´
92. Regarding the possibility to treat the industrial and sewage waste water for use in
agriculture and whether ICAR and other concerned departments have made any
progress in this direction and the steps being taken for resource conservation in
different agro-climatic zones of the country, the representative of DARE/ICAR replied
as under:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³Use of industrial and sewage waste water for raising tree crops has been
demonstrated by Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal.  In Metropolitan
cities like Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata, it is usual practice that the sewage waste
water is used for growing the vegetables.  In arid zone like Jodhpur, the waste
water from textile industry is being used by vegetable growers in peri-urban
areas.  But there are limited studies to assess the impact of using the sewage
waste water on soil and crop quality on a long term basis. ´
93. When asked whether Ministry of Agriculture has taken up with the Planning
Commission, its budgetary allocations shortage/requirements for adaptation and
mitigation strategies such as Methane mitigation strategy, shelter management
studies, allele mining for stress management, as proposed by them and the response
of the Planning Commission in this regard and also how many Plans and Prospective
Plans in all ICAR has made till date since its inception, cost and time factors involved
and status of implementation of each plan, the representative of DARE/ICAR replied
as under:
³The research activities on adaptation and mitigation strategies for reducing
methane emission for different crop management practices and shelter
management studies with livestock were initiated during X Plan period under
NPCC and is continuing during XI Plan period also.  Studies on Methane
Mitigation Strategies were taken up by Central Rice Research Institute, Cuttack
and NAIP Project was also funded to this Institute to conduct research in this
direction.  Allele mining for stress management is a new area to develop stress
tolerant crops.  Work in this direction was initiated at IARI/NRCPB.  CRIDA is
also formulating a program to take such work in coming years. ICAR has taken
several steps for improved understanding of impacts, adaptation and mitigation
strategies with reference to Climate Change. In addition to a Network Project
on Climate Change, several new programmes have been initiated to address
issues like methane production and mitigation; shelter management; feed &
fodder quality; conversion of C 3 plants to C 4 plants; and coastal areas
management. The amount approved for this as well as other ICAR projects and
NAIP is more than Rs.75 crores.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The ICAR is proposing 3 new institutes on Abiotic Stress Management, Biotic
Stress Management and Biotechnology during XI plan period. These institutes
will work on the impact of Global Climate Change on different natural resources
and its relationship with productivity. A number of institutes declaring with
livestock and fisheries sector are also initiating research activities on impact of
Climate Change. The major initiatives, which will make a significant progress in
these studies, are the proposed National Institutes on Abiotic Stress, Biotic
Stress and Biotechnology during XI plan period. An additional grant of Rs.500
crore would be required for this purpose.
The Perspective Plans are long term vision statements. Actionable plans are
prepared for five years or annually based on resource availability taking into account
the vision mentioned in the Perspective Plans. ICAR has a very intensive system of
external review through Research Advisory Committees (RACs) and Quinquennial
Review Teams (QRTs), besides being subject to Parliamentary oversight. ´
94. The Committee enquired about whether any estimate has been made to make
our country ¶s societies and economy ³Climate Proof ´ by DARE/ICAR.  To this point,
the Department stated as under:
³ICAR and State Agricultural Universities have always taken this issue of µclimate
proofing¶ seriously.  However, we have no comprehensive estimates of costs
associated with making our society and economy µclimate proof¶´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

PART- II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation No. 1
Role and Responsibilities of DARE/ICAR in Global Climate Change & Indian Scenario
The Committee observe that there is internationally accepted fact that
climate is changing due to increased emissions of Greenhouse gases.
Increased human activities in the last century, especially increased fossil fuel
usage, industrialization and land use changes have caused the build up of
Carbon Dioxide, Nitrous Oxide, Methane, Hydro-Fluoro-Carbons and other
Greenhouse Gases in atmosphere and are changing  the Climate of the earth
and causing temperature rise, heat waves, droughts, floods, rapid snow melt
and changes in rainfall distributions at several places.
The Committee note that the global average of sea level rose at an average
rate of 1.8 mm per year over 1961 to 2003 and about 3.1 mm during 1993 to 2003.
Projected global mean annual temperature by the end of 21 st century is likely to
be in the range of 2 to 4.5 0C and even the values substantially higher than 4.50C
cannot be excluded. For Indian region, according to IPCC, projected
temperature rise is 0.5 to 1.2 0C by 2020; 0.88 to 3.16 0C by 2050 and 1.56 to
5.440C by 2080 depending on the future development. The temperature will be
much higher in winter (for Rabi crops season) than in rainy season (Kharif
crops season).
The Committee also note that Agricultural Nitrous Oxide Greenhouse Gas
emissions are projected to increase by 35-60% up to 2030 due to increased
Nitrogen fertilizer use and increased animal manure production.
The Global livestock-related Methane production is expected to increase by
60% upto 2030.  About 2.5 to 10% decrease in crop yield is projected for parts of
Asia in 2020s and 5 to 30% decrease in 2050s compared with 1990 levels.
Projected changes in frequency and severity of extreme Climate events will
have significant consequences for food production and food security.  Small
landholders and subsistence farmers, pastoralists and artisanal fisherfolk will
suffer complex localized impacts of Climate Change. Food trade is expected to
increase from developed to developing countries.  In India, the agriculture
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

sector contributes 28% of the total Greenhouse Gases which primarily
constitutes the Methane emission from paddy fields, enteric fermentation in
ruminant animals.
The Committee are of the view that India will suffer Climate Change effects
of both, the world over changes as well as India ¶s contribution to it through
emission of Greenhouse Gases. The Greenhouse Gases from paddy fields can
be reduced, as has been observed by ICAR through its studies, by changing the
watering pattern of this crop. By developing high temperature resistant seeds
and by converting C3 plants to C4 plants and coastal area management.
The Committee also observe that the extreme rise in temperature and
emission of Greenhouse Gases will be felt only if the conditions remain the
same and no efforts are made to mitigate these environmental gases effects.
Due to increase in Greenhouse Gases, the impact is felt in the areas of
temperature rise, sea-level rise, time reduction in crop cycle, yield reduction,
migration of fishes to other areas.  Cattle breeding and milk production, poultry,
irrigation problems, floods, glacier receding, and forests land reduction, etc.
However, if the Government rises to its duties to develop strategies at
international, national and local levels including Panchayat level, and do agro-
climatic zonewise research work to know the ill- effects of global warming in a
particular region and develop measures to contain the rise in temperature and
to reduce the emission of Greenhouse Gases and farmers, self-help groups,
fishermen and others at village levels are educated about the measures required
to be taken by them to offset the impacts of Climate Change, increased policy
support and financial support from Government of India for agricultural
research and establishment of µGreen Research Fund ¶ as envisaged by the
Ministry of Agriculture, then the global warming can be contained in an effective
manner.
The Committee strongly recommend that DARE/ICAR should develop a
drought code, a flood code and a good weather code, at the earliest and should
also come out with concrete, constructive and feasible contingency plan for all
the agro-climatic zones. While preparing drought/flood/good weather codes,
DARE/ICAR should take care that drought code has comprehensive details of all
that needs to be done not only in human rehabilitation and relief but in terms of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

relief for crops, animals, etc. Similarly, the flood code should explain all that
needs to be done in case of floods and good weather code should explain how
to maximize crop/allied sectors production in the places where there is good
weather. The Committee also desire that Compensatory Production Programme
needed to be developed for agri-allied sectors in case of
droughts/floods/climate aberrations, etc. should be expeditiously done with
considerable attention and detailed planning based on
extensive/intensive/field/anticipatory/adaptation research to be done by
DARE/ICAR.
Recommendation No. 2
National Climate and Water Management Policies
The Committee note that the negative impacts of Global Climate Change
on Agricultural & Allied Sectors and on natural resources/water availability, etc.
are enormous. The negative impacts of Climate Change/global warming will be
terrible on Himalayan Glaciers/Rivers/Water availability, frequent
floods/droughts phenomenon.
The Committee learnt during evidence and on the spot Study Visits to
Himalayan States that the Ministries of (i) Agriculture, (ii) Environment & Forests
and (iii) Water Resources, etc. which are responsible for giving guidance to the
Himalayan States, lack the positive approach/attitude towards these
States/areas.  These Ministries are mostly said to be telling only about don ¶ts
and hardly explain about the do ¶s and other positive things to the policy
makers/implementing agencies at the States ¶ level and at the level of the
farmers and common people/other stakeholders engaged in the agrarian &
allied sectors activities.
 The Committee further observe that there is certainly lack of coordination
and interaction between Central Government and State Governments of
Himalayan States. The Committee, therefore, unanimously recommend that
Central Government through their Ministries/Departments should immediately
take necessary initiatives to associate the Himalayan State Governments with
all schemes and programmes related to Global Climate Change, its  implications
and solutions. These States should have an active role to play in National
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Action Plan on Climate Change/Water Management practices implemented at
State/grassroot level.  They should actively participate in National Policy on
Climate Management.  The Central Government should help these State
Governments financially and technically for better implementation of the
Climate Control Policies/Action Plans.
The Committee note that agriculture is the backbone of our food security.
Out of 75 million persons added world over to the µHungry¶ during 2007, over 30
million are from India. Since the problem of Climate Change is a current living
reality, the Committee observe that Central and State Governments and their
Departments have not learnt lessons from recent years ¶ floods, droughts, high
temperatures and changes in sea level, etc. due to Climate Change, as neither
tsunami affected nor recent Kosi river floods ¶ affected human beings have been
found rehabilitated after the floods receded.  The Government machineries have
not been able to give sufficient help to rehabilitate the agriculture and allied
activities of the affected areas. The frequent droughts/floods and other impacts
of Global Climate Change on Agriculture can change the face of the Indian
economy for worse.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Agriculture and all
other concerned Central Ministries/Departments should make coordinated
efforts to find solutions to the floods/droughts/high temperatures/climate
variations, etc. for the ultimate welfare of the homo-environ systems of the
country.
Recommendation No. 3
Mass-Spreading of Climate Literacy and related Missions/Programmes among the
Farmers/Commonmen
The Committee note with serious concern that the Climate Change and
global warming extension services are at the lowest level among the farmers,
people engaged in animal husbandry, fishery sectors and other stakeholders
involved in agricultural and allied sectors.
The Committee observe that this poor awareness of the knowledge about
the legal issues, rights and environmental or Climate Change and its negative
impacts on agro-economic life and things to be done at grassroot level to
overcome the negative impacts of Climate Change, not only create mistrust and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

misunderstanding among the farmers, fishermen and the Government
authorities and private agencies, involved in implementing/executing the action
plan, etc., but also generate strong opposition/objection from the masses/State
Governments towards the Central laws or National Action Plans. With the result,
it becomes extremely difficult to implement those laws or action plans which are
designed and created for the ultimate welfare of the farmers, fishermen and
other affected people, as happened with the recently announced notification of
the Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM). Almost all the State
Governments and their coastal population are objecting to it saying the Coastal
Zone Management is going to harm the fishermen, farmers and their livelihood
and their lands may be taken away by some rich people. Thus, a law or
scheme/plan which intend to protect them, get objections just because there is
not enough legal, climate and environment literacy and awareness among
farmers, fishermen and commonmen of the coastal areas.
Even if one goes to any tribal village or remote rural area, people there do
not know about the Farmers ¶ Rights Act or Biodiversity Act or the National
Action Plan on Climate Change. So this lack of legal/environ/climate literacy
among commonmen has become a serious shortcoming in getting the positive
outcome from such Acts and National Action Plans in the country.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that all the Central
Ministries & their Departments and other Government agencies should take
initiatives and make sincere efforts to inform, educate and propagate about the
Climate Change with all its positive and negative aspects, among the farmers,
fishermen and commonmen, only then any action taken or intended to be taken
against global warming by the Central/State Governments will be successful.
Recommendation No. 4
Need to empower/equip the State Governments for Mainstreaming the Climate
Change factors into various Missions/Schemes in Agriculture Sector
 The Committee observe that Rastriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and the
National Food Security Mission (NFSM), etc. should be actually prepared and
implemented at the district level and at the same time essentially require
coordinated/integrated efforts among Ministries of Rural Development,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Agriculture, Water Resources, Environment & Forests, Home Affairs and
National Rain-fed Area Authority along with State Governments.
 The Committee further observe that agriculture constitutionally being a
State subject, the State Governments are always reluctant to implement the
national missions/schemes of the Centre at the grass root level for reasons,
such as lack of funds, technology awareness, appropriate infrastructure, man-
power, proper guidance for practical implementation, etc.
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that if these national
missions/schemes as well as National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC)
with its eight missions including National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture,
are to succeed, then the Central Government Ministries/Departments concerned
not only should develop a coordination system with State Governments ¶
authorities/agencies involved in all such missions but also empower them with
funds, incentives, technological and management knowledge and
skills/guidance, etc., so that, State level implementing authorities/agencies can
handle the Climate Change/Global Warming related factors and implement
RKVY/NFSM/NAPCC at the district/village level for ultimate success of National
Mission for Sustainable Agriculture.
Recommendation No. 5
National Policy/Action Plan to control and manage Ever increasing Water Logging
The Committee observe that the problem of methane emissions get
aggravated due to various reasons, such as, (i) Water-logged areas, and (ii)
Marshy lands, apart from the industrial/agricultural pollutants, etc. The
Committee further observe that in many States, Irrigation Department divert the
flood waters through canal system to low lying areas. The water
logging/inundation make these areas unproductive for months together,
especially in Himalayan and Indo-Gangetic Plains and at present there is no
clear cut national policy to check and control the contribution of methane
emissions by these ever increasing water-logged areas.
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should come
out with clear-cut National Policy/Action Plan to check/control and manage (i)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Water-logged/inundated areas; (ii) Marshy lands, for Environment/Climate-
friendly uses.
Recommendation No. 6
Right Kind of Trees Plantation for Better Environment/Climate/Water Management
The Committee note that in many Himalayan States planting of wrong
varieties of trees in the name of increasing forests cover are rampant in the
country.  Since Climate stabilizes the forests and the forests stabilize the
Climate, vast denudation of forests and indiscriminate cutting of trees for
human greed and needs, are causing greater problems of environment, Climate
and present day humanity as well.  For example, in Uttarakhand, Himachal
Pradesh and most of the Himalayan region lot of eucalyptus, devadaru and
pines have been grown in huge quantity. Pines are self-pollinated, expanding
and multiplying trees. Pines and Eucalyptus have negligible role in Climate risk
management but rather these trees are well known to cause lots of negative
effects to the soil, water and micro-organisms of the area where these are
grown. Similarly, in the State of Kerala, under a scheme of growing trees, the
State authorities have bought eucalyptus, citorora and other African varieties
and planted these trees, as a result, in areas such as Vynad in Kerala where a
lot of water was there but owing to citorora and eucalyptus plantation, the water
has been drained out. Moreover, even friendly bacteria have been reported to be
missing in that soil.
 The Committee, therefore, recommend the Central and State Governments
to plant only those forest trees that can generate water, oxygen, attract clouds
to rain, maintain balance of ecology and also work as non-human Climate risk
managers to fight flood/drought conditions to help boost our agro-forestry
economy.  The non-glacier rivers originate from springs, which can ¶t be saved
without a thick forest coverage of the areas around their source of origin.  The
perennial flow of water in these rivers can only save our forests and irrigate
food crops in their catchment areas and keep the ill effects of warm-climate at
bay.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 7
Need for Interlinking of the Rivers
The Committee note with serious concern that the majority of the people
in the country get affected by frequent floods/droughts every year. These
problems can be overcome to a greater extent by interlinking major rivers and
their tributaries in the country and these proposals, viz,  µInterlinking of National
Rivers¶ were envisaged about more than 50 years ago and even after the lapse
of these years proposals still remain pending at the cost of
sufferings/miseries/pains of the millions of Indian
farmers/fishermen/commonmen year after year.
The Committee note that National Water Development Agency established
in 1982 under the Ministry of Water Resources to carry out the work of National
Perspective Plan for Water Resources Development comprising two
components; namely (i) Himalayan Rivers Development; and (ii) Peninsular
Rivers Development -- to create 35 MHa of additional irrigation potential and
generation of 34 million KW of hydropower, had constituted a Task Force on
Interlinking of Rivers Programme. Though the Task Force was wounded up after
giving its recommendations on 31 st December, 2004, however, the process of
study and finalization of feasibility reports of 16 link proposals by the affected
States, is very slow and no concrete action is seen on the ground for
interlinking of these Rivers. The earlier the interlinking process of rivers is
completed, it will be easier to manage the flood-waters and river-bed erosions.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Central/State
Governments must execute all the work related to inter-linking of national rivers
and their tributaries to divert the excess water which causes floods, to the
drought areas on priority basis in the time bound manner and to overcome the
problem of frequent floods/droughts as anticipated and already being
experienced by the countrymen at large, owing to Global Climate Change.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 8
Need to develop National Policy/Action Plan to encourage farmers to grow alternate
crops alongwith Paddy Crops
The Committee note that agriculture sector contributes 28% in Climate
Change and out of that Paddy/Rice cultivation alone contributes 23% by
releasing/ emitting Methane, one of the Greenhouse Gases into the environment
and directly contributes to global warming.
 The Committee are aware that in many areas of Uttarakhand, Punjab,
Haryana, U.P., Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa and other paddy growing areas in the
country, farmers are tempted to grow more and more paddy crop, even twice a
year, because of the profit motives and has neither the back up knowledge or
awareness to grow other alternate crops which can bring them economic
prosperity nor has any motivational incentives from the Government to grow
other than paddy crops, to avoid negative impacts of the paddy cultivation on
environment/climate.
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Agriculture should
launch a nation-wide awareness campaign for the Indian farmers on watering
system of paddy fields and also encourage them to grow other food crops to
contain Methane emissions.  The Government should come out with a National
Policy/Action Plan, agro-climatic zone-wise suggesting/recommending alternate
crops cultivation to bring economic prosperity to the farmers and at the same
time avoid rise in global warming.
Recommendation No. 9
Need to prevent the Emission of Nitrous Oxides
The Committee note that by 2025 more than double inorganic fertilizers
would be essential for producing more food. More forestlands will be converted
to farmlands and grasslands. This would lead to more Carbon Dioxide and
Nitrous Oxide (GHGs) emissions in the environment. Mitigation is unlikely to
occur without action; achieving the increase in food production will require
more use of Nitrogen Fertilizers leading to further increase in N 2O emissions
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and there will be more increase in Methane emissions from enteric fermentation
if livestock numbers increase in response to demands for milk, meat and other
livestock products. ICAR, at present, has knowledge to prevent only small part
of this emission by the use of nitrification inhibitors, slow release fertilizers and
integrated nutrient management practices.
 The Committee, recommend that ICAR should intensify their research to
find out ways and means to further prevent/mitigate the Nitrous Oxide and
Methane gas emissions from application of higher inorganic fertilization and
enteric fermentation by increased number of livestock, respectively, to avoid
greater harm/damage to environment/climate.
Recommendation No. 10
Impacts of Climate Change on Agriculture/Allied Sectors due to Sea Level Rise
 The Committee note that IPCC recently in their assessment report has
pointed out that modern global warming could melt glaciers and raise world sea
level by 0.18 to 0.59 meters by 2100.  If such rise in the sea level and rise in
high-tidal level, cyclones and storms takes place in India, with a coastline of
7500 kms, impacts on the livelihood of coastal communities will be
considerable.  But from agricultural perspectives, not many studies have been
done in India by ICAR.  However, it is expected that vast stretches of coastal
lands may get submerged, making them unsuitable for upland corps and
increased salinity in aquifers may lead to reduced crop production in coastal
lands, and fish production will also get affected.
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that DARE/ICAR should gear up
their research efforts on all the pros and cons of the impact of Climate Change
on all the agriculture & allied sectors due to rise in sea level.  Its impacts on the
agro-economic life of farmers/fishermen, etc. should also be studied with
practical & feasible solutions/remedies.  Development of salinity-tolerant crop
cultivars should be given priority.  The fishermen should get timely and advance
forecasting about weather and cyclones in the high seas.
 The Committee also recommend that Government should give more
attention towards coastal forests & mangroves. Building public awareness and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

other extension programmes on various aspects of Climate Change in
vernacular language is the need of the hour.
Recommendation No. 11
µDeep Water Rice ¶¶Boat Rice¶ and developing µSea Water Cultivation ¶ as a Science in
ICAR/SAUs
The Committee note that there is going to be more flooding in the Indo-
Gangetic plains owing to Global Climate Change.  From Kanyakumari to
Kashmir, from Gujarat to Tripura, rice is the only crop which is grown
everywhere; wheat cannot grow because of night temperatures being very
sensitive, wheat yield is a gamble in temperature, if the night temperature goes
up, the wheat yield will come down.  The Committee are aware that already
some work is going on in the flood prone areas, which is called µDeep Water
Rice or the Boat Rice ¶.  In Thailand, farmers harvest the rice on the boat and as
the water level rises, the plants also grow up.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that DARE/ICAR should
intensify their research on µDeep Water Rice or Boat Rice ¶ and should find out
solutions to make Deep Water Rice varieties to be more resistant even in case
these are submerged in muddy waters for more than two weeks.  ICAR should
also do extensive mapping for the likely flood prone areas in wake of
Global Climate Change.
The Committee further recommend that DARE/ICAR should undertake
µSea Water Cultivation ¶ as a Science in all their concerned institutes as well as
in curriculum of State Agricultural Universities (SAUs).
Recommendation No. 12
Dryland Agriculture & Global Warming
Since 60% of our agriculture land is rainfed, the focus should be given for
improving the techniques for enhancing the productivity of rainfed agriculture.
The Committee are of the firm opinion that dryland farming or rainfed
agriculture needs special attention to prevent the decline in agricultural
produces under Climate Change due to temperature rise.  The ICAR should
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

develop the seeds for drought and pest-resistant crop varieties for rainfed area
agriculture.  Methods for conservation of soil and water of these dryland areas
should be undertaken on priority basis.  The Government should provide the
financial support on easy terms to the farmers of dryland areas to invest in and
adopt requisite technologies to tide over the impacts of Climate Change.
Recommendation No. 13
Need to preserve, conserve and maintain Pedigrees/Local Breeds of Livestock
The Committee observe that there is going to be nefarious consequences
of Global Climate Change/Warming on Indian Livestock and Milk
Revolution/White Revolution in India which was to a large extent successful
because of the cross-bred cows, the Jerseys, etc. Since, these cows are
extremely vulnerable to high temperatures, it is feared that these cows would
slowly become unproductive and there is nothing like returning back to
normalcy for these cross-bred cows jeopardizing the success of the White
Revolution in India.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that DARE/ICAR should
treasure our indigenous cows such as µSahiwal¶, µTharparkar¶, µRathi¶, µOngole¶,
µNellore¶, etc. and buffalo breeds, like µBadavari¶, µMurrah¶, etc. and maintain on
priority basis all local breeds which can withstand the heat and vagaries of the
Climate Change and adapt themselves to such local situations without
jeopardizing or compromising with the successes of our White Revolution.
Recommendation No. 14
Climate Risk Managers
The Committee note that the Task Force of Climate Risk Mangers(CRMs)
in all the States & UTs at Districts & local panchayat levels, have potential to be
the real saviours of the farmers, fishermen and other rural folks alike and can
play a pivotal role in executing National Action Plan on Climate Change at
grassroot level.
 The Committee further note that the Climate Risk Managers till date figure
only at conceptual and intellectual levels and still far away from becoming a
reality in a professional manner at grassroot level.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

 The Committee, therefore, unanimously recommend that since the negative
impacts of Global Climate Change are ill-affecting and will continue to do so,
more intensely in times to come, all the agricultural and allied sectors, it is most
essential need of the hour to create and develop a nation-wide Task Force of
Climate Risk Mangers. These CRMs should be made well versed in prevalent
agricultural practices and systems of the areas they have to work/serve in. They
should be intensively trained in a professional manner on a host of issues about
agricultural and allied sectors ¶ activities, and have practical knowledge to
educate the farmers and local people all about Climate Change and its impacts
with a view to face & help in diverting natural disasters at grassroot level.  They
should be able to mitigate the sufferings of the farmers, fishermen and
commonmen in the village, due to adverse impacts of Climate Change and at
the time of floods, droughts, climate variability, natural disaster and technology
failure, etc., they should have the ability to convert a disaster into an
opportunity for better survival of humanity,  as well as flora and fauna of the
local areas under their jurisdiction. Since ³Climate Risk Managers ´ are needed
at both, village level & block level, they should be able to communicate the
strategies required to manage climatic risks on a real-time basis to the farmers.
At the same time they should be able to liaise with other related functionaries,
including National Disaster Management Authority(NDMA), Indian Meteorology
Department and Department of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, and
insurance officials. He/she should be trained in these aspects by the NDMA.
Such Climate Risk Managers would also be useful at district and state levels to
liaise with Government officials and other donor/relief agencies.
 The Committee further recommend that in addition to creating an extension
cadre of professionals, the Government should train at least one female and one
male member in every Panchayat to act as Climate Risk Managers. Moreover,
Panchayati Raj Training Institutes in the country should introduce climate
related literacy/knowledge and Climate Risk/Disaster Management
subjects/issues in their own curriculum for training the Panchayati Raj members
and others who are coming for training. Ministry of Agriculture should ensure
that all their extension workers/whosoever has the responsibility to liaise with
farmers, fishermen, livestock managers, etc. to educate them, must be trained
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

as Climate Risk Managers and each one of them, should have a specific annual
physical target to educate and interact with farmers and allied sectors clientele
on all aspects of Climate Risk Management in the area of their jurisdiction.
Recommendation No. 15
Intensify the R&D on Climate Change
The Committee note that Climate Change is likely to impact negatively on
many aspects of agriculture, including, irrigation availability, soil health, pests,
and crops and livestock production.  Preliminary calculations to quantify the
decrease in production of wheat suggest a likely decrease of 4 to 5 million
tonnes with an increase of 1 0C increase in temperature throughout the growing
season.  ICAR stated that work on other crops is being done and at present,
comprehensive estimates of costs of abating these damages due to
Climate Change has already started on Indian agri-allied sectors.
The Committee recommend that DARE/ICAR should expedite and
intensify their research & development work on all the major foodgrains, coarse
grains, pulses, cash crops, oilseeds, horticultural/medicinal & aromatic plants,
tuber and fodder crops, etc., with regard to likely negative as well as positive
impacts of Climate Change and should also come out successfully with
remedial solutions/packages/technologies/practices which can be conveniently
and feasibly practised and adopted by all the Indian farmers/livestock producers
in all the agro-climatic zones of the country.  Agriculture should be supported
by the convergence of traditional practical knowledge of the farmers about the
farming system and new technological innovations, biotechnology and in case
of failure of the crops effective insurance mechanisms need to be created.
The Committee also recommend that DARE/ICAR should take expeditious
steps to work out the comprehensive estimates of costs/funds required to abate
the challenges emerging out of Climate Change scenario as has been done by
many other countries.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 16
Research Grants to DARE/ICAR
The Committee note that ICAR has initiated research and development
programmes on several aspects of Global Climate Change impacts on
crops/livestock/fisheries, etc.  The Committee are of the view that the pace of
ICAR research is not satisfactory and is very slow.  This snail pace progress
can be accelerated only if the grants for Climate Change research are enhanced.
The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Planning Commission/PM ¶s
Council on Climate Change/Ministry of Finance to help ICAR to accelerate their
pace by doing useful R&D on the impacts of Climate Change by immediately
providing more grants to them to put an end to unending sufferings of the
Indian farmers/fishermen/livestock keepers, etc.  The Committee also advise the
DARE/ICAR to make their comprehensive estimates of funds/grants requirement
and place the same before Planning Commission/PM ¶s Council on Climate
Change fora/meetings for getting the approval for the funds for their research
on Climate Change impacts on agriculture & allied sectors.
Recommendation No. 17
Green Research Fund
The Committee observe that there is a need to establish µGreen Research
Fund¶ for strengthening research on adaptation, mitigation and impact
assessment on agriculture/allied sectors, of Climate Change in Indian context.
They strongly recommend that DARE/ICAR should come out with
comprehensive details/blue print of this µGreen Research Fund ¶ at their earliest
and place the same before the Planning Commission/PM ¶s Council on Climate
Change for favourable consideration and implementation and the Committee be
apprised of the outcome within three months from the date of presentation of
this Report to the Parliament. The Committee are also of the view that although
the main beneficiary of this µGreen Research Fund ¶ will be ICAR, yet this Fund
should have ample scope and opportunities to encourage and inspire financially
the private scientists/NGOs/non-governmental research organizations,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

institutions, societies, etc. throughout the nation to put in sincere R&D efforts
on the impact assessment of Climate Change and to come out with feasible
adaptive/mitigational remedies for the agriculture and allied sectors.
Recommendation No. 18
Financial Incentives and Packages for improved Land Management/Resource
Conservation
 The Committee are well aware of the alarming facts/impacts of the Global
Climate Change on agriculture and allied sectors in India as well as the endless
ongoing sufferings of Indian farmers/fishermen/livestock managers, etc.
 The Committee, therefore, unanimously recommend that it is high time
when the Government of India should make a healthy policy to provide and
extend financial incentives and packages to States and UTs to improve land
management, natural resource conservation/enhancement, i.e.  (Water, Energy,
Carbon) as well as man-made resources such as equipment/machinery, etc.
conservation/enhancement and fertilizer use efficiency, to individual farmers,
fishermen and livestock managers, etc. who proved to be a successful
practitioner in achieving the desired goals. This will really help the individuals
and the society as whole to get motivated and encouraged to indulge in
improved land management/resources conservation/enhancement and efficient
use of fertilizers/resources.
Recommendation No. 19
Developing Capacity for Understanding the Real Time Climatic Variability
The Committee note that ICAR requires to share weather data with Indian
Meteorological Department (IMD) in order to develop capacity for understanding
the real time climatic variability on a priority basis and recommend that for
achieving the above purpose ICAR and IMD should explore the possibility of
signing an MoU in this regard.
The Committee further recommend that in order to generate the right kind
of information/data which is critical and wanted, for the ground level
beneficiaries such as, farmers, fishermen, livestock managers, etc. on climatic
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

variability. Scientists have to go to the farmers and the agriculture experts and
ascertain from them about their actual requirements and accordingly should
generate the required information on weather conditions.
The Committee also note that several ICAR institutes collect data on
Crops/Livestock/Fisheries response to climatic variables.  The Committee
recommend that this data from different institutes should be compiled,
streamlined and put on ICAR Web for greater utilization and understanding
impacts of Climate Change by the farmers and other interested people.
Recommendation No. 20
Making the Society and Economy Climate Proof
 The Committee note that Climatic variability has always been an important
issue in Indian Agriculture. It has caused frequent events of droughts, floods,
heat and cold stresses, causing widespread impact on food production. Climate
Change is likely to increase such risks in future. Although ICAR and State
Agricultural Universities (SAUs) are reported to have always taken this issue of
µClimate Proofing ¶ seriously, yet, they have no comprehensive estimates of
costs associated with making our Society and Economy  µClimate Proof¶.
 The Committee, therefore, recommend DARE/ICAR to understand the
gravity of the negative impacts of Global Climate Change on Agriculture and
Allied Sectors.  It should come out with comprehensive estimates of costs and
best management practices for making our agro-socio-economy climate proof
at the earliest as this will help the research institutions to get the required
funding from the MoF/Planning Commission.  Such comprehensive estimates of
costs will also help the appraisal agencies to allocate funds appropriately
among various Ministries/Departments considering the priority of the
issues/matter involved. This will also help the Central Government to negotiate
India specific concerns with the various international financial
institutions/agencies who can be instrumental in helping us with required
funding to combat the whole issue of Global Climate Change in its totality.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 21
Development of Safe Biotechnological Interventions
The Committee observe that one of the item of the National Action Plan
on Climate Change is use of bio-technology.  Although the Government has
announced that it would set up National Bio-Technology Regulatory Authority,
there are lot of controversies and concerns in this regard, particularly, on the
agricultural side.  There are serious concerns among the masses about the
safety aspects of food bio-technology.
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that DARE/ICAR should
intensify and strengthen their research on the generation of the novel genetic
combinations, drought, flood, salinity, sodicity and biotic stress tolerant
varieties and at the same time they should also develop their capacity to ensure
safe and responsible use of bio-technology.
 Moreover, DARE/ICAR should review their performance as ICAR is
yet to come out with their first indigenous bio-technological breakthrough in
agricultural/allied sectors which can be happily and economically grown by
Indian farmers to come out of the slavery of imposed monopoly of multinational
companies selling them genetically modified seeds at a very high price every
time they use their seeds.
Recommendation No. 22
Bharat Nirman²Irrigation Programme
 The Committee note that Irrigation is one of the components for
development of rural infrastructure under Bharat Nirman. Ground water
irrigation is suffering immensely due to depletion of underground water-table.
The irrigation component aims at creation of irrigation potential of 10 million
hectare (MHa) in four years, i.e.,  from 2005-06 to 2008-09. The projects/schemes
for creation of irrigation potential are taken up by the State Governments from
their own resources according to their priorities.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Government of India has enhanced allocation for grants under Accelerated
Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) to provide support to State Governments.
 The physical achievements/progress under Bharat Nirman ²Irrigation
Component is stated to be 1676.916 thousand hectare for the year 2005-06;
1943.346 thousand hectare for 2006-07; and 1522.394 thousand hectare for
2007-08.  It is evident from these figures that about less than 50 per cent target
has been achieved in initial three years and in the last/final year, i.e. , 2008-09,
more than 50 per cent target is left to be achieved.
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that it is high time to
develop right kind of strategies and action plan, reviewing the past
performances, to convert the big failure of irrigation component of Bharat
Nirman into a bigger success in wake of man-made Global Climate Change.
 Recommendation No. 23
Prevention of Higher Greenhouse Gases (GHGs) Emissions by Food Processing
Industries
The Committee observe that Food Processing Industry have been to a
large extent dependent on technologies like refrigeration, cold storages, etc.
which are abhorred by environmentalists since these technologies are
productive of Greenhouse Gases (GHGs).
The Committee visualizing the negative impacts of Global Climate Change
on Food Processing Industry recommend that refrigeration/cold storage
technologies based on emission of more GHGs in environment needed to be
modified/altered to an extent that no or very low emissions of GHGs go in the air
as pollutants to the environment. The Committee further recommend that
DARE/ICAR should develop and come out successfully with modified alternative
packages for Food Processing Industry as they have an important role in
finding technological possibilities and developing varieties of agro-allied
produces which can sustain higher temperatures, drought resistant or which
can sustain skewed precipitations, etc. for securing a healthy future for our
Sun-rising Food Processing Industry.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

 NEW DELHI;
 25  February, 2009
6 Phalguna, 1930 (Saka)
MOHAN SINGH
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Agriculture.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2008
AT 1500 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. µ139¶, FIRST FLOOR,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav ± Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Ranen Barman
3. Shri Anil Basu
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
6. Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
8. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
9. Shri Prabodh Panda
10. Smt. Rupatai D.Patil Nilangekar
11. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
12. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar
13. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
14. Shri Harish Rawat
15. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
16. Shri Vikram Verma
17. Shri Vinay Katiyar
18. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed
19. Shri Datta Meghe
20. Shri M.Rajasekara Murthy
21. Prof. M.S.Swaminathan
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.S. Hooda   -  Deputy Secretary
3. Ms. Amita Walia   -  Under Secretary
WITNESSES
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) and read out
contents of Direction 55(1) of the µDirections by the Speaker, Lok Sabha ¶.
2. After the introductions, the Secretary (DARE) along with
Dr. P.K. Aggarwal, National Professor, IARI, New Delhi and also on the
international panel on climate change, briefed the Committee on various aspects
of the subject, µImpact of Global Climate Change on Agriculture and Allied
Sectors in India ¶ through a power point presentation.  The representatives of the
Ministry also replied to the various points raised by the members of the
Committee during the interactive session.
3. In view of the importance of the subject and its predicted impact on Indian
agriculture, hon. Chairman encouraged and motivated the scientists to do the
needful research in time to find out the solutions to the grave problems the nation
1. Dr. Mangala Rai                 - Secretary (DARE) & DG (ICAR)
2. Dr. P.K. Aggarwal                 - National Prof., IARI, New Delhi
3. Dr. A.K. Singh                       - Deputy Director General (NRM), ICAR
4. Dr. K.M. Bujarbaruah           - Deputy Director General (AS), ICAR
5. Dr. S.  Ayyappan                  - Deputy Director General (Fy.), ICAR
6. Dr. S.P. Tewari                     - Deputy Director General (Edn.), ICAR
7. Dr. P.L. Gautam                  - Deputy Director General (CS), ICAR
8. Dr. H.P. Singh                      - Deputy Director General (Hort.), ICAR
9. Shri A.K. Upadhyay            - Addl. Secretary(DARE) & Secretary
(ICAR)
10. Dr. Nawab Ali                     - Deputy Director General (Engg.), ICAR
11. Dr. K.S. Khokhar                - Assistant Director General (PIM), ICAR
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

is likely to face in future due to Global Climate Change and assured them full
support of the Committee for the same.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept.
5. The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 27 AUGUST, 2008    AT
1500 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. µ139¶, FIRST FLOOR,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1745 hrs
PRESENT
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav - Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Anil Basu
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Shri Gadakh Tukaram Gangadhar
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
8. Shri Mahendra Prasad Nishad
9. Shri Prabodh Panda
10. Smt. Rupatai Diliprao Nilangekar Patil
11. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
12. Shri M.P. Veerendrakumar
13. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
14. Shri Harish Rawat
15. Shri Ishwar Singh
16. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
17. Shri Vikram Verma
18. Shri Vinay Katiyar
19. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
20. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
21. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
22. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SECRETARIAT
1.  Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh  -  Joint Secretary
3. Ms. Veena Sharma  -  Director
4. Shri Raj Kumar  -  Deputy Secretary
5. Shri N.S. Hooda  -  Deputy Secretary
6. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary
    WITNESSES
1.  Prof. Sulochana Gadgil - Honorary Professor & Former
Chairman, Centre for
Atmospheric and Oceanic
Sciences, Indian Institute of
Science
2. Dr. Suhas Wani  - Principal Scientist & Regional
Coordinator  for Asia,
International Crops Research
Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
3. Dr. A.A. Nambi  - Project Director (Climate hange)
M.S. Swaminathan Research
Foundation
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee and
called in Prof. Sulochana Gadgil, Honorary Professor and former Chairman,
Centre for Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences, Bangalore.  She was welcomed
and apprised of the contents of Direction 55 (1) of the µDirections by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha¶.  Thereafter, Prof. Gadgil briefed the Committee about her views on
various aspects of µImpact of Global Climate Change on Agriculture and Allied
Sectors in India ¶ and also replied to the queries raised by the members of the
Committee.  She told the Committee that observation over the Indian region
shows that the temperature does show an increasing trend over 100 years, but
there is no increasing trend in the temperature of the monsoon season, June to
September, the Kharif season.  The increase in temperature seems to be
observed primarily in the winter & in the post-monsoon months.  She suggested
that we have to mitigate against or adapt our strategies for the variability of the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Climate between droughts and very good monsoon years.  She also pointed out
that more work is required in promoting inter-disciplinary research.
2. The Chairman thanked her for briefing the Committee.
(Prof. Gadgil then withdrew)
3. Thereafter, Dr. Suhas Wani, Principal Scientist & Regional Coordinator for
Asia, International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics,
Pattancheru, Andhra Pradesh, was called in and was welcomed and apprised of
the contents of Direction 55(1) of the µDirections by the Speaker, Lok Sabha ¶.
Dr. Wani briefed the Committee about his views on various aspects of µImpact of
Global Climate Change on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in India ¶.  He suggested
that we need to conserve our biodiversity, promote alternate rural enterprises to
have the farming system approach, which would diversify the source of income.
For that, we need to improve policies and institutions for the efficient use of
natural resources and also improve risk management through various early
warning systems so that the farmers are able to cope with the Climate Change.
We need to enhance the plantation of trees.  In all the systems, we need to
reduce the methane emissions from the paddy lands by bringing in water use
efficiency and minimising the water logging; need to increase water use
efficiency for agriculture as 80% of water is consumed by agriculture.  We need
to build shelter belt and alternate source of renewable energy, need to be put
together to really build our strategy for Climate Change.  He also replied to the
queries raised by the Members.
4. The Chairman thanked him for briefing the Committee.
(Dr. Suhas Wani then withdrew)
5. Thereafter, Dr. A.A. Nambi, Project Director (Climate Change), M.S.
Swaminathan Research Foundation, Chennai was called in and was welcomed
and apprised of the contents of Direction 55(1) of the µDirections by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha ¶.  Dr. Nambi briefed the Committee about his views on the subject.
He pointed out that although ICAR is having very good resources, knowledge
and research capabilities, yet it required to have dedicated research centre for
Climate Change.  Research institutes should design certain tools which are
helpful in assessing the specific vulnerability at specific places by having regular
and good monitoring framework and based on that we have to evolve the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

adaptation and mitigation strategies.  He also mentioned that there are ample
trading and economic opportunities from Climate Change but how to tap these
things and take it to rural level is the important thing and for that a good policy
support would always be helpful.  He also replied to the queries raised by the
members.
6. The Chairman thanked him for briefing the Committee.
(Dr. Nambi then withdrew)
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 8 SEPTEMBER, 2008 AT 1500 HRS. IN
COMMITTEE ROOM µ'¶, GROUND FLOOR,  PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW
DELHI
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1745 hrs
PRESENT
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav - Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Anil Basu
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
4. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Shri Prabodh Panda
7. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
8. Shri K.J.S.P.Reddy
9. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Redddy
10. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
11. Shri Harish Rawat
12. Shri Ishwar Singh
13. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
14. Shri Vikram Verma
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar
16. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
18. Prof. M.S.Swaminathan
19. Shri M.Rajasekara Murthy
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SECRETARIAT
1.  Shri A.K. Singh  -  Joint Secretary
2. Ms. Veena Sharma  -  Director
3. Shri Raj Kumar  -  Deputy Secretary
4. Shri N.S. Hooda  -  Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary
WITNESSES
1. Dr. Mangala Rai Secretary (DARE) & Director General
(ICAR)
2. Shri A.K. Upadhyay Additional Secretary (DARE)
& Secretary (ICAR)
3. Dr. A.K. Singh Deputy Director General (NRM)
4. Dr.P.L. Gautam Deputy Director General (CS)
5. Dr. H.P. Singh Deputy Director General (Hort.)
6. Dr. S. Ayyappan Deputy Director General (Fy.)
7. Dr. K.M. Bujarbaruah Deputy Director General (AS)
8. Dr. P.K. Aggarwal National Professor, IARI
9. Dr. K.S. Khokar Assistant Director General (PIM)
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) and read out
contents of Direction 55(1) of the µDirections by the Speaker, Lok Sabha ¶.
2. After the introductions, the Secretary (DARE) explained to the Committee that
estimates are being made regarding the impact of global warming on agriculture,
horticulture, fisheries and on livestock and there is unanimity that climate change is
certainly going to affect in different proportions in different regions.  He pointed out
that this continuous increase in temperature is not as big a problem as the swings in
temperature, precipitation, distribution in space and time,  that is probably creating a
lot of problem for scientists in ICAR.  He further explained about some aspects of
climate change and on use of transgenic technology for insulating crops, livestock and
fisheries to weather vagaries. The representative of the Department also replied to the
various points raised by the members of the Committee during the interactive session.
3. The Committee unanimously decided to hear and interact with some of the
directly involved Ministries and Departments and to be apprised about their collective
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and coordinated efforts to tackle the impacts of Global Climate Change on agriculture
and allied sectors in India.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept.
5. The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX IV
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE  30 SEPTEMBER,   2008 AT
1100 HRS. IN MAIN COMMITTEE ROOM, GROUND FLOOR,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav - Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Ranen Barman
3. Shri Anil Basu
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta
5. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
6. Shri Khagen Das
7. Shri Prabodh Panda
8. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
9. Shri M.P.Veerendrakumar
RAJYA SABHA
10. Shri Harish Rawat
11. Shri Ishwar Singh
12. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
13. Shri Vikram Verma
14. Shri Vinay Katiyar
15. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
16. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
17. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SECRETARIAT
1.  Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh  -  Joint Secretary
3. Ms. Veena Sharma  -  Director
4. Shri Raj Kumar  -  Deputy Secretary
5. Shri N.S. Hooda  -  Deputy Secretary
6. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary
               WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DAC)
1. Shri T. Nanda Kumar Secretary (A&C)
2. Dr. S.M. Jharwal Principal Adviser
3. Dr. N.B. Singh Agriculture Commissioner
4. Shri N.K. Das Additional Secretary
5. Shri P.K. Basu Additional Secretary
6. Shri R.C. Ray Economic & Statistics Adviser (ESA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DARE)
1. Dr. A.K. Singh Deputy Director General (NRM)
2. Dr. P.L. Gautam Deputy Director General (CS)
3. Dr. H.P. Singh Deputy Director General (Hort.)
4. Dr. S. Ayyappan Deputy Director General (Fy.)
5. Dr. K.M. Bujarbaruah Deputy Director General (AS)
6. Dr. K.S. Khokar Assistant Director General (PIM)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DAHDF)
1. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Secretary (ADF)
2. Dr. S.K. Bandyopadhyay Animal Husbandry Commissioner
(AHC)
3. Shri Dilip Rath Joint Secretary (A&DD)
4. Shri Tarun Sridhar Joint Secretary (Fy.)
5. Dr. Batobyal Joint Secretary (LP)
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES
1. Shri M.E. Haque Commissioner (PP)
PLANNING COMMISSION
1. Shri L. Rynjah Principal Adviser (Agriculture,
Environment & Forests)
2. Dr. V.V. Sadamate Adviser (Agriculture)
3. Dr. Indrani Chandrasekharan Adviser (E&F)
4. Shri M. Ravindranath Joint Adviser (E&F)
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
1. Shri Vijai Sharma Secretary (E&F)
2. Shri J. M. Mauskar Additional Secretary
3. Shri R. R. Rashmi Joint Secretary (Climate Change)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4. Shri Subodh Kumar Sharma Adviser (Climate Change)
MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES
1. Dr. Shailesh Nayak Secretary (ES)
2. Dr. Ajit Tyagi DG, IMD
3. Dr. L.S. Rathore Scientist µ*¶ (Advisor)
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee and
called in the representatives of the following six Ministries/Departments and the
Planning Commission and apprised them of the contents of Direction 55 (1) of the
µDirections by the Speaker, Lok Sabha ¶:
(i)  Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation);
(ii) Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and
Education);
      (iii) Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
& Fisheries);
      (iv) Ministry of Earth Sciences;
      (v ) Ministry of Environment & Forests;
      (vi) Ministry of Water Resources; and
      (vii) Planning Commission.
2. In his opening remarks itself, the Chairman asked to enlighten the Committee on
some specific points on the various aspects of the subject, µImpact of Global Climate
Change on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in India ¶, such as affectation of ground water
table due to change in precipitation and evaporization, extent of saline intrusion into
coastal and inland aquifers due to rising sea level, methane discharge of rice fields in
India & European Countries, need of financial and policy support from Government of
India, need to set up time frame for interlinking of rivers for proper utilization of water
in deficient regions, the benefited and non-benefited food crops due to increased C0 2
in the atmosphere, strategy to be adopted to reduce emission of greenhouse gases,
need to develop ocean atmospheric and climate model strategies, need to discuss the
budgetary requirement with Planning Commission for adaptation and mitigation
strategies and their  implementation meant for Climate Change, etc., etc.  Being the
nodal Ministry to oversee and coordinate with Inter-governmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) and inter-ministerial efforts as well within India to counter the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

ill-effects of Global Climate Change in India, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment &
Forests was asked to lead the briefing of the Committee.  In his introductory remarks,
the Secretary (E&F) gave a brief account of various measures on research, policy and
planning side, which have been taken domestically, taking into account the threats,
challenges and opportunities coming up due to Global Climate Change.  He also
informed the Committee that in the year 2007, Prof. R. Chidambaram, the Principal
Scientific Advisor to the Government of India was asked to look into some relevant
aspects of the impacts of Global Climate Change and very recently he has finalised
six reports on six areas.  He further mentioned about the eight missions set up under
National Action Plan on Climate Change which was released on 30 th June, 2008.
3. Thereafter, the representative of the Ministry of Earth Sciences was asked to
give his presentation. He gave a brief account of their mandatory activities and
programmes specifically related to ocean atmosphere, which he claimed, are guided
towards providing services to the society like the weather, agro-climate for aviation, for
fisheries and for that they have been making observations of the ocean and
atmosphere and integrate these observations and modelling to provide service.
4. After that, the representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources informed the
Committee that their first and foremost task is to have a reliable assessment of the
water resources, particularly its features as a result of impact of Climate Change.  He
also explained that their Ministry has been assigned the responsibility in respect of
institutionalization of National Water Mission envisaged under National Action Plan on
Climate Change and for that six sub-committees have been constituted to address the
related issues in a coordinated manner and by associating the various stakeholders.
5. Subsequently, representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture, Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation; Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries;
Department of Agricultural Research & Education; and Planning Commission also
briefly presented their views on the subject and their envisaged role in this regard.
6. Thereafter, Members raised several points/queries and Chairman asked the
representatives to send within 10 days, the written replies to all the points raised by
the Committee during discussion to which the representatives of respective Ministries
responded in affirmation.
7. The Chairman thanked all the representatives for briefing and expressing their
views in a free and frank manner before the Committee.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept.
9. The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

APPENDIX V
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, THE 25 FEBRUARY, 2009
AT 1000 HRS. IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. µ139¶, FIRST FLOOR,
PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW DELHI
The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1100 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Mohan Singh - Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Ranen Barman
3. Shri Girdhari Lal Bhargava
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Prabodh Panda
6. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar
7. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
8. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy
9. Shri Baleshwar Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
10. Shri Vikram Verma
11. Shri Vinay Katiyar
12. Shri M.Rajasekara Murthy
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

SECRETARIAT
1. Ms. Veena Sharma  -  Director
2. Shri N.S. Hooda  -  Deputy Secretary
3. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Under Secretary
   At the outset, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture
welcomed the Members and apprised them that the Draft Report on the Subject
has already been circulated to them and is ready for their consideration.  The
Report was then taken up for consideration.  The Report was unanimously adopted
with minor modifications suggested by the members.  The Committee also put on
record their appreciation of strenuous efforts put in by the Committee Secretariat
for reflecting Committee¶s concern and observations in drafting the Report.
 2. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the report and present
the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages