STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2004-2005) 
8
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005)  
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005)} 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
February, 2005/ Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) 
 

 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
 
(2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005) 
 
 
{Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005)} 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 2.3.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3.3.2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2005/ Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
  
          
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
INTRODUCTION 
  
CHAPTER I   Report  
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have   
   been accepted by the Government  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the   
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect   
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observa tions in respect of   
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee    
held on 25th   January, 2005 
. 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the   
Recommendations contained in the Fourth  
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2004-2005). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Composition of  the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005) 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta  
4. Shri G.L. Bhargava 
5. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
6. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
7. Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan 
8. Shri Lalchand Kol 
9. Shri Khagen Das 
10. Shri Dharmendra 
11. Shri Sharanjit Singh Dhillon 
12. Shri Raghunath Jha 
13. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
14. Shri Prakash V. Patil 
15. Shri A. Ravichandran 
16. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
17. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
18. Shri Harihar Swain 
19. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
20. Shri Mahboob Zahedi 
21. # Smt. Anuradha Choudhary 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
23. Shri Harish Rawat 
24. Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
25. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
26. Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
27. Shri Bhagwati Singh 
28. Shri Datta Meghe 
29. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
30. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
31. *Dr. M.S.Gill 
Chaudhary Munawwar Hassan  ceased to be the Member of this Committee owing to his 
nomination to  the Standing  Committee  on Labour  w.e.f.16.8.04 vide  L.S. Bt.Pt.-II 
dt.16.8.04 
# Smt. Anuradha Choudhary  has been nominated to this Committee  w.e.f. 30.8.2004 
vide  L.S. Bt.Pt-II, dt. 30.8.2004 
Shri Raashid Alvi ceased to be the Member of this Committee owing to his nomination  
to the Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law & Justice w.e.f  31.8.2004 vide  
R.S.  Bt Pt-II  dt. 31.8.2004 
*Dr. M.S. Gill has been nominated to this Committee w.e.f 31.8.2004 vide R. S. Bt  Pt-II  
dt. 31.8.2004 
 

 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Sh. N.K.Sapra    - Joint Secretary 
2. Sh. Devender Singh   - Director 
3. Sh. K.D.Muley    - Under Secretary 
4. Smt. P. Jyoti    - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-
2005) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, present th is Eighth Report on Actio n Taken by Government 
on the recommendations/observations contained in the 4 th  Report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2004-2005) on Demands for Grants 
(2004-2005) of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
2. The Fourth Report of the St anding Committee on Agriculture 
(2005 on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries was presente d to Lok Sabha on 17.08.2004 and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 17.08.2004.  The Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries was requested to furnish action taken replies of the Government 
to recommendations contained in the Fourth Report.  The replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were 
received. 
 
3. The Committee considered the ac tion taken replies furnished by 
the Government, approved the draft comments and adopted the  Eighth 
Report at their sitting held on 25. 1.2004.  Minutes of the sittings are 
placed in Appendix-I. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contai ned in the Fourth Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI      PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
25 January, 2005          C h a i r m a n  
5 Magha, 1926(Saka)   Standi ng Committee on Agriculture. 
  
  

 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations containe d in the Fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agricu lture (2004-2005) on Demands for Grants 
(2004-2005) of the Ministry of Food Processi ng Industries which was presented to the 
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.08.2004. 
 
1.2  The Action taken replies have been received from the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries and categorised as under: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II of the Report) Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 6, 8, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 
23 and 24 (Total – 15) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s action take n reply (Chapter III of the Report) Sl. 
No. 2 and 4 (Total – 2) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which action taken replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV of the 
Report) Sl. No. 21 (Total – 1) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Obser vations in respec t of which final replies of the 
Government are still awa ited.  (Chapter V) Sl. Nos. 5, 7, 9, 10, 12 and 15 
(Total-6) 
 
1.3 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations. 
 
SUPPLY OF FRUITS FOR MID-DAY MEAL  
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 8 
 
 
1.4 India loses 37% of its agricultural produce every year due to absence of 
infrastructure facilities.  The Committee desi re that the Ministry in coordination with 
State Nodal Agencies and Dire ctorate of Fruit and Vegeta ble Processing should examine 
the feasibility of supply of fruits in consultation with the Ministry of Human Resource 

Development for distribution to schools as part of Mid-Day Meal Scheme.  This will 
certainly serve the multiple purpose like prevention of post harvest losses, supply of fruits 
and nutritious food to school children living below poverty line and provide remunerative 
prices to the farmers. 
1.5 The Government in its Action Taken Repl y stated that matters relating to schools 
fall within the purview of the Ministry of HRD / State Governments.   Accordingly, the 
recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to the Ministry of HRD with a 
request to advise State Governments to take  necessary action in the matter as desired by 
the Committee. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.6 The Committee hope that the Ministry  would not rest contented by merely 
forwarding their recommendations to the Mi nistry of Human Res ource Development to 
examine the feasibility of making available fruits to School Children as part of the mid-
day meal provided to them but also pursu e the matter conclusively for its speedy 
implementation. 
 
COLD CHAINS 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 9 
 
1.7 The Committee have observed that one of  the greatest impediments in the overall 
development of Food Processing Industries is l ack of integrated cold chains.  The cold 
chain is a facility to keep the produce in a congenial atmosphere, right from farm to the 
market or from the farmers to the consum ers.  The Scheme was approved by the CCEA 
in August, 2003 only.  The Committee feel that th e integrated cold chain facilities are the 
lifeline of fresh food and require utmost attention to be paid.  The Committee, therefore, 

strongly recommend that the Scheme of cold ch ains be implemented as early as possible.  
The Ministry should also ta ke all the essential measur es in cooperation with the 
concerned Ministries for improving the roads leading from farm wh ere perishable goods 
are produced to the Urban Market Areas.  Th e Government may also consider providing 
of refrigerated Rail Wagons, Cargo and Vessels  to transport the perishable food items 
from the remote locations to major markets and consumers centres so that growers get 
remunerative prices and the consumer get quality fresh food item.   
1.8 The Committee desire that the Ministry  may identify the district and regions 
having major fruit and vegetable clusters so that these could be made the nodal points for 
creation of Food Processing infrastructure facilities. 
1.9 The Government in its Action Taken Reply stated that the scheme of cold chain 
facilities is intended to improve viability of  existing cold storages and enhance cold 
storage capacity.  Assistance @ 25% of the pr oject cost in genera l areas and 33.33% in 
difficult areas subject to a maximum of Rs . 75.00 lakh is provided for establishment of 
cold chain facilities.  At present the Scheme of MFPI is not applicable to horticultural 
produce as this is  being provided by Nationa l Horticulture Board. The scheme also does 
not provide for grant of assistance for reefer  van.  Necessary proposal for amendment of 
the scheme is under consideration.  Food pro cessing infrastructure facilities like food 
parks are generally created in regions/are as having adequate agricultural produce 
clusters. As regards improvement of roads, provision of refrig erated rail wagons etc., the 
recommendation has been brought to the notic e of the Ministries of Surface Transport 
and Railways for taking necessary action.   
 

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.10 The Committee expect the Ministry to pursue the matter vigourously and 
conclusively regarding establishment of in tegrated cold chains and availability of 
refrigerated rail wagons, cargo and vessels with the concerned Ministries for 
transporting perishable food items from  remote locations to the markets and 
consumer centres so that the farmers get much deserved remunerative prices and 
the consumers get farm fresh products at reasonable prices. Moreover, the 
perishable food items would not get wasted as well.  The Committee feel that in the 
ultimate reckoning, this will benefit not on ly the farmer and the consumer but also 
the entire nation. 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 20 
 
 
1.11 The Committee note that India is the f ourth largest producer of fish and second 
largest producer of fresh water fish in the wo rld.  India with its va st coastline of more 
than 8,100 kms. and huge territorial waters a nd Exclusive Economic Zones, rivers, lakes 
and ponds offer great scope for fish producti on of all kinds.  Reportedly, countries like 
Thailand and Bangladesh have done much more  in this field.  The Committee in their 
earlier Reports have been recommending for reformulating the Scheme for strengthening 
of traditional Fish Processing Technologies including technologies to use solar energy.  
The Committee have been informed that solar dryers are being used in some parts of the 
country but its cost efficiency in fish drying on a commercial scale is yet to be proved.  
The Committee feel that with proper coordi nated efforts with th e State Governments, 

State Nodal Agencies and Fishery Coopera tives, the Ministry should be able to 
popularize the existing mechanical dryers in drying fish by lowering operational cost and 
yet at the same time by utilizing the availa ble applied research in tapping the solar 
energy, big perennial source of energy. 
1.12 The Committee further desire the Minist ry of Food Processing Industries to 
borrow the technologies adopted by countries  like Japan, Thailand and Bangladesh to 
exploit the existing vast marine as well as inland fishery resources in India.  Special 
attention also needs to be directed to prom ote cold water fisheries and the fisheries in 
perennially water logged areas. 
1.13 The Government in its Action Taken Re ply stated that k eeping in view the 
recommendation of the Standing Committee, all St ates / UTs have been requested to take 
necessary steps for popularizing mechanical dr yer in fish drying and also for utilizing 
available applied research in  tapping solar ener gy for fish drying.  Assistance of NCDC 
has also been sought to advise fisheries coope ratives in this regar d.  CFTRI Mysore and 
Central Institute of Fish Technology, have al so been requested to initiate measures to 
intensify research on technology for cost-effective mechanical dryers.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.14 The Committee are pleased to note that  necessary steps have been taken by 
the Ministry for utilizing applied research in tapping solar energy for fish drying.  
The Ministry has, however, conspicuously refrained from commenting on the 
suggestion given by the Committee regarding the technologies adopted by countries 
like Japan, Thailand and Bangladesh for tappi ng their marine and inland fisheries.  
In their considered view, a study about the strategies being adopted by major fish 

processing countries, and Japan, Thailand and Bangladesh in particular, would 
certainly go a long way in the development of fish processing in our country. 
 
SUBMISSION OF UTILISATION CERTIFICATE 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 21 
 
 
1.15 The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry have not been successful in 
getting utilization certificates from the grant receiving agencies.  The Committee are 
unable to see as to how the Ministry is exercising vigil over the agencies receiving 
grant/financial assistance if unable even to obtain utilization certific ates.  In order to 
ensure effective monitoring and to safeguard th e use of public money, it  is essential that 
the Ministry institute a mechanism for recei pt of Utilization Cer tificates within the 
stipulated time frame.  In cas e of apparent failure, the Minist ry can consider to stop the 
second installment and also take stringent ac tion against the defaulters making them to 
refund the money, together with penal intere st thereon.  The Committee would also like 
to be furnished a statement of the grants sanctioned, State-wise and the utilization 
certificated received and awaited. 
1.16 The Government in its Action Taken Reply stated that the requisite information is 
being collected and will be furnished to the Committee on receipt of the same from State 
Governments.  The matter was also discu ssed with the State/UTs on 13.10.2004 and they 
were also requested to pursue submission of UCs. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.17 The Committee are not impressed with  the repetitive reply given by the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries regarding Non-Submission of utilisation 

certificates by the NGOs, cooperatives, pr ivate and Public Sector Undertaking for 
undertaking various activities relating to  food processing. The Committee reiterate 
their earlier recommendation regarding receipt of Utilisat ion Certificates from the 
grant receiving agencies and hope that the st atement of the grants sanctioned state-
wise and utilisation certificate received will  be furnished to them within the next 
three months with an appraisal note indica ting the periodic monitoring done State-
wise by the Ministry on the actual utilisation of grants.  
 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
INADEQUATE ALLOCATIONS TO THE MI NISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING 
INDUSTRIES 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
 
2.1 The Committee observe that despite th e vast potential of the Food Processing 
Sector and the declared importance att ached to the Food Processing Sector by 
Government, the Ministry has been given a paltry allocation of Rs. 110.00 crore for 
2004-05 which constitutes just 0.7 percent of th e total Central Plan Outlay.  As against 
the projected requirement of Rs. 2800 crore for the 10 th Plan, the Ministry has been 
allocated a meager amount of Rs. 650 crore.   Surprisingly, during the year 2003-04, BE 
of Rs. 75.00 crore has been reduced to Rs. 65.00 crore.  The Committee strongly 
recommend that curtailment of funds for this Ministry may be  avoided at RE stage of the 
current year and BE of th e remaining two years of 10 th Plan Period may be substantially 
increased so that Food Processing Sector is ab le to play the envisa ged catalytic role in 
transforming the national economy in a big way. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 The recommendation of the committee has been noted and the Ministry of 
Finance and Planning Commission both have been requested not to curtail funds of the 
Ministry at RE stage.  Necessary action for provision of increased budget for 2005 – 06 
has since been initiated.   

PRIORITY SECTOR BANK LENDING 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
 
2.3 While taking note of the fact that the Government consider the Food Processing 
Industries as priority sector, the Committee fi nd that the leading lending institutions have 
not accorded any priority for providing loans to this sector, despite the widely 
acknowledged potential of the sector and its mu ltiplier effect in the transformation of the 
economy.  The Ministry of Finance have expressed their unw illingness to fix a 
percentage within the Priority Sector for lending to Food Processing Sector within the 
18% minimum norms.  The position is not ac ceptable to the Committee as this decision 
of the Ministry of Finance negates the decisi on of Government to gi ve greater thrust to 
agricultural diversification through Food Proc essing.  The Committee, strongly desire 
that the Ministry of Food Processing Industries take up the matter again with the Ministry 
of Finance and make out a stronger case for earmarking a certain percentage credit to the 
Food Processing Sector by the financial institutions. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.4 As desired by the Committee, the proposal to earmark a certain percentage of 
credit to the food processing se ctor under priority sector lend ing has been referred to the 
Department of Banking for consideration. 
 
HIGHER ALLOCATION FOR INFRAS TRUCTURE DEV ELOPMENT/FOOD 
PARKS 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
 
2.5 The Committee are concerned to find that due to absence of basic infrastructural 
facilities, 8 to 37 per cent of total agricultural produce goes waste resulting in estimated 

loss of about Rs. 50,000 crore annually.  The pr ocessing units are mainly concentrated in 
the states where better infrastr uctural facilities are availabl e rather than at places where 
raw material is available and, as a result, mo st of the produce in the rural areas goes 
waste.  Inspite of India’s leading positi on in dairy, meat and poultry sector, the 
percentage of processing units in organized sector is very negligible i.e. 15% in dairy and 
10% in Meat.  India pr ocesses 2% of the agricultural produce in comparison to 30% in 
Thailand, 80% in Brazil and 60-70% in countries like the UK & USA.  To their utmost 
surprise, the Committee learnt that due to resource crunch, the co rresponding allocations 
for the Scheme of infrastructure was fixe d at Rs. 29 crores during 2002-03 and 2003-04, 
which has further drastically reduced to Rs. 10.00 crore at the RE of 2003-04.  The main 
reasons for this as cited by the Ministry is that as a result of revised infrastructural 
Scheme, the financial assistance is restricted to 25% of the project cost in general areas 
and 33.33% in difficult areas bu t no viable proposals are fort h coming.  Earlier there was 
no such restriction in terms of percentage  of the project cost.  The components of 
packaging Centre, modernized abattoirs, irradiation facilit ies and value added centers 
were incorporated in the Scheme for infrastructure development during the 10 th Plan 
Period, but these were approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) 
only in August, 2003.   
2.6 The Committee further note that the Ministry have b een pursuing proactively the 
task of setting up of Food Parks in different parts of the country depending upon the local 
needs.  The representative of the Ministry co nceded in his oral testimony that as against 
45 Food Parks sanctioned, only 9 Food Parks ar e partly in operation but assured that 
vigorous monitoring and periodic review should expedite the operation of all the Parks.   

 
2.7 The Committee, therefore, strongly reco mmend that the allocation for this 
Scheme should be enhanced positively at  the RE Stage for 2004-05 and also in the 
coming years so that all the activities under the Schemes are fully operational in order to 
develop infrastructural facilities for Food Processing Se ctor.  The Committee further 
desire the Ministry to liberalise the pattern of assistance and generate awareness about the 
Food Parks in order to attract more viable proposals and make concerted efforts to make 
all the sanctioned Food Parks fully operational as early as possible. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.8 Progress/functioning of food parks is being revi ewed on regular basis.  In order to discuss 
various issues including problems being face d by food parks, a Conference of State Nodal 
Agencies was held in New Delhi on13th October 2004.  A Conference of State Ministers of Food 
Processing was also held on 5th November 2004.  State Governments have been requested to make 
vigorous efforts in coordination wi th implementing agencies so as  to make food parks operational 
at the earliest.  As decided in the Conference, a proposal to liberalize the pa ttern of assistance for 
food parks is under consideration.   
 
 
SUPPLY OF FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PROCESSING FOR MID DAY MEAL 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
 
2.9 India losses 37% of its agricultural produce every year due to absence of 
infrastructure facilities.  The Committee desi re that the Ministry in coordination with 
State Nodal Agencies and Dire ctorate of Fruit and Vegeta ble Processing should examine 
the feasibility of supply of fruits in consultation with the Ministry of Human Resources 

Development for distribution to schools as part of Mid Day Meal.  This will certainly 
serve the multiple purpose like prevention of post harvest losses, supply of fruits and 
nutritious food to school chil dren living below poverty line and provide remunerative 
prices to the farmers. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.10 Matters relating to schools fall within purview of the Ministry of HRD/State 
Governments.  Accordingly, the recommenda tions of the Committee have been forward 
to the Ministry of HRD with a request to advise State Government s to take necessary 
action in the matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
2.11 For Comments of the Committee, please refer to para 1.6 of Chapter-I of the 
report. 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF PROCESSABL E VARIETIES OF FRUITS & 
VEGETABLES 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
 
2.12 The Committee find that due to lack of awareness or for lack of accessibility the 
producers are not able to take advantage of th e installed processing units and vice-versa.  
This is one of the reasons for low level of processing and losses incurred by the growers.  
The Committee, therefore, feel strongly that there is an urgent need for introducing 
processable varieties of fruits  and vegetables and also of building awareness about the 
availabilities of the produce in consulta tion with Indian Council for Agricultural 
Research, Indian Horticultural Research In stitute, National Ho rticulture Board and 

Horticulture Department of States.  A coor dinated approach needs to be adopted for 
promoting cultivation of processable varieties and popularize the same among processors 
and farmers.  The Committee expect the Ministry to prepare, compile and disseminate 
information on all processable varieties of Frui ts and Vegetables to attract entrepreneurs 
in the field of Food Processing. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT 
 
2.13 A Scheme of backward linkages has been im plemented by the Ministry providing inter-alia 
for cultivation of processable variety of farm produ ce.  Ministry also extends financial assistance 
to research institutions like ICAR and other R&D institutes , which undertake programmes for 
research of processable variety of farm produce .We have also brought the recommendation of the 
committee to the notice of Department of Agriculture Research and Education. 
 
FOOD FORTIFICATION 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 13 
 
2.14 The Committee note that in order to c ontrol malnutrition an d to enrich common 
man’s food, a scheme for fortification of wheat floor has been launched under which fifty 
per cent of the cost of capital equipment of  dosing machine subject to a maximum of Rs. 
3 lakh is provided.  As the Scheme has been launched recently, proposals are still awaited 
from the entrepreneurs.  The Committee also no te that fortified flour is being sold by a 
few branded names, which are not affordable by the general public suffering from 
malnutrition.  

2.15 The Committee would like the Ministry to extend the Scheme to all the flourmills 
and examine earnestly the feasibility of making the existing Scheme for fortification 
popular and institute measures accordingly to control malnutrition.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.16 The provisions of the scheme were discu ssed in the Conference of SNAs held on 13 th 
October 2004 and they have been requested to take necessary steps for popularizing the scheme 
among the entrepreneurs.   
 
 
NEED FOR WIDER PUBLICITY 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 14 
 
 
2.17 The Committee note that generic adve rtisement is the only way by which the 
Farmers Entrepreneurs, Self Help Groups, NGOs, Research Organisati ons and ultimately 
the consumers are made aware of the activities of the Ministry, its objectives and the 
advantages of processed food.  The Comm ittee are informed that many important 
schemes implemented by the Ministry, the response has been far from encouraging 
despite wider publicity given to various Schemes.  Reportedly, there are no applicants for 
availing benefits under the forward linkages Scheme and not a single industry association 
has come forward to avail financial assistance, for collection, compilation and analysis of 
data.  Many Schemes like, food fortificatio n, modernization of abattoirs, all the 
component of infrastructure development scheme including cold chain have been 
approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 23 rd August 2003.  
The Ministry is yet to make the Scheme fu lly operational.  The Committee further note 

that out of 45 Food Parks sanctioned only 9 are partly in operation.  Many R&D Projects 
have been taken up recently and they are yet to demonstr ate their utility.  During 10 th 
Plan Period, all the schemes have been broa dened and in some cases new activities have 
been added.  The rapidly increasing urbani zation, rising level of lit eracy and rising per 
capita income have changed the food habit of the people which is giving a great boost to 
ready made processed food.  India has the largest expanding middle class set to switch 
over to the processed food in a big way.  Furthe r, the demand of Indian Vegetarian Food 
has been increasing in the global market.  In  this encouraging backdrop, the Committee 
strongly feel that the Ministry should mount an effec tive publicity campaign through 
print and electronic media in cluding local news papers giving detailed information about 
benefits likely to accrue from its Schemes, procedure for availing th e benefits, terms of 
investment, avenues for earning a handsome return etc. so as to attract more 
entrepreneurs.  The Committee are optimistic more funds would be forthcoming in near 
future if viable projects are received and sanctioned by the Ministry. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.18 The recommendation of the Committee ha s been noted and necessary action is 
being taken to give publicity about benefits of the schemes of the Ministry    
 
 
HIGHER ALLOCATION FOR STRENGTHENING OF INSTITUTIONS 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 16 
 
2.19 Under the umbrella of the Scheme for Strengthening of Institutions, financial 
assistance is being provided for the (i) Strengthening of Paddy Processing Research 

Centre (PPRC), (ii) Strengthening of State Nodal Agencies (SNAs), (iii) Meeting the 
expenditure of Pay and Allowances for the Plan Posts, and (iv) Information Technology.  
The PPRC is one of the autonomous instituti ons financed by the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries.  The institute adhe res to its established responsibility of 
development and dissemination of technologies to reduce the post harvest losses in food 
grains with special emphasis on Paddy Pr ocessing.  During the year 2004-05, the 
Ministry decided to discontinue assistance to Rice Milling on the plea that they are giving 
priority to commodities of perishable nature like Fruit and Vegetable, Poultry and Dairy 
Processing.  The Ministry decided that appr opriate measures like technology support for 
redressal of problems of rice milling industry wi ll be taken care by the PPRC.  So far as 
SNAs are concerned, the Committee note that as Food Processing Industries are in the 
unorganized sector, SNAs have to play a very vital role  between state and Central 
Government.  Information Technology can play a very crucial role in this sector.  The 
Plan Funds utilization during first two years is Rs. 7.50 crore including BE 2004-05 i.e. 
10.00 crore.  Percentage expenditure for these scheme, is only 28.40% of the total 
approved 10 th Plan outlay for the Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that in order to strengthen the Food Processing Sector, the above-mentioned 
institutions should be strengthened further and enhanced allocations may made in the 
future years. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.20 A proposal has already been  initiated for providing hi gher grant to SNAs.  As 
regards PPRC, it has been decided to upgrade the Institute to include activities like 

processing of millets, oilseeds and pulses within its ambit.  Necessary fund is provided to 
the institute from the Budget of the Ministry.  
 
HIGHER ALLOCATION FOR R&D AND QUALITY CONTROL MEASURES 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 17 
 
2.21 Undoubtedly, India is blessed with la rge quantity and varieties of natural 
resources and can cater substa ntially to meet the demand of  National and international 
markets.  However, in the era of globalisation where competitiveness is the key to 
success, India must meet the ex acting international standards in order to get a reasonable 
position as processed food exporter.  The Committee note that though qualitative 
measures are being implemented by the Mi nistry through its plan schemes, many 
important sectors such as Meat and Poultry and Dairy Processing, do not meet the 
international standard.  About 90% processed food products  are in the unorganized 
sector.  There is an urgent need to do a lot of research work in these fields including the 
need for tapping solar energy in the vast co astal line for the benefi t of food processing 
units.  The Committee are surprised to note th at the financial allocation for 2004-2005 is 
only Rs. 6.00 crore which is less than the BE of 2002-03 and 2003-04.  During the first 
three years of 10 th Plan, the total expenditure is only 23.70% of the total 10 th Plan 
approved outlay.  During 10 th Plan few proposals were received for research and 
development from the institutions and unive rsities engaged in re search because of 
unattractive Schemes.  Surprisingly, for undert aking research projects, the cost of raw 
material, salaries of research personnel em ployed on the project have been deleted for 
getting financial assistance. 
  

2.22 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Scheme for Quality Control and 
Research Development should get higher allo cation and the Minist ry should take the 
responsibility to use these allocations fully by formulating attractive schemes to develop 
all the segments of Food Processing.  Th e Committee further recommend that provision 
should be made within the Scheme to provi de attractive incentives to the research 
personnel employed in the projects. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
2.23 The recommendation of the Committee ha s been noted and necessary action is 
being initiated to modify the provision/pattern  of assistance for R& D Scheme to include 
the cost of raw material, consumable, expenses on salary of research personnel etc. in the 
grant provided by the Ministry.  
 
 
HIGHER ALLOCATION FOR TECHNOLOGY 
UPGRADATION/ESTABLISHMENT/MODERNISATION OF FOOD 
PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 18 
 
2.24 The Committee note that during 10 th Plan, assistance in the form of grant-in-aid is 
proposed to be extended to all segments of the Food Processing Sector including fruits, 
vegetables, milk, fish, grain, meat poultry a nd other consumer products.  However, the 
Committee find that on allocation of Rs. 35.00 cr ore has been made in the BE for 2004-
05 due to resource-crunch.  Apparently, the scheme, despite  its wide ranging scope to 
accelerate the growth of food processing sector , has not been given its due importance.  

The Committee therefore strongly recommend that this sector should be accorded due 
importance and accordingly made higher allocations. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.25 As recommended by the Standing Comm ittee, the Government has initiated 
necessary action to seek additional funds for R.E. 2004-05 and B.E. 2005-06. 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FOOD TECHNOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 19 
 
2.26 The Ministry has a proposal to set up  a National Institute of Food Technology and 
Management as a National Centre of Excellen ce which will work synergistically with the 
industry and similar institutions with the obj ective to help, develop and adopt world class 
food technologists and entrep reneurs; provide business in cubator services; undertake 
research for development of food standards; provide training and advisory support to 
companies with established/potential interest  in the food industry; and become an apex 
information resource Centre.  The Ministry has identified an agency preparing for the 
feasibility and detailed project report.  The work for preparation of Feasibility Report and 
Detailed Project Report is likely to be completed during the year under review. 
  
2.27 The Committee note that the project cost, as per the feasibility  report, is Rs. 133 
crore.  The budgetary allocation for this institute will be made from Rs. 10.00 crore 
provision for the Scheme of Human Resource Development.  The Committee appreciate 
the efforts being undertaken by the Ministry in this direction and expect early finalisation 
of the feasibility report so that the ap ex body for food developing, food technology and 
management is set up at the earliest.   

 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.28 The recommendation of the Standing Co mmittee has been noted for necessary 
action.  
 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 20 
 
2.29 The Committee note that India is the four th largest producer of fish in the world 
and second largest producer of fresh water fish in the world.  India with its vast coastline 
of more than 8,100 kms. and huge territoria l waters and Exclusive Economic Zones, 
rivers, lakes and ponds offers great scope for fish production  of all kinds.  Reportedly, 
countries like Thailand and Bangladesh ha ve done much more in this field.  The 
Committee in their earlier Reports have been recommending for reformulating the 
Scheme for strengthening of traditional Fish Processing Technologies including 
technologies to use solar energy.  The Committ ee have been informed that solar dryers 
are being used in some parts of the country but its cost efficiency in fish drying in 
commercial scale is yet to be  proved.  The Committee feel that with proper coordinated 
efforts with the State Governments, State N odal Agencies and Fishery Cooperatives, the 
Ministry should be able to popularize the ex isting mechanical dryers in drying fish by 
lowering operational cost and yet at the same time by utilizing the available applied 
research in tapping the solar energy, big perennial source of energy. 

2.30 The Committee further desire the Minist ry of Food Processing Industries to 
borrow the technologies adopted by countries  like Japan, Thailand and Bangladesh to 
exploit the existing vast marine as well as inland fishery resources in India.  Special 
attention also needs to be directed to prom ote cold water fisheries and the fisheries in 
perennially water logged areas. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.31 Keeping in view the recommendation of the Standing Committee all States / UTs have 
been requested to take necessary steps for popularizing mechan ical dryer in fish drying and also 
for utilizing available applied research in tappi ng solar energy for fish drying.  Assistance of 
NCDC has also been sought to advise fisheries cooperatives in this regard.  CFTRI Mysore and 
Central Institute of Fish Technol ogy, have also been requested to  initiate measures to intensify 
research on technology for cost effective mechanical dyers.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
2.32 For Comments of the Committee, please refer to para 1.14 of Chapter-I of the 
report. 
 
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 22 
 
2.33 The Committee observe that India being th e largest milk producer in the world, is 
poised to assume an important position in the global dairy industry as well.  Many 
international dairy companies are reportedl y viewing India with an eye on its vast 
growing market for dairy products.  Milk production in India was estimated at 88 million 
tonnes during 2002-03 as against 84.60 m illion tonnes during 2001-02.  However, 

organized dairying industry accounts for less th an 15% of the milk produced in India.  
The rest of the milk is either consumed at Fa rm level, or is sold as fresh, non-pasteurized 
milk through unorganized channels.  Despite implementing the Plan Scheme for setting 
up expansion/modernization of food proce ssing units for manufacturing milk products, 
the position has hardly improved so far and our milk processing is still barely 14 per cent. 
 
2.34 The Committee are perturbed to note that  no applications were  received seeking 
financial assistance from dairy sector during 2000-2001.  During the years 2001-02 to 
2003-04, 35 applications were received.  Only one application was sanctioned each in 
year 2001-02 and 2002-03 and 9 in 2003-04.  On e application was closed/rejected in 
2001-02, three in 2002-03 and two in 2003-04.  Undoubtedl y, there is something 
basically wrong with the way the scheme for financial scheme has been launched given 
the little response that the scheme has elic ited.  With such a tardy progress, the 
Committee are afraid whether Ministry will be  able to do justice to dairy processing 
sector by ensuring availability of quality a nd hygienic milk and milk products for the 
domestic market as well as for the exports. 
  
2.35 The Committee, therefore strongly r ecommend that the Ministry should 
reexamine the scheme to make it encouraging and popular so that more viable proposals 
come forward to the Ministry for availing of  assistance with a vi ew to attaining the 
objective of standard quality and hygienic milk and milk products in the country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.36 The procedure regarding processing of applications  for grant to FPI units 
including dairy units has been simplified.  PAC meetings are now held twice in a month 

to sanction grant to FPI units.  The cases comp lete in all respects are required to be 
approved within a period of 30 days.  As a re sult of these initiatives, several cases for 
assistance to dairy units have been approved.   
 
 
 
PATENTING OF INDIAN PROCESSED FOOD 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 23 
 
2.37 The Committee observe that the global h ealth establishment, particularly the 
European countries, have become aware of the benefits of vegetarianism because of 
rising fears about mad cow disease and reserv ation on red meat consumption.  They look 
forward to India as their destination because no civilization uses vegetables and cereals in 
such a varied splendour as in India.  India is now uniquely well placed to help the West to 
reduce their consumption of ri sky and not so healthy red m eat by offering varied and 
sumptuous vegetarian food.  Taking due note of the changing trend towards 
vegetarianism, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry explore and tap this 
unique emerging market, so that processed vegetarian food earns valuable foreign 
exchange.  Besides, it is the quality food th rough which India’s friendly relation with the 
external world will be further strengthened and become enduring.  The Committee further 
desire that the Ministry s hould take all the necessary st eps in coordination with the 
concerned Ministries to patent the Indian Vegetarian Food items in right earnest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT 
 
2.38 The recommendation has been referred to the Departments of Commerce and  
Industrial Policy & Promotion for taking necessary action.  

 
 
SEPARATE DEPARTMENT OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES IN EACH 
STATE/UTs 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 24 
 
2.39 Food Processing is a state subject and it is spread over in organized and 
unorganized sector all ov er the country.  The subject is handed by separate departments 
in most of the States where there is no speci fic Food Processing Department.  Pursuant to 
the recommendations of the Standing Committ ee on Agriculture, a separate Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries was created in the year 2002 at the union level.  When asked 
about the need for having s separate Depart ment in all the States/UTs, the Secretary 
replied in the affirmative and felt that such a course would be immensely beneficial and 
accelerate the growth of food processing sector. 
  
2.40 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries being the nodal Ministry to devel op Food Processing Industries in the country, 
should persuade the State Governments for cr eation of a separate Ministry/Department 
exclusively to deal with Food Processing In dustries, where they do not exist for the 
speedy Development of Food Processing Industries. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.41 A Conference of State Ministers of Food Processing was held on 5 th November 
2004.  It was impressed on the states /UTs that separate Ministry / Department should be 
created for speedy development of food pro cessing industries in all State / UTs where 

such Ministry / Department does not exist.   A letter has also been addressed to Chief 
Secretaries of the State Governments in this regard.  

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS REPLIES 
 
 
CENT PERCENT FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE  FOR NORTH EAST ERN STATES AND 
OTHER HILLY AREAS 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
 
 
3.1 The Committee appreciate the efforts bei ng made by the Ministry with regard to 
the development of North Ea stern region.  The special in centives for North Eastern 
Region include: 
 
(i) 10% of the plan allocation for North Eastern States for treating North Eastern 
States as difficult areas; 
(ii) Financial assistance @ 33.33% of the project cost subject to a maximum of 
Rs. 75.00; 
(iii) 50% of the capital cost subject to a maximum of 4 crore provided under Mini 
Mission IV Programme; and 
(iv) Deduction of 100% of Profit for five years and 25% of profit for next five 
years in case of new agro-processing set up under Income Tax Act. 
 
3.2 The Committee, however, note the inability  expressed by the Ministry to provide 
cent per cent central fund for the projects in  the North Eastern region which holds the 
promise of becoming an excellent source fo r high value horticultural produce and value 
added products unique to these region for onward marketing both within the country and 
abroad.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should reconsider the 
matter and launch the 100 per cent centrally funded Scheme for tapping the tremendous 
and unique potential of Horticulture Produc e of the North Eastern Region also hilly 
States for rejuvenation of the entire economy of the region. 
 
 

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.3 North Eastern States are being treated as difficult areas.  Accordingly, financial assistance @ 
33.33% of the project cost subject to a maximum of Rs. 75 lakh is being granted for project in North 
East as against 25% of the project cost subject to  a maximum of Rs. 50 lakh in general areas.  For 
setting up of units / facilities for processing horticulture produce, 50% of the capital cost subject to a 
maximum of Rs. 4.00 crore is provided under Mini Mission IV programme.  As  financial assistance 
is in nature of grant and a stake is required from  the promoter, it is not po ssible to provide cent per 
cent central fund for the projects in North East.   However, recommendation of the Committee in 
this regard has been referred to the Ministry of Finance for consideration .M inistry also intends to 
propose a higher percentage of grant for infrastructure facilities in these areas 
   
 
 
PROCESSED FOOD DEVELOPMENT FUND 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
 
3.4 The Committee note that Food Processing Sector, though termed as a sunrise 
sector, has been entirely left at the mercy of commercial Banks/Institutions.  Obviously, 
these Institutions cannot provide  easy and cheap finances to cover the risk faced by the 
units in this upcoming sector unless so stipul ated by the Reserve Bank of India.  In the 
opinion of the Committee, it is the Ministry, which alone can make out a stronger ease for 
setting up a separate fund for Food Proces sing Sector as mooted in 1999-2000.  The 
Committee reiterate that the Mini stry should seriously take up  the matter of creation of a 
“Food Development Fund” with the Planning  Commission again in order to make 
institutional finance available to new entrepreneurs on soft terms so as to give a fillip and 
stimulus to the all round development of the Food Processing Sector. 

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.5 Several plan schemes like infrastructure development scheme, technology upgradation / 
establishment of FPI units, HRD, quality assu rance & R&D, backward & forward linkages, 
generic promotion etc., have been implemented for promotion of food processing industries.  An 
amount of Rs. 110.00 crore has been  provided for expenditure under these schemes in BE 2004 – 
05.  An enhanced amount is likely to be alloca ted for these schemes in the subsequent years.  
According to available information bank credit is hardly a problem for genuine entrepreneurs.  As 
such, creation of food development fund may not be viable proposition. The Ministry already 
undertakes EDP programmes with a view to enhance entrepreneurial skills of the intending persons  
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
SUBMISSION OF UTILISATION CERTIFICATE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 21 
 
4.1 The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry have not been successful in 
getting utilization certificate from the gr ant receiving agencies.  The Committee are 
unable to see as to how the Ministry is exercising vigil over the agencies receiving 
grant/financial assistance if unable even to obtain utilization certific ates.  In order to 
ensure effective monitoring and to safeguard th e use of public money, it  is essential that 
the Ministry institute a mechanism for recei pt of Utilization Cer tificates within the 
stipulated time frame.  In cas e of apparent failure, the Minist ry can consider to stop the 
second installment and also take stringent ac tion against the defaulters making them to 
refund the money, together with penal intere st thereon.  The Committee would also like 
to furnish a statement of the grants sanctioned, state-wise and the utilization certificated 
received and awaited. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.2 The requisite information is being collected  and will be furnished to the Committee on 
receipt of the same from State Governments.  The matter was also discussed with the State/UTs on 
13.10.2004 and they were also requested to pursue submission of UCs. 

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.3 For Comments of the Committee, please refer to para 1.17 of Chapter-I of the 
report. 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
INTEGRATION OF FOOD LAWS 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
 
5.1 The Committee are constrai ned to note that considerab le delay has already been 
made, for one reason or the other, in fina lizing the draft Food Laws which envisage 
integration of the existing mu ltifarious laws regulating Food Processing Industries.  The 
Committee desire the Ministry  of Food Processing Industri es to expedite the matter 
without any further delay and pr esent the integrated draft Food Laws to the Parliament at 
the earliest so that the F ood Processing Sectors move from regulatory regime to the 
promotional and developmental regime.  Need less to say, such a st ep will facilitate the 
growth of Food Processing Sector by prov iding a single window system to the 
entrepreneurs for setting up Food Processing Un its in various fields and regions of the 
country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 Consequent to change of Government in  May 2004, a new Group of Ministers (GoM) has 
been set up for examinations and finalization of modern integrated food law.  First meeting of 
GoM was held on 1 st November 2004 and the next meeting is scheduled for 24 th November 2004.  
Further action to finalize the food law will be taken as per directions of GoM. 
 
 

 
 
STRENGTHENING OF THE MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING 
INDUSTRIES 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
 
5.3 The Committee observe that the proposal for strengthening the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries by merging various promotional organizations like APEDA, 
MPEDA, National Horticulture Board, Nati onal Cooperative Development Corporation 
etc. of the Ministry of Agriculture, Depa rtment of Agriculture & Cooperation has not 
been found acceptable by the Committee of Secret aries.  In the considered opinion of the 
Committee, the Ministry should take up th e matter again so that all promotional 
organisations working in th e field of food processing, preservation and storage are 
brought under single administrative control.  To begin with, at  least the top experts of all 
relevant premier research organizations should form a jo int pool of human resource, 
which can act as Standing Advisory Council to the Ministry  of Food Processing 
Industries. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.4 The matter regarding merger of APEDA, NHB et c., with MFPI has been considered by the 
Committee of Secretaries and found not acceptable. A proposal in this regard has been submitted 
afresh to the Cabinet Secretary.   

 
COLD CHAINS 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
 
5.5 The Committee have observe that one of the greatest impediment in the overall 
development of Food Processing Industries is l ack of integrated cold chains.  The cold 
chain is a facility to keep the produce in a congenial atmosphere, right from farm to the 
market or from the farmers to the consum ers.  The Scheme was approved by the CCEA 
in August, 2003 only.  The Committee feel that th e integrated cold chain facilities are the 
lifeline of fresh food and require utmost attention to be paid.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Scheme of cold ch ain be implemented as early as possible.  
The Ministry should also take all the essential measure in cooperation with the concerned 
Ministries for improving the roads leading from farm where perishable goods are 
produced to the Urban Market Areas.  The Go vernment may also consider providing of 
refrigerated Rail Wagons, cargo and Vessels to  transport the perishable food items from 
the remote locations to major markets a nd consumers centres so that growers get 
remunerative prices and the consumers get quality fresh food item.   
5.6 The Committee desire that the Ministry  may identify the district and regions 
having major fruit and vegetable clusters so that these could be made the nodal points for 
creation of Food Processing infrastructure facilities. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.7 The scheme of cold chain facilities is intended to improve viability of existing cold storages 
and enhance cold storage capacity.  Assistance @ 25% of the project cost  in general areas and 

33.33% in difficult areas subject to a maximum of Rs. 75.00 lakh is provided for establishment of 
cold chain facilities.  At present the Scheme of M FPI is not applicable to horticultural produce as 
this is  being provided by Nationa l Horticulture Board. The scheme also does not provide for grant 
of assistance for reefer van.  Necessary pr oposal for amendment of the scheme is under 
consideration.  Food processing infr astructure facilities like food parks are generally created in 
regions / areas having adequate agricultural produce clusters. As regards improvement of roads, 
provision of refrigerated rail wagons etc., the recommendation has been brought to the notice of the 
Ministries of Surface Transport and Railways for taking necessary action.   
 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
 
5.8 The Committee observe that Food Proce ssing Industries are expected to grow 
rapidly in the years to come and consequently the demand for trained manpower at all the 
level (including entrepreneurs,  managers, technologist, skilled workers etc.) to man the 
growing needs of the Food Processing Industries will also surge.  This is more so because 
the existing Food Industry will also re quire continuous technology upgration and 
diversification and new ways to manage a nd market in the face of global competition.  
Management of quality control systems will again require specially trained manpower.  
Developing entrepreneurs with variety of skill will be the key to rapid growth of Food 
Processing Industries with a view to extending the spread of Food Processing Units in the 
remote areas closer to the raw material sources.  There will be need for developing 
entrepreneurship in such areas for production packaging and marketing of processed food 
products.  Furthermore, building internati onal grade manpower to manage, innovate and 

build is one of the primary functions of th e Government.  To meet these objectives, the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries have  been implementing the Scheme for Human 
Resources Development.  Th e Committee are distressed to  note that due to limited 
resources available for plan purposes, RE  for HRD in respect of 2002-03 and 2003-04 
were restricted to Rs. 2.70 crore and Rs. 3.00 crore respectively.  The Committee are 
apprehensive whether the Ministry would be anywhere near achieving the goal with such 
reduced allocations.  The Committee, therefore,  desire that the Mini stry of Finance and 
the Planning Commission be pursued to realize the importance of Human Resource 
Development in the Food Processing Sector and increase the allocation in future stages. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.9 The MFPI is taking necessary steps for development of human resources for FPI sector 
within the available resources.  However, as recommended by the Committee, the Ministry of 
Finance and Planning Commission requested to provide enhanced allocation of fund to the 
Ministry in BE 2005 – 06. 
 
 
PROMOTING ETHNIC AND ORGANIC FOOD 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
 
5.10 The Committee take note of the growi ng consciousness among the consumers and 
the increasing demand for ethnic foods of orga nic origin in the c ontext of reports of 
adulterated food items and use of harmful ch emicals in processing and preservation of 
food produces.  The market for ethnic foods and the products of organic origin, which are 
eco-friendly and health-friendly, are growing tremendously.  The Committee, therefore, 
feel that the Ministry should di rect their attention to this aspect as well and coordinate 

with Indian Council of Agricultural Resear ch, (ICAR) Agricultural and Processed Export 
Development Authority (APE DA), National Horticultural Board (NHB) and the State 
Department to popularise the development of organic food processing and its marketing. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.11 The recommendation has been noted for appr opriate action in co nsultation with the 
Ministry of Agriculture and other agencies.   
 
 
COMPILATION OF DATA AND FORM ULATION OF NATIONAL FOOD 
PROCESSING POLICY 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 15 
 
5.12 The Committee are informed that as the Food Processing Industries are both in 
the organized and unorganized sector, prec ise information relating to employment 
generated in the Food Processing Sector yearwise and state wise; amount of loan availed 
by the Food Processing Units under priority s ector and reasons relating to decline in 
respect of export of Meat Products are not available with the Ministry.  The Committee in 
their 43rd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)  had recommended that the Ministry 
should compile data at the ear liest for better planning an d development of the Food 
Processing Sector and analyse their problems.  The Committee are surprised to note that 
under the Scheme of Backward and Forw ard Integration and other Promotional 
Activities, a provision has been made to gr ant financial assistance upto Rs. 2 lakh to 
industry associations to enable them to co llect, compile, analyse a nd publish data about 
Food Processing Industries’ Units  at regular interval.  Ho wever, till now not a single 
industry association has come forward to ava il the assistance.  The Committee are afraid 

as to how the Government w ould prepare and finalise the draft National Food Processing 
Policy without such basic data.  The Co mmittee feel strongly that collection and 
compilation of relevant data is an essentia l sine-qua-non for the formulation of National 
Policy for Food Processing sector and therefore expect the Ministry to make concerted 
endeavours in this direction. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.13 A comprehensive study has been commissioned with  a view to generate adequate data and 
prepare a concrete action plan / vision document for development of food processing sector in the 
country.  
 
NEW DELHI            PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
25 January, 2005                 Chairman 
5 Magha, 1926(Saka)       St anding Committee on Agriculture 
  
 
 

APPENDIX – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 25 TH JANUARY, 2005 AT 1100 HRS. IN 
COMMITTEE ROOM ‘C’, GROUND FLOOR, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, NEW 
DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1240 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Hiten Barman 
3. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
4. Shri G.L. Bhargava 
5. Shri Khagen Das 
6. Shri Dharmendra 
7. Smt. Rupatai D. Patil Nilangekar 
8. Shri A. Ravichandran 
9. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
10. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
11. Shri M.P. Veerendra Kumar 
12. Shri Mahboob Zahedi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13 Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
14 Shri Harish Rawat 
15 Shri Pyarelal Khandelwal 
16 Shri Sk. Khabir Uddin Ahmed 
17 Shri Bhagwati Singh 
18 Shri Bashistha Narain Singh 
19 Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh   -  Director 
2.  Shri K.D. Muley   -  Under Secretary 
3. Smt. Ratna Bhagwani   -  Assistant Director  
 
     

 At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman , welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and requested them to take up me moranda Nos. 2, 3 & 4 containing draft 
Action Taken Reports on 2nd, 3rd and 4th Reports on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agri cultural Research and Education); Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husb andry & Dairying) and Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries, respectively for consideration and adoption. 
2. The Committee then considered and adopt ed the draft Action Taken Reports with 
certain additions/modifications as suggested by members of the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter authorized the Chairman to present the above-
mentioned Report to the House on a date and time convenient to him. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

APPENDIX – II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14th LOK SABHA) 
  
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     24 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Obser vations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Serial Nos. 1,3,6,8,11,13,14,16,17,18,19,20,22,23 & 24 
 
T o t a l          1 5  
 
Percentage        62.55% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Sl. Nos. 2 & 4 
 
T o t a l          2  
 
Percentage         8.33% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies 
Of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
Serial Nos. 21 
 
T o t a l          1  
 
Percentage        4.16% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which  
Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Serial No. 5,7,9,10,12 & 15 
 
T o t a l          6  
 
P e r c e n t a g e         2 5 %  
 