1 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
             
                                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-second Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2012-2013)} 
 
                
FORTIETH REPORT 
  
 
                      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2012/Agrahayana,1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
40 

2 
 
 

3 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) 
  
         
[Action Taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-second Report 
of the Committee on Agriculture (2012-2013)] 
 
  Presented to Lok Sabha on       20.12.2012      
  Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on     20.12.2012     
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
December, 2012/Agrahayana,1934 (Saka)  


4 
 
 
COA No. 263 
 
 
          
         
       
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

5 
 
<CONTENTS> 
                   PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………      1  
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have    25 
   been accepted by the Government ……………      
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the   38 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..        
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect   39 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….        
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of   48 
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….        
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Committee   53 
held on 19 December, 2012.           
            
                                   ANNEXURE 
 
I Performance Evaluation Report for the Department 2010-11  55  
       
II Performance Evaluation Report for the Department 2011-12  61  
       
III Road-map with timelines for establishment of NIASM      67 
 
IV Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the       71 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-second Report                     
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2012-2013).            
                
  
(i)  

6 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2012-13) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
30.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 
 
 
 (iii) 

7 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Joint  Secretary 
2. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director 
3. Shri R.S. Negi   - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

8 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (20 12-2013) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this  Fortieth Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) pertaining 
to Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education). 
 
2. The Thirty-second Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 24 
April, 2012 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 26 April, 2012. The Action Taken 
Replies on the Report were received on 29 July, 2012. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 19 
December, 2012. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-second Report of the Committee is at Annexure. 
 
 
      
                 
             
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
NEW DELHI;                 BASUDEB ACHARIA 
19 December, 2012                                                               Chairman, 
28  Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                       Committee on Agriculture. 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
R E P O R T 
 
 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations contained in the Thirty-second Report of the 
Committee on “Demands for Grants 2012-13” pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) which was presented to             
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25 April 2012.  
 
1.2  The Department of Agricultural Research & Educatio n have furnished Action 
Taken Replies in respect of all the 28  Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report. These have been categorized as under:  
 
 . Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:  
 
Recommendation Para No s. 2.61, 2.63, 2.66, 2.67, 2.69, 2.72, 2.73, 2.74, 2.75, 
2.77, 2.78, 3.32, 3.34, 3.35, 3.36 and 3.39 
 
. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Governments reply:  
 
Recommendation Para No. NIL  
 
. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  
Recommendation Para No. 1.4, 2.62, 2.70, 2.71, 2.76, 3.31, 3.33 and 3.37 
 
. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited :  
 
Recommendation Para Nos. 2.64, 2.65, 2.68 and 3.38   
 
 

10 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the O bservations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and Final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
1.5 The Committee were deeply concerned to note that the Minister of Agriculture 
was yet to make a Statement under Direction 73-A of Directions by Speaker, Lok Sabha 
in the context of Twenty -third Report of the Committee which was presented to the 
Parliament on 29 August, 2011.  The Statement is to be mandatorily made within six 
months of the presentation of an Original Report to the Parliament.   What was most 
perturbing, was that this repeated non-adherence to a Direction by Speaker, Lok Sabha 
has almost become a norm in spite of being adversely commented upon by the 
Committee in their Fourth and Twenty -third Reports.  The Committee strongly 
deprecated this repeated failure of the Ministry to adhere to stipulations laid down in 
Direction 73-A. They also desire d that the Statement in the context of the Twenty -third 

11 
 
Report be made, without fail, during the second half of the ongoing Ses sion (Budget 
Session, 2012) itself.  
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that t he Minister of 
Agriculture made a Statement on 29 th Report which contains Action Taken Report 
based on 23rd Report of the Committee as well as further Action Taken Report based on 
29th Report on 8 th May, 2012 in Lok Sabha and in Rajya Sabha on 11 th May, 2012. 
Since 29th Report is a follow -up of 23 rd Report the Statement under Direction 73A was 
laid down first to give the updated and present status  to the  Committee. Later, the 
Agricultural Committee Branch of Lok Sabha Secretariat insisted that the Statement 
based on 23 rd Report may be laid down in Parliament. Accordingly, the statement 
separately on 23rd Report was also prepared.   
 
Further, as advised by Lok Sabha Secretariat to the Department, the Hon’ble 
Minister of Agriculture made the Statement in the context of 23 rd Report of the 
Committee during the second -half of the Budget Session this year i.e. on 22 nd May, 
2012 in Lok Sabha and on 18th May 2012 in Rajya Sabha.  
1.7 The Committee note with satisfaction that in compliance with their 
Recommendation, DARE have got the Statement of the Minister under Direction 
73A made within the stipulated deadline of second half of the Budget Session, 
2012.  They also expect that the inordinate delays in Statement by Minister under 
Direction 73A of Directions by Spea ker, Lok Sabha will finally be a thing of past 
and henceforth the time line of six months will be adhered to  without any 
exception in case of all Reports of the Committee. 

12 
 
 Coming to the insistence of the Committee Secretariat in regard to the 
Statement by the Minister, the Committee would like to ask the Department that 
how could a Statement be made by the Minister on the Twenty-ninth Report of the 
Committee without a Statement being made about the status of implementation of 
Recommendation contained in th eir Twenty -third Report.  After all, the former 
was only a corollary to the latter.  The advice of the Committee Secretariat was, 
therefore, tendered only to facilitate the understanding of the issue in its right 
perspective. 
OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.62) 
 
1.8 Noting that a sum of Rs. 3220.00 crore had  been allocated on the Plan side to 
DARE against the Department’s proposal of Rs. 4719.68 crore  and viewing this Annual 
Plan Outlay of the Department in the context of the Total Outlay of   Rs. 57887.00 crore 
plus proposed by the Department for the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Committee had felt 
with a great sense of disappointment that the story of the yesteryears ha d been 
repeated by the Planners and the Government in the matter of allocation of funds to 
DARE during this year also  and the compelling fact that DARE ha d to now venture far 
beyond the task of food security into the uncharted realms of global warming, cli mate 
change, etc., which w ould require capital intensive solutions, seems to had  been given 
a go by the Planners and the Government.  The Committee had further felt that b oth of 
them have also singularly failed to understand that these being formative year s of 
developing mitigating strategies and technologies for the emerging challenges, funds in 
requisite measures need to be infused in to NARS on a top priority basis and a ny 

13 
 
dithering or delay would not only delay evolution of these strategies and developme nt of 
technologies, but would also be against long term national interest.  The Committee  
had, therefore, recommend ed that allocations to the Department in the ongoing Fiscal 
be enhanced substantially at the RE stage by when, hopefully EFC/SFC approvals 
alongwith the formalization of Twelfth Plan Outlay will be in bag.  The Committee had  
also advise d the Department that they should also rework their requirements for the 
present year, keeping in view the Schemes for which EFC/SFC approvals will be 
forthcoming in the next few months  as the proposed Outlay of Rs. 4719.68 crore was 
not in consonance with the overall Outlay proposed by the Department for the Twelfth 
Plan viz. Rs. 57887.00 crore as it was not even 10% of the Outlay proposed by DARE 
for the Twelft h Five Year Plan.  They  had further asked the Department to revisit their 
financial requirements for the ongoing Fiscal based on doable Schemes and submit 
justifiable fund requirements at the RE stage so as to ensure that the first year of 
Twelfth Plan was positively different from the first year of the Eleventh Plan in so far as 
achievements were concerned. 
1.9  In their Action Taken Note, the Government have stated that the Draft SFC/EFC 
documents are under preparation, so that they can immediately be sub mitted for 
approval as soon as the allocations are firmed up. 
1.10 The Committee note with grave concern that the allocations for Schemes 
requiring EFC/SFC clearances are yet to be firmed up.  They wonder as to what 
purpose would the readiness of DARE with their EFC/SFC proposals would serve, 
when these is still no trace of the Twelfth Plan. They can only express their 
extreme displeasure at the inept and unprofessional manner the Government has 

14 
 
handled finalization of the Twelfth Plan.  Moreso, when the economic situation is 
in a serious mess. 
The Committee also deprecate  the silence of DARE on their 
Recommendation to make efforts with a view to come up with a well reasoned 
allocation proposal for the ongoing Fiscal as the present proposal of Rs. 4719.68 
crore was totally out of sync of the total Plan Outlay of Rs. 57887 c rore.  The 
Committee desire an immediate response in the matter. 
ELEVENTH PLAN ANALYSIS 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.64) 
 
1.11 Concerned to observe that in spite of the Department prioritizing procurements 
and programmes, few infrastructure projects could no t be completed and a few 
equipment could not be purchased.  Apart from this, development of new cultivars and 
production technologies also got slowed down, in so far as time lines are concerned and   
apprehending that apart from loosing in time there would definitely be cost -escalation in 
all such cases in future , t he Committee  had recommended that all these pending 
Schemes and works be carried out with utmost promptitude during the first year of the 
Twelfth Plan itself. 
1.12 In response, the Department have stated in their Action Taken Note that t he 
Council has already issued instructions to all the Institutes that during the current 
financial year, priority is to be given to the completion of spillover Works & Eq uipments 
of the previous Plan period and meet the ongoing committed expenditure, pending 
EFC/SFC’s approvals/ sanctions. 

15 
 
 
1.13 The Committee are glad to note that in pursuance of their instant 
Recommendation the Department have issued instructions to all t he institutes for 
completion of spillover works and equipments of the previous plan period  during 
the current financial year .  It is, however, a moot point, as to what extent the 
Department would succeed in their endeavour in the absence of EFC/SFC 
approvals and adequate funds.  They would, therefore, like to be apprised of the 
details of progress registered in completion of various spillover works and 
equipments at the earliest. 
RESULT FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT (RFD) 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.65) 
 
1.14 Appreciating that based on their performance against the commitments made by 
them in the Result Framework Document  for the year 2009 -10, DARE had  secured a 
composite score of 95%.  In fact their overall score was higher than the average 
composite score of 89.4% for all the 59 Departments that were evaluated under Phase I 
of RFD policy , the Committee has also asked them to make process of strategy 
formulation of the Department truly participative and thoughtful and also evolve  
Sevottam Compliant Citizen’s Charter and Grievance Redressal Mechanism.  They had 
also asked the Department to apprise them about their evaluation by Cabinet 
Secretariat on these two aspects. 
1.15 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that the achievements of 
the Department in terms of total composite score of RFD of DARE for the years 2010-11 
and 2011 -2012 were 99% and 96.69% respectively. The Performance Evaluation 

16 
 
Report of the Department of Agricultural Research and Education for the year 2010 -11 
and 2011-2012 is enclosed as Annexures I and II respectively. The Strategic Plan and 
the Sevottam compliant Citizen’s Charter &  Grievance Redress Mechanism of the 
Department was submitted to the PMD, Cabinet Secretariat. Subsequently, these 
documents were revised as per suggestions of the Ad -hoc Task Force (ATF) of the 
PMD and resubmitted. The Committee will be apprised of the eva luation as and when 
communicated by the Cabinet Secretariat. 
1.16 The Committee are happy to note that the DARE had in pursuance of their 
Recommendation, submitted a Strategic Plan and Sevottam Compliant Citizen’s 
Charter and Grievance Redressal Mechanism of the Department to the Cabinet 
Secretariat.  Furthermore, based on the suggestions of the Ad -hoc Task Force of 
Cabinet Secretariat, DARE have resubmitted these documents after due 
modifications. They hope that the evaluation of the performance of DARE on 
relevant parameters will be completed by the Cabinet Secretariat expeditiously  
and the Department would apprise the Committee about the results of the 
evaluation at the earliest. 
NEW SCHEMES IN ELEVENTH PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.66) 
 
1.17 During the Eleventh Five Year Plan the National Institute of Abiotic Stress 
Management, Baramati was included as a new Scheme. The Committee ha d in their 
previous Reports recommended, time and again, for expeditious setting -up of the 
Institute in view of t he pressing imperative of abiotic stress management in agriculture 
and allied sectors.  However, noting that the full operationalisation of the Institute 

17 
 
appeared to be a distant possibility , the Committee had asked the Department to 
immediately draw a roa d-map with well laid down time lines and also ensure that they 
were strictly followed  so that the Institute was established and operationalised on war 
footing.  T he Department had also been asked that the said road-map should also be 
submitted to the Committee for their information. 
1.18  In their Action Taken Note  the Department have stated that a s directed by the 
Committee, a Road Map, with well laid down timelines has been prepared. A copy of the 
same is enclosed at Annexure-III.  
1.19 The Committee appreciate the fact that DARE have drawn a Road Map with 
well laid down tentative timelines for completion of various works of N ational 
Institute of Abiotic Stress Management (NIASM) .  From the Ro ad map furnished 
by the Department the Committee find that some of the projects have been 
scheduled for completion during this calendar year and the Institute will be 
functional in all manners by the end of 2017.  Considering the fact that this is a 
capital intensive project, the Department will really have to work very hard to 
ensure sufficient funds so that at least even this staggered time line is adhered to 
and the Institute becomes fully operational by December, 2017.  
UNSPENT BALANCES 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.68) 
 
1.20 The Committee were concerned to note that the Department ha d surrendered 
unspent balances to the Government of India in each of the year of the Eleventh Five 
Year Plan.  These unspent balances amount to a hefty Rs. 548.00 odd crore at the end 

18 
 
of the Eleventh Plan.  While sums of Rs. 190.21 crore in the First Year of the Plan and 
Rs. 101.20 crore in the second year were understandable, as the Department did not 
had timely clearances/approvals for various Schemes, the unspent balance of            
Rs. 167.50 crore in the Final Year of the Plan was inexplicable and this appears to be 
due to inept handling of finances by the Department.  The Committee further note d that 
with a view to streamlining their accou nting system the Department had  strengthened 
their internal control.  Accordingly, now their internal audit would be carried out by 
professional bodies.  For this purpose, the job of internal audit which was, hitherto, 
being done by the inspection team of ICAR Headquarters, was being outs ourced 
through professional bodies such as Institute of Public Auditors of India and C&AG 
empanelled chartered accountant firms.  A part from this measure, ICAR had  adopted 
Accrual System of Accounting which captures all receipts and payments on real -time 
basis.  It was also putting in place a Centralised Financial Management Enterprise 
Resource Package (ERP) to integrate the financial processes of ICAR Headquarters 
and its constituent units.  Once in place, this mechanism would ensure consistent 
monitoring of financial activities viz. budgetary control, actual achievements, shortfalls 
with reference to targets, accounting, etc. and provide accurate and real -time data for 
the purpose of decision making by the management as well as the end users.  The 
Committee felt that this laudable initiative of ICAR to improve its accounting system has 
not come a day soon.  Delays in accounting, lack of timely feedback and inputs have 
been the bane of the accounting system in vogue in the Government and its agencies 
for decades together now.  If successfully implemented the initiative of ICAR has all the 
potential to change the accounting system in vogue into an accurate and real -time 

19 
 
system which not only facilitates better control by management but will also usher the 
much needed transparency for the benefit of the end users.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommended ICAR to put in place the Accrual Accounting System alognwith 
ERP package without any further loss of time so that its implementation commences 
from this very F inancial year.  Keeping in view the immense possibilities offered by the 
system adopted by ICAR, the Committee would like the Ministry of Finance and the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation to evaluate this system thoroughly 
with a view to implement it in other Ministries/Departments/Agencies as well.  For this 
purpose, the Committee would like DARE to forward a detailed note on the accounting 
system and EPR package being implemented by ICAR to both these Ministries 
alongwith the Recommendat ion of the Committee.  The results of the evaluation may 
also be furnished by DARE to the Committee for their information. 
1.21 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that ICAR has adopted 
Accrual Accounting system since 2002 -03. Hence, a ne ed was felt to have a financial 
and accounting system which could not only meet the present day accounting 
requirements but also help the day -to-day monitoring both in terms of quantitative and 
qualitative aspects from operational as well as management poi nt of view. Accordingly, 
a Financial Management Software (ERP Package System) has been selected and is 
being developed through M/s IBM which would be rolled out across the ICAR system. 
Thus, a web -based Financial Management System/Management Information 
System (FMS/MIS) having broader coverage of the ICAR’s Financial/administrative 
aspects is under way. The FMS/ MIS will be developed on a universally tested software 

20 
 
platform like Oracle Financials. The system will enable to retain a full set of accounting 
data in standard accounting format.  
The system envisages the integration of an accrual accounting system with the 
Pay Roll Package, Inventory Management, Research Project Management and  
Personal Information System  etc. so that package broadly can be termed as the 
FMS/MIS of the ICAR. A sound and updated information should serve as a base for the 
effective managerial control and timely decision making. The FMS/ MIS is expected to 
enable a meaningful extrapolation, forecasting and projections. The objectives of the 
FMS/MIS as a tool will be to: 
1. Manage finances, budgets, and inventory management of ICAR as a whole.  
2. Take care of Human Resource System along with Pay Roll.  
3. Provide consistent monitoring of financial activities viz., Budgetary Control, actual 
achievements, shortfall with reference to targets, accounting etc.  
4. Provide real time data for the purpose of precise decision making by the 
management as well as to the end users. 
5. Track the expenditure progress of ICAR on real time basis. 
6. Capture the complete project cycle from the beginning, i.e. project/ sub -project 
submission, approval process, sanction and funding, and also track their 
respective expenditure.  
7. Provide all necessary MIS reports. 
 
The FMS/MIS software would be implemented in a phased manner. In Phase-1 (Part 
1), it is proposed to be implemented in 6 large constituent units of ICAR within 9 months 
of kick-off of the FMS/MIS software development , i.e. March 2012.  In Phase -1 (Part 2), 
it is proposed to be extended to 14 other institutes  during subsequent 6 months’ period. 
The remaining units are proposed to be covered in a 12 months’ period in Phase -2 
which is subsequent to completion of Phase-1.  

21 
 
The FMS -MIS implementatio n plan finally will result in capacity building and 
enhancement of managerial skill for finance, administrative and other officials. The 
ultimate aim of the entire effort is to achieve a complete robust solution through this 
FMS to cater the overall needs of Accounting, Financial and Administration disciplines.  
Once the software is developed and rolled out, it will be mandatory for all the ICAR units 
to adopt the system and report through it for which adequate training will be provided. 
This centralized so ftware will have multiple user system and will be user -friendly. The 
operational manual will also be developed for FMS/MIS, covering all the screen shots, 
formats, reports, etc. for usage of the software by the end user. 
It is pertinent to mention here tha t the software development and implementation 
is going to take place in phases. Accordingly, its overall impact/test of efficiency and 
effectiveness in streamlining and strengthening the management and accounting 
system including availability of real time data, can be assessed only after complete 
implementation.   
1.22 From the submissions of the Department before them at the time of 
examination of Demands for Grants (2012 -13) on the aspect of Financial 
Management Scheme, the Committee had acquired a defini te impression that the 
scheme would be operational at an early date. They had, therefore, accordingly 
recommended certain actions which were post operationalization in nature.  From 
the Action Taken Note  it is apparent  that the entire scheme is at a very  nascent 
stage and would require considerable time to prove its utility. The Committee also 
note that the Action T aken Note is silent on the reference of the Scheme to 
Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Science and Technology. Since, the Scheme 

22 
 
is at the nascent stage, the find it all the more reason for an opinion on it s pros 
and cons from these two m inistries.  They, therefore, recommend the Department 
to immediately seek the views o f the two previously mentioned m inistries and 
appraise the Committee about the outcome at the earliest.   
SCHEMES IN THE TWELFTH PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.70) 
 
1.23 Noting that the Department has proposed 80 Schemes for implementation during 
the Twelfth Plan  including Abiotic Stress Management, Agri -Biodiversity management, 
Genomics, Seed (Planting material, propagules, semen), Hybrids,  Conservation 
Agriculture, Water, Waste (Agro -waste, Municipal waste, Residues),  Health Foods, 
Feed & Fodder, Fibre, Bio-fortification, Precision Farming, Farm mechanization, Energy, 
Nanotechnology, Agri -Incubators, Socio -economic dimensions etc. and being  
apprehensive that with the present uncertainty about the timely availability, as also the 
quantum of financial resources, the Department’s g ood intentions of implementing such 
a huge basket of Schemes would face a lot many glitches and problems, the Committee 
had asked the Department to work out inter-se prioritization of their Schemes, so that 
the pace of implementation continues unhindered.      
1.24 In their Action Taken Note the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education have stated that they have noted and  the inter-se prioritization will be worked 
out. 
1.25 The Committee are not at all satisfied with the stock reply of the 
Department on the matter of prioritization of Schem es.  With the present 

23 
 
uncertainty about Budget and Finances and such a large number of Schemes, the 
least the Committee expected from DARE was that they would have prioritized the 
funds allocation amongst their 80 odd Schemes during the intervening months 
since the presentation of the Report of the Committee.  Going by the reported 
curtailment of funds at revised estimates stage in all Ministries/Departments , had 
the Department heeded to the advice of the Committee and done due 
prioritization of allocations to their various Schemes, they would not have been 
negatively impacted due to reduction in allocation in the middle of the Fiscal.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to do the needful without any 
further delay so as to ensure that funds flow, hereinafter, is based on the genuine 
requirements of each of the Scheme. 
ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS/CLEARANCES 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.71) 
 
1.26 Going by the submission of the Planning Commission that NDC may consider the 
Twelfth Plan Document in June/July this year, the likely  scenario of Plan Outlay 
approval reaching DARE in October/November, this year  and the fact that EFC and 
other approvals can take between 6 to 18 months, on the average about one year, the 
Committee had felt that only those  items that require upto three to three and a half 
years will be finished within the Twelfth Plan period while those requiring more time will 
spill over the  Thirteenth Plan.  The Committee had, therefore, opined that like the 
planning mechanism and the planning process, the system of administrative 
approvals/clearances also needs to be urgently revisited so as to make it quick and 
compact as t he present syste m of approvals taking anything between 6 to 18 months 

24 
 
was not at all in consonance of the dynamics of the developmental process of today.  
The Committee had accordingly recommended the Department to take initiative on this 
crucial issue at the highest leve l in the Government with a view to simplify and shorten 
this prolonged procedure and furnish a quick feedback in the matter to them.  
 
1.27  In their Action Taken Note the Department of Agricul tural Education and 
Research have again stated that  draft SFC/EFC documents are under preparation so 
that they can immediately be submitted for approval as soon as the allocations are 
firmed up. They have further stated that l ike other Departments DARE/ ICAR are, 
however also required to follow the guidelines issued b y Department of Expenditure 
Vide OM No. 1(3)/PF -II/2011 dated 14 th December, 2011 and 23 rd April, 2012 for each 
of the 76 SFC/EFCs required.  
 
1.28 The Committee cannot but, express their extreme displeasure on the 
grossly unprofessional manner in which DARE have dealt with this 
Recommendation of huge import ance not only for DARE but all sister ministries 
and departments.  From their own experience the Committee have found that the 
system of administrative approvals/clearances of Schemes takes, even in th ese 
hi-tech times anything between 6 to 18 months.  Apart from the slip shod  
planning mechanism and the archaic planning process it is the excru ciatingly 
long time taken by the Government machinery in granting administrative 
approvals/clearances that is c ausing most damage to the developmental process 
in the Country.  The Committee had, therefore, recommended the Department to 
take initiative on this crucial issue at the highest level in the Government with a 

25 
 
view to shorter this prolonged procedure.  The Department, unfortunately, have 
frittered away this golden opportunity and chosen to take refuge behind a couple 
of Government guidelines pertaining to SFC/EFC.  In view of the immense 
importance of the matter vis -à-vis developmental process, the Committee  desire 
DARE to at least take up this matter now at the highest level.  The Committee 
would appreciate feed back in this regard. 
CUT OFF DATE FOR DATA 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.76) 
 
1.29 The Committee had observed that l ike the variations in the units, in which the 
figures were quoted by the Department in various documents furnished to the 
Committee, the cut-off dates of different data also vary.  In most of the cases data as on 
31 December, 2011 had  been furnished while in others, data as on 29 February, 2012 
had furnished to the Committee.  Due to this cut -off mismatch , evaluation and 
comparison became a casualty. In a different context, the Committee had been given to 
understand by the Department of Agriculture and Coop eration, that the Ministry of 
Finance guidelines for preparation of Outcome Budget 2012 -13 required the information 
on physical performance of the Schemes be furnished upto 31 December, 2011 in the 
context of Fiscal 2011 -12.  Finding this cut-off not in consonance with the existing data 
generation, feedback, m onitoring and reporting systems, the Committee had  desired 
that the data cut -off date for information being submitted to the Committee for and in 
connection with the examination of Demands for  Grants should be February end so as 
to facilitate maximal evaluation of the physical and financial performance of the 

26 
 
Department in the year gone by and  also a step towards real time reporting of the these 
matters to the Parliament.  
1.30  The Government in their  Action Taken Reply have stated that t he Ministry of 
Finance guidelines for preparation of Outcome Budget 2012 -13 required the information 
on physical performance of the Schemes to be furnished upto 31 December. The 
Detailed Demand for Grants, Annual Repor t, Annual Plan, Scrutiny of Demand for 
Grants etc, were sent alongwith the Outcome Budget. All these documents were to be 
submitted to the Parliament prior to 15 th February. The matter of changing the cut off 
date, as February end can be taken up with the Ministry of Finance, if Committee so 
directs. 
1.31 The Committee are not at all convinced  with the reply given by the 
Department.  It seems that the Department hav e not appreciated the import ance 
of their Recommendation.   The Committee have never asked the Department to 
change the cut off date as February end for submission of data to Ministry of 
Finance.  They have specifically desired that the cut-off date for information being 
submitted to the Committee for and in connections with the examination of 
Demands for Grants should be February end and for which three is no need for 
seeking approval the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their earli er Recommendation and desire the Department to furnish data on at 
February end for evaluation of the physical and financial performance of the 
Department by the Committee for examination of next Demands for Grants of the 
Department. 

27 
 
CROP SCIENCE 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.31) 
 
1.32 The Committee had noted that due to the scaling down of the Outlay of ICAR, the 
Crop Science Division allocation had been reduced from Rs. 670.70 crore to Rs. 460.00 
crore resulting in several Schemes of the Crop Scienc e Division Institutes being 
drastically down-sized.  The financial proposals in respect of National Bureau of Plan 
Genetics Resources (NBPGR), Directorate of Seed Research (DSR) and Central 
Institute of Cotton Research (CICR) had been reduced by almost 80% , 71% and 48% 
respectively.  On the other hand, proposals of IARI, New Delhi and Indian Grass and 
Fodder Research Institute (IGFRI), which are also in th e same Division, had been hiked 
by almost 78% and 71% respectively.  The Department had justified the reduction in the 
allocations to NBPGR, DSR and CICR on the grounds that the overall reduction in the 
allocations to Crop Science Division ha d resulted in down -sizing to allo cation of these 
funds.  They had  also justified the present reduced allocations of t hese three Institutes 
on the grounds that these allocations are still significantly higher than the RE allocations 
to these Institutes during the Fiscal gone by.  As regards the hike in allocations of IARI 
and IGFRI, these ha d been justified in the light o f the importance of these Institutes, 
priority and need of the Sch emes, etc., etc.  The Committee were not convinced by  the 
justifications extended by the Department, the proposals for funds of the three Institutes 
who had been subsequently allocated far less allocations would had  been approved by 
DARE/ICAR before consolidated proposal of Rs. 4719.68 crore was made by them to 
the Planning Commission.  Likewise, the proposals of IARI and IGFRI in their original 
form would also have had the concurrence/appro val of DARE/ICAR.  Citing, the case of 
IARI, whose original proposal of Rs. 47.30 crore had been enhanced to Rs. 68.38 crore 

28 
 
in the Budget Estimate showing an increase of more than 78%.  The Committee had 
wondered as to h ow the Institute would be able to a bsorb this additional allocation .  
Feeling strongly about these cases of ad-hocism in the financial management , t he 
Committee had desired  that rather t han waiting till the RE stage, DARE/ICAR should 
seriously reconsider the original proposals of all the five Institutes and consider a just 
re-appropriation of funds within the Division so that priority research areas do not suffer 
in any of these Institutes.      
1.33 In their Action Ta ken Note the Government ha ve stated that a s advised by the 
Committee, re-appropriations of funds within the Division will be made after assessing 
that the priority research areas do not suffer in any of these institutes. 
1.34 The Committee are not at all c onvinced by the non -chalant attitude of the 
Department on this important aspect.  In the first instance such lopsided 
allocation of funds ought not have been done.  And the Department’s casualness 
in remedying the situation even after its pitfalls have bee n clearly pointed out by 
the Committee is deplorable.  The Committee in the interest of all these institutes 
as also to ensure that precious funds, in the present situation of paucity, are not 
stuck with entities who don’t have the capacity to immediately absorb them, 
cannot but reiterate their recommendation that the entire issue be revisited 
urgently and the Committee be informed of the results after appropriate 
reallocation. 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
AGRICULTURE EXTENSION 
 
(i) Allocation 
 (Recommendation Para No. 3.33) 
 
1.35 The Committee having noted that a gainst the proposed allocation of Rs. 755.00 
crore the share of Agriculture Extension Division ha d been reduced to Rs. 507.00 crore 
with the allocation of  KVK Scheme being reduced to Rs. 491.67 from originally 
proposed Rs. 734.61 crore  and going  by the admission of DARE that this drastic 
curtailment was going to affect infrastructure development duri ng the current Financial 
Year had wondered as to why the Department  had chosen to wield their axe on the 
allocations of agricul ture extension and strongly recommend ed the Department to 
restore the allocation to Agriculture Extension Division as per their requirements for the 
Fiscal through permissible re -appropriation.  They had also recommended that t he 
funds shortage arising out  of such an enhancement may be compensated from the 
funds accruing to Schemes of DARE/ICAR through the route of RKVY. 
1.36 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that they have n oted the 
recommendation of the Committee .  They further stated that t he Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation will be consulted on whether RKVY funds are available for 
ICAR to the extent required, and which activities of ICAR can they be used for.   
1.37 The Committee consider this another glaring failure of the G overnment in 
implementation of a Recommendation of the Committee which had all the 
potential of providing much needed financial breather to the agri -extension 
services which are in deep morass.  In fact from ‘has been noted’ and will be 
consulted bit in th e reply of DARE, the Committee cease rank casualness end a 

30 
 
serious lack of professionalism in the functioning of the Department.  Three 
months is a substantial amount of time within a Fiscal of a dozen month to take 
action which will effect that very Fiscal positively.  The Committee condemn this 
micawberian attitude of the Department and desire immediate action and 
feedback on their instant Recommendation. 
AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.37) 
 
1.38 The Committee had observed that a  sum of Rs. 78.00 crore only had been 
allocated under Major Head Agricultural E ngineering for the year 2012 -13 against the 
proposed amount of Rs. 117.08 crore.  This curtailment ha d resulted in the budgetary 
allocations of Central Institute on Post Harvest  Engineering and Technology and India 
Institute of National Resins and Gums being reduced by more than 33%.  The 
Department had extended their oft repeated reply, about ongoing Schemes not being 
affected due to funds curtailment, in the case of these two I nstitutes also.  However, 
based on their Study Visit to I INRG, Ranchi during February this year  where they had 
found that the Institute had several ambitious research projects and schemes in the 
pipeline for the Twelfth Plan, the Committee had felt that requirement of any 
organization should be assessed on its projection of cogent and workable proposals 
which are of utility for the developmental process.  Merely equating these requirements 
with RE figures of previous year can never do justice with the genui ne requirements of 
the organization and could lead to sub -optimal utilization of its capacity and capabilities.  
Feeling that given an opportunity CIPHET would also ha d strived for greater 
achievements had there funds requirement been met in toto, the Comm ittee had 

31 
 
recommended the Department to do justice with these two Institutes at the RE stage of 
the ongoing Fiscal.  
1.39 In their Acti on Taken Note the Government have  stated that i t is pertinent to 
mention that there is a substantial increase in BE 2012 -13 as compared to RE of Rs. 
247.10 lakhs for 2011 -12 in case of IINRG, Ranchi. There is also a nominal increase in 
BE 2012-13 against the RE 2011 -12 in case of CIPHET, Ludhiana. The concern of the 
Committee is noted.   
 
1.40 The Committee  are well aware of the position which Department have 
explained in their Action Taken R eply as this very logic was extended by them 
when the Demands for Grants were being examined .  Keeping in view of the facts 
observed by the Committee during their visit to IINRG, Ranchi they have 
recommended for the increase d allocation of funds to these Institutes at RE 
stage.  Therefore, a clinical and irrelevant comparison with the RE allocation of 
last year is neither prudent nor worthwhile.  The Committee recommend t hat 
since the RE stage in this Fiscal has been missed by the Department due to their 
procrastination in the matter, needful may be done in Demands for Grants      
2013-14. 
ANIMAL SCIENCE 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.38) 
 
1.41 The Committee had noted that Major Head Animal Science had been allocated a 
sum of Rs. 250.00 crore as BE 2012 -13.  This was 13% or so less than the proposed 
amount of   Rs. 287.64 crore.  DARE had  informed the Committee that since the BE 
amount of Rs. 250.00 compares favourably with the RE 2011 -12 of Rs. 201.53 crore, 

32 
 
there would be no effect on the programmes of various Animal Science Institutes.  They 
have, however, in the same breath admitted that due to BE being lesser than the 
proposed amount, semen sexing and goat genome mapping  programmes would 
undertaken during coming years.  Taking note of t he dichotomy in the response of the 
Department and appreciating how the reduced allocation had played havoc with the well 
laid down plans of DARE/ICAR in the first year of the Twelfth Plan , the Committee had 
recommended the Ministry of Finance to take suitable corrective action at the RE stage 
to enable the Department to undertake two of their ambitious projects viz semen sexing 
and goat genome mapping in this very year itself.  
1.42 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that they have n oted the 
recommendation of the Committee for compliance. The recommendation of the 
Committee will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage.  
1.43 The Committee note that the DARE have complied with the  
Recommendation of the Committee.  They desire to be apprised of the outcome 
of the efforts of the Department in the matter at the RE stage immediately. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER –II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH SYSTEM 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.61) 
 The National Agricultural Research System has played a crucial role in the 
agriculture sector of the Country.  Right from the  late sixties, when it ensured a 
paradigm shift from import of foodgrains to self sufficiency through domestic 
foodgrains production upto the extant situation of a food secure nation, the 
contributions of NARS have been multi -faceted and highly commendable .  While 
food security will continue to remain a constant challenge for NARS, the world, 
India not excluded, now faces more complex and graver challenges of global 
warming and climate change.  The Committee are confident that NARS will show 
the way to the World comity of scientists to successfully tackle the twin 
challenges of global warming and climate change by developing appropriate 
mitigating strategies and technologies. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
NARS, and specially ICAR, would do its best to live up to the confidence placed 
in us so kindly by the Committee.   
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
  
FUNDS UTILISATION DURING ELEVENTH PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.63) 
 The Committee observe that a sum of Rs. 12023.00 crore was allocated to 
DARE for the Eleventh Plan against an amount of Rs. 17126.73 crore  proposed by 
the Department.  The actual allocation at RE stage has, however, been Rs. 
10325.75 crore only.  Out of the allocated amount, the Department have been able 
to spend a sum of Rs. 8689.67 crore only upto January, 2012.  That leaves just 
last two months of the Eleventh Five Year Plan to be accounted.  Coming to the 
last year of the Eleventh Plan viz. 2011 -12, the Committee find a sum of Rs. 
2850.00 crore was allocated to the Department.  They have been able to spend an 
amount of Rs. 1654.58 crore o nly upto January, 2012.  On The face of it, the 
financial performance of DARE during the Eleventh Plan as a whole and in the 
Annual Plan 2011 -12 leaves a lot to be desired.  However, as the subsequent 
narrative will prove, there are a few extraneous reason s, apart from the 

34 
 
implementation performance of the Department that have contributed to the 
under-utilization of funds during the Eleventh Plan and Annual Plan 2011 -12.  In 
fact, the initial delay in formulation of the Eleventh Plan and consequent delays i n 
EFC/SFC approvals all had a cascading effect on the funds release schedule 
during the entire Eleventh Plan.  All these were a major contributory factor 
towards undermining the implementation of various Schemes of the 
Ministries/Departments including DARE .  However, the Department can also not 
escape blame to the extent that they should have made the best use of whatever 
funds were being made available to them during the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  The 
Committee hope that during the Twelfth Plan there will n ot be recurrence of what 
happened in the Eleventh Plan, both in the planning and approvals and the 
implementation proper of the Schemes.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Noted. 
 Draft SFC/EFC documents are under preparation, so that they can immediately be 
submitted for approval as soon as the allocations are firmed up. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23rd July, 2012, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
NEW SCHEMES IN ELEVENTH PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.66) 
 During the Eleventh Five Year Plan the National Institute of Abiotic Stress 
Management, Baramati was included as a new Scheme. The Committee have in 
their previous Reports recommended, time and again, for expeditious setting -up 
of the Institute in view of the pressing imperative of abiotic stress management in 
agriculture and allied sectors.  However, the full operationalisation of the Institute 
appears to be a distant possibility.  The Committee note that for the year 2012 -13 
a sum of Rs. 36.35 crore has been earmarked for the Scheme.  The Committee are 
of the firm opinion that the Institute can play a pivotal role in cutting edge 
research and development of technologies for mitigation of abiotic stress, hence 
it should be established and operationalised on  a war footing basis.  For this 
purpose, the Department should immediately draw a road -map with well laid 
down time lines and also ensure that they are strictly followed.  The said road -
map should also be submitted to the Committee for their information. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 As directed by the Committee, a Road Map, with well laid down timelines has been 
prepared. A copy of the same is enclosed at Annexure-III.  

35 
 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23rd July, 2012, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.67) 
 Apart from the National Institute of Abiotic Stress Management, Baramati , 
the Department also planned two more new Schemes National Institute of 
Agriculture Biotechnology, Ranchi and National Institute of Biotic Stress 
Management, Raipur during 2011 -12.  A sum of Rs. 30.00 crore and   Rs. 20.00 
crore respectively was earmarked  for these two Institutes during 2011 -12.  The 
Committee find that the establishment of the two Institutes has been approved on 
2 March, 2012.  The Department intends to submit the note for approval to the 
Cabinet/CCEA in the first quarter of the current F iscal.  Agriculture biotechnology 
and biotic stress management are frontier science areas in which a lot of ground 
needs to be covered by the Country.  It is, therefore, but essential that these two 
Institutes are established post haste.  The Committee, th erefore, recommend that 
the Department not only stick to their promised deadline but also complete the 
remaining formalities on top priority basis so that these Institutes become a 
reality within minimum possible time. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Noted for compliance. 
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23rd July, 2012, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
TWELFTH PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.69) 
(i) Formulation of Plan 
 As is well know now, the delay in finalization of the E leventh Plan, the 
consequent delays in approvals and clearances had a cascading effect on the 
implementation of the Schemes of various Ministries and Departments.  
Resultantly, the developmental process too suffered.  To avoid a recurrence of 
the same during the Twelfth Plan, the Committee have in several of their previous 
Reports recommended that the Twelfth Plan Document be finalized by 31 

36 
 
December, 2011, so that approved Schemes and Outlays are conveyed to the 
Ministries/Departments well before the comme ncement of the Plan on 1 April, 
2012. The Chairman of the Committee had also addressed the concern of the 
Committee in regard to the delay in finalization of the Twelfth Plan in his letter 
dated 3 February, 2012 to the Prime Minister and sought his interve ntion in the 
matter in his capacity as Chairman of the Planning Commission. The Committee 
find that the Department submitted draft Twelfth Plan Document of DARE/ICAR to 
Planning Commission on 27 December, 2011.  This was done after going through 
a detailed  appraisal process by several appraisal agencies.  The Planning 
Commission had also constituted eleven working groups for agriculture more 
than two years back for the purpose.  While DARE proposed an allocation of Rs. 
57887.00 odd crore for Twelfth Plan, t he working group of Planning Commission 
has also recommended about Rs. 55000.00 crore for DARE/ICAR.  The Reports of 
all the eleven working groups have been submitted to Planning Commission by 
December, 2011.  The Committee have been given to understand th at the 
recommendations of these working groups are being used by the concerned 
Steering Committee in their exercise.  Once the respective Steering Committees 
are through with their exercises the chapterisation of Plan Document would 
commence. The allocatio ns to various Ministries/ Departments will be known 
once the chapters on various sectors are completed.  The Committee during their 
current examination tried time and again to ascertain from the Planning 
Commission the time schedule in regard to the approv al of the Plan Document by 
NDC and its subsequent presentation to the Parliament.  During the course of the 
Oral Evidence on 11 April, 2012 the representative of Planning Commission 
hinted at the possibility of the Twelfth Plan Document being placed before  NDC 
during June or July this year.  As everything hinges on the timely conveying of 
outlays to the Ministries and Departments, the Committee desired to be apprised 
about the specific datelines for various stages of consideration and approvals of 
the Twelfth Plan Document till its presentation to the Parliament.  The Committee 
were in response informed that ‘as regards schedule of planning process and 
approval by NDC, guidance has been sought from the competent authority and it 
would be intimated in due cou rse’.  Incidentally, when in view of the uncertainty 
surrounding the finalization of Twelfth Plan Document, the Committee sought the 
views of the Government and the Planning Commission on the desirability of 
having 2012-13 as a stand alone Annual Plan and the Twelfth Plan commencing 
from 2013-14 onwards on the lines of similar Plan holidays in the past, this very 
reply, though totally out of context, was repeated.  Similarly, when the Committee 
desired to know about the reasons due to which the Mid -Term Appraisal of the 
Eleventh Plan was brought out after inordinate delay in the middle of Fourth Year 
of the Plan, thereby, rendering it infructuous, in so far as, the mid course 
correction is concerned, the representative of Planning Commission stated 
during the Oral Evidence on 11 April, 2012 “Sir, about Mid-Term Appraisal, I have 
noted your concern and I will carry back to my system”.   Due to such vague, 
incoherent, out of context and evasive inputs the Committee are not in a position 
to Report to the Parliame nt on these vital issues, which is a very serious matter.  
The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that not only the planning process 

37 
 
but the planning machinery also requires to be reviewed by an appropriate 
authority to assess its capability to plan efficiently, effectively and professionally 
and in tandem with the ever evolving dynamics and typical requirements of a 
developing economy where time is of essence.  The Committee feel that unless 
this task is attended to with utmost priority the aim of th e Government of ‘faster, 
sustainable and more inclusive growth’ may just remain restricted to the cover 
page of the Approach Paper of the Twelfth Plan.    
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Noted, Sir. 
[Vide  Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION TO PARLIAMENT 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.72) 
 During the course of the examination of Demands for Grants 2012 -13 of 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education the Committee noticed some 
shortcomings in the facts and figures submitted to them.  Besides, they also felt 
that the format of informat ion furnished needs to be changed to make it more 
user friendly and compatible with the requirements of examination. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Noted for compliance. 
[Vide  Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
 Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS - 2012-13 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.73) 
 The Committee noted that Demand No. 2 pertaining to the Department did 
not reflect the total Budgetary Allocation of the Department under the Revenue 
Section on the very first page of the Demands.  Moreover, the break -up of 
Revenue Section Allocation betwe en Charged and Voted expenditure was also 
not reflected there.  It may be pertinent to mention here that the entire allocation 
of Rs. 5392.00 crore of the Department is in the Revenue Section.  Be it printer’s 
devil or oversight, the Committee find this la pse an indefensible one and hope 
that the Government would be careful, while presenting documents to the 
Parliament, in future. 
 

38 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Noted for compliance. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
CROP SCIENCE 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.74) 
 This is another instance when information has been furnished to the 
Committee in a perfunctory manner.  Instead of furnishing information about 
Physical Performance under Crop Science Division for the entire Eleventh Plan, 
figures for the period 2008 -10 only were furnished to the Committee.  
Furthermore, while the Department indicated that 493 varieties were released 
during this period, the numbers when added came to 472 only.  The Committee 
expect that such instances would not recur in future. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Error is seriously regretted. In future, updated list of varieties/hybrids inclusive 
of Central and State releases shall be furnished. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
UNIFORMITY IN DATA 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.75) 
 The Committee note  that the Department have been furnishing figures 
relating to allocation and expenditure for various Schemes of the Department in 
different documents and materials in different units.  In some documents and 
materials these figures are quoted in lakh rupees  while in others they are quoted 
in crore rupees.  Such variations in units make evaluation and comparisons of 
related indices impractical.  Given the highly time bound nature of examination of 
the Demands for Grants and their Reporting to the Parliament a nd the practical 
ease in evaluation and comparison the Committee desire that, henceforth, the 
unit of figures in all documents and materials to be furnished to them by the 
Department, save the detailed Demands for Grants of the Department, should 
invariably be crore rupees.  The figures in the detailed Demands for Grants may 
continue to be, as per approved format, in thousand rupees. 
 
 

39 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The recommendation of the Committee to submit the data in the unit of figures as 
recommended by them has been noted for compliance.  
[Vide  Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
 
INDO-US KNOWLEDGE INITIATIVE/AGRICULTURAL COOPERATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.77) 
 
 The Indo-US Knowledge Initiative was a Scheme under the Eleventh Plan.  
There had been gross under utilization under the Scheme during first two years 
of the Plan (just 22% of the allocation).  On being apprised that the poor 
utilization of funds was due to matching grants not forthcoming from the US side, 
the Committee had in their Fourth Report recommended that the matter be taken 
up with the US side to ensure contribution of matching grants.  During the course 
of examination of the Demands for Grants  20 10-11 of the Department, the 
Committee again noticed a sum of Rs. 80 lakh allocated for the Initiative.  On 
being queried in the matter, the Department informed the Committee that due to 
lack of adequate response from the US side the Scheme had ended on 31  March, 
2010.  They had also informed the Committee that the outcome of the expenditure 
incurred by the Indian side were not and will not be shared with USA and the sum 
of Rs. 80 lakh will be utilized for other activities in international cooperation 
during 2010-11.  The stated position of the Department has been duly reflected in 
the Eighth and Nineteenth Reports of the Committee.  However, while scrutinizing 
the Demands for Grants 2012 -13 and related documents the Committee find that 
no monies were spent from this amount of Rs. 80 lakh.  They also note that even 
during 2011 -12 a sum of Rs. 200 lakh has been allocated for the Scheme.  No 
expenditure has, however, been incurred from this amount.  The Committee 
further note that the Scheme also figures in the  Scheme-wise Plan Outlay 
proposed by the Department and Annual Plan 2012 -13.  It has also been included 
in the Outcome Budget of 2012 -13 of the Department.  No allocations have been 
shown against the Scheme at all these places.  The Committee really find i t 
inexplicable as to why in spite of the Committee repeatedly highlighting the 
deficiencies of the Scheme and finally the Scheme having been terminated on 31 
March, 2010, funds have continued to be allocated even in successive fiscals, 
year after year.  Th e alibi of the Department that the funds allocated in the year 
immediately after the termination of the Scheme on 31 March, 2010 will be used to 
fund other international cooperation activities also does not cut ice as no funds 
were spent on any activity du ring 2010 -11 from this Head.  In any case, the 
Department have a separate Head for International Cooperation and related 
activities.  The allocation of Rs. 200 lakh for the Scheme during 2011 -12 as also 

40 
 
the Scheme being included in 2012 -13 defies all logic.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department may submit a detailed explanatory note on this entire 
sequence of events including reasons therefor and their ramifications to the 
Committee on top priority basis.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Scheme ‘Indo-US knowledge initiative in Agriculture’ had a budget allocation 
of Rs. 32.28 crore for the years 2007 -10 of the Eleventh Plan. The programme was 
concluded on March 31, 2010. The provision of funds to the tune of Rs.80 lakhs at the 
BE stage for the f inancial year 2010 -11 was made prior to 31 st March, 2010, and no 
provision was made under this scheme at RE stage 2010-11. 
In the meanwhile, another agreement for agriculture cooperation between India & 
USA was signed, namely “Co-operation in Agriculture & Food Security”. Since there has 
been no progress on these aspects, the proposed allocation of Rs.200 lakhs could not 
be accorded.  
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
NATIONAL HERBARIUM OF CULTIVATED PLANTS 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.78) 
 The Committee have noted discrepancies in the figures submitted to them 
in regard to the achievements of the National Herbarium of Cultivated Plants.  At 
one place in the Outcome Budg et 2012-13, it has been stated that 316 herbarium 
specimen were added to the Herbarium during 2010 -11, taking the total holdings 
to 20300 plants.  At another place while enumerating the achievements during 
Fiscal 2011-12, the total holdings have been shown as  20560.  Asked to reconcile 
the difference in total specimens at the end of 2010 -11 and the total during 2011 -
12 the Department have stated that while the former figure pertains to the total 
specimen as on 31 March, 2011 the latter pertains to total as  on September, 2011.  
The Committee are, however, not satisfied with the reasons adduced by the 
Department.  The clarification of the Department notwithstanding, the figures of 
the total specimens at the end of 2010 -11 (20300) do not match with the total 
specimens during 2011-12 (20560) if the acquisitions during the latter period (321) 
are added to it.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to revisit 
the issue and furnish a factual note in the matter after due reconciliation. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 It is submitted that  “during the period September 2010 to August 2011 (2011 -
12 DARE Report), 260 herbarium specimens were added taking the total holdings to 
20,560 specimens in the National Herbarium of Cultivated Plants (NHCP).  However, 

41 
 
earlier the period reported was inadvertently from August 2010 to September 2011”.  
Due care shall be taken in future.  
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
 HORTICULTURE 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.32) 
 The allocation to Horticulture Division has also suffered due to the overall 
reduction in the allocation of DARE/IARI.  It was been allocated          Rs. 240.00 
crore against the proposed Outlay of Rs. 360.30 crore.  The Department have tried 
to allay the apprehension of the Committee by stating that there shall be no effect 
on ongoing programmes due to less allocation in 2012 -13 since new initiatives 
challenge and network programmes and platforms shall be take n up after the 
approval of SFC/EFC.  The Committee are, however, not convinced since as per 
their own admission the Department are trying to get maximum possible SFC/EFC 
clearances in the first half of the ongoing Fiscal.  This would mean additional 
requirement of funds during the second half of the Fiscal.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to revisit the requirements of Horticulture 
Division so that they are, apart from implementing ongoing Schemes of Eleventh 
Plan, also able to commence work on the new Schemes for which SFC/EFC 
approvals are obtained during the Fiscal. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Horticulture Division had projected requirement under plan for Rs.360.30 crores for 
the year 2012 -13, but has been allotted Rs. 240.00 crores keepi ng in view of the 
allocation of the Council.   
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
(ii) Transfer of Technology 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.34) 
 As stated previously, transfer of technology has remained, an area of huge 
concern for years together now, as the technologies developed are not being 
transferred from lab to land in desirable numbers and at desirable pace.  Thus the 
achievements of agricultural research are being frittered away to a large extent in 
the absence of adequate and timely transfer of technology.  The Committee note 
from the Approach Paper to the Twelfth Plan that at last Planning Commission 
has realized the need for improving up on this aspect.  The Commission have 
empahsised on the need for strengthening ATMA; integrating into ATMA, the 
problem solving capacities of KVKs and the feedback loops these offer to NARS.  

42 
 
In the Scheme of things envisaged by the Commission for the purpo se, the KVKs 
would be required to come up as local knowledge resource centres with down the 
line advisory linkages with (i) block level formations (ii) farmer organizations     
(iii) agri-entrepreneurs.  The Committee also note from the Approach Paper that  
Planning Commission is of the view that guidelines of RKVY be revisited so that 
ATMAs and KVKs could bring better convergence at the district level and below 
between planning, research and extension.  The Committee find a lot of merit in 
the instant propo sals of Planning Commission.  They, therefore, recommended 
their expeditious fructification, so that the Government takes further necessary 
action to implement these salutary measures, which have all portents of changing 
the face of the technology transfer mechanism, without any further loss of time. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
A Joint Circular, signed by Secretary DAC and Secretary DARE, has been issued 
for Strengthening the convergence of activities of KVKs and ATMA. It has been found to 
be effective. In orde r to further streamline the integration of activities of KVKs and 
ATMA, the KVKs need to be strengthened in the following manner: 
 Increase the number of Subject Matter Specialist to 10 (from the existing 6) in 
each KVK. 
 Increase the office contingency amount to each KVK to about Rs.25 lakh per 
year. 
 Improve the KVK infrastructure by expanding e-connectivity to all the KVKs. 
 KVK Instructional Farm and Demonstration units need Integrated Farming 
System(IFS) models and Techn ology Cafeteria for show -casing technologies 
relevant to each District. 
 The KVK also need Soil and Water Testing Laboratory, Micro -nutrient Analysis 
facility, Minimal Processing and Mini Seed Processing facilities to enhance their 
technical back up to ATMA in every district. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.35) 
 The Committee note that for Agricultural Education an Outlay of         Rs. 
583.00 crore has been approved against the proposal of Rs. 730.00 crore.  In this 
case also the Department have in their micawberish vision assured the 
Committee that the ongoing activities would not be affected due to this more than 
20% curtailment in the funds requirement for agricultural education. However, 
they have also admitted that it would mean exclusion of new activities like Centre 

43 
 
for Excellence, Engendering Education, So cial Inclusiveness, Information 
Management and Forecasting, Student Development, Reforms in Governance, 
Instructional Farms, etc.  During their various interactions with the Committee, 
the Department have been time and again pointing out the morass in whic h the 
agriculture education has been for last so many years.  They have also been 
repeatedly pointing out to the Committee, as to how this mess in the Agricultural 
Education Sector has lead to a drastic shortage of talent in the Sector leading to 
severe shortage of scientific and technical manpower in the National Agricultural 
Research System.  The Committee, therefore, find it incomprehensible as to how 
the Department, who are so highly sensitized to the present state of and the 
pressing requirements of Ag ricultural Education Sector, have chosen to curtail 
the funds allocation to this critical input for the entire Agricultural Sector.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Department to have an urgent rethink over the 
allocations to the Agricultural Educatio n Division so that all the planned new 
activities, as far feasible, are taken up for implementation during the current 
Fiscal in the larger interest of the Agricultural Sector.    
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The concern of the committee is noted. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
ECONOMICS, STATISTICS AND MANAGEMENT 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.36) 
 Amongst the various divisions of ICAR, the Economics, Statistics an d 
Management Division has been worst sufferer due to the reduced allocations of 
funds to ICAR.  Their proposal of Rs. 45.21 crore has been downsized to a paltry 
sum of Rs. 5.00 crore only.  The Committee note that the various Institutes of this 
Division are engaged in research in several core areas including Climate change 
and adaptation, Optimal utilization of resources for increasing farm income 
without deterioration of environment and natural resources, Bio -informatics, 
Regional crops planning for improv ing resource utilization efficiency and 
sustainability, Strengthening of agricultural bio -informatics grid and Fore -
warning of pests and diseases in crops, to cite a few.  How this almost 90 % 
curtailment in funds allocation would affect these research pro jects is nobody’s 
guess.  The Department would, therefore, be well advised to see that these 
Research Projects are not delayed for want of funds and the system would 
benefit from the outcome of these research projects in the coming days.  
  
 
 

44 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The concern of the Committee is noted. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
VACANCIES IN ICAR AND ITS INSTITUTES 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.39) 
 The Committe e have been greatly concerned about the vacancies in 
scientific, technical and administrative cadres in ICAR and its constituents.  From 
the latest information furnished by the Department on this vexed problem the 
Committee note that there are 1377 vacanci es in the Scientific Cadre against the 
sanctioned 6470 posts.  In the Technical Cadre the situation is equally bad with 
1539 vacancies out of 6635 sanctioned posts.  On the Administrative side also, 
out of total 4886 posts 724 are vacant.  While the number  of these vacancies are 
very perturbing, what is more worrisome is the fact that as per the admission of 
Secretary, DARE and DG, ICAR during the Oral Evidence before the Committee on 
11 April, 2012 there is also a serious dearth of talent for direct entry level 
recruitment.  The Committee are pained to know that this dearth of talent has 
already led to a situation where many of research stations and all -India 
Coordinated Projects are not provided with manpower of requisite quality.  In the 
opinion of the Committee, this situation is a direct offshoot of the years and years 
of neglect of NARS in general and agricultural education in particular by the 
planners and the Government.  With low priority being accorded to their 
requirements of men, material and mone y and an attitude of apathy towards 
agriculture sector due to an overwhelming preference for industry and services 
sector, the law of diminishing returns has set in.  To undo this will indeed require 
a herculean effort from all concerned.  Keeping the grav ity of the situation in view 
the Committee recommend that the planners, the Government, DARE/ICAR and 
the SAUs should put their heads together at the soonest, so that both short and 
long term solutions to this problem are found and also put in place withou t any 
further loss of time. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1. The process of filling up vacancies in various cadres which are to be filled up 
centrally through the Agricultural Scientists’ Recruitment Board (ASRB) has been 
accelerated and wherever vacancies are to b e filled up as per delegated powers, 
instructions have been issued to get it filled up on top priority basis.  
 
 

45 
 
2. The process of filling up various vacancies in ICAR has been speeded up over 
the last 5 years, as the table below would reveal.  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Period Scientific Admn. Total 
1. 2002-03 to 2006-
07 
777 12 789 
2. 2007-08 to 2011-
12 
2264 396 2660 
 
3. During this financial year i.e. from 01.04.2012 to 30.06.2012 offers have been 
issued for 126 Scientific  positions, 407 positions in the Administrative category 
comprising of Administrative / Finance Officer and Assistants.  The process of 
filling up other lower positions in the administrative category has been initiated 
and shall be expedited.  
4. Further, the recommendations concerning ARS Examination-2011 for filling up of 
321 entry level positions in the Scientific category is expected in the near future.  
351 positions are to be advertised for ARS -2012 Examination.  Requisitions for 
another 356 Senior Scientific positions have been forwarded to the ASRB.   
5. Regarding vacancies in the scientific cadre non -availability of qualified scientific 
personnel befitting the specified requirements in certain specializations has been 
a concern.  However, this is being addressed to by resorting to broad -basing the 
essential and desirable requirements and introduction of the concept of flexi -
disciplines which shall be tailor -made matching the specific requirements and 
needs of the respective individual projects. 
6. Regarding the vacancies in SAUs, the Council has a very limited role, as these 
are State Government entities.  On its part, however, Council has decided to 
conduct the NET Examination twice in a year so that the SAUs have adequately 
qualified and competent applican ts for various teaching positions.  Further, the 
issue of vacancies in the various SAU based Coordinating centres of AICRPs 
shall be taken up for discussions in the forthcoming Conference of Vice 
Chancellors / Deans for priority action. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
  

46 
 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

47 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.4) 
 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the Minister of 
Agriculture is yet to make a Statement under Direction 73 -A of Directions by 
Speaker, Lok Sabha in the context of Twenty-third Report of the Committee which 
was presented to the Parliament on 29 August, 2011.  The Statement is to be 
mandatorily made within six months of the presentation of an Original Report to 
the Parliament.   What is most perturbing, is that this repeated non -adherence to 
a Direction by Speaker, Lok Sabha has almost become a  norm in spite of being 
adversely commented upon by the Committee in their Fourth and Twenty -third 
Reports.  The Committee strongly deprecate this repeated failure of the Ministry 
to adhere to stipulations laid down in Direction 73 -A. They also desire that  the 
Statement in the context of the Twenty -third Report be made, without fail, during 
the second half of the ongoing Session itself.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Hon’ble AM made a Statement on 29 th Report which contains Action Taken 
Report based on 23 rd Report of PSCA as well as further Action Taken Report based on 
29th Report on 8 th May, 2012 in Lok Sabha and in Rajya Sabha on 11 th May, 2012. 
Since 29th Report is a follow -up of 23 rd Report the Statement under Direction 73A was 
laid down first to give the updated and present status  to the PSCA. Later, the 
Agricultural Committee Branch of Lok Sabha Secretariat insisted that the Statement 
based on 23 rd Report may be laid down in Parliament. Accordingly, the statement 
separately on 23rd Report was also prepared.   
 
Further, as advised by Lok Sabha Secretariat to the Department, the Hon’ble 
Minister of Agriculture made the Statement in the context of 23 rd Report of the 
Committee during the second -half of the Budget Session this year i.e. on 22 nd May, 
2012 in Lok Sabha and on 18th May 2012 in Rajya Sabha.  
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.62) 
 The Committee note that as per Demand No. 2 pertaining to Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) a sum of Rs. 5392.00 crore  has been 
allocated to the Department as BE 2012-13.  Out of this a sum of Rs. 3220.00 crore 
has been allocated on the Plan side marking an increase of 12.65% over the RE 
figure of Rs. 2858.54 core of the Fiscal gone by. This Plan allocation of Rs. 
3220.00 crore is against the Department’s proposal of Rs. 4719.68 crore.  The 
Annual Plan Outlay of the Department is also to be seen in the context of the 
Total Outlay of   Rs. 57887.00 crore plus proposed by the Department for the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The e ntire Plan Outlay is in the Revenue Section.  On the 
Non-Plan side the Department have been allocated a sum of Rs. 2172.00 crore as 
BE 2012 -13.  This is merely 0.67% higher than the RE figure of last year of Rs. 
2157.60 crore.  The Committee note with a gr eat sense of disappointment that the 
story of the yesteryears has been repeated by the Planners and the Government 
in the matter of allocation of funds to DARE during this year also.  The compelling 
fact that DARE has to now venture far beyond the task of food security into the 
uncharted realms of global warming, climate change, etc., which will require 
capital intensive solutions, seems to have been given a go by by the Planners 
and the Government.  Both of them have also singularly failed to understand th at 
these being formative years of developing mitigating strategies and technologies 
for the emerging challenges, funds in requisite measures need to be infused into 
NARS on a top priority basis.  Any dithering or delay would not only delay 
evolution of these strategies and development of technologies but would also be 
against long term national interest.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
allocations to the Department in the ongoing Fiscal be enhanced substantially at 
the RE stage by when, hopefully EFC/SFC approvals alongwith the formalization 
of Twelfth Plan Outlay will be in bag.  The Committee would also like to advise the 
Department that they should also rework their requirements for the present year, 
keeping in view the Schemes for which EFC/SFC  approvals will be forthcoming in 
the next few months.  The Committee strongly feel that the proposed Outlay of 
Rs. 4719.68 crore is not in consonance with the overall Outlay proposed by the 
Department for the Twelfth Plan viz. Rs. 57887.00 crore as it is not even 10% of 
the Outlay proposed by DARE for the Twelfth Five Year Plan.  They, therefore, 
expect the Department to revisit their financial requirements for the ongoing 
Fiscal based on doable Schemes and submit justifiable fund requirements at the 
RE stage so as to ensure that the first year of Twelfth Plan is positively different 
from the first year of the Eleventh Plan in so far as achievements are concerned. 
 

49 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Draft SFC/EFC documents are under preparation, so that they can imm ediately be 
submitted for approval as soon as the allocations are firmed up. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
(ii) Schemes in the Twelfth Plan 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.70) 
 The Committee note that DARE/ICAR have proposed 80 Schemes for 
implementation during the Twelfth Plan. While 76 of them  are of continuing 
nature, four are new proposals.  In addition, the National Initiative on Climate 
Resilient Agriculture which was announced by the Finance Minister in the Budget 
of 2010 -11 for a period of two years will also be carried on.  The Committee  
further note that Abiotic Stress Management, Agri -Biodiversity management, 
Genomics, Seed (Planting material, propagules, semen), Hybrids,  Conservation 
Agriculture, Water, Waste (Agro -waste, Municipal waste, Residues),  Health 
Foods, Feed & Fodder, Fibre , Bio -fortification, Precision Farming, Farm 
mechanization, Energy, Nanotechnology, Agri -Incubators, Socio -economic 
dimensions etc. are the major areas to be attended to by the DARE/ICAR during 
the Twelfth Plan.  With their focus on these emerging issues, DARE/ICAR have 
weeded out and reoriented some of the Schemes/Programmes of the Eleventh 
Plan.  The Committee are, however, apprehensive that with the present 
uncertainty about the timely availability, as also the quantum of financial 
resources, the Department’s good intentions of implementing such a huge basket 
of Schemes will face a lot many glitches and problems.  The Committee, 
therefore, feel that it would be in the interest of the Department to work out inter-
se prioritization of their Schemes, so that the pace of implementation continues 
unhindered.      
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Noted, the inter-se prioritization will be worked out. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 

50 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
(iii) Administrative Approvals/Clearances 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.71) 
 The delay in communication of the Twelfth Plan Outlay will have a chain -
reaction and also delay the subsequent processes like EFC/SFC approvals of 
various Schemes.  Going by the submission of the Planning Commission that 
NDC may consider the Twelfth Plan D ocument in June/July this year, the 
Committee had sought the views of the Department regarding the likely dates of 
EFC/SFC approvals,  thereafter, in a likely scenario of Plan Outlay approval 
reaching them in October/November, this year.  The Committee are  perturbed to 
know that since EFC  and other approvals can take between 6 to 18 months, on 
the average about one year, it would be October/November, 2013 by when most of 
the approvals would be obtained.  Consequently, items that require upto three to 
three and a half years will be finished within the Twelfth Plan period while those 
requiring more time will spill over the Thirteenth Plan.  The scenario, as such, is 
reminiscent of what happened during the Eleventh Plan.   The Committee are of 
the considered o pinion that like the planning mechanism and the planning 
process, the system of administrative approvals/clearances also needs to be 
urgently revisited so as to make it quick and compact.  The present system of 
approvals taking anything between 6 to 18 mon ths is not at all in consonance of 
the dynamics of the developmental process of today.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to take initiative on this crucial issue at the highest 
level in the Government with a view to simplify and shorten t his prolonged 
procedure.  The Committee will appreciate a quick feedback in the matter.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 As stated earlier, draft SFC/EFC documents are under preparation so that they 
can immediately be submitted for approval as soon as the alloca tions are firmed up. 
Like other Departments DARE/ ICAR are, however also required to follow the guidelines 
issued by Department of Expenditure Vide OM No. 1(3)/PF -II/2011 dated 14 th 
December, 2011 and 23rd April, 2012 for each of the 76 SFC/EFCs required.  
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
 

51 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
CUT OFF DATE FOR DATA 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.76) 
 Like the variations in the units, in which the figures are quoted by the 
Department in various documents furnished to the Committee, the cut -off dates 
of different data also very.  In most of the cases data as on 31 December, 2011 
has been furnished while in others, data as on 29 February, 2012 has been 
furnished to the Committee.  Due to this cut -off mismatch, evaluation and 
comparison become a casualty. In a different context, the Committee have been 
given to understand by the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, that the 
Ministry of Finance guidelines for preparation of Outcome Budget 2012 -13 
required the information on physical performance of the Schemes be furnished 
upto 31 December, 2011 in the contex t of Fiscal 2011 -12.  The Committee are of 
the firm opinion that this cut -off is not in consonance with the existing data 
generation, feedback, monitoring and reporting systems.  They, therefore, desire 
that the data cut -off date for information being subm itted to the Committee for 
and in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants should be 
February end.  This will not only facilitate maximal evaluation of the physical and 
financial performance of the Department in the year gone by but will also be a 
step towards real time reporting of the these matters to the Parliament, which the 
Committee are, very confident, is achievable in near future with the help of the 
present IT enabled data generation, monitoring, reporting and feedback systems.  
Furthermore, submission of data as on end -February for the next Demands for 
Grants would also be a test of the efficacy of the Accrual Accounting System and 
ERP package that has been put in place by ICAR to streamline and strengthen its 
financial management.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Ministry of Finance guidelines for preparation of Outcome Budget 2012 -13 
required the information on physical performance of the Schemes to be furnished upto 
31 December. The Detailed Demand for Grants, Annual Report, Annual Plan , Scrutiny 
of Demand for Grants etc, are sent alongwith the Outcome Budget. All these documents 
are to be submitted to the Parliament prior to 15 th February. The matter of changing the 
cut off date, as February end can be taken up with the Ministry of Fina nce, if Committee 
so directs. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 

52 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.31 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
CROP SCIENCE 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.31) 
 
 The Committee note that due to the scaling down of the Outlay of ICAR 
from the proposed Rs. 4719.68 crore to Rs. 3220.00 crore for Annual Plan 2012 -13 
has resulted in down-sizing of the allocations of various divisions of the Council.   
For instance the Crop Science Division allocation has been reduced from Rs. 
670.70 crore to Rs. 460.00 crore.  This has resulted in several Schemes of the 
Crop Science Division Institutes being drastically down -sized.  The financial 
proposals in respect of National Bureau of Plan Genetics Resources (NBPGR), 
Directorate of Seed Research (DSR) and Central Institute of Cotton Research 
(CICR) have been reduced by almost 80%, 71% and 48% respectively.  On the 
other hand, proposals of IARI, New Delhi and Indian Grass and Fodder Research 
Institute (IGFRI), which are also in the same Division, have been hiked by almost 
78% and 71% respectively.  The Department have justified the reduction in the 
allocations to NBPGR, DSR and CICR on the grounds that the overall reduction in 
the allocations to Crop Science Division has resulted in down -sizing to allocation 
of these funds.  They have also justified the present reduced allocations of these 
three Institutes on the grounds that  these allocations are still significantly higher 
than the RE allocations to these Institutes during the Fiscal gone by.  As regards 
the hike in allocations of IARI and IGFRI, these have been justified in the light of 
the importance of these Institutes, pr iority and need of the Schemes, etc., etc.  
The Committee, cannot, but take the justifications extended by the Department 
with a pinch of salt.  The proposals for funds of the three Institutes who have 
been subsequently allocated far less allocations would  have been approved by 
DARE/ICAR before consolidated proposal of Rs. 4719.68 crore was made by them 
to the Planning Commission.  Likewise, the proposals of IARI and IGFRI in their 
original form would also have had the concurrence/approval of DARE/ICAR.  
Here, the case of IARI deserves specific mention. Their original proposal sought a 
sum of Rs. 47.30 crore.  This has been enhanced to Rs. 68.38 crore in the Budget 
Estimate showing an increase of more than 78%.  How the Institute would be able 
to absorb this  additional allocation is a matter to ponder about.  The Committee 
have a growing feeling that the reduction in allocation of certain Institutes on the 
plea of reduction in over all allocation and simultaneously substantial 
enhancement in case of two other  Institutes in the same Division, indicates a 
degree of ad -hocism in the financial management. The Committee, therefore, 

53 
 
desire that rather than waiting till the RE stage,  DARE/ICAR should seriously 
reconsider the original proposals of all the five Instit utes and consider a just re -
appropriation of funds within the Division so that priority research areas do not 
suffer in any of these Institutes.      
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As advised by the committee, re -appropriations of funds within the Division will 
be made after assessing that the priority research areas do not suffer in any of these 
institutes. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.34 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
AGRICULTURE EXTENSION 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.33) 
(i) Allocation 
 Against the proposed allocation of Rs. 755.00 crore the share of Agriculture 
Extension Division has been reduced to Rs. 507.00 crore in the changed scenario.  
The worst affected being KVK Scheme whose allocation has been reduced to Rs. 
491.67 from originally proposed Rs. 734.61 crore.  By their own admission, this 
drastic curtailment is going to affect infrastructure development during the 
current Financial Year.  The agriculture extension services are the most important 
interface of the Department/Council with the biggest stakeholder in the 
agriculture sector namely the farmer.  It is also common knowle dge that the 
extension services are already beset with several shortcomings.  In fact, 
technology transfer has been one of the weakest links in agricultural research.  In 
such a scenario, why have the Department chosen to wield their axe on the 
allocations of agriculture extension is beyond comprehension and also a pointer 
towards their casual approach towards extension services.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend the Department to restore the allocation to 
Agriculture Extension Division as per t heir requirements for the Fiscal through 
permissible re -appropriation.  The funds shortage arising out of such an 
enhancement may be compensated from the funds accruing to Schemes of 
DARE/ICAR through the route of RKVY. 
 

54 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Noted. The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation will be consulted on 
whether RKVY funds are available for ICAR to the extent required, and which activities 
of ICAR can they be used for.   
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.37 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.37) 
 A sum of Rs. 78.00 crore has been allocated under Major Head Agricultural 
Engineering for the year 2012 -13.  The amount proposed was   Rs. 117.08 crore.  
This curtailment has resulted in the budgetary allocations of Central Institute on 
Post Harvest Engine ering and Technology and India Institute of National Resins 
and Gums being reduced by more than 33%.  The Department have extended their 
oft repeated reply, about ongoing Schemes not being affected due to funds 
curtailment, in the case of these two Institu tes also.  The fact, however, remains 
that the Committee had visited IINRG, Ranchi during February this year.  They 
had found that the Institute had several ambitious research projects and schemes 
in the pipeline for the Twelfth Plan.  The Department drawi ng solace from the fact 
that funds requirement of the Institute this year have been matched with the RE of 
last year is, therefore, highly misplaced.  The funds requirement of any 
organization should be assessed on its projection of cogent and workable 
proposals which are of utility for the developmental process.  Merely equating 
these requirements with RE figures of previous year can never do justice with the 
genuine requirements of the organization and could lead to sub -optimal 
utilization of its capacity and capabilities.  The Committee are sure, that given an 
opportunity CIPHET would also have strived for greater achievements ha d these 
funds requirement been met in toto .  If not now, the Committee expect the 
Department to do justice with these two Institutes at the RE stage of the ongoing 
Fiscal.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
It is pertinent to mention that there is a substantial increase in BE 2012 -13 as 
compared to RE of R s. 247.10 lakhs for 2011 -12 in case of IINRG, Ranchi. There is 

55 
 
also a nominal increase in BE 2012 -13 against the RE 2011 -12 in case of CIPHET, 
Ludhiana. The concern of the Committee is noted.   
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.40 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 

56 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
ELEVENTH PLAN ANALYSIS 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.64) 
 The Committee note with satisfaction that the Department have  been able 
to achieve, by and large, the targets envisaged for the Eleventh Plan.  However, 
they are concerned to observe that in spite of the Department prioritizing 
procurements and programmes, few infrastructure projects could not be 
completed and a few  equipment could not be purchased.  Apart from this, 
development of new cultivars and production technologies also got slowed down, 
in so far as time lines are concerned.  Though the Department could not provide 
the Committee the exact magnitude of cost an d time overruns due to these 
slippages, it is a foregone conclusion that apart from loosing in time there would 
definitely be cost -escalation in all such cases in future.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that, as assured by DARE, all these pending Schemes and works 
be carried out with utmost promptitude during the first year of the Twelfth Plan 
itself. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Council has already issued instructions to all the Institutes that during the 
current financial year, priority is to be given t o the completion of spillover Works & 
Equipments of the previous Plan period and meet the ongoing committed expenditure, 
pending EFC/SFC’s approvals/ sanctions. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
RESULT FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT (RFD) 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.65) 
 The Committee observe  that with a view to monitor the performance of 
various Departments the Cabinet Secretariat has evolved a mechanism viz. Result 
Framework Document (RFD).  The Committee are happy to note that based on 
their performance against the commitments made by them in RFD for the year 

57 
 
2009-10 DARE have secured a composite score of 95%.  What is even more 
commendable is the fact that this overall score of DARE was higher than the 
average composite score of 89.4% for all the 59 Departments that were evaluated 
under Pha se I of RFD policy.  While appreciating the achievement of the 
Department, the Committee would also like to point out to them that the while 
communicating the outcome of RFD to them the Cabinet Secretariat has also 
sought action on two issues from the Depa rtment.  One, the process of strategy 
formulation of the Department is truly participative and thoughtful and two 
Sevottam Compliant Citizen’s Charter and Grievance Redressal Mechanism.  The 
Committee expect the Department to continue their good work on th is front as 
well so that these two stipulations of Cabinet Secretariat are met at the earliest 
and in right earnest.  They would also like to be apprised of the achievements of 
the Department and also their evaluation by the Cabinet Secretariat on these tw o 
issues. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The achievements of the Department in terms of total composite score of RFD of 
DARE for the years 2010 -11 and 2011 -2012 were 99% and 96.69% respectively. The 
Performance Evaluation Report of the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education for the yea r 2010 -11 and 2011 -2012 is enclosed as Annexures I and II 
respectively. The Strategic Plan and the Sevottam compliant Citizen’s Charter & 
Grievance Redress Mechanism of the Department was submitted to the PMD, Cabinet 
Secretariat. Subsequently, these documents were revised as per suggestions of the Ad-
hoc Task Force (ATF) of the PMD and resubmitted. The Committee will be apprised of 
the evaluation as and when communicated by the Cabinet Secretariat. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
UNSPENT BALANCES 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.68) 
 The Committee are  concerned to note that the Department have 
surrendered unspent balances to the Government of India in each of the year of 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  These unspent balances amount to a hefty Rs. 
548.00 odd crore at the end of the Eleventh Plan.  While s ums of Rs. 190.21 crore 
in the First Year of the Plan and Rs. 101.20 crore in the second year are 
understandable, as the Department did not have timely clearances/approvals for 

58 
 
various Schemes, the unspent balance of Rs. 167.50 crore in the Final Year of t he 
Plan is inexplicable and this appears to be due to inept handling of finances by 
the Department.  The Committee further note that with a view to streamlining their 
accounting system the Department have strengthened their internal control.  
Accordingly, now their internal audit would be carried out by professional bodies.  
For this purpose, the job of internal audit which was, hitherto, being done by the 
inspection team of ICAR Headquarters, is being outsourced through professional 
bodies such as Institut e of Public Auditors of India and C&AG empanelled 
chartered accountant firms.  Apart from this measure, ICAR has adopted Accrual 
System of Accounting which captures all receipts and payments on real -time 
basis.  It is also putting in place a Centralised Fi nancial Management Enterprise 
Resource Package (ERP) to integrate the financial processes of ICAR 
Headquarters and its constituent units.  Once in place, this mechanism would 
ensure consistent monitoring of financial activities viz. budgetary control, actu al 
achievements, shortfalls with reference to targets, accounting, etc. and provide 
accurate and real -time data for the purpose of decision making by the 
management as well as the end users.  The Committee feel that this laudable 
initiative of ICAR to impr ove its accounting system has not come a day soon.  
Delays in accounting, lack of timely feedback and inputs have been the bane of 
the accounting system in vogue in the Government and its agencies for decades 
together now.  If successfully implemented the initiative of ICAR has all the 
potential to change the accounting system in vogue into an accurate and real -
time system which not only facilitates better control by management but will also 
usher the much needed transparency for the benefit of the end user s.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend ICAR to put in place the Accrual 
Accounting System alognwith ERP package without any further loss of time so 
that its implementation commences from this very Financial year.  Keeping in 
view the immense poss ibilities offered by the system adopted by ICAR, the 
Committee would like the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation to evaluate this system thoroughly with a view to 
implement it in other Ministries/Departments/Age ncies as well.  For this purpose, 
the Committee would like DARE to forward a detailed note on the accounting 
system and EPR package being implemented by ICAR to both these Ministries 
alongwith the Recommendation of the Committee.  The results of the evalua tion 
may also be furnished by DARE to the Committee for their information. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ICAR has adopted Accrual Accounting system since 2002 -03. Hence, a need 
was felt to have a financial and accounting system which could not only meet the 
present day accounting requirements but also help the day -to-day monitoring both in 
terms of quantitative and qualitative aspects from operational as well as management 
point of view. Accordingly, a Financial Management Software (ERP Package System) 
has been s elected and is being developed through M/s IBM which would be rolled out 
across the ICAR system. 

59 
 
Thus, a web -based Financial Management System/Management Information 
System (FMS/MIS) having broader coverage of the ICAR’s Financial/administrative 
aspects is under way. The FMS/ MIS will be developed on a universally tested software 
platform like Oracle Financials. The system will enable to retain a full set of accounting 
data in standard accounting format.  
The system envisages the integration of an accrual a ccounting system with the 
Pay Roll Package, Inventory Management, Research Project Management and 
Personal Information System  etc. so that package broadly can be termed as the 
FMS/MIS of the ICAR. A sound and updated information should serve as a base for  the 
effective managerial control and timely decision making. The FMS/ MIS is expected to 
enable a meaningful extrapolation, forecasting and projections. The objectives of the 
FMS/MIS as a tool will be to: 
8. Manage finances, budgets, and inventory management of ICAR as a whole.  
9. Take care of Human Resource System along with Pay Roll.  
10. Provide consistent monitoring of financial activities viz., Budgetary Control, actual 
achievements, shortfall with reference to targets, accounting etc.  
11. Provide real time data for the purpose of precise decision making by the 
management as well as to the end users. 
12. Track the expenditure progress of ICAR on real time basis. 
13. Capture the complete project cycle from the beginning, i. e. project/ sub -project 
submission, approval process, sanction and funding, and also track their 
respective expenditure.  
14. Provide all necessary MIS reports. 
 
The FMS/MIS software would be implemented in a phased manner. In Phase-1 (Part 
1), it is proposed to be implemented in 6 large constituent units of ICAR within 9 months 
of kick-off of the FMS/MIS software development , i.e. March 2012.  In Phase -1 (Part 2), 
it is proposed to be extended to 14 other institutes  during subsequent 6 months’ period. 
The re maining units are proposed to be covered in a 12 months’ period in Phase -2 
which is subsequent to completion of Phase-1.  
The FMS -MIS implementation plan finally will result in capacity building and 
enhancement of managerial skill for finance, administrati ve and other officials. The 
ultimate aim of the entire effort is to achieve a complete robust solution through this 
FMS to cater the overall needs of Accounting, Financial and Administration disciplines.  
Once the software is developed and rolled out, it will be mandatory for all the ICAR units 
to adopt the system and report through it for which adequate training will be provided. 
This centralized software will have multiple user system and will be user -friendly. The 
operational manual will also be develope d for FMS/MIS, covering all the screen shots, 
formats, reports, etc. for usage of the software by the end user. 
It is pertinent to mention here that the software development and implementation is 
going to take place in phases. Accordingly, its overall impa ct/test of efficiency and 
effectiveness in streamlining and strengthening the management and accounting 

60 
 
system including availability of real time data, can be assessed only after complete 
implementation.   
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012,  dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
ANIMAL SCIENCE 
(Recommendation Para No.3.38) 
 Major Head Animal Science has been allocated a sum of Rs. 250.00 crore 
as BE 2012 -13.  This is 13% or so less than the proposed amount of   Rs. 287.64 
crore.  DARE have informed the Committee that since the BE amount of Rs. 
250.00 compares favourably with the RE 2011-12 of Rs. 201.53 crore, there will be 
no effect on the programmes of various Animal Science Institutes.  They have, 
however, in the same breath admitted that due to BE being lesser than the 
proposed amount, semen sexing and goat genome mapping programmes will be 
undertaken during coming years.  The dichotomy in the response of the 
Department speaks volumes about how the reduced allocation has played havoc 
with the well laid down plans of DARE/ICAR in the first year of the Twelfth Plan.  
The Comm ittee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Finance should take 
suitable corrective action at the RE stage to enable the Department to undertake 
two of their ambitious projects viz semen sexing and goat genome mapping in 
this very year itself.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Noted for compliance. The recommendation of the Committee will be taken up 
with the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2012, dated 23 rd July, 2012, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.43 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                  BASUDEB ACHARIA 
19 December, 2012                                                                             Chairman, 
28 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                                  Committee on Agriculture. 

61 
 
APPENDIX 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 19 December, 2012 from 1 000 hours to 
1030 hours in Committee Room  ‘B’ (G/F), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOKSABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Smt. Paramjit  Kaur Gulshan 
5.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
6.  Shri P. Kumar 
7.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
8.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
9.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
10.  Smt. Bhavana  Gawali (Patil) 
11.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
12.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
               RAJYA SABHA 
13.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
14.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
15.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
16.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
17.  Shri S. Thangavelu 

62 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri  R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
      53 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up Memorandum No. 0 4 pertaining to  action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirty-second Report of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants 2012 -13”  xxxx  xxxx      
xxxx      xxxx. 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report(s) without any 
modification and authorized the Chairman to present xxxx the Report(s) after getting 
them factually verified  from the concerned Department(s). 
4. xxxx                xxxx      xxxx   xxxx .  
5. xxxx                xxxx      xxxx   xxxx .  
6. xxxx                xxxx      xxxx   xxxx . 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
____________________________  
xxxx  Matter not related to this Report.  