FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-2014)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FOOD TECHNOLOGY ,
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND MANAGEMENT (NIFTEM)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.02.2014
Laid on the T able of Rajya Sabha on 11.02.2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)


C.O.A. No. 280
Price : Rs. 60.00
© 2014 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2013-14) .......................................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-13) .......................................... (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2011-12) .......................................... (vii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (ix)
PART I
REPORT
CHAPTER I Setting up of NIFTEM ................................................ 1
(A) Need for a New Institute .................................. 1
(B) Engagement of Consultants ............................... 8
(C) Form of the Institute .......................................... 16
C
HAPTER II Delay and Cost Escalation ......................................... 18
(A) Schedule of Completion ..................................... 18
(B) Cost of the Project ............................................... 19
(C) Generation of Revenue ....................................... 23
(D) Faculty ..................................................................... 25
(E) Creation of Posts .................................................. 25
CHAPTER III Academic Initiatives..................................................... 32
(A) Academic Endeavours ......................................... 32
(B) Industry Internship .............................................. 32
(C) Village Adoption Programme ............................ 32
(D) Other Initiatives .................................................... 34
(E) NIFTEM Research Development Council
(NRDC) ................................................................... 35
(F) Research & Training Centres ............................ 36
(G) Foreign Collaborations ........................................ 37

PAGE
(ii)
PART II
Recommendations and Observations of the
Committee ............................................................................... 39
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Thirtieth Sitting of the Committee
(2011-12) ................................................................................... 43
II. Minutes of the Thirty-sixth Sitting of the Committee
(2011-12) ................................................................................... 45
III. Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of the Committee
(2013-14) ................................................................................... 47

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2013-2014)
Shri Basudeb Acharia —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
6. Shri L. Raja Gopal
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
9. Shri Premdas Katheria
10. Shri P . Kumar
11. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
12. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
13. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
14. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
15. Shri Devji M. Patel
16. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
17. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
18. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
19. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
20. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
21. Shri Hukumdev Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri N. Balaganga
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
(iii)

25. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
26. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
27. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri S. Thangavelu
30. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
(iv)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2012-2013)
Shri Basudeb Acharia —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
6. Shri L. Raja Gopal
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
9. Shri Premdas Katheria
10. Shri P . Kumar
11.D r. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
12. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
13. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
14. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
15. Shri Devji M. Patel
16. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
17. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
18. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
19. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
20. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
21. Shri Hukumdev Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
*23. Vacant
(v)
* Vice Shri A. Elavarasan who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on his
retirement from Rajya Sabha on 24 July, 2013.

24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
25. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
26. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
27. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
30. Shri S. Thangavelu
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
(vi)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2011-2012)
Shri Basudeb Acharia —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
4. Shri Thangso Baite
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhary
6. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
7. Shri Biren Singh Engti
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
10. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam
11. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
12. Shri Premdas Katheria
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
14. Shri Devji M. Patel
15. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
16. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
17. Shri Jagdish Thakor
18. Shri Laxman Tudu
19. Shri D. Venugopal
20. Shri Hukumdev Narayan Yadav
21. Shri Ramakant Yadav
(vii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
*23. Shri Narendra Budania
*24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
25. Shri A. Elavarasan
*26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Upendra Kushwaha
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar
30. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
31. Shri S. Thangavelu
(viii)
*Nominated to the Committee on 04.05.2012.

(ix)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (2013-2014) having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Fifty-Seventh Report on National Institute of Food
Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) pertaining
to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries.
2. The Committee took a briefing on the subject from the
representatives of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries on
23.04.2012 and took their oral evidence on 08.06.2012. The Committee
also undertook on-the-spot study tour to NIFTEM on 28.10.2013.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their
Sitting held on 06 February, 2014.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries and National Institute of
Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management for tendering
evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to the
Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Part-II of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA,
10 February, 2014 Chairman,
21 Magha, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

PART I
REPORT
CHAPTER I
SETTING UP OF NIFTEM
(A) Need for a New Institute
Quantum increase in the level of processing and value addition of
primary agriculture produce is of critical importance for enhancing
farmers’ income, generating employment and reducing wastages, and
to accomplish overall growth of the national economy. It is equally
important to ensure global cost and quality competitiveness of
processed food so as to access global markets where price realization
is higher and India has a comparative advantage. Moreover, setting
food standards and reliable testing protocols has become a matter of
serious public concern. It is accordingly necessary to develop world
class Food Scientists and Technologists who could do R&D in frontier
areas, set food standards and develop protocols for testing, and also
develop world-class entrepreneurs who undergo courses and training
programmes having proper mix of inputs on food science, technology,
management, entrepreneurship and business incubation. Vision, strategy
and action plan document prepared by the Ministry (April, 2005) aims
to treble the size of food processing industry in next ten years by
increasing the level of processing from 6% to 20%, value addition
from 20% to 35% and share in global trade from 1.5% to 3% by the
year 2015. The Ministry in its vision document—2015, has emphasized
the need for an apex institution to focus on these aspects.
1.2 In view of the above, it was decided in August, 2006 to set up
National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and
Management (NIFTEM) at a cost of Rs. 245 crore with anticipated
completion in 2009-10.
1.3 National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and
Management has been set up with a vision to be a Centre of Excellence
which integrates all facets of food technology, entrepreneurship and
management and be recognized as focal point for catalyzing the growth
of the Indian Food Processing Industry in the global context.

2
1.4 There are a few institutions in existence like National Dairy
Research Institute (NDRI), Central Food Technological Research Institute
(CFTRI) and Defence Food Research Laboratory (DFRL). These institutes
are constrained by their existing organizational setup and could not
attract world- class talent, which is a prerequisite for a multi-
dimensional role in a globalized world. An evaluation of these institutes
for upgradation was examined. NDRI was ruled out for comparison
due to their limited sectoral focus.
1.5 The main objective of DFRL at Mysore is to cater to the needs
of the defence personnel. Only CFTRI is catering to the R&D needs of
Food Processing Industries. CFTRI is focused on basic level research &
training of local importance and is moreover located at Mysore in
southern India. CFTRI focuses on applied research in Food Technology
and lacks the comprehensive research focus in the food science arena.
There is no institute in India to cater to the needs of its unique
requirements.
1.6 During evidence when asked about the functions being
undertaken at Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology (IICPT)
Thanjavur, the Secretary , MoFPI replied:—
“There we research in crop processing as also we run B.Tech. and
M.Tech. courses. In the case of NIFTEM, the mandate is much
wider. It is because we will have this division which is looking
after small and medium enterprises. We will have a Consultancy
Division and we will help FSSAI in developing standards. So,
IICPT, at present, is a much smaller institution. Its total cost was
about Rs. 88 crore. Initially , it was affiliated to the Annamalai
University. Last year, they got affiliation with the Tamil Nadu
Agricultural University. At some point of time, as it grows, we
may perhaps make it a deemed university or we may have our
own Act. That we will see as we go along.”
1.7 When asked how NIFTEM is different from the Central Food
Technology Research Institute, Mysore, the Secretary, MoFPI, further
informed that:—
“The CFTRI is one of the CSIR institutes. But we cannot say that
it has nothing to do with our Ministry as it does a lot of research
for us. But it is not under our Administrative control. It is under
CSIR but we also use their expertise in some of our Committees.
We give them money to do research. We have interaction with
them. They do not run regular B.Tech. or M.Tech courses. Perhaps

3
they do some short term training but they do not have regular
B.Tech. or M.Tech. courses. The B.Tech and M.Tech. courses in the
Government are only in the Thanjavur Institute and next will be
in NIFTEM. But as we go along, we will show how NIFTEM’s
approach is going to be radically different.”
1.8 On being enquired whether NIFTEM would be a stand alone
project or it would also coordinate with other research institutes like
the ICAR, the Secretary , MoFPI, informed the Committee that:—
”NIFTEM, as a whole will definitely be engaged in collaboration
with other research organisations in India and outside. That is one
of the key features of NIFTEM that they will act as a central
repository of knowledge. They also have a consultancy division to
provide consultancy in the field of Food Processing Sector....... That
is one of the objectives of NIFTEM.”
1.9 On being pointed out that the Food Technology Institute at
Thanjavur has already been functioning for quite sometime and
experience has also been gathered and then why a new institute is
being developed instead of developing the existing institute by
converting it into an integrated one both technology-wise and
management-wise. Further, it took about five years since the idea was
conceived. The Secretary of MoFPI, informed the Committee that:—
“The IICPT, the Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technologies,
Thanjavur, ........ was started in 1968 as a small research station in
Tamil Nadu as part of the Tamil Nadu Food Supplies Corporation
and because its focus was very limited, it could not grow...... Paddy
which was grown in Thanjavur area was the focus of that
institution and ultimately, when it got shifted to Thanjavur also, it
was called the Paddy Processing Research Centre. Only in 2007, a
decision was taken to upgrade it to a national level institute where
the Finance Minister announced in the Budget speech and then a
project worth about Rs. 89 crores was sanctioned for strengthening
the Institute by doing two things. One is taking in more scientists
on the rolls of that institution and changing from paddy processing
research centre to Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technologies
and secondly, by establishing more number of laboratories so that
they can work on a larger scale focussing on paddy and related
crops. The main focus for them remained this crop and they could
not graduate into meat, fish and other things..... It has not got into
management...... In the 12th Plan, we are hoping to expand these
Institutes both in Thanjavur and NIFTEM so that they either have

4
branches or they have distance learning. There are some issues
with the UGC regulations. We will have to see how to overcome
these but given the level of skill shortage and given the demand
that is there for skill, there is space for both these institutions.....
So, there was a need for a new institution to be developed which
would focus both on the academic side and the non-academics
side.....”
1.10 Further, it was also stated that:—
“......... IIMR which is an institution of repute had conducted a
detailed study about the food processing sector in 2006 itself and
they had projected that by 2022, you will need to train and skill
3.5 million people for the food processing sector because that is
the shortage which the sector is suffering from now...... They say
that because of the unskilled people working in the industry, the
productivity and efficiency of the food processing industry is
suffering by 32 to 35 per cent and that itself is a huge loss. To
train about 3.5 million skilled people over a period of ten years is
difficult.”
1.11 The need for setting up of the NIFTEM was that:—
(a) The Institute of Applied Manpower Research (IAMR) in its
report (2004) had recommended creation of a National
Institute of Technology and Management for taking care of
human resource development needs of the FPIs. and
building effective partnerships among various stakeholders.
(b) Integrated strategy for the promotion of agri-business under
Prime Ministers’ thrust areas envisages setting up of such
an institution.
(c) Therefore a new organization was required to be set up,
with a structure and systems aligned with its objectives to
be the apex institution in food research and education in
the country having global capabilities.
(d) The Finance Minister, in his Budget Speech on 28.02.2006
announced the intention of government to set up a National
Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and
Management (NIFTEM) as an international center of
excellence which will work synergistically with industry and
other institutions within India and abroad.
1.12 It is observed from the minutes of the Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) meeting held on 16.12.2005 that the total expenditure
for setting up of NIFTEM was estimated to be Rs. 245 crore, including

5
recurring expenditure of Rs. 75 crore in the first five years. The
recurring expenditure of NIFTEM, when fully operational would be
Rs. 24.4 crore per annum. It was explained that the projected Internal
Rate of Return (IRR) was 9.75 per cent for a 15 year period under the
assumption of robust growth of food processing sector and if the
growth was moderate, Government might have to meet two-third of
the recurring expenditure, as is the case with IIM, Lucknow.
1.13 Expressing serious reservations regarding the establishment of
NIFTEM, in the EFC meeting on 16.12.2005, the Joint Secretary,
Department of Expenditure pointed out that there would be duplication
of functions and felt that there was a strong case for upgrading existing
institutions because of longer lead time, and expressed doubt about
economic viability of the project. He also added that the project may
face a serious risk of sustainability as it may not be easy for NIFTEM
to attract world class faculty. The Director, Min. of Health felt that the
proposed functions of NIFTEM would result in duplication. The
Advisor, Planning Commission felt that public private partnership
model would be better than a purely public funded model and also
suggested a SWOT analysis to identify the critical gaps that needed to
be filled up. The Deputy Director General, Indian Council of Agriculture
Research suggested that upgradation of existing institutions would be
more appropriate and that NIFTEM would find it difficult to get quality
faculty as many of the existing institutes were already facing similar
problems.
1.14 In the EFC meeting held on 24.03.2006, the Joint Secretary,
Department of Expenditure pointed out that answers to various issues
raised in the earlier meeting were still not forthcoming and that there
was no case for creating a new institution with R&D capability.
Businesses incubators were provided generally as an adjunct to
industrial parks and Universities. These facilities should be spread all
over the country and cannot be localized in one institute. The Joint
Secretary, Min. of HRD stated that there was not clarity regarding the
courses and curriculum to be taken up by the NIFTEM. The Advisor,
Planning Commission stated that the status of existing institutions was
not clear and the gap analysis was not adequate. He emphasized the
need for greater involvement of the private sector. The Secretary, MoFPI
stressed that while the institute was envisaged to become self-
sustainable, five years to achieve this goal may be too short a period
and stated that eleven years has been projected on the basis of fresh
projections. In the statement of comments attached to the proposal, it
was stated that the institution would start earning revenue from the
3rd year of inception. The funds generated from the 3rd to 5th year

6
shall be able to sustain it from 6th to 10th year after which it shall be
on a fully self-sustaining basis.
1.15 In the note for Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA)
(14th August, 2006), it was projected that the institute would commence
limited activities in 2006-07 in hired buildings to begin with.
Infrastructure would be completed and equipments installed by the
4th year and the Institute will be fully operational from 2010-11.
1.16 Based on the observations of the EFC a revised DPR was
prepared which addressed the issues raised in the EFC and the
comments received from various stakeholders. The observations of EFC
were addressed and the proposal submitted to CCEA for its approval.
1.17 Thereafter, the CCEA considered the proposal of setting up of
NIFTEM in its meeting held on 31.8.2006 and approved the following:—
(i) Setting up of National Institute of Food Technology
Entrepreneurship & Management (NIFTEM) at Kundli
(Haryana) at an estimated cost of Rs. 244.6 crore including
foreign exchange component of US $ 8.1 million.
(ii) The mandate of the Institute was as follows:
(a) promote cooperation and networking amongst existing
institutions both within the country and international
bodies, create a complete data base on domestic
resources and bring in international best practices for
improving the food processing sector,
(b) undertake frontier and inter disciplinary research in areas
of relevance to the sector,
(c) cooperate in setting standards as well as protocols for
testing of food products,
(d) provide industry friendly short-term courses, including
regular degree and management courses leading upto
Ph.D. programmes, for developing HRD resources for
the food processing sector,
(e) with capacities developed in the aforesaid areas, assist
Government in policy formation and regulatory
framework, and
(f) to interact and work with all stakeholders, namely ,
industry, Government and consumers so as to remain
economically viable and socially relevant and guide the
growth of the food processing sector along healthy and
modern lines.

7
(iii) Register the Institute under Section 25 Company of the
Companies Act, 1956 with the Board of Directors comprising
Head of the institute; Secretary, Ministry of Health; Secretary,
Ministry of Food Processing Industries and Secretary,
Department of Commerce as members; two industry
representatives from Food Processing Industries; three
Directors, one each from a reputed management institute
and a reputed technology institute in India and one from a
leading global technology institute.
(iv) CCEA also directed that a detailed road map of phased
expansion of the institute be finalized by 31.03.2007.
1.18 NIFTEM would work as Sector/Business Promotion
Organization of the food processing sector. Major objectives of NIFTEM
drawn from its mandate are:—
(a) Working as a “One Stop Solution Provider” to all the
problems of the sector.
(b) Working for “Skill Development” and “Entrepreneurship
Development” for the sector.
(c) Facilitating business incubation services with its ultra
modern pilot plant for processing of fruit and vegetables,
dairy, meat and grain processing.
(d) Conducting frontier area research for development of the
sector.
(e) Developing world class managerial talent with advanced
knowhow in food science and technology.
(f) Providing intellectual backing for regulations which will
govern food safety and quality and at the same time foster
innovation.
(g) Functioning as a knowledge repository on various aspects
of food processing such as product information, production
and processing technology , market trends, safety and quality
standards, management practices among others.
(h) Working for upgradation of SME food processing clusters.
(i) Promoting cooperation and networking among existing
institutions within India and as well as with international
bodies.

8
1.19 Accordingly, in pursuance of the decision taken by the CCEA,
the MoFPI acquired 100 acres of land from Haryana State Industrial
and Infrastructure Development Corporation (HSIIDC) at Kundli,
Sonepat, Haryana at a cost of Rs. 31.37 crore in August, 2007. The
work for design, architecture and construction of NIFTEM campus at
Kundli, Haryana was awarded to NBCC on turnkey basis with the
signing of MoU in October, 2007. Subsequently, M/s. RITES Ltd. was
engaged as a third party inspection agency for the project.
(B) Engagement of Consultants
1.20 Enumerating chronology of events which led to short listing
of M/s Rabo India Finance Pvt. Ltd., as the agency for preparing
DPR, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries informed that a
proposal was initially received from Government of U.P . for setting up
of Institute of Food Technology in May, 2001 along with a Project
Report. The proposal was examined in the Ministry and it was found
that the U.P . Government’s Project Report was only indicative of the
need for the Institute and is required to be redone to make it objective
oriented, comprehensive and complete. Moreover Food Technology
concern areas of frontier knowledge and every nation has to compete
globally for the large and extending Food Trade. The State Government
may not be in a position to set up such an Institute of global standard
and to meet the recurring and future developmental expenditure. Hence
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries considered it imperative to
set up a National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and
Management.
1.21 Accordingly, an Executive Committee consisting of
representatives from MoFPI, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Ministry
of HRD and Planning Commission was constituted to facilitate
preparation of a comprehensive action plan for setting up the proposed
Institute and to ensure speedy implementation and monitoring of the
Project.
1.22 Initially the work for preparation of Feasibility Report and
Detailed Project Report was assigned to M/s. Educational Consultants
India Ltd. Their report was, however, not found acceptable by the
Executive Committee. The Executive Committee therefore recommended
that consultants of global reputation may be assigned the work. Based
on this, the Ministry invited technical and financial bids from the six
Consultants which were earlier shortlisted by the Ministry for
preparation of Mega Study-cum-Vision Document for the Ministry. Out
of the 6 Consultants, only three Consultants responded to the Ministry’s
letter seeking bids including M/s. Rabo India Finance Pvt. Ltd.

9
1.23 Further, the Executive Committee after taking presentation
from the above three Consultancy firms, shortlisted M/s. Rabo India
Finance Pvt. Ltd. in its meeting held on November, 2003, at a cost of
Rs. 40.70 lakh plus applicable service tax.
1.24 The Ministry further indicated that credential of M/s. Rabo
India Finance Pvt. Ltd. as provided by them in their Technical bid
were as follows:—
1. An institution Dedicated to Food and Agribusiness.
2. Strong Repository of Knowledge of various sectors in Food
and Agribusiness.
3. Significant experience in the Food Supply Chain from Farm
to Consumer.
4. International Resources involved in Food and Agribusiness
research.
5. Team of highly qualified and experienced Food and
Agribusiness Professionals.
6. Experience of working with Government and Industry
Bodies.
7. Deep knowledge and experience of developing public private
partnership models for infrastructure projects in India.
8. Agency was assigned the work for preparation of a Mega
Study of Vision Document by the Ministry.
1.25 Past performance for similar Project Consultancy Services in
the Technical bid as given by M/s. Rabo India is given below:—
“NDDB—Feasibility study for setting up modern marketing systems
for fruits and vegetables in India.
1. Gujarat State Government—Strategic Plan for food and
agriculture for Gujarat.
2. DCM Sriram Consolidated Ltd.—Strategies to develop and
supply chain for food and agriculture products.
3. MARK FED, Punjab—Strategies for growth in processed
vegetable sector.
4. Mother Dairy—Corporate Strategy .
5. Leading Sugar Company—Business and financial
restructuring.

10
6. Leading Tea Company—Restructuring and sourcing
international alliances.
7. Heineken International—Entry Strategy for India.
8. Dairy Industries Ltd.—Strategic advisory for growth plan
and sourcing potential alliances.
9. Leading Starch Cooperative—Strategic Advisory services
(market analysis) with report to its entry plan in India.
10. IFFCO—Advisory on Business diversification areas.
11. ISAGRO S.P .A.—Advisory RPGLS in the sale of its
agrochemical business.
12. WHYTE MACKAY—Advisory in the sale of 51% of Whyte
and Machay India Ltd to BACARDI.
13. Leading Marine Product Company—Identification of market
opportunity and develop a comprehensive business strategy.
14. Coffee Trading Company — Sole strategies and financial
advisory to amalgamated Bean Coffee Trading Co. (ABC)
for raising capital for its growth plan.
15. East Asiatic Company—Entry Strategy upto India and
acquisition of “Protenix” and “Dumex” from Ptizer Ltd.
16. Leading Brazilian Company—Strategic Advisory (market
analysis) on current status and future potential for fuel
ethanol in India.
Project Approval Committee Chaired by the then Secretary, MoFPI,
gave the approval.”
1.26 As a part of the terms of reference for preparation of DPR,
Rabo India Finance was required to identify a collaboration partner
for NIFTEM. M/s Rabo India Finance after extensive interaction with
the global institutions of excellence in the similar fields identified three
Universities for such collaboration. Cornell University, USA was placed
at No. 1 institution in the order of priority. It was also suggested in
the DPR that it is critical to engage a collaboration partner in the
initial stage to ensure that active support and inputs are obtained in
the areas of course structure and design, organization structure and
advisory on strategic planning process and sustainability.
o Keeping in view that—
• Cornell was placed at No. 1 institution in the order of
priority in the DPR after extensive interaction with the
global institutions of excellence in the similar fields by
Rabo India Finance Ltd.

11
• Cornell is the foremost among IVY League Universities
with comprehensive ability to deliver different
dimensions of research and education programs in Life
Sciences.
• No other University offers such diversity of courses in
the areas of agriculture, Food Nutrition and other aspects
of Life Sciences as Cornell.
• Cornell is the only IVY League University with
comprehensive team strength in India through Cornell
Sathguru Foundation for Development, Hyderabad who
has been engaged for the last 15 years and rendering
support services to ICAR, Department of Bio-technology ,
Ministry of Health, Ministry of Environment and several
State Government agencies.
• Cornell has unmatchable brand value which will help
develop NIFTEM as a world class institute.
1.27 The College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (CALS) at Cornell
University, a global leader in agriculture and food research and
education through Cornell Sathguru Foundation for Development,
Hyderabad were engaged for knowledge sharing partnership for design
of facilities, course curricula, faculty training and internship, developing
a strategic frame work for nurturing research, development of
intellectual property and technology transfer policy and strategic plan
for technology transfer and enterprise development, training centre for
continuing education and design of food enterprise incubator with the
approval of the Project Approval Committee of the Ministry of Food
Processing Industries. An agreement was signed with Cornell Sathguru
Foundation in this regard on 08.01.2008.
1.28 The knowledge sharing partnership agreement was signed
with College of Agriculture and Life Sciences at Cornell University
through CSF on 08.01.2008 on payment of Rs. 3.925 crore spread over
three years. The duration of agreement was for a period of five years.
However, the duration of specific services would be initially for period
of 30 months. The following are key task areas (scope of work) for
CSF in supporting NIFTEM:—
1. Strategic inputs for design of teaching and research facilities
including support facilities such as the Library/Laboratories
and e-learning centre.
2. Guidance for design of under-graduate courses and also
procedure for selection.

12
3. Faculty capacity building and exchange.
4. Development of a strategic framework for nurturing research
within NIFTEM.
5. Development of Institutional Policy , Intellectual Property and
Technology Transfer Policy and Development of a strategic
plan for Technology Transfer and enterprise development.
6. Developing strategic plan and course design for a Training
centre for continuing education.
7. Development of detailed plan for food enterprise incubator
and interface with industry.
8. Assistance in faculty selection.
1.29 CSF reviewed the Rabo DPR and functional requirements of
NIFTEM which envisaged the following additional focus areas, which
were not conceived in the RABO Report:—
• Focus on comprehensive spectrum of food science and food
technology such as food chemistry, food molecular biology,
food nutrition, food process engineering and food laws as
distinct research disciplines with requisite research labs for
each of the core disciplines of food science and technology.
•C reation of comprehensive incubators for Grains, Fruits and
Vegetables, Meat products and dairy products in order to
validate technologies developed by NIFTEM researchers and
transfer such technology to small and medium enterprises.
•C reation of tenancy area within the Incubator, wherein
enterprises can incubate their research projects and work in
tandem with NIFTEM faculty for product research.
•C reation of Bio-resource center, Sensory facility, culinary
kitchen and other essential research facilities that is essential
to deliver advanced courses in food science and food
technology.
•C reation of a continuing education centers with state-of-
the-art equipments that can help to re-skill industry
professionals and Scientists in modern food science and food
process technologies.
• State-of-the-art symposium and auditorium facility that is
essential for a center of excellence to conduct symposiums
and workshops.

13
1.30 The above entire core infrastructures are essential facilities to
be created for NIFTEM to excel in research and knowledge generation
in the area of food science and food technology commensurate to the
envisaged mandate.
1.31 Cornell Sathguru Foundation for Development (CSF),
Hyderabad, did not provide the following essential documents/
services:—
1. Basic parameter for equipment for Central Bio-Process
facilities, Incubator and Labs.
2. Appropriate learning tools and help devise experiential
learning modules for best exposure to students.
3. Development of intellectual property and technology transfer
policy and development of a strategic plan for technology
transfer and enterprise development.
4. Identification of training needs of entrepreneurs and design
of training course.
5. Design of food enterprise incubator.
6. Approaches on forming research consortiums and strategic
focus in forging international partnerships in research
management.
1.32 Regarding selection of Cornell University as knowledge partner
a representative of MoFPI stated as follows:—
“When this Detailed Project Report was made for establishing
NIFTEM, the idea was to establish an institution with a wide
canvass with a modern outlook. ..... This is why a few universities
were short listed. Cornell University was finally selected because
it has a very well established food processing department. It has
food processing laboratories of various kinds; it has very large
pilot plants incubation centres.... One could really learn and see as
to what are the different possibilities with the same product. For
example, take milk. Milk can be converted into hundreds of
products while we make only a few. Similarly, there are many
such horticulture products, meat or fish which could be developed
in such a way so that on the one hand we save them from getting
rotten or wasted and on the other hand we improve the farmers.
or growers. income because that value addition will flow ultimately
to the farmer or to the grower. Cornell has such an old and well-
developed physical infrastructure and very well-developed academic
team also. That is why at that time Cornell was selected.”

14
1.33 Regarding terms of reference in the agreement with
M/s. Cornell Sathguru Foundation for Development, Hyderabad (CSF)
and the reasons for termination of the consultancy, the representative
of the MoFPI submitted that:—
“Initially, the terms of reference were broadly two. One is to design
or improve the DPR which was initially made for the project so
that all sorts of modern laboratories, all modern practices could be
brought in and infrastructure could be built which could be used
for the most frontier areas of research. .....The second part of the
terms of reference was to design the curriculum in such a way
which is suited to the Indian industry, which is required by the
Indian industry and which is a blend of modern as well as
traditional knowledge in the country. But, in between we found
that they could not come up to our expectations in the sense that
the suggestions which were coming from them were not related or
not relatable to Indian conditions or Indian industry and we
thought it will be very impractical to implement such suggestions
in India because whatever is happening in America or maybe in
France, we cannot transplant the whole thing here. This has to be
properly altered, indigenised and all that. But, somehow, that did
not come. That was one big problem.
Secondly, when the question of designing the course curriculum
for B.Tech. and M. Tech. came up, they could not do that.
Ultimately, we had to take that up on our own where we designed
the curriculum by having three rounds of consultations. In the
first round, we invited about 150 people — all top professors,
researchers, scientists and top industry people from all over the
country. They sat here for two days in Delhi and made the first
framework of B.Tech. and M.Tech. curriculum. We circulated this
to about 500 people all over the world just to get their comments.
....After getting their comments, we had another Core Group and
fine-tuned the curriculum further. Finally, we circulated it again to
the industry; got their feedback and we have refined the
curriculum.... ultimately we had to pull out of that Cornell
arrangement and now for the last two and a half years, we are
totally on our own.”
1.34 It has been stated that the reasons for signing an agreement
in January, 2008 with Cornell Satguru Foundation for Development
(CSF) instead of directly having an agreement with the College of
Agriculture and Life Science at Cornell University and the credentials
and standing of CSF in Food Technology, Research and Education were
as follows:—
(a) Cornell—Sathguru Foundation is an initiative of Cornell
University and Sathguru Management Consultants,

15
Hyderabad to support academic and research partnerships
of importance to India in the area of agriculture and life
sciences.
(b) The College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (CALS) at
Cornell University was engaged through Cornell Sathguru
Foundation for Development, Hyderabad for knowledge
sharing partnership. Cornell Sathguru Foundation for
Development, a non-profit organization registered under
Andhra Pradesh Societies Registration Act, 2001, focuses on
the development of agriculture and food chain in India
through partnerships with Public and Private Sector and
engages resources from Cornell University and Sathguru
Management Consultants with a view to engage in education
and research partnerships. Cornell University has permitted
use of certain Trademarks (such as Cornell in India, Cornell
University and Cornell) in rendering services for the joint
initiatives of Cornell Sathguru in India.
1.35 Subsequently, on 28.01.2010 the College of Agriculture and
Life Sciences, USA addressed a letter to Secretary, MoFPI, regretting
their inability to provide any more assistance beyond what has been
provided, on account of funding uncertainty and absence of faculty in
NIFTEM.
1.36 The above situation was due to a delay of about 2 years in
obtaining the approval for revision of cost estimates from the competent
authority due to procedural formalities and comments received from
various Government Departments which were required to be addressed
suitably before obtaining approval of CCEA. There was also delay in
creation of posts and appointment of faculties due to the legal status
of NIFTEM as a Company registered under Section 25 of the
Companies Act. Creation of posts and recruitment of faculties could
only be made after the Union Cabinet approved registration of NIFTEM
as an autonomous body under the Societies Registration Act.
1.37 It has been stated that in view of above position and the fact
that College of Agriculture and Life Sciences at Cornell University had
disassociated itself from the project midway on grounds of funding
uncertainty and non-availability of faculty, which were beyond the
control of the Institute till approval of revised cost estimates and
approval for creation of posts, it was considered appropriate to
discontinue with the agreement signed with CSF with no further
financial liability on NIFTEM and subject, however, to the condition
that CSF furnishes details of services rendered by them under the
agreement proportionate to the fee already paid to them.

16
1.38 When asked whether there was any scope of having fresh
Agreement at this stage in order to achieve the original aim of the
Agreement, the MoFPI in their written reply stated that most of the
aims of the Agreement with CSF have been achieved by NIFTEM. The
UG & PG course curriculum has been developed. For training &
internship, NIFTEM has signed three MoUs with renowned Universities
viz. (a) Kansas State University, Manhattan, USA, (b) Wageningen
University Research, The Netherlands, and (c) University of Nebraska,
Lincoln, USA. The strategic frame work of research with NIFTEM has
been planned. Short Term Training Programmes are being conducted
by Skill Development Division of NIFTEM. In view of this position, it
is felt that there is no need to have a fresh agreement with them at
this stage.
(C) Form of the Institute
1.39 The institute was incorporated as a ‘not for profit’ Company
under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 in August, 2007.
Subsequently, the Institute was registered as a Society under the Society
Registration Act.
1.40 Inspite of the fact that NIFTEM is an educational institution,
originally registration was made under the Companies Act. The reason
being that the DPR suggested both the options for registering NIFTEM
either under section 25 of the Companies Act or under Societies
Registration Act. M/s. Rabo India Finance Limited had however,
recommended that NIFTEM be constituted as a Section 25 Private
company as it provides certainty to the legal status, which is critical
in terms of collaborations with leading Global Institutes, provide more
accountability and transparency in terms of financial reporting. The
draft EFC Note and the CCEA Note, inter alia, providing for registration
of NIFTEM under section 25 of the Companies Act was circulated to
Ministry of HRD who in turn obtained comments of UGC and AICTE.
The Ministry of HRD while supporting the proposal commented as
under:—
(a) It has to be set up either as a Central University or apply
for Deemed to be University status.
(b) No overlapping with the role of AICTE for determining the
norms and standards in the area of engineering and
technology.
(c) Obtaining AICTE approval of the courses and intake of the
programme.

17
1.41 The Ministry in their written replies specifically stated that at
no point of time did it transpire that the legal status of the Institute
as Section 25 of Company registered under Companies Act would
make it ineligible to get Deemed to be University status from UGC.
1.42 The Ministry further informed that since the legal status of
NIFTEM as a Company was creating hurdles in obtaining statutory
recognition as a Deemed University from the University Grants
Commission (UGC) for running its academic courses, the Government
approved registration of NIFTEM as a society with transfer of all assets
and liabilities from the Company to the Society and winding up of
the NIFTEM company. In pursuance of above decision, NIFTEM has
been registered as a society on 19.05.2010 and all assets and liabilities
of the company transferred to the society on 11.11.2010. The Voluntary
Liquidator appointed by the company, after realizing all known
liabilities of the company, has already sent a report to the Official
Liquidator of the Delhi High Court on 07.05.2012 for voluntary winding
of the Company.
1.43 Thereafter, on 08.05.2012, the Ministry of Human Resource
Development (Department of Higher Education) on the advice of UGC
declared NIFTEM a Deemed to be University under De Novo category
under Section 3 of the UGC Act, 1956.
1.44 When the Committee enquired why the Ministry did not think
of bringing up a legislation for creation of NIFTEM, the Secretry, MoFPI
stated, that—
“While it is possible that we could have taken the last route—
and if I may say so, we are not ruling that out for the future
also—but at that time, it was felt that the best way for a new
institute to be developed, an institute of this magnitude and
importance, was to take advantage of the UGC Act and establish
it under the framework of the UGC Act, which is also a framework
approved by the Parliament.
There are many institutions of the Government of India of equal
importance, which have also used this route successfully. For
example, the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade is a deemed-to-be
university, and the National Institute of Fashion Technology is also
a deemed-to-be university. So, from what I can understand is that
looking at the successful examples, the Ministry had, at that time,
felt that the shortest and the fastest route would be to use the
existing legislation and if necessary, at a later point of time, consider
our own legislation.”

18
CHAPTER II
DELAY AND COST ESCALATION
(A) Schedule of Completion
2.1 The original schedule of completion of infrastructure envisaged
in the Implementation Schedule as estimated on 14.08.2006 was
2009-10. In the note dated 15.04.2011 submitted to Government for
approval of revised cost estimates it was indicated that the Institutional
Buildings and other peripheral infrastructure of Phase-1 has been
completed.
2.2 Regarding completion of construction work, the MoFPI stated
in October, 2013 that nearly 80% of the construction has been completed
and the remaining 20% is under way. This is expected to be completed
by June, 2014. The construction of various facilities had been linked
with the students intake, faculty strength etc. Some of the items which
are incomplete as yet are second floor of Institutional Building, interior
work of Auditorium, interior work and designing of Pilot Plants,
1st & 2nd floor of Seminar Block, interior work of Guest House and
interior work of Bank and Post-office. Hostel Block and Residential
Units have been completed and become functional.
2.3 Giving the status of completion of infrastructure facilities
provided at NIFTEM, the MoFPI stated as under:—
(1) Major portions of Institutional Buildings have been
completed.
(2) The shell structure of Pilot Plants and Auditorium have
been completed.
(3) For designing furniture, furnishing and procurement of
equipments in Pilot Plants, a Project Management Agency
was being appointed.
(4) Auditorium and the remaining work of Institutional
buildings were in progress.
(5) 3 Hostel Blocks with a capacity for accommodating
725 students and residential units have been completed.
(6) 13 out of 14 Teaching-cum-Research Labs have been
completed and functional.

19
(7) NIFTEM Knowledge Centre (Library) made functional with
adequate resource of international level.
(8) The primary horticulture work commensurating with the
Institutional buildings have been completed. Main
horticulture work contracts have been awarded and the work
will be completed by 31.12.2013.
2.4 The following Teaching and Research Labs have been made
fully functional except the ‘Central Instrumentation’ Lab which is under
construction:—
(1) Food Science and Technology
(2) Dairy & Food Engineering
(3) Engineering Workshop-I
(4) Engineering Workshop-II
(5) Animal Product Technology
(6) Electrical & Electronics Engineering
(7) Computer Centre and Communication
(8) Chemistry & Biochemistry
(9) Central Instrumentation
(10) Microbiology
(11) Food Packaging
(12) Food Engineering
(13) Physics
(14) Engineering Graphics
2.5 When the Committee visited NIFTEM in October, 2013, the
Committee were informed that the Institutes uses IT infrastructure to
the maximum possible extent. Backup of the class room teachings are
automatically recorded so that students could use it later on whenever
they require.
(B) Cost of the Project
2.6 The CCEA approved the setting up of NIFTEM in its meeting
held in August, 2006 at an estimated cost of Rs. 244.6 crore including
foreign exchange component of US $ 8.1 million. Now the revised
project cost is Rs. 479.94 crore.

20
2.7 On being asked reasons for revision of project cost, the Ministry
in a written reply stated that the Secretary, MoFPI after visiting various
Universities in USA from September, 2007 to October, 2007 suggested
that the structure of NIFTEM as provided in RABO DPR and functional
requirements need to be reviewed immediately with a view to ensure
that they are in line with the best international practices and that the
Architect should visit USA and understand the architectural practices
adopted and the facilities provided. These suggestions were approved
by Minister of State (Independent Charge) of the Ministry of Food
Processing Industries in October, 2007 and he further ordered that the
experience gained by the Secretary should be fully utilized in framing
the Ministry’s MoU with NBCC.
2.8 Accordingly, a team consisting of representatives of NBCC, STUP
Consultants Pvt. Ltd. and MFPI visited Cornell University and U.C.
Davis during December 1-7, 2007. Based on the inputs gathered by
the team and those provided by the Cornell University to NBCC and
their Architect, the concept and design of NIFTEM Campus was
prepared by the Architect and approved by the Ministry with the
approval of Minister of State (Independent Charge) of the MoFPI. On
the basis of accepted concept and design Block Cost Estimates were
submitted by NBCC for construction work.
2.9 Based on the inputs about technical area requirement from
Cornell Sathguru Foundation, NBCC worked out the circulation and
utility areas for the NIFTEM campus as per established sound civil
engineering practices and bye laws. The area for residential and other
amenities buildings have been adopted as per CPWD/UGC norms by
NBCC. The cost of construction submitted by NBCC has increased
from Rs. 75.10 crore to Rs. 310.74 crore with covered area of
98,539 sq.m. The construction cost has been worked out based on
CPWD rates of 2008. The increase in cost of construction of NIFTEM
campus has been attributed to the following:—
• Escalation in cost vis-a-vis the cost indicated in the DPR
which is based on May, 2005 market price.
• Increase in area of construction vis-a-vis the area indicated
in the DPR due to increased intake capacity of the students
from 430 to 950 and assuming 100% provision for hostels
and 60% for residential as against 50% both for residential
and hostels assumed in DPR of May, 2006.
• Additions of facilities not provided in the DPR such as
landscaping, internal roads, lighting, etc., Continuing

21
Education Centre, Water treatment plant with pumps, electric
work for water treatment plant, plant room work, solar panel
system, lifts, boundary wall, neighbourhood facilities,
amphitheater, ETP and STP .
2.10 Further to the submission of Block Cost Estimates by NBCC,
Cornell Sathguru Foundation worked out the total project outlay
covering cost of construction, cost of equipments, hardware & software,
library resources, IT infrastructure and other miscellaneous expenditure
at Rs. 604.75 crore.
2.11 Accordingly, the Draft EFC Note was circulated to Ministry of
Finance and Planning Commission and other concerned Ministries/
Departments for their comments. The Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission had expressed reservations on the enhanced cost projected
in the RCE vis-a-vis the original approved cost of Rs. 244.60 crore and
advised the MoFPI to re-examine and rationalize the overall cost
estimate. In pursuance of the directives of Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission the Revised project cost was revised by the
Ministry. A series of review meetings were taken with NBCC and
Architect as a result of which the revised cost was reduced from
Rs. 604.75 crore to Rs. 479.94 crore without compromising with the
quality of construction.
2.12 It was stated that the proposal for revision of Project Cost
Estimates from Rs. 244.60 crore to Rs. 479.94 crore has been appraised
and recommended by the Expenditure Finance Committee in its
meeting held on 18 February, 2011 for approval of CCEA. The proposal
as recommended by EFC was being submitted to CCEA for
consideration and approval. When asked to furnish a detailed note on
hiking of initial estimated cost of Rs. 244.60 crore to Rs. 604.75 crore
and, thereafter, pruning it down to Rs. 479.94 crore, the Ministry replied
that the original cost estimated of Rs. 244.60 crore was based on DPR
of May, 2006 prepared by M/s RABO India Finance India Pvt. Ltd.
The Break-up of cost, component-wise, is indicated below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Component Original 1st Revised Final
No. Approved Cost Revised
Cost Cost
12 3 4 5
1. Land 31.40 31.37 36.10
2. Building 75.10 314.16 264.58

22
3. Equipments 47.00 41.60 56.00
4. Hardware & Software 4.00 9.58 13.57
5. Library & Others 12.50 12.50
6. Preoperative expenses 11.70 31.32 13.27
7. Contingencies (@3% 1.91 -
on Sl. No. 3 to 5)
8. Total Non-recurring 169.20 432.44 396.02
cost
9. Recurring Cost 75.40 172.31 83.92
(For 5 Years)
Total 244.60 604.75 479.94
2.13 The reasons for revision of cost from Rs. 244.60 crore originally
to that of Rs. 479.94 are as under:—
Sl.No. Reasons for escalation Escalated cost
(Rs. in Crore)
1. Escalation in cost based on 2008 market price
vis-a-vis the cost indicated in the DPR, which was
based on 2005 market price
2. Increase in area of construction vis-a-vis the area
(from 40588 sq.mtr. To 98539 sq.mtr.) indicated
in DPR/due to increase intake of students (from
430 to 950) and assuming 100% provision for
hostels and 60% for residential accommodation
for faculty and staff as against 50% both for
hostels and residential assumed in DPR.
3. Additional facilities such as development services
(other than landscaping), continuing education
centre, water treatment plant, solar panel system,
neighbourhood facilities, amphithreatre, ETP/STP
(Effluent Treatment Plant/Sewerage Treatment
Plant) etc. not provided in the original DPR.
Total
1  2 3 4 5
75.58
121.04
38.72
235.34

23
(C) Generation of Revenue
2.14 The Institute has commenced its first Academic Session with
effect from the Academic Year 2012-13. During the year 2012-13, the
institute has generated revenue to the tune of Rs. 845.74 lakhs. The
details of the same are indicated below:
(Rupees in lakhs)
1. Income from the Students 242.33
2. Interest earned 517.36
3. Other income from Consultancy services/ 86.05
STTP etc.
                             Total: 845.74
2.15 The Institute has also earned some income in earlier years
from interest on short term deposits/saving bank.
2.16 The institute anticipates revenue income of Rs. 976.84 lakhs
during current fiscal i.e. 2013-14 as per details below:
(Rupees in lakhs)
1. Income from the Students 542.34
2. Interest earned 300.00
3. Other income like Consultancy services/ 134.50
STTP etc.
                             Total: 976.84
2.17 During informal discussion, the Committee enquired whether
NIFTEM is able to generate its own resources to meet financial
requirements, the representative of NIFTEM informed the Committee
that none of the Government Institution like IITs, IIMs, etc. are in a
position to generate sufficient funds to fully meet their financial
requirements. There has to be financial support from the Government.
Already these Institutions have increased the fee structure for various
courses and it is not prudent to put extra burden on the parents.
Unless there is substantial financial support from the Government,
neither can they support in-house Academic and Research work to the
desired level nor can make best of the faculty/non-faculty recruitment
within the available resources. NIFTEM is already facing financial
crunch on this count.
2.18 Subsequent to the above, the Ministry submitted a note on
“Non-Plan support to National Institute of Food Technology
Entrepreneurship & Management (NIFTEM), Kundli, Haryana and

24
Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology (IICPT), Thanjavur, Tamil
Nadu (which are under its administrative control) during 12th Plan”
contemplating, inter-alia, that the institutes have their main revenue
income from tuition fee. The revenue generated from registration fee
of seminars and short term courses, and consultancy is very small.
The tuition fee of these institutes is higher than NITs, Central
Unviersities, IITs and other Government technical institutions. These
institutes have to incur expenditure connected with salaries,
maintenance of assets, electricity charges, lab and research expenses,
library charges, telephone/internet and postage, office expenses,
seminars and conferences, etc. Apart from these, the institutes also
incur further expenditure like advertisement and publicity, travelling
etc. The expenditure incurred on these items is much more than the
revenue generated by the institutes. Their tuition fee being already
very high, cannot be revised upwards as any further enhancement
will deny opportunity to poorer sections of the society from availing
the benefit of study in these Government funded institutions.
2.19 As per the approvals of the Government granted to these
institutes, NIFTEM is provided financial support for recurring
expenditure upto 2014-15 by the Ministry. Thereafter, the institute still
requires Non-Plan support from the Government to meet its Revenue
expenditure.
2.20 IICPT has submitted a proposal to the Ministry for Non-Plan
support of Rs. 28.50 crore from 2013-14 to 2016-17. However,
Department of Expenditure has agreed to provide only 50% of the
proposed amount. NIFTEM has also submitted a proposal to meet the
deficit between revenue income and revenue expenditure amounting
to Rs. 131.67 crore for the period 2014-15 to 2016-17.
2.21 As per Planning Commission “Guidelines for classification of
expenditure (Plan/Non-Plan) for the 12th Plan period” all expenditures
connected with maintenance of existing institutions and establishment
will be treated as Non-Plan committed expenditure.
2.22 Central Universities and similar institutes like IITs, NITs, NIFT,
and academic institutions under ICAR are running on Non-Plan support
from the Government. University Grants Commission has also informed
the Ministry that it provides non-plan grant to the Central Universities
for meeting expenditure on salaries and non-salary items (which
includes recurring expenditure on maintenance of laboratories, libraries,
maintenance of buildings, payment of taxes, telephone, postages,
electricity, water charges, etc). UGC has further informed that Ministry
of Human Resource Development for the year 2013-14 has approved
the BE of Rs. 3408.96 crore under non-plan in respect of Central
Universities.

25
2.23 The MoFPI have submitted to the Committee that since,
Ministry of Human Resource Development through UGC is providing
full financial support to Universities and similarly Department of
Agricultural Research & Education provides support to ICAR institutes
for meeting their non-plan expenditure, NIFTEM may also be provided
adequate non-plan support to meet essential recurring expenditure.
The other revenue expenditure of the institute would be met from the
revenue generated by the institutes.
(D) Faculty
2.24 The Ministry in their note to CCEA regarding setting up of
NIFTEM, proposed about the staffing of the Institution that:—
“The staffing of the institution shall be kept lean, essentially based
on projects taken up for research, priorities and mandate of the
Institute. The institution shall have visiting faculty and engage
temporary faculty depending on the requirements as they emerge
from time to time. Detailed proposal for creation of posts will be
taken up with the Competent Authority. The institution shall be
encouraged to outsource as many services as possible and
advantageous.”
(E) Creation of Posts
2.25 The total number of posts as per DPR was 240. The breakup
of posts envisaged in DPR is indicated below:—
Faculty
• Director : 01
• Additional Director : 01
•P rofessors (including 13 theme centre heads) : 21
• Associate Professors : 30
• Assistant Professors : 42
Staff
• Grade I (research scholars and associates) : 58
• Grade II (lab assistants) : 56
• Grade III (secretarial) : 31
                                Total : 240

26
2.26 However, creation of posts approved so far with the approval
of Ministry of Finance was as under:
Sl.No. Year of approval Creation of posts approved
1. 2010-11 46
2. 2011-12 18
3. 2012-13 29
4. 2013-14 7
Total: 100
Category wise:-
Sl.No. Category of Posts Creation of posts approved
1. Director 01
2. Academic (Teaching) 45
3. Academic (Non-Teaching) 22
4. Non-Academic 32
Total: 100
Total No. of Contractual and Outsourced Staff in NIFTEM:—
No. of Contractual Staff 52
No. of Outsourced Staff 25
         Total: 77
2.27 Explaining the modalities regarding recruitment and
appointment of and the qualifications prescribed for the post of
Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, Director and Registrar of the Institute and
for the other members of the Board of the Institute, the MoFPI stated
as follows:—
• The post of Chancellor is non-functional post. The Ministry
has appointed Secretary, MoFPI as Chancellor of NIFTEM,
Deemed to be University.
•V ice Chancellor and Director is one post. Director, NIFTEM
has been designated as Vice Chancellor of NIFTEM by the
Ministry. The post of Director was created with the approval

27
of Cabinet. Selection of Director was made through the
mechanism of Search-cum-Selection Committee as prescribed
by Central Government for senior level posts. Appointment
of Director was made with the approval of Appointments’
Committee of the Cabinet.
• The post of Registrar was created with the approval of
Ministry of Finance. Selection was made through Search-
cum-Selection Committee mechanism. Appointment was
made with the approval of Secretary, MoFPI.
• The qualifications and experience is prescribed in the
Recruitment Rules for each post approved by the Ministry.
• The Board of Management was constituted as prescribed in
Rules and Regulations approved by Registrar of Societies at
the time of registration of NIFTEM as a Society. All Members
of the Board except Director-cum-VC are honorary and are
selected ex-officio. There is as such no qualification prescribed
for Board Members. The Board is now being reconstituted,
consequent to the recognition of the Institute as a Deemed
to be University.
2.28 The Applications for filling up the post of Director, NIFTEM
were invited through advertisement issued by NIFTEM. In response to
the advertisement, 47 applications were received and of these 45
applicants met the eligibility criteria. Ministry of Food Processing
Industries with the approval of Hon’ble Minister (A&FPI) and the
Department of Personnel & Training (DoP&T) had constituted a Search-
cum-Selection Committee (SCSC) with following composition:—
1. Chairman : Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing
Industries
2. Member : Secretary, Department of Agriculture &
Co-operation (Nominee of the President of the
Deemed to be University)
3. Member : Pr of. Devi Singh, Director, IIM (Lucknow)
(Director of National Level Institute)
4. Member : Dr. Sur endra Prasad, Director (IIT), Delhi
(Subject Expert)
2.29 The SCSC in its meeting held on 17.06.2011 had shortlisted
10 candidates for discussion/personal interview for final selection. The
SCSC after considering all aspects of the candidates recommended the

28
following panel of candidates in the order of merit for selection to the
post of Director, NIFTEM as under:—
1. Shri Ajit Kumar, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing
Industries
2. Dr. B.S. Bisht, Vice-Chancellor, G.B.Pant Agricultural
University
3. Dr. Satish Kulkarni, Head, NDRI (SRS Bangalore)
2.30 DoP&T vide their OM No. 9/34/2011-EO (SM.II) dated
31.01.2012 had conveyed the approval of ACC for appointment of
Sh. Ajit Kumar, IAS (BH: 80) to the post of Director, NIFTEM in the
scale of pay of Rs. 75,000 (fixed) + 5000 Spl. Allowance on permanent
absorption basis with effect from the date of assumption of the charge
of the post for a period of 5 years or till he attains the age of 70 years
or until further orders whichever is the earliest. Sh. Ajit Kumar assumed
the charge of the post of Director, NIFTEM w.e.f. 01.05.2012.
2.31 Sh. Ajit Kumar joined the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries on the post of Joint Secretary on 18.09.2006 and worked in
the Ministry for a period of more than 5 years. In this capacity he
was dealing with various schemes and programmes for promotion of
Food Processing Sector in the Ministry and Policy issues related thereto.
His educational qualification is M.Sc. (Environmental Sciences).
Dr. Ajit Kumar holds Ph.D. from IIT, Delhi and the topic of his thesis
was “Drying of Medicinal Plant/Vegetable Products by Hybrid
Photovoltaic Thermal (PVT) Green House Dryer”.
2.32 Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of
Higher Education declared NIFTEM a Deemed to be University under
De Novo category on 08.05.2012. Consequent upon this, the board of
Management of NIFTEM has been reconstituted by NIFTEM in
accordance with its revised Memorandum of Association and rules
concurred by UGC, Shri Ajit Kumar, Director-cum-Vice Chancellor,
NIFTEM is the Chairman of Board of Management of NIFTEM.
2.33 All posts of faculty and non-faculty were created with the
approval of Ministry of Finance. The approval includes approval of
pay scales, qualifications and experience required etc. Recruitment were
made by calling applications through advertisement on all India basis.
Reservation for SC/ST and OBC as prescribed by Central Government
was followed. Selection were made through Selection Committees duly
constituted by Board of Management and appointment were made
with the approval of Secretary, MoFPI and Chairman, NIFTEM Board.
The qualifications of faculty were in conformity with the UGC/AICTE
requirements.

29
2.34 Out of 100 sanctioned posts 53 posts have been filled. The
details of vacancies in each category against the sanctioned posts are
given at the table below:—
Details of Posts created, filled & to be filled
Sl. Post name Post Incumbents Posts to
No. Created in Position be filled
1. Director 1 1 0
2. Professor 6 3 3
3. Associate Professor 14 9 5
4. Assistant Professor 25 17 8
5. Registrar 1 1 0
6. Private Secretary 1 - 1
7. Personal Assistant 2 - 2
8. Executive Assistant 11 3 8
9. Peon 2 - 2
10. Lab Incharge 8 2 6
11. Lab Technician 9 3 6
12. Deputy librarian 1 1 0
13. Assistant Librarian 2 1 1
14. Sr. Library Information Asstt. 2 1 1
15. Assistant Registrar 3 3 0
16. Network Administrator 1 - 1
17. System Administrator 1 1 -
18. Deputy Controller 1 1 0
(Finance & Accounts)
19. Accounts Officer 1 1 0
20. Accountant 2 2 0
21. Cashier 1 1 0
22. Junior Engineer 2 2 0
23. Deputy General Manager 1 - 1
24. Assistant General Manager 1 - 1
25. Controller of Examination 1 0 1
Total: 100 53 47

30
2.35 As intimated by the Ministry, Faculty posts have been worked
out year-wise based on the students strength as per AICTE norms.
Creation of Faculty posts have been approved by the Government
based on the student strength upto the Academic Year 2013-14. Proposal
for creation of faculty posts based student strength upto the academic
year 2014-15 is being submitted to the Government for approval.
2.36 As regards the creation of non-faculty posts, a proposal for
creation of 63 posts was sent to the Government for approval. As
against this, the Ministry of Finance has approved creation of only
4 posts. The proposal for creation of remaining non-faculty posts was
being submitted again for approval.
2.37 Further, in order to meet the requirement of teaching, Guest
faculties in the concerned subjects have been arranged from Academia
and Industry. Visiting faculty have also been engaged in some courses.
Rolling advertisement have been given to attract competent faculty.
This was being repeated after regular intervals of time.
2.38 Pending creation and filling up of regular posts, 52 persons
have been engaged on contractual basis. Further action was being taken
to recruit additional staff on contractual basis pending creation and
filling up of the regular posts so that the work of the Institute does
not suffer.
2.39 On being asked whether the Institute is able to attract world
class faculty, the Ministry in their written replies stated that efforts are
being made to appoint best possible candidates out of those who have
applied to NIFTEM for teaching position. There is overall dearth of
qualified University Faculty even in reputed IITs & IIMs. Many of
NIFTEM Faculty is drawn from reputed institutions like IITs, IIMs,
BHU, and JNU. Some of the Faculty members are also trained in
foreign countries.
2.40 During informal discussions, the representative of the NIFTEM
informed the Committee that the Institute is facing great difficulty in
getting higher level teaching staff due to unmatched salary package as
available in private sector. Even teaching staff from foreign universities
are not coming forward to join NIFTEM due to low pay packages.
2.41 Giving details of the incentives for the faculty, the MoFPI
stated:—
• Faculty Members are encouraged to visit good Institutions
abroad.

31
• Participate in conference and training programmes.
• Engage in research, project writing/workshops.
• Faculty is provided the facilities of Books/E-Books/
E-Journals, Computers/Laptops, Residence, Telephone
Reimbursement, Entertainment Allowances, Professional
Development facilities, Medical Reimbursement, Medical
facilities in the campus, Relocation Allowance etc.
• Faculty Members granted additional/advance increment as
per UGC norms.
• The faculty’s facility support generates positive work
environment.

32
CHAPTER III
ACADEMIC INITIATIVES
(A) Academic Endeavours
3.1 Giving details of the degree courses, the Ministry have stated
that NIFTEM has started four years regular degree programme as
B.Tech. in Food Technology and Management at under graduate level
and two years regular M.Tech. degree programme in five different
disciplines namely— 1. Food Supply Chain Management, 2. Food Safety
and Quality Management, 3. Food Process Engineering and
Management, 4. Food Plant Operations Management, 5. Food
Technology and Management at post graduate level.
3.2 115 students in B.Tech. (Food Technology and Management)
and 88 students in the five streams of M.Tech. were admitted for the
first academic session 2012-13. For the 2nd Academic Session 2013-14
174 students in B.Tech and 88 in M.Tech admitted. Ph.D. Programme
in all the five disciplines has commenced from the Academic Year
2013-14 and 9 scholars have been admitted in Ph.D.
(B) Industry Internship
3.3 It has been informed that all the students of M.Tech. have
been placed in the prominent food processing industries for 5 months
industrial internship starting from August, 2013.
(C) Village Adoption Programme
3.4 NIFTEM has reportedly developed a ‘Village Adoption
Programme’ with the following features:—
(i) Conceptualisation of Village Adoption Program for the
students with a view to make them aware of rural India,
educate them on the problems and practices of the farmers
at the grass root level.
(ii) The aim is to help the Indian food processing sector to
accomplish its objective of all inclusive growth and facilitate
the process of integrating the underprivileged sections of
our population with the main stream economy.

33
(iii) To sensitize and train the farmers and local youths about
food processing and its advantages, encourage farmers and
local youths to form producer’s company and establish small
Food Processing Units and promote good agricultural
practices.
NIFTEM has already completed 3 Village Adoption
Programmes in 2012-13 adopting 72 Villages covering
43 States. In the fourth round ending October, 2013,
27 villages in 17 States across the country have been
adopted.
3.5 According to the MoFPI, this programme has made the students
and the faculty understand ground realities of the country and connect
them to the grass root level with farmers. They have also been able
to understand and appreciate as to why the farmers not get enough
remuneration for their hard work in the fields and what are the points
of exploitation of farmers. They also get sensitized as to what are the
inefficiencies in the supply chain from the farmer’s farm gate to the
consumer’s dinner plate and how they can be addressed. When the
students and faculty educate and guide the farmers, village youths
and poor women about the value addition to the agricultural produce,
reduction of wastages and preservation of the produce by starting
small micro enterprises of food processing, the students unconsciously
develop a sense of entrepreneurship in themselves also. The faculty
also becomes more knowledgeable of the ground realities which make
them more competent to find solutions towards inclusive growth in
the country through food processing.
3.6 Under the Village Adoption Programme, immediately after
joining B.Tech./M.Tech. course, students are divided into groups of 5
to 7. Each group adopts a village anywhere in India and nurses it for
four years of B.Tech. or two years of M.Tech. Students stay in the
village four times a year: 7 to 15 days each time.
3.7 Students obtain firsthand experience of Indian Rural scenario;
villagers are benefited by their scientific and Technical knowledge. They
study traditional food processing practices and promote future
possibilities and also help farmers in making them entrepreneurs.
3.8 The programme has received support of government
departments, industry, academia and social institutions:—
•T eam NIFTEM has organized various activities like
awareness campaigns, training workshops, expert lectures
for raising awareness about food processing in various
locations.

34
• Banks, corporate houses, industries and other institutions
are coming forward to get associated with NIFTEM V AP .
• ICAR has supported NIFTEM V AP by consenting association
of 22 Krishi Vigyan Kendras in different rural locations
across India.
•P romotion of use of solar energy and its use in food
processing.
•C reation of core groups/SHG’s for food processing related
activities.
• Addressing social issues adult education, girl child
education, sanitation, hygiene, etc
(D) Other Initiatives
3.9 The Ministry informed the Committee that a consultancy
division has been established as there was an urgent need for a global
standard consultancy in the Food Processing Sector which can fill in
the gaps across the entire value chain from arm to fork. NIFTEM
consultancy division will be striving to strengthen food processing
sector by universalizing core competencies in the sub-sectors, enhance
business capabilities of SMEs and provide single window catering
across the sector.
3.10 According to the Ministry, NIFTEM has conducted 26 Short
Term Training Programmes during 2011-13 benefitting 583 participants.
The rationale and objectives of the skilled development programme
was to educate and upgrade the knowledge of base level to well
qualified and professionals; to integrate different sectors of Food
Processing to fill the gap between skill available and skill needed. It
is also meant to design need based segment-wise separate module of
Training Programme; and to impart training from Farm to Customer
level to enhance the deliverable quality of food and prevention of
wastages.
3.11 The Ministry informed that the Institute has established a
‘Research Cell’ for starting research activities in the relevant areas of
Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management. Six research
projects started with internal funding. A research project from the Indian
Council of Medical Research in collaboration with NDRI, Karnal started
at a cost of Rs. 31 lakhs. A research project on Biochar from food
industry waste has also been started.

35
3.12 Accordingly to the MoFPI, NIFTEM has conceptualized creation
of an Innovation Fund for students of NIFTEM to promote innovation
driven learning. Under this initiative, NIFTEM extends Financial
Assistance to the students to motivate them to undertake innovative
research as individuals or groups. NIFTEM provides 100% of the
Innovation project cost upto Rs. 15.00 lakh for a project. This limit can
be exceeded in case of deserving projects.
3.13 Elaborating on the IT initiatives of the NIFTEM, the Ministry
stated that Wi-Fi facility is provided in whole campus with 100 Mbps
internet speed. There is a provision of Video Conferencing/Interview/
Lecture system. NIFTEM has registered website under the domain name
niftem.ac.in When enquired whether the website contains any
information beneficial to farmers and food processing industry apart
from student community, the Ministry intheir written reply stated that
NIFTEM website is registered under domain.ac.in with URL
www.niftem.ac.in for public access. Information about various schemes
of MoFPI is available on the website of the Ministry to which a link
has been provided from NIFTEM’s website.
(E) NIFTEM Research Development Council (NRDC)
3.14 The Ministry informed the Committee that Research
Development Council consisting of about 50 members drawn from
industry and academia has been set up to chalk out the future Research
Agenda of NIFTEM. Experts from Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR)/Central Food Technological Research Institute
(CFTRI)/Central Institute of Post Harvest Engineering & Technology
(CIPHET)/Defence Food Research Laboratory (DFRL)/Defence Research
& Development Organisation (DRDO)/IIT, Kharagpur, Harcourt Butler
Technological Institute (HBTI), Kanpur have been included in the
Council. Two meetings of NIFTEM Research Development Council have
so far been held.
3.15 The Institute has set up NIFTEM Industry Forum consisting
of representatives of Micro, Small, Medium and Large Industries in
Food Processing Sector. This will be one of the main policy advisory
body to lay down the NIFTEM’s Agenda for the future for Teaching,
Research, Entrepreneurship Development, Skill Development,
Consultancy to the Industry and also SME Upgradation. Under this
initiative interaction of Industrial houses with the students of NIFTEM
will also be arranged to provide necessary exposure to the students
and sensitize them to understand the challenges of the Industry. Three
meetings of NIFTEM Industry Forum have so far been held.

36
3.16 When asked about NIFTEM’s initiatives to support the needs
of Industry, the Ministry explained as follows:—
(a) Proposed NIFTEM initiatives to meet the Industry needs
are:
(i) Pilot Plants-cum-incubation Centre.
(ii) Specialized Centres.
(iii) Food Testing Laboratories.
(iv) Centre for Entrepreneurship Development.
(b) Initiative for benefit of Industry:
(i) Short Term Training Programmes.
(ii) Greening of Food Processing Sector.
(c) Establishing Chair Professors of Industry Focused Research.
(F) Research & Training Centres
3.17 International Grain Processing Research and Training Centre
has been set up in collaboration with Grain Industry to function as an
international outreach organization of NIFTEM and to enhance market
promotion, consumption and utilization of Indian Cereal grains and
their value added products. The Centre has organized an International
Short Term Training Programme (STTP) on ‘Extrusion Processing—
Technology, Applications and Business Development for the Indian Food
and Feed Market’ from April 8-10, 2013 in collaboration with Kansas
State University, USA & M/s. Wenger, USA.
3.18 The Committee were informed that NIFTEM has set up an
International Bakery Research and Training Centre to facilitate in-house
& externally supported continuous experiential learning or motivating
the entrepreneurs to establish or start new ventures with faculty
mentoring from NIFTEM. The proposed Bakery Centre could also train
the work force and upgrade their skills to achieve quality of the bakery
products. Apart from this the proposed Bakery Centre will also cater
to the needs of new product development and implementation of
hygiene in the Bakery Plants. The efforts will also help to convert
NIFTEM generated technologies into commercialized bakery products.
NIFTEM delegation during their visit to Germany held discussions
with IREKS GmbH, Germany, a lead company in bakery ingredients.
Collaboration arrangement with them is being worked out.

37
3.19 The MoFPI stated that for setting up of an International Centre
of Excellence on Food Safety and Quality to address all the related
issues in a holistic manner. NIFTEM proposes to set up a Food Testing
Lab for conducting physical, chemical and microbiological analysis of
food samples. The proposed Testing Lab will be accredited by National
Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL)
for the purpose of carrying out analysis of samples by the food analysis
under this Act. Further the laboratory shall fulfill all the conditions
required for a Referral Laboratory as per the guidelines of Food Safety
and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). This lab will also provide
testing facility to Food Sector at low cost and will meet Referral
Laboratory as per the guidelines of FSSAI. Food Testing Lab is expected
to be commissioned by the end of December, 2013.
3.20 The Ministry informed the Committee that the Food Safety
and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) and National Horticulture
Board (NHB) have approached NIFTEM for setting up of Chair
Professor separately for FASSI & NHB. FSSAI has also sought to sign
a MoU with NIFTEM with regard to provide training to Food safety
officers, designated officers, etc. The NHB has desired that the training
may be given to graduate Mechanical and Refrigeration Engineers.
The Institute will impart training to the FSSAI/NHB personnel as well
as African Nationals. NIFTEM proposes to conduct Outreach/Training
Programmes all over the country for farmers/prospective entrepreneurs
on Pan India basis.
3.21 NIFTEM is in the process of setting up a Food Testing
Laboratory which will also provide for testing of meat and meat
products. NM&PPB has made available some of the food testing
equipments like GCMS, LCMS, ICP-OES, HPLC etc. to NIFTEM for
making use of the same in the NIFTEM Food Testing Laboratory. These
equipments will be used for testing of food for various parameters
and making food testing services available to the food testing industry.
(G) Foreign Collaborations
3.22 Informing the Committee of the foreign collaboration, the
MoFPI stated that NIFTEM has signed MoUs with (i) Wageningen
University, The Netherlands on 08.11.2011; (ii) Kansas State University,
USA on 29.08.2012; and (iii) University of Nebraska Lincoln, USA on
10.01.2013 mutual cooperation in the field of faculty/students exchange
programme, research and other subjects of common interest.
3.23 When enquired how these Universities were selected for
mutual cooperation, whether there will be technology transfer between

38
these Universities and NIFTEM and what kind of technical help they
will provide to NIFTEM, the Ministry in their written reply stated
that:—
“These universities were selected on the basis of their expertise
and reputation in education and research in area of Food Science,
Food Safety and Technology including food safety. As a result of
these agreements 1st batch of 18 meritorious students of B.Tech.
and M.Tech. led by 3 faculty members was sent to University of
Nebraska Lincoln (UNL), Kansas State University (KSU), USA &
University of Saskatchewan, Canada for 1 week/3 Weeks study
visit during July-August 2013.
Under the terms of MoUs with these institutions, educational and
academic exchanges in the following area will be considered:
(i) Long-term and short-term exchanges of faculty , students,
and staff for purposes of teaching and research;
(ii) Reciprocal assistance for visiting faculty, students and staff;
(iii) Coordination of joint research, lectures and training;
(iv) Development of mutually beneficial academic programs,
courses, and distance learning facilities;
(v) Exchange of documentation and research materials in fields
of mutually interest provided that, to the best knowledge
of the respective institutions, there is no prohibition at law
or otherwise against the exchange;
(vi) Exchange of students for study and research;
(vii) Coordination/Guidance in setting up of research priorities;
and
(viii) Any other activity requiring consultation.
Technology transfer, as such, is not a part of the MoUs signed
with these Universities.”
3.24 Giving details of the international visits of the students in the
year 2013, the Ministry stated as follows:—
University M.Tech. B.Tech.
students students
Univ. of Nebraska, Lincoln, USA 4 8
Kansas State Univ. Manhattan, USA 4 -
Univ. of Sasketchwan, Saskatoon, Canada 2 -
        Total: 10 8

39
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
1. The Committee’s examination of National Institute of Food
Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) reveals that
the proposal to set up NIFTEM was approved by the Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC) despite serious reservations by the
Department of Expenditure, Planning Commission, Ministry of Health
and Ministry of HRD on the grounds of duplication of functions,
economic un-viability, longer lead time, lack of clarity regarding
courses, difficulty in attracting world class faculty and that there
was no case for creating a new institution, as evident from the
minutes of EFC meetings held on 16.12.2005 and 24.03.2006. The
Committee feel that there was no strong case for creation of a new
institution at a huge cost when the Indian Institute of Crop
Processing Technology (IICPT) at Thanjavur, which is under MoFPI
was conducting graduate and post-graduate courses on food
technology. In the Committee’s view, the objectives of setting up of
the NIFTEM could have easily been achieved at a fraction of the
cost of NIFTEM and within shortest time, by suitable upgradation
of the IICPT. Alternatively, the same could have been achieved by
introduction of relevant courses and facilities in the IITs which are
located in most of the states with requisite infrastructure and eminent
faculty.
2. The setting up of NIFTEM at an initially estimated cost of
Rs. 245 crore was approved in August, 2006 with scheduled
completion in 2009-10. The Committee observe that the project
suffered phenomenal cost escalation and time over run. The cost of
the project as well as execution time were almost doubled. The cost
of the project shot up from Rs. 245 crore to Rs. 480 crore and the
project which was originally anticipated to be completed in 2009-10
is now expected to be completed only by June, 2014, three and half
years after the initial schedule of completion. Increase in the cost of
the project is attributed to increase in area of construction (from
40,588 sq.mtr. to 98,539 sq.mtr.) and addition of facilities not provided
in the detail project report (DPR) such as development services,
continuing education centre, water treatment plan, solar panel system,
amphitheatre etc. It is obvious that the initial planning and DPR
were awfully inadequate. Besides, the form of organistion of the
Institute was misconceived. The knowledge sharing partner
disassociated itself midway. The Committee do not expect such
amateurish handling of a project relating to an institute which was
projected to be a global centre of excellence.

40
3. Though it was aimed to set up a world class institution, the
Committee observe that no global competitive bid was invited from
consultants having relevant experience. Initially, M/s. Educational
Consultants India Limited was engaged for preparation of a
Feasibility Report (FR) and Detailed Project Report (DPR). The report
was not found acceptable. Then the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries (MoFPI) invited bids from six short-listed consultants and
finally engaged M/s. Rabo India Finance Pvt. Limited in November,
2003 at a cost of over Rs. 40 lakhs. It is observed from the
information furnished by MoFPI that Rabo India never had any
experience in preparation of FR/DPR of any educational institution.
It is no surprise that when the Rabo DPR was reviewed by Cornell-
Sathguru Foundation (CSF) for Development, it found that several
essential facilities required for NIFTEM to excel in research and
knowledge generation were not conceived in the DPR. The
Committee would await an explanation as to how such a consultant
was engaged for setting up an Institute touted to be an International
Centre of Eminence.
4. An agreement was signed in January, 2008 with Cornell
Sathguru Foundation for Development (CSF) for five years with
staggered payment of Rs. 3.925 crore (spread over three years) for
having knowledge sharing partnership with the College of
Agriculture and Life Sciences (CALS) at Cornell University. Cornell
is stated to be the foremost among IVY League Universities and a
global leader in agriculture and food research and education with
unmatchable brand value. The agreement was, however, terminated
in January, 2010. MoFPI came up with two conflicting versions as
reasons for termination. In a written submission it was stated that
the Cornell disassociated itself from the project midway on the
grounds of funding uncertainty and non-availability of faculty in
NIFTEM. During the oral deposition before the Committee, it was,
however, stated that Cornell could not design the course curriculum
and their suggestions were not relatable to Indian conditions. The
Committee would like to know what exactly were the reasons for
termination of contract with Cornell and what action was taken to
claim damages for breach of contract if any, by CSF.
5. Strangely, NIFTEM was initially incorporated (in August, 2007),
as a “not-for-profit” company under Section 25 of the Companies
Act despite the fact that it is not a commercial entity but an
educational institution. It was realized only later that the institute
in the form of a company would be ineligible to get the status of
“deemed university” from the UGC for running its academic courses.

41
It was only in August, 2010, NIFTEM was registered as a society
and it took another two years for it to get the status of “deemed to
be university”. Consequently, creation of posts and appointment of
faculties and staff got delayed which reportedly led to termination
of agreement by the knowledge partner. The Institute became
operational only in 2012-13 instead of the initial plan of
commencement in 2010-11. Surely, such inept handling of establishing
an educational institution cannot be expected from any quarter. The
Committee would like to know who was responsible for this
mishandling and what action was taken in the matter.
6. In a presentation made to EFC on 16.12.2005, NIFTEM was
projected to earn an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 9.75 per cent
for a 15 year period and NIFTEM becoming self-sustainable from
the 6th year. The recurring expenditure when fully operational was
projected to be around Rs. 25 crore per annum. It was stated that
the institution would start earning revenue from the 3rd year of
inception. The funds generated from the 3rd to 5th year shall be
able to sustain it from 6th to 10th year after which it shall be on a
fully sustaining basis. It has, however, been pleaded now before the
Committee that unless there is substantial financial support from
the government, neither can NIFTEM support in-house academic and
research work to the desired level nor can it make best of the faculty/
non-faculty recruitment. NIFTEM has sought non-plan support of
around Rs. 132 crore for the three years period from 2014-15 to
2016-17 to meet the deficit between revenue income and revenue
expenditure. It is indeed distressing that Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs was presented with a fait accompli .
7. The Committee have been informed that there are plans to
expand IICPT and NIFTEM with networks of branches/distance
learning. Ideally, IICPT and NIFTEM should have statutory basis
with sufficient autonomy for their academic and professional
functioning on the lines of IITs. The Committee desire that action
should be taken in this regard and legislation introduced in
Parliament at the earliest.
8. Sadly, an institution, projected to be an international centre of
excellence, has begun its academic functioning with a bureaucrat as
its Vice-Chancellor. Without casting doubt on the capabilities of the
present incumbent to steer NIFTEM to global heights, the Committee
would stress that, as a general rule, NIFTEM should be headed by
a professional/academician specialized in the field with proven
credentials as in the case of IITs/IIMs. There is no dearth of such
persons in the country. The Committee urge that there should be no
bureaucrat as Vice-Chancellor in NIFTEM, in future.

42
9. The Institute is reportedly facing great difficulty in getting
higher level teaching staff due to unmatched salary package available
in private sector. Thus, the apprehensions expressed in this regard
in the EFC meeting on 16.12.2005 turned out to be prophetic. It has
been stated that in order to attract suitable faculty, incentives such
as professional development facilities, research projects, participation
in conferences, training programme, etc. are extended. Out of
45 posts of faculty already created, only 29 have been filled up. It
has been stated that in order to meet the requirement of teaching,
guest faculties have been arranged from Academia and Industry. The
Committee would suggest that NIFTEM should emulate IITs and
follow their methods and incentives to attract the best faculty.
10. The Committee have been informed that NIFTEM has signed
MoUs with Wageningen University (Netherland) in 2011, Kansas State
University (USA) in 2012 and University of Nebraska Lincoln (USA)
in 2013 on mutual cooperation in the field of faculty/students
exchange programme, research etc. and that the first batch of
18 students led by three faculty members was sent to these
universities in 2013. The Committee desire that maximum benefit
should be derived from such collaborations in the field of research,
training, development of academic programmes, etc. and it should
be ensured that NIFTEM achieves its objective of becoming a global
centre of excellence.
11. The Committee are glad to know that since its inception in
2012-13, NIFTEM has taken a number of initiatives such as village
adoption programme for the students and short term training
programmes benefitting 580 participants for skill development.
NIFTEM has also set up a research development council consisting
about 50 members drawn from industry and academia such as from
Indian Council of Agriculture Research, Central Food Technological
Research Institute, Central Institute of Post Harvest Engineering &
Technology, Defence Food Research Laboratory, Defence Research
and Development Organisation and IIT, Kharagpur. A number of
research and training centres have also been set up to cater to the
needs of the industry. The Committee hope that all these initiatives
will yield desired results in meeting the projected skilled manpower
requirement of 3.5 million by the year 2022.
   N
EW D ELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA,
10 February, 2014 Chairman,
21 Magha, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

43
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2011-12)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 23 April, 2012 from 1500 hours
to 1615 hours in Committee Room No. ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Thangso Baite
3. Smt. Shruti Choudhary
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
5. Shri Premdas
6. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
8. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
9. Shri Upendra Kushwaha
10. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Deepak Mahna — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .V .L.N. Murthy — Director
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Additional Director
WITNESSES
1. Shri Rakesh Kacker — Secretary
2. Shri Ajit Kumar — Joint Secretary

44
National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and
Management (NIFTEM)
Shri Sushil Kumar — Registrar, NIFTEM
*2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the Sitting of the Committee. *** *** ***
*3. *** *** ***
4. Thereafter, the Chairman directed that the witnesses be ushered
in for and in connection with the examination of the Subject “National
Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management”.
(At around 1515 hours the representatives of Ministry of Food Processing
Industries took their seats in the Committee Room)
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Food Processing Industries and NIFTEM to the Sitting. After the
customary introduction, the Secretary of the Ministry briefed the
Committee on “National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship
and Management with the help of an audio-visual presentation”. The
members sought several clarifications on the various aspects of the
subject. The representative of the Ministry responded to them.
6. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witness for appearing
before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information
on the subject. He also directed him to send the replies to the queries
which could not be clarified by him during the Sitting to the Committee
Secretariat latest by 7 May, 2012, positively .
The witness then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately .
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

45
APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2011-12)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 8th June, 2012 from 1500 hours
to 1625 hours in Room G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Shruti Choudhary
3. Shri Premdas
4. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
Rajya Sabha
5. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
6. Shri Narendra Budania
7. Shri Upendra Kushwaha
8. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
9. Shri S. Thangavelu
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Deepak Mahna — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Additional Director
WITNESSES
Ministry of Food Processing Industries
1. Shri Rakesh Kacker — Secretary
2. Smt. Anuradha Prasad — Joint Secretary

46
National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and
Management (NIFTEM)
1. Shri Ajit Kumar — Director
2. Shri Sushil Kumar — Registrar
2. At the outset, the Chairman and the members deliberated for a
while and decided to continue the Sitting as Oral Evidence of
representatives of Ministry of Food Processing Industries which had
already been postponed once on 31 May, 2012 due to Bharat Bandh
was to be taken. The Chairman, then directed the witnesses be ushered
in.
(At about 1505 hrs. the witnesses were ushered in)
3. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses and asked them to
introduce themselves. The Secretary of the Ministry and other witnesses
briefed the Committee on the various aspects of NIFTEM including
the efforts being made by the Government for commencement of the
admission to Degree Courses during 2012 Academic Session. Thereafter,
the members sought several clarifications pertaining to the subject
‘National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and
Management’.
4. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairman thanked the witnesses
for appearing before the Committee and sharing their views on the
subject and directed them to send information on points on which
information could not be readily provided by them during the Sitting
to the Committee Secretariat by 18 June, 2012.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately .
The Committee then adjourned.

47
APPENDIX III
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 6 February, 2014 from
1500 hours to 1515 hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Shri Premdas Katheria
5. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
8. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
9. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri N. Balaganga
11. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
12. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
13. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
14. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

48
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting
of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the draft Report on
”National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and
Management (NIFTEM)” for consideration.
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report
without any modification and authorized the Chairman to finalise the
same on the basis of factual verification and present the same to
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.