1 
 
      
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)  
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 (2013-14) 
 
FORTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2013 / VAISAKHA, 1935 (Saka) 
47 

2 
 
FORTY SEVENTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
                (2012-2013) 
 
         (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 (2013-14) 
 
 
        Presented to Lok Sabha on           23.04.2013           
     Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on        25.04.2013 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2013 / VAISAKHA, 1935 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
 
COA No. 2.... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
                
         
        Price :  Rs. 
         
         
            
© 2013 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 
 
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in            
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

4 
 
CONTENTS 
       
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………       (iii)   
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………..                       (v) 
ABBREVIATIONS……………………………………………………                    (vii) 
 
CHAPTER  I         IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S        1 
        RECOMMENDATIONS       
   
CHAPTER II         NEW CHALLENGES IMPACTING AGRICULTURAL  
SECTOR          3 
         (A) SOIL HEALTH           8 
       (B) SMALL AND MARGINAL 
 FARMERS                                                 11 
CHAPTER III        ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS             19 
      (A) INTRODUCTORY         19 
      (B) OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS        20 
      (C) OUTLAY FOR 2013-14          22 
      (D) FUNDS UTILISATION DURING 
 ELEVENTH PLAN                                   24  
      (E) TWELFTH PLAN OUTLAY          27 
 
CHAPTER IV      SECTORAL EVALUATION          39 
      (A) CROP SCIENCE          39 
      (B) HOTRICULTURE          41  
          (C) AGRICULTURE EXTENSION         42 
      (D) AGRICULTURE EDUCATION         49  
      (E) HUMAN RESOURCES          54 
      (F) VACANT POSTS IN DARE         56 
          (G) AGRICULTURE ENGINEERING        59 
        (H) NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT       63 
(I)  ANIMAL SCIENCE           65 
      (J)  FISHERIES            68 
 
ANNEXURES 
I Quarterly PAO Expenditure for the year 2012-13 Plan Head              81 
II Quarterly PAO Expenditure for the year 2012-13 Non-Plan Head        82 
III Statement showing Monthly Expenditure Plan for 2012-13       83 
IV Major Schemes/Projects undertaken in Horticulture Science    84  
V List of 400 Districts for which contingency plans are completed         89  
VI Statement showing intake capacity/actual enrollment in ICAR   92 
Deemed-to-be- Universities  
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
          
 I Minutes of the 21st Sitting of the Committee held on  01 April, 2013.  97  
 
 II Minutes of the 25th  Sitting of the Committee held on 17 April, 2013.              100 
 
 (ii)  

5 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2012-13) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.
  
 Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
30.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
(iii) 

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.S. Negi   - Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

7 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this  Forty-seventh Report on 
the Demands for Grants (20 13-2014) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agricultural Research & Education). 
 
2. The Committee under Rule 331E (1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure considered t he 
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Agricultural Research & Education 
which were laid in Lok Sabha on 19 March, 2013. The Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of the Department of Agricultural Research & Education, Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research  and Planning Commission at their Sitting held on      
01 April, 2013.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the  
Department of Agricultural Research & Education, ICAR and Planning Commission for  
appearing before them and for furnishing the information they  de sired in connection 
with the examination of Demands for Grants of the Department.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on           
17 April, 2013. 
 
4. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold at the end of each Chapter of the Report. 
 
                 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                          BASUDEB ACHARIA 
17 April, 2013                                    Chairman, 
27 Chaitra, 1935 (Saka)                                               Committee on Agriculture  
 
 
 
 
(v) 

8 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AICRP   All India Coordinated Research Project  
APCAEM    Asia and Pacific Centre for Agricultural Engineering and Machinery  
ATMA    Agricultural Technology Management Agency 
ARYA   Attracting & Retaining Youth in Agriculture  
ASRB    Agricultural Scientists Recruitment Board 
BE    Budget Estimates  
BPD    Business Planning and Development 
CAFT     Centres of Advanced Faculty Training 
C& AG   Comptroller & Auditor General 
CAU   Central Agricultural University 
CERA   Consortium for e-Resources in Agriculture  
CIAE    Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering  
CIFE   Central Institute Fisheries Education .. 
CISH    Central Institute for Subtropical Horticulture   
CPCRI   Central Plantation Crops Research Institute    
CRP   Consortia Research Products 
CSWCR & TI   Central Soil & Water Conservation Research Training Institute 
CU   Central University  
DAP   Depend on Animal Power 
DARE    Department of Agricultural Research & Education 
 DFR                Directorate of Floriculture Research  
 DU   Deemed-to-be-university 
 EFC/SFC   Expenditure Finance Committee/ Standing Finance Committee 
GDP   Gross Domestic Products 
GEF   Global Environment Fund 
HRD   Human Resource Development  
IARI   Indian Agricultural Research Institute  
IMC    Institute Management Committee   
ICAR   Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
IGFRI    Indian Grassland and Fodder Research Institute 
IRC      Institute Research Committee     
IVRI   Indian Veterinary Research Institute 
JRF     Junior Research Fellowship  
KVASU  Kerala Veterinary and Animal Sciences University   
KVK    Krishi Vigyan Kenda 
(vii) 

9 
 
LCC   Leaf Colour Chart  
MoF   Ministry of Finance 
MIS   Management Information System 
NAARM          National Academy of Agricultural Research Management 
NAEP   National Assessment of Education Programme 
NAIP    National Agricultural Innovation Project 
NARS    National Agriculture Research System 
NDC    National Development Council 
NGO    Non-Governmental Organization 
NIASM   National Institute of Abiotic Stress Management 
NIAB   National Institute of Agriculture Biotech   
NIBSM   National Institute of Biotic Stress Management  
NBSS&LUP  National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land use Planning  
NICRA   National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture 
NISAGENET  National Information System on Agricultural Education Network 
NIRJAFT  National Institute of Research on Jute and Allied Fiber Technology 
NFBSFARA National fund for Basic Strategic and Frontier Application Research in 
Agriculture  
NPCC    National Project on Climate Change 
NRCAF  National Research Centre for Agroforestry  
NRM    National Resource Management  
PAO   Pay and Account Office 
PG   Post Graduate  
PHT   Post Harvest Technology 
RAC           Research Advisory Committee  
RE    Revised Estimates 
RES   Regional Engineering Services  
RMP   Research Management Position  
RKVY   Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
SRF   Senior Research Fellowship 
SAU    State Agricultural Universities 
SOC   Senior Officers’ Committee  
SMD    Subject Matter Division 
SRI   System of Rice Intensification   
UG   Under Graduate 
VPKAS  Vivekananda Parvatiya Krishi Anusandhaan Sansthan 
(viii) 

10 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 The Thirty- second Report of the Committee on Agriculture on Demands for 
Grants (201 2-13) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural 
Research & Education) was presented to Lok Sabha on 25 April, 2012 and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 26 April, 2012. The Report contained 28 Observations 
/ Recommendations.  
 
1.2  The Minister concerned is required to make Statement under Direction 73-A 
of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha about the s tatus of implementation of 
Recommendations contained in the Original Report of the Committee within six 
months of presentation of Report to the Parliament.   Statement under Direction 73-
A in the context of the Thirty-second Report was made by the Minister of 
Agriculture in time.  
 
1.3 On the basis of the Action Taken Notes received from the Department of 
Agricultural Research & Education in respect of the Thirty- second Report, the 
Committee presented their Fortieth Report to Lok Sabha  and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 20 December, 2012 . The Committee commented on the Action 
Taken Notes furnished by the Department in respect of Recommendations at Para 
Nos. 1.4,2.62,2.64,2.65,2.66,2.68,2.70,2.71,2.76,3.31,3.33,3.37 and 3.38  of the 
Thirty- second Report. An analysis of the Action Taken Notes revealed that the 
Government have accepted 57% Recommendations of the Committee. 29% 
Recommendations have not been accepted by the Government thus requiring 
reiteration. Replies in case of 14% Recommendations are of interim nature.  

11 
 
1.4 The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Thirty -Second Report of the Committee were furnished by the  
Government within the stipulated three months and the Statement of the 
Minister under Director 73 -A was made within the stipulated six months 
period.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government reveals that 57% 
Recommendations have been accepted,  29% Recomme ndations have not 
been accepted and 11% of Recommendations are in the various stages of 
implementation.  While the Committee hope and trust  that the Department  
will continue to adhere to the stipulations laid down under Direction 73 -A in 
future, in letter and spirit.   
  

12 
 
                        CHAPTER II 
NEW CHALLENGES IMPACTING AGRICULTURAL SECTOR 
2.1  Indian Agriculture saw growth in all its dimensions during the year 2011 -12 
with a record production of foodgrains, fruits, vegetables, milk, meat , eggs and fish.  
The agriculture and allied sectors achieved a compound growth rate of 3.3% during 
the XI Five Year Plan which is higher than the 2.4 per cent registered in the X Five 
Year Plan.  The year 2012 saw intense activity for the Indian National A gricultural 
Research and Education System (NARES), in terms of completion and 
consolidation of programmes of the XI Five Year Plan, Indian Agriculture is posed 
by challenges, with an erratic monsoon, drought -like situation in some parts of the 
country as also cyclones impacting agriculture.  The technological backstopping by 
the ICAR institutes helped the farmers in their efforts to overcome the impact of 
these natural calamities. 
2.2 Land Degradation, Deterioration of soil Health, Low Falling Productivity and 
Profitability of Small Land Holdings, Low Water Productivity, Productivity of 
Rainfed/Dryland Agriculture, Declining factor productivity of Intensive Agriculture, 
Impact of Climate Change on Agriculture, are some of the new challeng es, 
impacting Agricultural Sector. The Committee when asked the extent to which the 
Department has geared itself to overcome these challenges, the Department 
informed that various ICAR Institutes and Project Directorates are undertaking 
research and developed appropriate tech nologies to overcome the upfront.  Their 
details is as follows: 
(i)  Land Degradation : This is one of the major problem  of 
rainfed/dryland regions of the country. The Council through Central Soil and 
Water Conservation Research and Training Institute, Dehradun and Central 
Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur is addressing all issues related to 

13 
 
water & wind erosion respect ively. The institutes suggested several location 
specific bio -engineering measures of soil and water conservation to tackle 
soil erosion and organize training for popularizing various erosion control 
measures. The problems of salt affected and water logged  soils are being 
addressed by Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal through All 
India Coordinated Research Project on Salt Affected Soils. The institute has 
developed cost effective reclamation measures and evolved salt tolerant 
varieties. These  institutes organize trainings for popularizing various land 
management practices. 
 
(ii)  Deterioration of Soil Health: The Council through  Indian Institute of 
Soil Science including four  All India Coordinated Research Projects namely 
Long-Term Fertilize r Experiments, Soil Test Crop Response, Micro, 
Secondary & Pollutant Element and Soil Biodiversity &  Biofertilizers are 
generating site specific balanced & integrated nutrient management  
practices to maintain soil health & quality with due consideration o f farmers’ 
resource availability. Enhancement of nutrient use efficiency is also being 
addressed through development of efficient urease and nitrification inhibitors 
and coating material, conservation agriculture, resource conservation 
technologies (RCTs),  biofortification, fertigation and integrated water & 
nutrient management and nanotechnological interventions. 
 
(iii)   Low Falling Productivity and Profitability of Small Land Holdings : 
In order to systematically  integrate multi -enterprise systems, the Council 
through Project Directorate on Farming System Research, Modipuram has 
initiated an AICRP on Development of Integrated Farming System (IFS) 
models for small and marginal farmers of different agro-ecological zones in 
the country during XI Plan for enhancing the productivity, profitability and 
livelihood of farming community particularly with respect to small and 
marginal farm holdings. The project is being further strengthened during the 
current Plan. The ICAR Research Complexes for Eastern Region and NEH 
region and NRC Agro-forestry are also engaged in such endeavor.  
 
(iv)  Low Water Productivity : The Council through Directorate of Water 
Management, Bhubaneswar including AICRPs on Wa ter Management and 
Ground Water Utilization is giving emphasis on water harvesting, 
conservation and storage, integrated use of surface groundwater including 
waste water and multiple use of water in order to enhance water 
productivity. Technologies for increasing water and irrigation use efficiencies 
are also being addressed. Besides, training of trainers and farmers is being 
conducted under Scaling up of Water Productivity in agriculture for 
livelihoods through teaching cum demonstration. 

14 
 
 
(v)  Productivity of Rainfed/Dryland Agriculture  :The Council through 
Central Research Institute for Dry land Agriculture, Hyderabad,  Central Arid 
Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur, Central Soil and Water Conservation 
Research & Training Institute, Dehradun and Centres of  All India 
Coordinated Research Projects on Dry land Agriculture and Agro -
meteorology and National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture(NICRA) 
is providing requisite technology support for optimizing crop productivity of 
dry land/ rainfed farming in arid and semi arid regions  through efficient crop 
planning including agroforestry, development of short duration drought 
resistant varieties, intercropping, rain water harvesting & storage for 
supplementary irrigation, integrated watershed management, mi cro 
irrigation, land management, integrated nutrient management and 
short/medium range weather forecasting and contingent crop planning. 
(vi)  Declining Factor Productivity of Intensive Agriculture : The 
Council has recommended various measures like judicious use of water & 
fertilizers through integrated water & nutrient management. The activities for 
enhancing soil health and water productivity will contribute towards 
enhancing factor productivity of water and nutrients.    
(vii) Impact of Climate Change on Agriculture : The Council has 
initiated a Network project entitled National Initiative on Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (NICRA)  to enhance resilience of Indian agriculture to climate 
change and climat e vulnerability through strategic research and technology 
demonstration. Capacity Building and Sponsored/Competitive Grants . 
Climate resilient technologies are being demonstrated in four modules 
across vulnerable districts in selected villages representing  all states of the 
country. Cultivars are also being tested for climate resilient attributes. 
Besides, training programmes for scientific personnel and farmers’ 
awareness programmes on climate resilient agriculture are being organized. 
 
 2.3 Explaining the rationale, to tackle frontier research, Secretary, DARE during 
evidence stated :- 
  
“the challenge today is enhancing input use efficiency, water efficient 
crops, the abiotic stress that we talked of.  We need absolutely an 
anticipatory research.  Earlier it used to be some kind of an adaptive 
research.  That is no more possible.  The canvas is very difficult and 
different.  We need to have original research in our agro ecological 
conditions brought up.  For that, we absolutely need technology -led 
agriculture, science inputs in greater measures which require absolutely 

15 
 
investments of that kind .  We have brought up these things. Our research 
process would be delayed if we do not invest, if we do not have inputs in the 
right time.  xxxx    xxxx   xxxx We have also said how critical the technology 
input into our productions systems is whether of c rops or animals.  xxxx    
xxxx   xxxx So we have brought up again all these challenges, climate 
resilient agriculture, pre -season farming that is required and all those new 
scientific methods.  xxxx    xxxx   xxxx. 
xxxx    xxxx   xxxx.  We need higher allo cations to do that kind of 
competitive science anywhere in the world.  At the same time what we need 
to do, given the conditions, is a good priority decision.  Otherwise we would 
not be doing a good job.  xxxx    xxxx   xxxx.  But then, in the long -term, if 
we do not get adequate funds and if we do not invest at the right time then 
there will be a long-term impact. 
 
2.4   While briefing the Committee during oral evidence the Secretary, DARE 
stated as follows :-    
 
“xxxx        xxxx       xxxx   Whatever we  invest in agriculture 
research, R&D, for every rupee we invest, the returns are to the 
extent of Rs.13.50, which is much higher than any other sub -sector in 
this country, and any other country in agriculture R&D. This is the 
strength of technology compone nt contribution in our production 
process.” 
 
2.5    The Department in Post Evidence Note, referred to study conducted with 
regard to impact of investment in Agricultural Research and Education.  As per this 
Study, the Committee was informed that agricultur e spending in Research and 
Development, generally, has the largest positive effects on growth and poverty 
reduction.  In many cases government agricultural spending in R&D has 
contributed substantially to agricultural productivity, rural household income, rural 
household consumption and rural poverty reduction.  For each unit of local 
currency spent on the agricultural, on average 11 local currency units are returned 
in term of increased agricultural productivity or income across the Asian countries 
studied.  Investment in agricultural R&D have substantially reduced rural poverty by 

16 
 
stimulating agricultural growth and reducing food prices.  Returns in Public 
Spending in Asia and Africa are as follows :-  
Sector China India Thailand Ghana Uganda Tanzania Ethiopia 
Returns to agriculture or rural income 
(Local currency/local currency spending) 
Agric. 
R&Da 
6.8 13.5 12.6 16.8 12.4 12.5 0.14 
Education 2.2 1.4 2.1 -0.2 7.2 9 0.56 
Health n.e. 0.8 n.e. 1.3 0.9 n.e. -0.03 
Roads 1.7 5.3 0.9 8.8 2.7 9.1 4.22 
Ranking in returns to poverty reduction 
Agric. 
R&D 
2 2 1 n.e. 1 2 n.e. 
Education 1 3 3 n.e. 3 1 n.e. 
Health n.e. 4 n.e. n.e. 4 n.e. n.e. 
Roads 3 1 2 n.e. 2 3 n.e. 
Source: Fan, Mogues, and Benin (2009) 
aThis refers to agricultural spending in R& D except in Ethiopia and Ghana, where it 
is agricultural spending aggregated across subsectors. 
 
In regard to position in India, the study mentions that “looking more closely at India, 
the results also show that about 13.5 rupees are returned for every rup ee invested 
in agricultural R&D. This finding has important policy implication for India”.   
2.6   The Committee also took note of another study on the quantifying indicators.  
The outcome of research using various outcomes of Research  attributed in study  
can be quantified by using the following indicators: 
1. Decline in real cost of production 
2. Increase in productivity and farm income 
3. Increase in food and nutritional security 
4. Reduction in incidence of poverty and hunger 
5. Reduction in post harvest losses 
6. Improvement in input use efficiency 
7. Improvement in environment or quality of natural resources 
 

17 
 
Further, as per the policy paper on “ Total Factor Productivity and 
Contribution of Research Investment to  Agricultural Growth in India” published by 
National Centre for Agricultural Economics and Policy Research, the Specific 
Contribution of Research to Crop Output in terms of quantity and value can be 
described as under. 
Share of TFP growth in output growth has been estimated to be in the range 
of 10.1% for R&M to 58.9% for wheat (vide Table 1). The share of research in 
TFP growth has been estimated as 5 5.7% for rice, 40.1% for wheat, 79.2% 
for maize, 27.8% for jowar, 74.8 % for bajra, 42.2% for gram, 36.0% for 
groundnut, 88.6% for R&M and 26.4% for cotton. These two sets of numbers 
were multiplied to arrive at the contribution of research to production g rowth.  
Based on these estimates it was found that around one fourth growth in 
output of wheat and cotton, one fifth in the case of bajra and around 13 
percent in paddy and maize was due to investments in research and 
education. In most of the other crops about one tenth of output growth was 
taking place due to public sector research, the lowest being 6.6 percent in the 
case of jowar.  
  
(A)  SOIL HEALTH 
2.7 The Agriculture sector is also beset with the problem of land degradation, 
including problems of soil and water erosion. Bio engineering measures of soil and 
water conservation, organizing training for popularization of appropriate 
technologies is pre requisite for controlling erosion. Salt affected and water lo gged 
soil too needs to be addressed.  Ground water imbalances, impaired soil health and 
contamination of food chain and environment pollution too impact agriculture sector.   
 
2.8 Inventory of soil resources, soil maps, etc. are basic tool s to address the 
problems associated with the soil.  When the Committee  asked about inventory of 
soil resources, soil fertility map, water erosion etc. the Department in Post 
Evidence reply has stated  that NBSS&LUP has undertaken soil resource inventory 
for 55 districts of the country.  The Central Soil and Water Conservation Research 

18 
 
and Training Institute (CSWCR&TI), Dehradun has prepared potential water 
erosion maps showing different erosion classes for all states (and not of districts) 
except Mizoram in collaboration with National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use 
Planning (NBSS&LUP), Nagpur.  
 
2.9 Further, geo-referenced soil fertility maps (macro and micro -nutrients) for 
152 districts have been prepared out of 171 selected districts based on discussion 
with Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture by Indian 
Institute of Soil Science (IISS), Bhopal. Soil fertility maps of remaining 19 out of 
171 selected districts will be completed by September 2013. 
 
2.10 Besides, NBSS&LUP Nagpur has prepared soil fertility maps both micro and 
macro nutrients of the 57 districts on demand and financed by state Govt.  
(a) West Bengal (all 18 districts) 
(b) Assam (all 13 districts) 
(c) Jharkhand (all 22 districts) 
(d) Tripura (all 4 districts) 
Similar maps are being prepared for Sikkim (4 districts), Nagaland (11 districts) and 
Kerala (all districts).  
 
2.11      NBSS & LUP is engaged in preparation of soil resource maps alongwith 
various interpretative maps at district level with due consideration of land 
situations, soil types, water availability, agro -ecosystem and various socio -
economic conditions.  
 
2.12 Based on these, soil-site suitability of various crops in different districts have 
been formulated for use at district/taluka level. For developing viable, scientific and 
sustainable land use planning at farm  or village level, detailed characterization and 

19 
 
mapping of soil & water resources, climatic parameters, land use, socio -economic 
conditions, infrastructure, marketing facilities etc is a prerequisite. Presently, such 
cadastral level digital database at 1:10,000 scale is not available in the country. 
 
2.13 During Oral Evidence, Secretary DARE while briefing the Committee stated 
that they have soil nutrient mapping, fertility mapping of all the districts but work on 
geo-referenced maps  is under way .  The Department has completed geo -
referenced for major nutrients and micro-nutrients of 62 districts and in the XII Plan 
a target of 300 districts contemplated.  He further added :- 
“I must mention today we have 62 districts completely geo -referenced 
for everything both major nutrients and micro -nutrients.  Our 
endeavour is to go in for two more things.  
One is to have a good geo -referenced map for the micro -
nutrient is becoming a bigger issue now.   The major nutrients are 
known nitrogen, potash and all that. So, in the 12 th Plan, a greater 
emphasis would be laid o n geo -referenced.  We will complete 300 
districts in the 12th Plan.   
I must mention that on 16 th March, 2013, there was a very high 
level meeting at the Indian Space Research Organisation coordinated 
by the Hon. Member, Planning Commission.  All the Secre taries were 
there from the Agriculture, me from ICAR and members from the 
National Remote Sensing Agency. We all have an agreed on Action 
Plan and also about the satellite imageries, the band -width that we 
require to be more precise.  We have also placed o ur requirements.  
So, they also have to look into some certain things.  The recent 
satellite pictures also that are available would be shared.  There were 
some concerns on that also. All these were discussed.  So, the way 
forward in the 12 th Plan is an int er-departmental and inter -ministerial 
effort to have this mapped at the cost of repetition with geo -
referencing.   
I would like to again mention that both ATMAs and soil health 
cards are being dealt by the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation.  
There would be submission but from both of them, I would like to say 
that we have been discussing these issues. So, the 12 th Plan would 
see a better coverage, a comprehensive coverage because everytime 
the satellite imageries will be improved with regard to band -width.  
When they send out satellites, they take our requirements.  In fact that 
day, it was basically a client meeting what all we want from them 
including the Oceansat and so on.  So, we have placed our 

20 
 
requirements.  I think in the 12 th Plan, many of the m would be 
enabled”.  
 
(B) SMALL AND MARGINAL FARMERS  
2.14 Supplementing further, the Secretary, DARE apprised the Committee that 
ICAR aims to invest heavily in R& D so as to reduce production cost.  Efforts are 
also underway to make the profession remunerative specially for small and 
marginal farmers.  He stated :-  
“xxxx  xxxx   xxxx I must say that it is absolutely on our agenda making 
agriculture remunerative, pr ofitable and so on.  I just want to submit two or 
three things. One is that we have been working on the total factor 
productivity.  In that context, we have worked out what is possible in 
reducing the cost of cultivation.  We brought it out in the policy d ocument for 
Agriculture Research.  In that we have clearly shown there is a reduction of 
one to 2.5 per cent in the cost of cultivation every year from rice, wheat to 
pulses and oil seeds in the last 30 years.  This is what we have documented 
- the reducti on in cost of cultivation is ranging from 1 to 2.5 per cent. We 
have published it.  This is mainly because of the technologies we have 
developed starting from water conservation, varietal introduction health pest 
control to final harvesting mechanization. All these were included and the 
cost of cultivation has reduced.  
Second, xxxx    xxxx   xxxx .  We have brought out very clearly three 
crops in one year – a cereal, a paddy and a legume.  Now we have got 
summer moong in just about 65 days crop after which, they can go for 
another crop.    
xxxx    xxxx   xxxx.  We have developed 300 farming system models for 
the whole country to suit different agro -climatic zones.  We think that the 
labour cost is another major problem in the last five to six years. Earlier, it 
used to be the seed cost.  Purchasing seed, fertilizer, irrigation was earlier 
costly but recent projections also show that labour is also very expensive.  In 
a State like Kerala, it could be Rs. 650 per day.         
xxxx    xxxx   xxxx , the major emphasis in the plan would be on farm 
mechanisation. You have talked of small farms. People say that why do we 
not import implements. Looking into this, very very customised farming 
implements are required. We are happy to report that drip irrigation is there 
in the State of Rajasthan. Earlier, we had never heard of this. Now drip 
irrigation is becoming a  common thing. We are going to start with that. 
Second is the small implements that can be suitable for half an acre size. 
Next is custom hiring. Earlier, people never talked of this. So, a set of 
implements given to a village level and this is what we are  doing. We are 

21 
 
seeing what is the minimal of farming implements available. Similarly, we 
are talking of minimum processing facilities. So, farming implements you 
have given; customised thing has worked with success. The next thing is 
about the minimal proc essing facilities. xxxx    xxxx   xxxx , the next point is 
with regard to cluster farming. We are now trying with bore well for irrigation. 
In Andhra Pradesh for example, each one is going in for that. Earlier, we 
had demonstrated 140 people coming together  and going in for one or two 
single bore. This is the way forward for cluster farming. xxxx    xxxx   xxxx.  In 
cluster farming, buy inputs together, manage the crop and go to the market. 
This is what is required. The issue of small farmers is absolutely in  the 
agenda. This would work out the overhead cost and will reduce the cost. 
This is what we are trying to experiment in cluster farming in different 
locations”. 
2.15 Dominance of small and marginal farmers with very small land holdings , 
results into low in productivity and profitability.  When asked about appropriate 
technology developed to take care of them, the Dep artment in a note furnished to 
Committee stated that the Council has initiated an AICRP on Integrated Farming 
System (IFS) for small and marginal farmers of different agro -ecological zones to 
increase productivity and profitability. Such multi -enterprise system involves crops, 
horticulture, agroforestry, livestock, fisheries, poultry, piggery, mushroom 
cultivation and bee-keeping and has the potential to increase productivity by 2 to 7 
times. Few salient examples are listed below: 
 
 Crop-dairy based farming system for small farm families of Bihar having 
1 acre of irrigated land and four crossbred cows. 
 Watermill based integrated farming system for north western Himalayas.  
 Trench cum raised bed based horticulture -fish farming system for 
seasonally waterlogged areas of Bihar. 
 Multi-enterprise farming system model for reclaimed sodic lands. 
 Rice, coconut and rabbit based integrated farming syste m for Western 
Ghats. 
Rainfed farming system model with 1.15 ha area for small and 
marginal farmers in Telangana region of AP.  
 
Short duration, biotic and abiotic tolerant varieties/hybrids of rice, wheat, maize, 
pearl millet, sorghum, pulses, oilseeds and commercial crops  have been 

22 
 
developed for enhancing the cropping intensity and thereby production per unit 
land of small and ma rginal farms across the country. Besides, profitable 
intercropping systems in commercial crops along with oilseeds and pulses have 
been developed for rainfed tracts catering to small and marginal farmers. 
Rice-based integrated farming systems (IFS):  Generic IFS models have been 
developed by the CRRI, to judiciously integrate cropping with related agricultural 
enterprises like horticulture, fish, poultry, ducks, pigs, sericulture, mushroom culture, 
bee keeping, farm woodlots, suitable for different agro -climatic and socio -economic 
conditions. 
 System of Rice Intensification (SRI) with main components - 
alternate wetting and drying and leaf colour chart (LCC) based 
nitrogen management is a method of rice cultivation that cut down the 
cultivation cost.  Cultivati on of aerobic rice is another important 
method of growing rice with low water requirement.  
 For technological up gradation of farm operations  of small and 
marginal land holders, Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering (CIAE) 
Bhopal has designed and fabricated several implements/equipments for 
different farm operations (tillage, sowing, weeding, harvesting etc.) and 
post harvest practices (cleaning, shelling/dehulling etc.). These 
implements/equipments are useful for small and marginal farmers in 
reducing the drudgery in farm operations.  
 VPKAS has designed and commercialized small farm implements 
and tools suitable for mechanization of agriculture in hills.  Vivek Millet 
Thresher, VL Paddy Thresher, VL Seed -cum-Ferti drill, VL Syahi Hal and 
other smal l farm implements have helped tremendously to reduce the 
drudgery in the related operations 

23 
 
Farming system and cropping system approach for sustainable use of farm 
resources and reduced risks have been successfully demonstrated in perennial 
horticulture. Various farming system models have been developed and suitable 
crops in earlier year of tree plantation to maximize the output in different agro -
climatic conditions have also been developed.  
2.16 Horticulture is best option for diversification and system productivity for small 
holdings, they can grow high value crops, flowers, medicinal and aromatic plants 
under protected cultivation, mushrooms, bee farming and post harvest processing 
and preparation of value added items. 
2.17 To enable the poor and marginal fish farmers/fishermen for th eir economic 
empowerment, the technologies with slight modifications will create opportunities 
like small scale aqua farming in pond, seed production, coastal aquaculture , 
marine and inland  aquaculture, mussel farming, oyster farming, poly -lined pond 
culture systems for hill areas and technology for ornamental fish  culture. The aqua 
farming will improve the economic status of the poor and marginal fish farmers. 
Open sea cage farming is another technology where demonstration have been 
conducted with activ e participation of fishermen in different regions of east and 
west coast of India. Hygienic fish drying/ smoking technologies and value addition 
to low value fishes is helping poor farmers fetch more price for their commodity. 
The institutions in the Fishe ries Division are imparting suitable training in all these 
activities.  
  

24 
 
2.18 Sustainable development, climate change, bio -security, bio-safety are 
some of the upfront areas requiring detailed research.  The development of 
appropriate technology for conse rvation management and sustainable 
utilisation of natural resources, to ensure food, nutritional and environmental 
security; deteriorating productivity of resources, profitability of small land 
holdings, dry -land agriculture, farm mechanisation etc. are so me of the 
challenges confronting Indian agriculture.  Many of the challenges have there 
been in the past and some owe their genesis to fast changes contemporary 
scenario. Some of the challenges have been tamed and very long distance 
ought to be travelled b efore the new and novel manifestations are win over.  
The technology -driven agriculture with farmers’ centric approach calls for 
anticipatory research of various agro -ecological conditions instead of 
adaptive research.  Recent empirical studies have revealed that investment in 
Agriculture Research and Development is one of the factors contributing to 
substantially reduction in rural poverty by stimulating agriculture growth and 
reducing food prices, globally.  In the Indian context, results have shown that 
about 13.5 rupees are returned for every rupee invested in Agriculture 
Research and Development.  Another study to quantify outcome of research, 
found that around ¼ growth in output of wheat and cotton, 1/5 th   in case of 
bajra and 13% in paddy and maize, were due to toil and labour put by 
research and development works.  The primacy of agriculture R&D in the 
development process is second to none.  The Committee desire that 
investment in Agriculture R&D be stepped up, so as to obtain high returns, 
further t he Committee trust and hope that  the Indian scientists and 
technocrats will continue to strive hard, as before and overcome the 

25 
 
challenges besetting Indian agriculture, on war footing, by developing 
appropriate mitigating strategies & technology, for the benefit of  farmers.  
 
SOIL  MAPPING 
2.19 Inventory of soil resources including soil map is one of the basic tool 
as it guides suitability of various crops.  Keeping the farmers constantly 
updated of soil health profile, mapping and geo -reference database of micro 
and micro-nutrients play a major role in improving the agriculture production 
in the Country.  The Committee are concerned to find that geo-referenced soil 
fertility maps for only 152 districts have been prepared out of 171 selected 
districts and remaining 19 districts are likely to be co mpleted by September, 
2013.  The Department has been assigned a target of 62 districts in the 
current fiscal and 300 Districts in the XII Five Plan.  The Department is 
working with other organizations like Indian Space Research Organisation, 
National Remot e Sensing Agency etc. in close tandem.  Since the geo -
reference database help in working out the exact nutrient requirement 
especially micro -nutrients of a crop in the field, the Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department to review their targets and complete geo -
reference of all the 600 odd Districts in the Twelfth Five Year Plan itself.  They 
further desire the Department to work out the additional financial requirement 
needed for completion of major and micro nutrients geo -reference map and 
prevail upon the Planning Commission and the Government to liberally fund 
the project during the current Five Year Plan period. 
 

26 
 
SMALL AND MARGINAL FARMERS 
2.20 In a country, where a large section of the farmers are small and 
marginal with low land holdings, inade quate purchasing power and lack of 
access to credit and extension services, it is but desirable that appropriate 
farm technologies to cater to their specific needs, be evolved.  It is a matter 
of great relief that the Council has initiated an AICRP on Inte grated Farming 
System for small and marginal farmers of different agro -ecological zones to 
increase productivity and profitability.  The multi -enterprise system involves 
crops, horticulture, agroforestry, livestock, fisheries, poultry, piggery, 
mushroom cu ltivation and bee -keeping with the potential to increase 
productivity.  The Committee note that the cluster farming system has been 
undertaken in some states and Integrated farming system units set up in 50 
KVKs to demonstrate the suitability of integrated  farming system models.  
Keeping in view of the interest of small and marginal farmers, the Committee, 
desire the Department to increase the number of KVKs for demonstration of 
integrated farming system models  expeditiously.   The rise in input costs, 
dearth of labour etc. contribute significantly to the end cost of agriculture 
produce.  Farm mechanisation is one of key to growth, for so called 
progressive farmers and can afford cost of such implements and 
machineries.  Economy of scale may not appropriate ly suit farm machineries 
and implements, to be used in small land holdings.  The unique characteristic 
of small and marginal farmers, thus calls for introduction and development of 
low cost, light weight, multi -purpose farm equipments and tools for their 
benefit.  The Committee desire that appropriate steps including technological 

27 
 
innovation and support be extended to small and marginal farmers.  A ction 
taken by the Government may be apprised to the Committee.   
2.21 The subsequent narratives deals with details examination of the 
working of the Department in terms of implementation of its Schemes and 
financial performance during the Fiscal, 2012 -13 and projections for the year 
2013-14.  The Committee desire that the De mand No.2 of the Ministry of 
Agriculture ( Department of Agricult ural Research and Education)  be 
approved. 

28 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS 
 
(A) INTRODUCTORY 
  
3.1 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) provides 
government linkages to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) - an 
apex and autonomous organization for planning, promotion, execution and 
coordination of agricultural research and education in the country. It also discharge 
other governance responsibilities like coordination of Central and State government 
agencies and international matters relating to agricultural research and education. 
ICAR is organized into eight Subject-Matter Divisions (SMDs), which are supported 
with a network of research Institutes/Schemes in their respective area of 
specialization, and have time-tested institutional linkages with the State Agricultural 
Universities (SAUs) and private organizations. In  order to support this network, 
there are a number of multidisciplinary centres called Krishi Vigyan Kendras  for 
assessment, refinement and demonstration of frontline technologies and training of 
farmers and rural entrepreneurs 
 
3.2 Main activities of ICAR  are agricultural research, frontline extension and 
education. These responsibilities are discharged through a network of institutions. 
Four ICAR institutes having the status of Deemed University also impart education 
through Masters and Doctoral Programmes. In addition, there is a scheme of ICAR 
to strengthen SAUs and promote excellence in education, and a Central 
Agricultural University for the North-east. Assessment, refinement and 
demonstration of new technologies are done by KVKs. For a number of activ ities, 

29 
 
ICAR institutes work in partnership with SAUs, who are mandated to education and 
state-specific research. 
 
3.3 ICAR mandate broadly consists of the following responsibilities :  
  
 To plan, undertake, aid, promote and coordinate education, research 
and its application in agriculture, animal science, fisheries, agroforestry, 
home science and allied sciences.  
 To act as a clearing-house for research and general information relating 
to agriculture, animal husbandry, fishery, agro -forestry, home science 
and allied sciences through its publications and information system and 
instituting and promoting transfer of technology programmes.  
 To provide, undertake and promote consultancy services in the field of 
research, education, training and dissemination of i nformation in 
agriculture, animal science, fisheries, agro -forestry, home science and 
other allied sciences.  
 To look into the problems relating to broader areas of rural development 
concerning agriculture, including post -harvest technology by developing 
co-operative programmes with other organizations such as the Indian 
Council of Social Science Research, Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Universities, etc.  
 To do other things considered necessary to attain the objectives. 
 
 
(B) OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
 
Demand No. 2 pertaining to the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education for the year 2013 -14 was presented to the Lok Sabha on 27 March, 
2012.  
  
  

30 
 
The details of allocations proposed in Demand No. 2 are as under :-  
 
DEMAND No. 2 
               (Rs. in crore)  
 Plan 
 
Non Plan Total 
Revenue 
(Voted)  
3415.00 2314.17 5729.17 
Revenue 
(Charged)  
00 00 00 
Capital 
(Voted)  
00 00 00 
Capital  
(Charged)  
00 00 00 
GRAND TOTAL 5729.17 
 
3.4 It may be seen that a sum of Rs. 5729.17 crore has been allocated to the 
Department for 2013 -14 which is the second year of the Twelfth Plan. Out of this , 
Rs. 3415.00 crore is on the Plan side in the Revenue Section and the balance Rs. 
2314.17 crore is on Non-Plan side under the Revenue Section. There are no 
allocations for the Capital Section in either Plan or Non-Plan side. 
3.5 It may be pertinent to mention here that during the year 2013 -14, the 
Department had proposed an amount of Rs. 4869.36 crore on t he plan side to the 
Planning Commission against which an amount of Rs. 3415.00 crore on Plan side 
has been allocated.   
3.6 The details of Revised Estimates for the year 2012 -13 and Budget 
Estimates for 2013-14 are given in the table below :- 
            (Rs. in crore) 
 RE 2012-13 BE 2013-14 
 Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
Revenue 2520 2100 3415 2314.17 
Capital 00 00 00 00 

31 
 
3.7 It may be seen that there is a hike of 26.20% in the BE of Rs. 3415 crore of 
2013-14 on the Plan side as compared to RE amount of Rs. 2520 crore of 2012-13.  
On the Non-Plan side the BE amount of Rs. 2314.17 crore for the ongoing Fiscal is 
9.25% more than RE amount of Rs. 2100 crore in 2012-13. 
(C)  OUTLAY FOR 2013-14  
3.8 The details of proposed outlay of the Department for all Major Heads during 
the Annual Plan 2013-14 and the Budget Allocation are as under: 
S. 
No. 
Name of the Sector Annual Plan 
2013-14 
Proposed 
Annual Plan 
2013-14 (BE) 
1. Crop 
Science+NIBSM+NIAB 
628.01 465.00 
2. Horticulture  200.00 200.00 
3. NRM+NICRA 351.40 310.00 
4. Agricultural Engineering 99.30 75.00 
5. Animal Science 280.00 225.00 
6. Fisheries 104.80 85.00 
7. Economics, Statistics & 
Management 
9.88 10.00 
8. Agricultural Extension 795.08 520.00 
9. Agricultural Education 
+KVASU, Kerala 
535.00 
+20.00 
475.00 
10 CAU+DARE 124.97 100.00 
11. ICAR Headquarters 315.99 395.00 
12. NAIP+GEF 399.39 400.00 
13 NFBSFARA 100.00 75.00 
14. New Initiatives under process 
Iii) CAU, Bundelkhand 200.00 50.00 
iv) CAU, Barapani 00.00  
v) CAU, Bihar 150.00 30.00 
vi) National Agricultural 
Education Project 
262.50 _ 
vii) National Agricultural 
Entrepreneurship Project 
  
 
 
 Consortial Platforms  100.00  
 
 Total (ICAR+DARE) 4676.32 3415.00 
 Budget announcement 
XII Plan (in 2012-13) 
193.04  
 
 

32 
 
3.9 The Outcome Budget broadly indicates the physical dimensions of financial 
budget as also the actual physical programme.  It also records performance of first 
Nine months of a Fiscal year and targeted performance for the year ahead. 
3.10 When the Committee enquired fro m DARE, the reasons for not adhering to 
the Ministry of Finance instructions contained in OM NO. 10(3)/E/Coord./2012   dt.  
01 January, 2013 with regard to the Outcome Budget 2013 -14, the Department in 
Post Evidence reply submitted that “the format assigned was adhered to in chapter 
II. It is indicated in the MOF OM that the figures of outlay 2013 -14 in column 4(i) 
and 4 (ii) are to be provided as per statement of Budget Estimate included in 
Expenditure Budget volume 2 with plan Budget figures indicating th e amount 
allocated for NE out of lumpsum allocation. In this regard it is stated that in chapter 
2 of Outcome Budget 2013 -14, the outlay 2013 -14 figures are reflected in 
Annexure, strictly as per SBE format which is sector wise allocation. The scheme-
wise figures BE   2013-14 also given”. 
 
3.11 The Department further added that  “in chapter II Financial Outlay could not 
be included in view of the fact that details of all the schemes are included in 
chapter VI of financial reviews of the documents.  Further, the functioning of set up 
and sector-wise accomplishment has been included except the major programmes 
in respect of woman/ gender equality. However, equity issues including gender are 
indicated exclusively in the document.  Chapter III is presented as stat ed. Chapter 
IV regarding review of past performances Physical performance has been given 
sector -wise consisting of various schemes therein in a précised form for the year 
2011-12 and 2012-13. Chapter V & VI Information to chapter V requiring Financial 
Reviews ha s been covered in Chapter VI whereas Performance of statutory and 
autonomous Bodies- has been covered in chapter V in the Outcome Budget, 2013 -
14. The information provided in these chapters were interchanged and this mistake 
has happened inadvertently. The discrepancy noticed will be rectified carefully 
following the guidelines for preparation of Outcome Budget for the year 2014-15”. 
  

33 
 
(D) FUNDS UTILISATION DURING ELEVENTH PLAN 
3.12 The Department during the year 2012 -13 has furnished the following figures 
in respect of allocations being sought by the Department year after year in the 
Eleventh Plan, the amounts actually released in the five years of the Plan out of 
Rs. 12023.00 crore earmarked for the Eleventh Plan of DARE/ICAR and the actual 
expenditure against the funds thus released: 
         (Rs. in crore) 
(Years  Proposed  BE  RE  Expenditure  
2007-08  1945.50  1620.00  1434.00  1317.18  
2008-09  2646.79  1760.00  1760.00  1652.61 
2009-10  4000.00  1760.00  1760.00  1711.00  
2010-11  4000.00  2300.00  2521.75  2354.29 
2011-12  4534.44  2800.00  2850.00 1654.58* 
Total  17126.73  10240.00  10325.75 8689.66 
     *till January, 2012 
3.13 From the figures of expenditure submitted by the Department for the scrutiny 
of Demands for Grants for the year 2013 -14, the Department has revised their 
expenditure figure for the Financial Year 2008 -09 and 2009-10 from 1652.61 crore 
to 1652.58 crore and from 1711.00 crore to 1711.44 crore.  The final figure of Rs. 
2765.27 crore for the expenditure during the year 2011 -12 has also been furnished 
by the Department. 
3.14 Out of Eleventh Plan allocation of Rs. 10325.75 crore, the Department have  
been able to spend a sum of Rs. 9 800.77 crore in the entire Plan, l eaving a huge 
balance of Rs. 524.98 crore unspent.  
3.15 During the year 2012-13 the DARE/ICAR was allocated 0.49% of total outlay 
at BE.  However, at RE stage, it has been, reduced to 0.3 8%.  The overall 

34 
 
proportion for DARE/ICAR for the entire Twelfth Plan outlay with respect of total 
Central Plan outlay has also decreased from 0.70% to 0.68%.   
3.16 The Department while submitting the reasons for non -utilisation of 11% 
funds by DARE/ICAR and its impact on various schemes/project and steps taken 
or proposed by the Department to utilize 0.70% allocation during the Twelfth Five 
Year Plan period has furnished that r educed allocation of DARE/ICAR  during year 
2012-13 from 0.49% of total outlay at BE to 0.38% at RE stage, does not mean 
non-utilization of 11% funds as far as utilization is concerned.  As such, some of 
the new initiatives such as NAEP, NICRA, CRPs and Extra Mural Fund Projects 
are being initiated. Procurement of certain new works/e quipments which were 
supposed to be taken up in the ongoing schemes of DARE/ICAR would be taken in 
due course.  The allocation of 0.70% of the total Central Plan Outlay during the XII 
Five Year plan to DARE/ICAR will be most judiciously and efficiently uti lized by 
expeditious clearance of SFC/EFC of on -going plan schemes, taking up certain 
projects under Extramural Funding, initiation of new scheme of NICRA, Platform 
research on core areas such as Genomics, Bio -fortification, Molecular Breeding, 
Nanotechnology, Diagnostics & Vaccines etc. 
3.17 In reply to post evidence query of the Committee , the Department has 
submitted the quarterly expenditure incurred by DARE/ICAR, scheme -wise during 
2012-13 (upto Feb.2013) both under Plan and Non -Plan are given at Annexure-I 
and Annexure-II, respectively.  
3.18 The Committee during the oral evidence desired to know the reasons for 
unspent balance of Rs. 201.58 crore for 2010 -11 and Rs. 108.89 crore for 2011 -12 
the representatives of the Department has stated as follows :-  

35 
 
“Sir, there are two reasons.  Firstly, a s you are aware, when there are 
EFC/SFC documents, there will be handful utilisation.  In the absence of 
that, it will mean ongoing projections from the previous plan period.  That is 
one reason where we would not be able to contemplate the whole thing and  
have the funds utilised.  The second thing also is in regard to the releases 
that we have.  This time, of course, the first semester release was there. So 
we could manage a little bit.  Otherwise, in the previous year, as you have 
pointed out, the fund releases as and when they are received and also there 
are restrictions at some stages.  These are some reasons and I must 
mention that we have a system where we are operating in hundred different 
locations of institutes.  We are having Krishi Vigyan Kendras in different 
locations, and the University where we provide funds.  From some of those 
locations, for various reasons sometimes the equipment could not be bought 
or sometimes the works could not be completed.  So we do not deposit 
money unless things are c ompleted.  From those quarters when small 
moneys come, they get approved like this.  But I must assure the Hon. 
Committee that once EFC is in place, plan fund utilisation is always in all the 
previous plans of the same condition.  In the first year, it would be around 88 
to 90 per cent; second year it would be around 92 per cent; in third, fourth 
and fifth year it will be 96 or 97 per cent.  This is how the expenditure 
position all the time has been.  We would make all out efforts once the EFC 
documents are in place”.   
 
3.19 While briefing during the oral evidence before the Committee, the Secretary, 
DARE has mentioned that the Eleventh Plan has closed and the growth 
percentage in Agriculture is close to 3.5%, up above 1.8, 2.3 and so on during the 
previous years.  
3.20 As per instructions of Ministry of Finance regarding monthly expenditure 
plan, not more than 1/3 (33%) of BE may be spent during last quarter of the 
Financial Year. The MoF instructions related to Monthly Expenditure Plan in 
respect of Demand No. 2- DARE are enclosed at Annexure-III.   Further, not more 
than 15% of BE is to be expe nded in the month of March.  When Committee asked 
to furnish percentage expenditure incurred under Major Head/Divisions, in each 
quarter and month of March, in the Financial Year 2011 -12, 2012 -13, quarters, 
Division/Major Head -wise, reasons for failure to observe the instant instruction of 
Ministry of Finance and steps taken/proposed for evenly expanding of expenditure , 

36 
 
the Department submitted that the instructions of Ministry of Finance regarding 
monthly expenditure plan to be 33% of BE in the last quarter and 15% of BE in the 
month of March applies to PAO expenditure.  However, the expenditure ceiling was 
enforced for the Demands for Grant as a whole, subject to RE  ceilings from 2012-
13.  Accordingly, the PAO expenditure in respect of DARE/ICAR for the last quarter 
in the financial year 2011-12 and 2012-13 is as under:. 
 (Rs. in lakh) 
* expenditure upto Feb., 2013 
3.21 In Post evidence reply the Department has clarified that the instructions of 
MoF regarding expenditure to be 33% of BE in last quarter and 15% of BE in last 
month of Financial Year applies at PAO level. The intention was to state that PAO 
being last check point of control of Government expenditure enforce these 
instructions. It is further clarified that these instructions are applicable and 
implemented by DARE as can be seen from statement of expenditure for the year 
2012-13. The Monthly Expenditure Plan is always drawn up before the 
commencement of financial year, which is adhered to as per MoF’s instructions. 
  
(E)  TWELFTH PLAN OUTLAY 
3.22 The Twelfth Plan Document has been delayed despite several observations 
made by the Committee in their previous Reports.  The Committee when asked the 
status of various schemes and time by which SFC/EFC of various schemes are 
                  
DARE/ICAR 
BE PAO          
expenditure 
in the    last 
quarter 
% with 
 respect  
to BE 
PAO           
expenditure 
in March 
2012 
% with  
respect  
to   BE 
      2011-12 280000.00 77815.00 28 % 42661.00 15 % 
      2012-13 322000.00 36737.86* 11 % Yet to be 
received 
 

37 
 
likely to be prepared and finalized, the Department in their written reply has stated 
that the Gross Budgetary support for the XII Plan of Rs.2 5,553 crores was 
communicated to DARE on September 18, 2012 by Planning Commission.  The 
SFC/EFC proposals of all the schemes under DARE/ICAR are under preparation 
and appraisal/approval process is to be initiated from financial year 2013 -14 
onwards. 
 3.23 The Working Group of Planning Commission ha d recommended Rs.55000 
crore as Twelfth Plan outlay against the DARE/ICAR proposal of Rs.57,887.21 
crore.  Now the Planning Commission has communicated Rs. 25,553.00 crore as 
Twelfth Plan allocation to the DARE/ICAR .  The Committee when asked the basis 
on which the Department has worked out Rs. 57,887.21 crore and the details of 
sub-allocation made by them on receipt of communication from the Planning 
Commission, the Department in their written reply has furnished as follows: 
 
Sector-wise XII Plan Proposed and Earmarked Outlay is detailed as below; 
                  (Rs in crore) 
 
XII Plan 
Proposed 
Outlay   
(Rs 
57887.21 
cr) 
XII Plan 
earmarked 
Outlay 
(Rs 25553 
cr) 
Crop Science 6178.66 3000.00 
Horticulture 4900.00 1150.00 
Natural Resource Management  3428.61 1350.00 
Agricultural Engineering 828.29 500.00 
Animal Science 6000.00 1400.00 
Fisheries 1250.00 600.00 
ESM 370.42 125.00 
Agricultural Extension  10255.80 6000.00 
Agricultural Education 12229.05 4000.00 

38 
 
Central Agricultural University + DARE 1695.95 500.00 
MIS( ICAR Headquarter) 515.83 1631.00 
National Agricultural Innovative Project  422.60 500.00 
National Fund for Basic, Strategic and 
Frontier Application  Research in Agriculture 
1000.00 500.00 
National Initiative on Climate Resilient  in 
Agriculture   
In NRM 600.00 
KVASU Kerala (Budget Announcement 2011-
12) 
 50.00 
National Agriculture Education Project 2595.00 In 
Education 
National Agricultural Entrepreneurship 
Project 
5000.00  
New - CAU Bundelkhand  , CAU Bihar  , CAU 
Barapani    
1217 1167 
Consortia  Research Platforms (Seed 250, 
Biofortification 150,Hybrids 200, 
Agrobiodiversity 200, Genomics120, 
Molecular Breeding150, Diagnostic and 
Vaccine 100, Nanotechnology 200, Water 
150, Conservation Agriculture 100, Health 
Foods, 150, Natural Fibre140, Secondary 
Agri.200, Farm Mechanisation 140, energy 
60, Agri-incubator 100, Borer 40, 
Phytochemical & High Value Compounds 30) 
These CRPs will be part of either ICAR hqrs. 
or of the respective schemes for the purpose 
of SFC/EFC approval. 
 2480 
GRAND TOTAL 57887.21 25553.00 
 
3.24 in regard to impact on curtailment of funds, the Committee was informed 
that t he pace of progress of some important research programmes such as 
genomics work in horticultural plants, markers for desirable traits, and stem cell 
research are likely to get slackened.  Besides, some other activities likely to be 
affected to a considerab le extent are preparedness to address the impact of 
impending climate change, strengthening of existing KVKs with additional facilities 
like basic plant health, diagnostic facilities, minimal processing facility, soil and 
water testing labs, setting up of automatic weather stations for capacity building in 
agro-meteorology, farm mechanization and primary processing etc.  The planning 

39 
 
process for the new initiatives namely “Consortia Research Platforms” on Agri -
biodiversity Management, Genomics and Molecular  Breeding, Seed, Water, Health 
Foods etc. are likely to be affected due to the reduced allocation during the XII 
Plan. 
 
3.25 Further a s ICAR is committed to extend financial assistance to SAUs for       
strengthening and development of higher education, th e approved 
programmes/schemes under the Agricultural Education’s main scheme of 
“Strengthening and Development of Agricultural Education” such as niche area of 
excellence, experiential learning etc. are also likely to be affected. 
 
3.26 Apart from this the  pace of certain new initiatives proposed to be  
undertaken during XII Plan such as, National Agricultural Education Project, 
Farmers FIRST, Student READY, ARYA etc. will slackened.  
3.27 Explaining the status of schemes, under approval by EFC/SFC, Secretary, 
DARE stated as follows:   
“Now, I will come directly to the 12 th Plan. As you are aware, the National 
Development Council Meeting was held on 27 th December, 2012 after which 
a figure was communicated to us as the 12 th Plan allocation and that is Rs. 
25,553 crore. But before that also, as I said, our Plan process is in full swing 
and we can submit the EFC documents only now after we got the formal 
communication from the Planning Commission. So, in the Annual Plan for 
2012-13, we had the BE to the extent of Rs. 3,220 crore and I must mention 
here that at the RE stage, it was reduced to Rs. 2,520 crore. This reduction 
happened across all Departments and Ministries. Of course, in the mean 
time, we have replied many questions with regard to allocation of budg et as 
to why there was some figure in the BE stage and why that was changed at 
the RE stage etc. Many questions that have been raised have basically a 
bearing with regard to this point.  
This is with regard to the BE and RE that we finally got.  We have 
made all efforts to have this again revised.   

40 
 
In the meantime, I must mention, a number of meetings were held 
with the institutes, with the heads of divisions where collective measures, re -
allocations and all these things have been done.  At this time the RE of 
2013-14 also has been received to the tune of Rs. 3,415 crore.  This is what 
we have for the Annual Plan 2013-14.   
With regard to the EFC Document, on 19 th and 20 th we had the 
Directors’ meeting of all the institutes.  Those Documents would be ready 
soon.  Then the circulation of appraisal committee takes mandatory six 
week’s time and then actual meetings would happen. 
I would submit that from the Department side the preparedness, 
whether in terms of preparing EFC Document or linkages, planning, etc. all 
that has been done in the last two years time.  The moment we have got a 
formal figure we have been into action.  From the Department side, there is 
absolutely no delay.” 
 
3.28 Explaining the rationale of projections t he Secretary, DARE stated during 
evidence as follows: 
 “xxx  xxx I would like to mention, as you have seen the figures, it was 
our endeavour with the Working Group in the Planning Commission for the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan .  We have gone before them.  These are the 
proposed figures. We have proposed Rs.57,887 crore; the Working Group 
recommended Rs. 55,000 crore.    
This is what action is being made.  The investment in agriculture has 
to be at least to the order of one per cent of agriculture GDP.  In many 
countries it is two to two -and-a-half per cent.  That is why these figures 
were put up.  I would like to mention that the actual provision was 
Rs.10,325.76 crore.  I must mention that from our Department side, the 
performance, the utilisation has been made all the time above 95 per cent.  
At the end of the Plan Period, we have something like 95.7 per cent of the 
funds provided.  That is the figure that we have at the end of Eleventh Five 
Year Plan.    
For the Twelfth Five Y ear Plan, as I mentioned, looking at the 
challenges, the long-time research that we need to undertake, the high -end 
research and the kind of infrastructure that we require, all these were taken 
into consideration and the figures were projected.   
Our entire scheme of KVK is under Plan.  It is 100 per cent provided 
for by the Plan.  Similarly, for the All India Coordinated Research Projects, 
75 per cent is contribution from the Plan funds.  We have brought all these 
matters.  At the end of the day, as I said , the allocation was Rs.25,553 
crore.  From the Department side, we have again made submissions about 
the requirements.   
At this stage, given the allocation for the first two years, as I said, 
Rs.2,520 crore and Rs.3,415 crore, adds up to something like R s.6,000 
crore.  So, the rest of the period would be three years time.  So, for the rest 
of the three years, these allocations have been made and this would be 
something like Rs.18,000 crore to Rs.19,000 crore.  Our projections in the 

41 
 
three years of the Twe lfth Five Year Plan, 2014 -15 onwards, would be to 
the tune of Rs.6,000 crore per year.   
We are aware that this would affect some of the projections where we 
wanted to have long -time research programmes.  So, this definitely would 
be there.  But having sai d that, given the allocation, we have held several 
discussions on how to privatise programmes and projects and programmes 
which we wanted to initiate may have to be taken up later.  So, basically 
privatisation of projects and programmes is the only way to go about. 
The second thing is, to the extent possible, linkages, sharing all 
facilities, infrastructure and so on.  The third thing is that we are talking 
about platforms so that people come together so that there is no 
duplication.  So, we are trying to l ook at all these things so that we can 
effectively manage within what we have provided.  This is my submission, 
but then, definitely more funds would have been needed for this.  But these 
are all the allocations at this time.” 
 
3.29 In reply to Post Evidence query regarding the schedule for various stages of 
SFC/EFC for considering and approvals of schemes, the Department has 
submitted the following : 
Action has been initiated to firm up the number of schemes 
under various sectors wit h a view to streamline the monitoring 
and convenience. New schemes as well as modification in 
schemes suggested have been brought to the notice of Planning 
Commission. Accordingly Plan funding is allocated to various 
SMDs to decide with Directors/ Project Directors / Project Co -
ordinators of various schemes. This is an exercise in the 
process of finalization in the context of proposed targets set 
during the XII plan for preparation of EFC / SFC. Moreover EFC/ 
SFC of budget announcement for the year 2012 -13 for five 
agricultural universities has already been completed. 
 
3.30 The Committee , during Oral Evidence when asked the representative of 
Planning Commission regarding the rational behind reducing drastically the 
allocation for the DARE when the Working Committee are appointed by the m 
recommends allocation for the Agriculture, DARE/ICAR and Animal Husbandry  
Sector the representative of the Planning Commission stated as follows:- 

42 
 
“So far as the 12 th Five Year Plan is concerned, we have set a major 
target for the Department of Agricultural Research  and Education and 
allocation to research sector which is taking plan expenditure to one 
per cent of the agricultural GDP. In the 11 th Five Year Plan, the 
allocation to the agricultural research and education from both Central 
and State has been about 0.7 per cent. Our target for the 11 th Five 
Year Plan allocation was one per cent of agricultural GDP. We 
analysed why we have not been able to achieve one per cent 
allocation to the agricultural research and education. The reason was 
that there has been some c ut by Centre by about 20 per cent. The 
allocation on the plan side was Rs. 12,000 crore and the realisation is 
only Rs.10,000 crore which is about 20 per cent reduction by the 
Central Government to the agricultural research and education. The 
major factor has been that the States have not given their share to the 
agricultural research and education.  In their case the reduction is far 
more than, the centre specially in the case of the non -plan allocation 
by the State Governments to the research and educatio n. That is one 
of the reasons why we have not been able to achieve the one per cent 
target. This has been a major lacuna. If we can condition for RKVY 
allocation, to the State Governments based on their allocation 
agricultural research, we hope we will be able to realise higher 
allocation for agricultural research and education. So far as working 
groups are concerned, when they make recommendations, they are 
not constrained by the fact that what will be the total size of the 
resources available with the Pla nning Commission or the Government 
of India. Their recommendations have to be rationalised by the 
Department concerned keeping in view the total available resources in 
the country. In the case of DARE, what we have just mentioned is that 
the 12 th Five Year  Plan allocation has been 0.7 per cent of the total 
resources whereas in the 11 th Plan the total allocation was 0.56 per 
cent. There has been considerable increase from the 11 th Plan to the 
12th Five Year Plan from Rs.10,000 crore to Rs.25,000 crore is the hike 
which has been given to very few departments by the Government of 
India. There have been demands from other sectors like infrastructure 
for education, health sanitation and within the resources available, 
hefty cake has been given to the Department o f Agricultural Research 
and Education. We have taken note of the other observations that 
were made by the Committee and we will be submitting our 
submissions to the Committee in a few days”. 
 
 
OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
  
3.31         The Committee note that as per Demand No. 2 pertaining to 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education a sum of Rs. 5729.17 
crore has been allocated to the Department at BE for the current Fiscal.   Out 

43 
 
of this Rs. 3415.00 crore has been a part of Plan  side which is 26.20 % higher 
than the RE of previous financial year and 26.97 % lower than the proposal of 
the Department i.e. 4676.32 crore.    On the Non Plan side the Department has 
allocated a sum of Rs. 2314.17 crore as BE 2013 -14 which is 9.25 % more  
than RE of Rs. 2100.00 crore for the previous Fiscal.   The Annual Plan Outlay 
of the Department which is Rs. 5729.17 crore is also to be seen in the context 
of total Outlay of Rs. 25,553 crore communicated by the Planner to the DARE 
for the Twelfth Five Year Plan.   The Committee note that as in the past the 
Department has again failed to change the mindset of the Planner and the 
Government in the matter of allocat ion of funds to DARE during the current 
Fiscal also.  This is a undoubted fact that Indian Agriculture has been facing 
a large number of challenges as narrated in previous chapter which will 
require capital intensive solutions, seems to have been given a g o by the 
Planners and the Government.  Both of them have, again in this Second year 
of the Twelfth Five Year Plan , too failed to understand  the urgency of timely  
infusion of capital in the system so as to give an impetus for developing 
technologies for th e emerging challenges.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that allocations to the Department in the ongoing Fiscal be 
reconsidered and enhanced accordingly at the RE stage by when, hopefully   
EFC/SFC approval of the schemes will be cleared.   
  
OUTCOME BUDGET 
 3.32       Outcome Budget broadly indicates the physical dimensions of 
financial budget as also the actual physical programmes of the Department.   
It also records performance of first Nine months of the a Fiscal year and 

44 
 
targeted performance for the year ahead.   The Ministry of Finance issues 
instructions to various Ministries and Department for presentation of 
Outcome Budget Document in a uniform format in the Parliament.   The 
scrutiny by the Committee ha s revealed that D ARE has not observ ed the 
guidelines of the Ministry of Finance in preparation of the document in letter 
and spirit .  For instance, minute details as required under the instant 
guidelines, have not been reflected in Chapter II to V, religiously and in clear  
terms.  Further, as admitted by the De partment, the information contained in 
Chapters V & VI, were inter -changed, though inadvertently.    The Committee 
take strong note of the failure to adhere to the stipulations and other minute 
details, contained in t he instant instructions, and also the so called 
“inadvertent mistakes” in the Outcome Budget.  The Committee is of the view 
that due care and caution has not been exercised in the process of 
compilation and presentation of the Document to Parliament and it s 
authorities.  Appropriate action to correct the mistakes, be taken and the 
Parliament apprised thereof.  The Committee also desire that DARE should 
meticulously follow the instructions of Ministry of Finance and present their 
error free Outcome Budget, in the ensuing year. 
 
FUNDS UTILISATION  
3.33         The Committee note that the figures for the Financial Year 2008 -09 
and 2009-10 submitted in the Committee last year, have been changed in the 
documents submitted to the m this year.   The Department has   
communicated  the final figure for expenditure of 2011 -12   Rs. 2765.27 
against the expenditure of Rs. 1654.58 crore till January, 2012 communicated 

45 
 
previous year.   The Committee find that Rs. 1195.47 crore (Rs. 2765.27 – 
1654.58) has added in two months expenditure of the Department.  Out of the 
allocated amount, the Department has been unable to utilize Rs. 524.98 
crore   (10325.75 – 9800.77) during Eleventh Five Year Plan period.  The trend 
of expenditure clearly reveals that the Department has failed to  observe the 
instructions/guidelines of Ministry of Finance regarding monthly expenditure 
plan.  From the quarterly expenditure , the Committee found that for 2011 -12 
the expenditure is 28 % in the last quarter and for 2012-13 is 11 %.  There was 
NIL expenditure in the Second Quarter in ICAR Plan and Non Plan side during 
the year 2012-13.   The Committee note with a great sense of disappointment 
that despite several assurance given by the Department on the previous 
recommendations regarding utilization of fu nds by them have again  failed to 
utilized 100 % of their allocation.   They therefore, strongly feel that the 
Department to review the functioning of the ir funds utilization mechanism  to 
check recurrence of such trend in future and apprise the outcome.  
  
UNSPENT BALANCES 
 3.34          The Committee not e that the Department ha s again surrendered 
unspent balances to the tune of Rs. 201.58 crore for Financial Year 2010-11 
and Rs. 108.89 crore for F.Y. 2011-12 to the Government.   The reasons 
regarding EFC/SFC documents, delay in release of funds and operation of 
institutes from different locations etc.  tendered by the Department before the 
Committee are not convincing.  The Committee note that while the 
Department argue forcefully to step its allocation and at the same time return 
the past years unspent balance, do reflect poorly on the performance and 

46 
 
planning process monitoring mechanism of the Department.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to revisit their exist ing funds 
utilization mechanism and over the whole system so as to ensure that the 
funds once allocated are fully utilized by various Divisions in the remaining 
period of the Twelfth Five Year Plan. 
 
TWELFTH PLAN OUTLAY 
3.35 The Twelfth Plan Document  though approved by NDC in December 
2012 has been delayed considerably and is yet to see the light of day, despite 
several efforts made by the Comm ittee during the previous years, t he 
Department has propose d Rs. 57,887.21 crore for the XII Plan.  The Worki ng 
Group appointed by the Planning Commission has  also recommended Rs. 
55,000 as Twelfth Plan outlay for DARE/ICAR.  The Department has been 
communicated the Gross Budgetary support of Rs. 25,553 .00 crore for the XII 
Plan by the Planning Commission on Sept ember, 2012.   The Committee do 
not appreciate the downsizing of allocation, if the communicated figure is 
taken on its face value which is less than 1% of Agriculture GDP.  The 
Eleventh Plan document had unequivocally emphasized agriculture spending 
on NARS, to be 1% of Agriculture GDP. The Committee would also urge upon 
the Government to allocate 1% of Agriculture GDP for Agriculture Research 
and also rework on financial and other requirements of 1% investment of 
Agriculture GDP on Research.   The Commit tee note with a great sense of 
disappointment that the exercise undertaken by the Working Group set up by 
the Planning Commission to suggest plan size, has been proved to be futile, 
as Planning Commission failed to honour the recommendations made by one 

47 
 
of its authority.  They therefore, desire the Government to make such 
examination/scrutiny of planning process, more realistic in future 
 
3.36 The Committee note that 44% of proposed outlay of the Department 
has been reduced by the Planner for Twelfth Five Y ear Plan.  The pace of 
progress of important research programmes like genomics work in 
horticultural plants, markets for desirable traits stem cell research will be 
slackened due to the cut.  The strengthening of existing KVKs including new 
initiatives viz . Consortia Research Platform  (CRP) on Agri -biodiversity 
Management Genomics and Molecular Breeding etc. will too be affected due 
to reduced allocation during the XII Plan.  In addition to that new initiatives 
like National Agricultural Education Project, Farmers First, Student Ready, 
ARYA etc will be slackened.  It is a matter of deep concern that High end 
Research Projects such as Agro -biodiversity, Genomics, Nanotechnology, 
Conservation Agriculture, Health Foods,  Farm Mechanisation etc. which are 
component of  CRP, may either had to be shelved or postponed indefinitely.  
The Committee appreciating the constraints of ICAR for slackening these 
important programmes would like to advise the Department to again draw 
attention of the Planner and the Government  on the gravity thereof and ask 
enlarge funds to complete these activities as to overcome the challenges 
faced by Indian Agriculture.   
  

48 
 
CHAPTER IV 
SECTORAL EVALUATION 
(A)    CROP SCIENCE 
 4.1 During the course of examination of the Demands for Grants of DARE, it 
was noted that under the major head Crop Science as against the proposed outlay 
of Rs.628.01 crore , Rs. 465.00 crore was approved  indicating a reduction of 
25.95%.  It has further been observed that the proposals in respect of National 
Bureau of P lant Genetics Resources, Indian Grassland and Fodder Research 
Institute, Central Institute of Cotton Research, Nagpur PD -Rapeseed & Mustard, 
Bharatpur, Management AICRP NSP, Management  Seed Production in 
Agriculture Crops and Fisheries, Management Nationa l Institute of Biotic Stress 
Management and Indian Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology have also been 
reduced by 38.29%, 64.78%, 77.56% 36.04% and 37.73%, 31.40%, 38.29% 93.33 
and 92.5% respectively. Simultaneously, proposals under  IARI, AICRP on 
Pesticides Residues, AICRP on Nematodes, New Delhi, AICRP on Wheat & Barley 
Improvement Project, Karnal, AICRP on Sugarcane, Lucknow, AICRP on 
Groundnut, Junagarh, AICRP on Sesame and Niger, Jabalpur, AICRP on Honey 
Bee Research & Pollinators, Hissar, Network on Agricultural Acarology, Bengaluru 
Network Programme on Insect, Biosystematics have received enhanced 
allocations at BE stage. The Department were, therefore, asked to explain the 
reasons for such changes in the proposals and how the various Schemes of t he 
Division will be affected due to changes during the Fiscal. 
 4.2 In their written reply it was stated that based on the cut in the Annual Plan 
outlay by the Finance Ministry to the Department, Crop Science Division had been 
allocated Rs.468.0 0 crore as against the projection of Rs.628.01 crore. 

49 
 
Accordingly, the size of the Annual Plan (2013 -14) was reduced.  The effect of 
such budgetary revision would influence the procurement of research materials and 
cost of the laboratory / field work force.  Operatio nal cost of these projects were 
reassessed and need-based upward revision was done. 
4.3 When desire to know the procedure for assessment of Schemes/projects 
and how frequently such assessment are reassessed t he Department in their Post 
Evidence reply stated that progress of research schemes/projects are reviewed in 
Research Advisory Committee (RAC) meeting, Institute Research Committee (IRC) 
and Institute Management Committee (IMC) at the institute level. The 
recommendations are reviewed at Subject Mat ter Division level for need based 
revision. Besides, the Annual Group Meeting of All India Coordinated Research 
Project Scheme assesses the operational cost of projects. The overall requirement 
and expenditure for any possible revision and mid -course corre ction towards the 
operational cost of the projects are reassessed in the Senior Officers’ Committee 
(SOC) meeting held every month at the ICAR Hqrs. Based on the expenditure 
monitoring in various schemes, the reassessment was undertaken to cover for the 
projected operational costs. 
 
4.4 It has noticed from the Outcome Budget 2013 -14 that the Division has been 
able to utilize only 52.13 % of funds upto January, 2013 .  The reasons assigned for 
non utilization of funds  is t he processing time  taken to complete the official 
procedures to procure equipments .  S ince May 2012, monitoring of expenditure 
was undertaken and the BE allocation of Rs 460.00 crore reduced to 410 .00 crore 
at RE stage. That Committee was also informed that w herever justifiably required, 
re-appropriation amongst sub -heads for Grant for Capital/ Salary / General was 

50 
 
done through divisional meetings. The RE was accordingly reallocated amongst 
schemes to effect the proper utilisation of the allocation.  
 
  (B) HOTRICULTURE 
4.5 The major schemes/projects undertaken in horticulture division and their 
targets/achievements are given in Annexure – IV.  While clarifying the deficiencies 
notices in their implementation and corrective measures taken , the Department in 
their written repl y stated that since the XII Plan EFC proposals were under 
consideration, action on new works and equipments could not be initiated. Two 
meetings were held on 13.3.13 and 19.3.13 for finalization of reallocations, 
prioritization and EFC’s discussions.    
4.6 During the Financial Year 2012 -13, the Division has been able to utilize 
73.86% of funds till January 2012 and the institutes like Central Institute of Sub 
Tropical Horticulture, Lucknow, Central Institute of Arid Horticulture, Bikaner, 
Central Plantatio  Crops Research Institute, Kasargod and Directorate of 
Floriculture, New Delhi were unable to utilize more than 26% of their allocations till 
January, 2012. While furnishing reasons for non utilization and corrective steps 
taken, the Department has submitted that the EFC documents are in the process of 
finalization. The expenditure posit ion up to February, 2013 during the current 
financial year is in the range of 91 - 95% of RE with respect to Central Institute for 
Subtropical Horticulture (CISH) Lucknow; Central Institute for Arid Horticulture, 
(CIAH) Bikaner; Central Plantation crops Re search Institute (CPCRI),  Kasargod 
and Directorate of Floriculture Research (DFR), New Delhi. 
4.7 The Committee when asked to clarify as to how finalization of EFC 
documents are concerned with non utilization of funds by these Centers/Institutes 

51 
 
of Hortic ulture Division during 2012 -13, t he Department in their Post Evidence 
Reply has stated that situation is not relevant in Plan schemes since plan -to-plan 
carry-over of funds is not permissible.  Non -utilised funds of the ICAR schemes are 
monitored and adjus ted at RE stage of each financial year.  In the absence of 
approved EFC, the expenditure is based on the existing allocation. 
  (C) AGRICULTURE EXTENSION 
4.8 Agriculture Extension is one of the major scheme to disseminate knowledge 
and information to the farmers.  It enables transfer of technology and knowledge for 
Labs to the farms.  The Department in their written submission has informed that 
the major programmes taken up by KVKs during 2012 -13 include on -farm trials; 
frontline demonstrations; training of  farmers and extension personnel; awareness 
creating extension activities; production of technology inputs for availability to 
farmer.  During 2012 -13 the KVKs have a ssessed, refined and demonstrations of  
technologies through 29428 on -farm trials 1.31 lak h front -line  demonstrations in 
different farming systems. Besides, the KVKs provided training to 18.80 lakh 
farmers, rural youth and extension personnel and created awareness among 
170.16 lakh farmers and other stake holders through large number of extens ion 
programmes.  In addition the KVKs produced 1.74 lakh quintal   seed and  206.59 
lakh planting  material ;  analysed  3.78 lakh samples of soil, water, plants and 
manures and provided  mobile agr -advisory to 11.14 lakh  farmers by sending 1.47 
lakh messages. Under NICRA project 100 KVKs also demonstrated  a number of 
climate resillient technologies through 23441 demonstrations in farmers field 
covering  132 villages. The  actual allocation as per RE of Rs. 43490.0 0 lakh for 
the year 2012-13 under KVK scheme will be will be  fully utilized  during the year. 

52 
 
4.9 The Agricultural Extension Division has been able to utilize Rs. 291.26 crore 
out of RE of Rs. 450 .00 crore for 2012-13.  The Committee when desire d to know 
the reasons for non -utilisation of funds and steps taken for utilization of funds , the 
Department in their written submission has stated that the funds received will be 
utilized fully and the expenditure is being monitored.  
4.10  The Committee in their Pos t Evidence query desire d to know the existing 
expenditure monitoring mechanism under the Agriculture Extension Division and 
the reasons for non-utilisation of funds as per the instructions of Ministry of Finance 
by the Division.  The Department in their re ply has submitted that the expenditure 
incurred by KVKs is monitored regularly on monthly basis through eight Zonal 
Project Directorates by obtaining monthly expenditure reports from KVKs and after 
closing of the financial year through Audit Utilization Ce rtificate duly signed by 
Chartered Accountant/Comptroller/F&AO.  The funds are utilized by KVKs as per 
availability of funds in instalments. 
4.11 During Oral Evidence the Committee when desire d to know the status of 
performance of these KVKs in the country, the Secretary, DARE stated as follows:  
“àÉèbàÉ, BÉEä´ÉÉÒBÉEä BÉEÉÒ ¤ÉcÖiÉ +ÉcàÉ £ÉÚÉÊàÉBÉEÉ cè* ªÉc iÉÉä ABÉDºÉ]å¶ÉxÉ ÉÊºÉº]àÉ xÉcÉÓ £ÉÉÒ cè* ªÉc iÉÉä |ÉEÆ] ãÉÉ<xÉ 
ABÉDºÉ]å¶ÉxÉ cè*  <ºÉBÉEÉ ¤ÉäÉÊºÉBÉE +ÉÉì¤VÉäÉÎBÉD]´É cè, ]äBÉDxÉÉäãÉÉVÉÉÒ AºÉäºÉàÉå] AÆb ÉÊ®{ÉEÉ<xÉàÉå]* =ºÉÉÒ =qä¶ªÉ ºÉä ªÉä 
ºlÉÉÉÊ{ÉiÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉä MÉªÉä lÉä* càÉ ºÉÆºlÉÉxÉÉå ªÉÉ ÉÊ´É¶´ÉÉÊ´ÉtÉÉãÉªÉÉå àÉå VÉÉä ]äBÉDxÉÉäãÉÉVÉÉÒ ÉÊ´ÉBÉEÉÊºÉiÉ BÉE®iÉä cé, É ÊBÉEºÉ 
iÉ®c =ºÉä c® ÉÊVÉãÉä àÉå ãÉä VÉÉAÆ +ÉÉè® =ºÉä ´ÉèÉÊãÉbä] BÉE®å* =ºÉä +É{ÉxÉÉAÆ*  
=ºÉBÉEÉä +É{ÉxÉÉAÆ +ÉÉè® =ºÉàÉå VÉÉä ÉÊnBÉDBÉEiÉå A´ÉÆ BÉEÉÊàÉªÉÉÆ +ÉÉiÉÉÒ cé, =xÉBÉEÉä cãÉ BÉE®xÉä BÉEä càÉÉ®ä ºÉÉ<ÆÉÊ]º]ÂºÉ  
BÉEä {ÉÉºÉ ãÉÉAÆ* AMVÉèBÉD]ãÉÉÒ ªÉcÉÓ <Æ]å¶ÉxÉ lÉÉÒ* +ÉÉ{É VÉÉxÉi Éä cé ÉÊBÉE +ÉÉVÉ 632 BÉEä´ÉÉÒBÉEä àÉå ºÉä BÉE®ÉÒ¤É 30 -32 
BÉEä´ÉÉÒBÉEä ~ÉÒBÉE BÉEÉàÉ xÉcÉÓ BÉE® ®cä cé* ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ àÉé +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÉä +ÉÉ¶´ÉºiÉ BÉE®xÉÉ SÉÉciÉÉ cÚÆ ÉÊBÉE àÉé c® MÉÉÆ´É àÉå , c® 
BÉEä´ÉÉÒBÉEä àÉå VÉÉBÉE® näJÉiÉÉ cÚÆ* BÉÖEU BÉEä´ÉÉÒBÉEäVÉ, VÉÉä ªÉÚ ÉÊxÉ´ÉÉÌºÉ]ÉÒVÉ BÉEä ºÉÉlÉ cé, =xÉàÉå ´ÉèBÉEåºÉÉÒVÉ cé* càÉÉ®ÉÒ 
+ÉÉä® ºÉä =xÉBÉEÉÒ ÉÊSÉ]Â~ÉÒ £ÉÉÒ ÉÊãÉJÉÉÒ MÉªÉÉÒ cè ÉÊBÉE +ÉÉ{É iÉÖ®ÆiÉ <xÉ ´ÉèBÉEåºÉÉÒVÉ BÉEÉä ÉÊ{ÉEãÉ -+É{É BÉE®å* BÉE<Ç VÉMÉc 
{É® {ÉEÉàÉÇºÉÇ ¤ÉÉäãÉiÉä cé ÉÊBÉE BÉEä´ÉÉÒBÉEä ºÉä =xÉBÉEÉä ãÉÉ £É cÖ+ÉÉ cè* BÉEãÉ cÉÒ àÉé ¤ÉºÉ®, +É°ôhÉÉÆSÉãÉ |Énä¶É àÉå 
ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉÉå BÉEä ¤ÉÉÒSÉ ¤Éè~É cÖ+ÉÉ lÉÉ, ºÉ¤É ãÉÉäMÉ ¤ÉÉäãÉ ®cä lÉä ÉÊBÉE {ÉcãÉä càÉå {ÉiÉÉ cÉÒ xÉcÉÓ cÉäiÉÉ lÉÉ ÉÊBÉE BÉEèº Éä 
|ÉÉäbBÉD]ÂºÉ ¤ÉxÉÉAÆ* ¤ÉºÉ® àÉå =xÉ ãÉÉäMÉÉå xÉä BÉÖEU |ÉÉäbBÉD]ÂºÉ ¤É xÉÉA lÉä* =xÉBÉEÉ BÉEcxÉÉ lÉÉ ÉÊBÉE BÉEä´ÉÉÒBÉEä ]ÅäÉËxÉMÉ 
ºÉä +ÉÉVÉ càÉ ãÉÉäMÉ àÉcÉÒxÉä àÉå 2000 ªÉÉ 3000 âó{ÉªÉä BÉEàÉÉiÉä cé* ªÉc ¤ÉÉiÉ ´ÉcÉÆ ºÉä +ÉÉ ®cÉÒ cè, ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ 

53 
 
<ºÉBÉEÉä BÉEèºÉä ºÉÖofÃ ¤ÉxÉÉªÉÉ VÉÉA* càÉÉ®ÉÒ ºÉÉÎ¤àÉ¶ÉxÉ cè ÉÊBÉE AOÉÉÒBÉEãSÉ® ]ä BÉDxÉÉäãÉÉìVÉÉÒ àÉèxÉäVÉàÉå] AVÉåºÉÉÒVÉ £ÉÉÒ 
cé +ÉÉè® VÉÉä º]ä] ABÉDºÉ]å¶ÉxÉ àÉ¶ÉÉÒxÉ®ÉÒ cè, ÉÊVÉxÉBÉEÉ ¤ÉäÉÊºÉBÉE àÉÖqÉ cè ABÉDºÉ]å¶ÉxÉ BÉE®xÉä BÉEÉ, ªÉc näJÉxÉä àÉå 
+ÉÉªÉÉ cè ÉÊBÉE AOÉÉÒBÉEãSÉ® cÉÒ xÉcÉÓ, nÚºÉ®ä ÉÊ´É£ÉÉMÉÉå VÉèºÉä {É¶ÉÖ{ÉÉãÉxÉ ªÉÉ àÉÉÎiº ªÉBÉEÉÒ ÉÊ´É£ÉÉMÉ àÉå ´ÉèBÉEåºÉÉÒVÉ cé*  
càÉ ºÉàÉªÉ-ºÉàÉªÉ {É® ªÉc ÉÊxÉ´ÉänxÉ BÉE® ®cä cé, àÉÆjÉÉÒ àÉcÉänªÉ ºÉä, SÉÉÒ{ÉE ºÉäµÉEä]®ÉÒ A´ÉÆ AOÉÉÒBÉEãSÉ® ºÉäµÉEä]®ÉÒVÉ 
ºÉä ªÉc ÉÊxÉ´ÉänxÉ BÉE®BÉEä +ÉÉA cé ÉÊBÉE ´ÉcÉÆ {É® =xÉ {ÉnÉå BÉEÉä £ÉÉÊ®A*  That is the ba sic 
extension arm. So, to have everything done by KVK or that complete 
district extension would be a very difficult task. It was not intended 
also initially. But from our side, yes, for example we have been saying 
vacancies have improved in the last 2 -3 years. I must mention to you 
that there was 40 per cent vacancy three years before but now it has 
been reduced to 20 per cent, which is still not good. But we are 
making all out efforts to see that vacancies are first filled. 
Second thing is, capacity buildi ng in these KVKs is a subject 
matter of specialists. When we recruit people, they come with some 
degrees. Now, as you said, climate change, new technology, precision 
farming, protected cultivation, for example, now -a-days for moisture 
conservation we have evolved a technique called hydro -gels. We use 
gels and they absorb 250 times . +ÉMÉ® ABÉE OÉÉàÉ VÉäãÉ bÉãÉå, iÉÉä 250 AàÉAãÉ {ÉÉxÉÉÒ VÉàÉÉ 
cÉä VÉÉiÉÉ cè*  Now, these are the things that they should also be made aware 
of. So, what we are trying to do is, a c ontinuous backstopping from the 
university and institutes . ºÉàÉªÉ-ºÉàÉªÉ {É® =xÉBÉEÉ ]ÅäÉËxÉMÉ |ÉÉäOÉÉàÉ cÉäxÉÉ SÉÉÉÊcA* They 
have to undergo some human resource development programme. So, 
we are doing all these but at the same time , +ÉÉ{ÉxÉä +É£ÉÉÒ º]Úbå]ÂºÉ BÉEÉÒ ¤ÉÉiÉ BÉEcÉÒ*  
càÉÉ®ä ÉÊºÉº]àÉ ºÉä, ãÉMÉ£ÉMÉ 62 AOÉÉÒBÉEãSÉ® ªÉÚÉÊxÉ´ÉÉÌºÉ]ÉÒVÉ ºÉä about 30,000 students come 
out every year ÉÊVÉxÉàÉå ºÉä ãÉMÉ£ÉMÉ  23,000 graduates, 5000 AàÉAºÉºÉÉÒVÉ A´ÉÆ 2000 
{ÉÉÒASÉbÉÒVÉ ÉÊxÉBÉEãÉBÉE® +ÉÉiÉä cé* Recently, 1 st and 2 nd March, in Delhi we had 
organised a meeting of youth researchers in agriculture, what their 
intentions for the next 30 years or 40 years and so on. I must mention 
here that we have one scientist  to be in  place in 2050 also . It was a 
total surprise. Now we are trying to bring in all these capacities to 
these youngsters so that they are made aware of these new 
technologies and they have a new way of thinking and so on. We also 
projected the manpower requirement in the next 20 years, 30 years 
and so on from the university. That is one another thing we are trying 
to do. 
I would also like to mention here that many delegations which 
come here, mainly from Africa are asking for KVK model xxx xxx , an 
integrated approach on all subjects at district l evel. This is one model 
that we have in the KVK.  xxx xxx xxx I would also like to mention that 
in some KVKs where we have had problems, we have called them and 
we are taking corrective measures. I must say 600 KVKs are doing 
well. But we need  to enhance th eir capacity . 12´ÉÉÓ ªÉÉäVÉxÉÉ àÉå =xÉBÉEÉÒ {ÉºÉÇxÉãÉ 
]ÅäÉËxÉMÉ BÉEä ÉÊãÉA, BÉEèºÉä =xÉBÉEÉ BÉEÆ]ÉÒxÉVÉåºÉÉÒ {ÉèºÉÉ ¤ÉfÃÉAÆ +ÉÉè®  how to keep them abreast 

54 
 
with the new technologies happening. So, we are trying to do all this in 
the Twelfth Plan.  
4.12  During oral Evidence , the Committee pointed out drastic reduction of 
funds in ma ny Major Heads .  For instance, allocation for Agricultural 
Education curtailed from Rs. 12,230.00 crore to Rs. 4,000.00 crore. Similarly, 
Agriculture Extension down from Rs.10,000. 00 crore to Rs.6,000.00 crore, 
same fate noticed for Animal Sciences where the reduction was from 
Rs.6,000.00 to Rs.1,400.00 crore, Fisheries from Rs.1,250.00 crore to 
Rs.600.00 crore. The allocation for the Agriculture Extension was also on the 
decline year after year.  
4.13 Explaining his point of view t he Sec retary, DARE during evidence 
stated as follows :- 
“xx xx xx I would like to submit that this is what we have 
submitted in the first projection that started as early as 2011. We have 
made these projections given the kind of challenges. Madam, as you 
know, as the plan process proceeds, the Planning Commission takes 
it up and then it goes for discussions with the Finance Ministry and so 
on. Then, finally we are allocated this budget. In that, we will have 
again to go to different heads. You are right and I would like to submit 
my thanks to you for this point on KVKs. This is totally a plan 
programme. While in other division, we will have non-plan components 
towards salaries. But KVKs, including salaries, are only met by plan 
funds. So, this is what we have been submitting time and again that 
we require more funds towards this. We have brought up these points.  
I would like to mention it again that at least in KVKs, this 
happened because of the RE 2013, where we have got a cut of 
Rs.820 crore.  
When it comes to fund utilization in KVKs, it will be hundred per 
cent. Because this would not be adequate, we will have to take some 
more spill over from this year to next year and this will be hundred per 
cent utilization”.    
 

55 
 
He further added. 
In the year 2011 -12, that figure was due to the pay arrears that 
we had to pay in the Sixth Pay arrears.  In the year 2012-13 and 2013-
14, we are bui lding up and we want to enhance . xxx xxx xxx We had 
asked for as much as Rs. 10,000 crore. Now, we have been allocated 
something like Rs. 6,000 crore.  We had already got annual plan 
allocation RE for 2012 -13 and BE is also with us for 2013 -14. Given 
those figures for Rs. 2,520 crore and Rs. 3,415 is what we could do. 
Again I would like to submit here since Rs. 6,000 crore are there, so, 
Rs. 6,000 crore minus these two years figures, I th ink we can go up to 
something like Rs. 1,000 crore in the 3 year i.e. in the 12 th Plan. That 
shows a good amount of allocation.  We also have been submitting Sir 
in this Committee and also Planning Commission and everywhere that 
the contingency money that is available for each KVK is only of the 
order of Rs. five lakh.  So, we have brought out this also very clearly 
that it has to be enhanced manifolds because seven scientists are 
sitting in KVKs.  Just about Rs. 50,000 per month would not be 
adequate. We h ave made this point.  In the next three years, we will 
also see a considerable rise in allocation to Extension.  
4.14 During the Oral Evidence the representative of Planning Commission 
supplemented that   
“Sir, on KVKs, we have been suggesting to the Plann ing 
Commission that there is a component of the non -Plan which should 
be transferred to the non -Plan so that plan expenditure is spent only 
on the activities which are developmental in nature . But somehow the 
Ministry of Finance has not accepted the recomm endation of the 
Department of Agriculture Research and Education to transfer funds  
which are of non -plan in nature and which should be transferred to 
non-plan side, but they have not agreed to that. It is a bit of a 
concern”. 
4.15 As a large number of KVKs in the country are unable to discharge their 
assigned mandate due to lack of infrastructure, shortage of all other reasons.  As 
such, DARE took a policy decision to involve private participation in the Extension 
Services.  The private players indulged into pursuing their own agenda .   The 
system of private participation had its own demerit.  The Committee during oral 

56 
 
evidence, when  asked the r epresentative of the Department, on these issues 
stated as follows :-  
“Madam, xxx   xxx   xxx  we see a private extension xxx in different districts, 
we have analysed, they take it invariably with some inputs. Very common 
thing is to promote potash fertilizer.  So they take up only those plots and 
have an absolute agenda there.  Let us be very clear.  Now,  if they want to 
promote their product, that much of extension goes or they have their seeds 
or whatever, they want that much in those specific plots and it is not a 
universal extension system for the whole KVKs with all commodities.   
If they talk of one seed, for example, hybrid seed of vegetable, it is 
only limited to that only whereas in the public extension system, as you also 
said just now, the demand is from cereals to pulses to oil seeds to milk to 
fishes, everything.  So, nobody can replace the exi sting system, I would not 
use the word deficient, but whatever its performance we need to strengthen 
it.   
At this time, I must say, there are 632 KVKs as on today.  
Administrative building is available with 554 of them; you talked about 
infrastructure, administrative building is not available with 78 KVKs, that is 
what we are factoring in in the Twelfth Plan; soil testing laboratories 
available with 389 of them.  So, we still have to go for 243 in the Twelfth 
Plan and farmers are still available with 490 o ut of 632, 142 is our target in 
the Twelfth Plan; staff quarters, of course, may not be of much interest; 
demonstration units, 394 are available, we still need to do for 234.  This is 
what we are asking for more money in the Twelfth Plan to cater to all th ese.  
As you said, we need to go a long way”. 
 
4.16   Indian Agriculture is mostly rain dependent farming system. There has been 
drought and drought like situation prevailing in some parts of the country. 
Improvement in productivity in Rain fed/Dry land agriculture are crucial areas 
requiring technological an d research support from ICAR/DARE especially in the 
context of prevalent drought.  When queried about measures taken to contain 
effect of drought, t he Department in Post Evidence Note submitted that the ICAR 
has developed a number of technologies for droug ht proofing which are listed 
below: 
 Use of early maturing drought tolerant varieties in chronically drought 
prone areas. 

57 
 
 Adoption of rainwater harvesting technologies for providing 
supplementary irrigation during dry spells 
 In situ moisture conservation pr actices to help tie over short term 
droughts by crops 
 Wide spacing and altering plant geometry to reduce water requirement 
 Mid-term contingency measures like foliar application of Potassium and 
reduction of plant population 
 Preparation of district-wise contingency plans and their dissemination. 
 
Specific examples include:  
 
  Demonstrating drought proofing through varietal replacement in rainfed 
rice  and alternate cropping systems during the 2009 in Chhatisgarh, 
Orissa and Jharkhand  
   In Andhra Pradesh, irrigated dry crops were successfully demonstrated 
during dry periods in place of paddy.   
   Technology for recharge of open and bore wells helped to augment 
water availability in Saurashtra region for supplemental irrigation of 
cotton and groundnut, during 2002 and 2009 droughts.   
  In Maharashtra and northern Karnataka, adoption of compartmental  
bunding saved crops in large areas and the farmers were able to ensure 
fodder availability for livestock during a drought year. 
 Water harvesting and short duration finger millet varieties could help 
farmers harvest 25-30% yields in south interior Karnatak a during 2012 
drought.  
  
Integrated watershed programme in Maharashtra (Jalna, Aurangabad 
and Beed districts) ensured drinking water and fodder availability during 
2012 drought. 
 
4.17  The Department further added that Central Research Institute for Dryland 
Agriculture (CRIDA), Hyderabad has conducted 160 demonstrations under crops, 
natural resource management and fodder in the drought affected districts of 
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Gujarat and Rajasthan during 2012 under National 
Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) project and AICRP on Dryland 
Agriculture. Likewise, Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur organized 153 
demonstrations and trainings in 2012-13 on drought proofing.  The NAIP subproject 
activities on livelihood improve ment are undertaken in cluster mode.  These 

58 
 
subprojects are being implemented through village level and cluster level 
committees in association with more than 40 KVKs. 
 
4.18  During briefing to the Committee the Secretary, during evidence stated as 
follows: 
“xxx  xxx  xxx.  Today we talk of with confidence the 
contingency plans which are very important, because even now we 
have drought situation in some districts, etc. and from ICAR side, we 
have 400 plus districts contingency plans on the website, which 
anybody can use.” 
 
4.19   In reply to post evidence query regarding the District level contingency plan , 
the Department has submitted that ICAR in association with State Agriculture, 
Horticulture, Veterinary and Fisheries Universities prepared district level  
contingency plans to meet aberrant weather situations for the entire country based 
on the recommendations of the parliamentary committee.  These plans cover not 
only crops but also horticulture, livestock, poultry and fisheries sectors.  The plans 
cover climate related contingencies like delay in monsoon, mid -seasonal break in 
monsoon, unseasonal rains, heavy foods, cyclones, cold wave, frost, heat wave 
etc. So far, around 400 districts have been covered which are at Annexure-V. 
(D) AGRICULTURE EDUCATION 
4.20 Developing and strengthening Agricultural Education at Under/Post 
Graduate levels and research are so me key areas of Agriculture Policy.  The 
Department has submitted that t he Agriculture Education is being imparted in the 
country by 55 AUs, 5 DUs, 1 CU and 4 CUs having Agricultural faculties. To reduce 
the in breeding in Agricultural Education and promote the talent, an All India 
Entrance Examination for Admission to UG level courses for 15%  (1234) seats and 

59 
 
to PG level courses for 25%  (2812) seats are also held annually. Admissions to 11 
bachelor degree programmes namely Agriculture, Horticulture, Fishery, Forestry, 
Home Science, Sericulture, Bio -Technology, Agricultural Engineering, Dairy 
Technology, Food Science and Agricultural Marketing & Cooper ation are done 
through entrance examination. Admissions are also done for 93 Master Degree 
Programmes awarded by Agricultural Universities in 20 major disciplines viz. Plant 
Biotechnology, Plant Sciences, Physical Science, Entomology & Nematology, 
Agronomy, Social Sciences, Statistical Sciences, Horticulture, 
Forestry/Agroforestry & Sericulture, Agricultural Engineering & Technology, Water 
Science & Technology, Home Science, Animal Biotechnology, Veterinary Science, 
Animal Sciences, Fisheries Science, Dairy  Science, Dairy Technology, Food 
Science Technology and Agri -Business Management. The SRF fellowships for 
Ph.D. programmes are also being awarded in 56  subjects in AUs.  The human 
capital availability and requirements in Agriculture and allied sector has be en 
worked out through a study entrusted to National Academy of Agricultural 
Research Management (NAARM), Hyderabad and Institute of Applied Manpower 
Research, New Delhi. The discipline wise supply (2010) of Human Capital 
requirement for the Agricultural Sector is as under: 
Annual out turn by education level in 2010: 
Discipline UG PG Ph.D Total 
Crop science  11852 3514 583 15949 
Horticulture 1001 409 55 1465 
Veterinary 1761 797 125 2683 
Fisheries 285 109 30 424 
Dairy 255 30 25 310 
Agri Biotech 558 156 20 734 
Agriculture 
Engineering 
1218 262 27 1507 
Forestry 386 275 55 716 
Total 17316 5552 920 23787 

60 
 
 
4.21 The ICAR also supports to a limited extent strengthening and development 
of agricultural education , student amenities like Educational Museum, Sports 
Complex, Smart Class Rooms, Examination Hall, Boys & Girls Hostel etc. The 
supports to promote niche area of excellence, hands on training (experiential 
learning), Library and other student amenities are al so provided for   education 
quality and reforms. The Accreditation of university is done after the first batch of 
student pass out to ensure quality of higher agricultural education. Scholarships 
and Training Programmes for Human Resources Development and capacity 
development are also covered under the  Agricultural Education. The various 
projects of Agricultural Education are as under: 
 
Details of Projects Initiated for Agricultural Education  
Name of the Scheme :  Strengthening and Development of Higher   
Agricultural Education in India 
Programmes Major Activities  
Infrastructural Development Girl’s, boys’ and international students’ hostels, 
educational museums, examination halls,  
sports facilities,  refurbishing /renovation,  
model-class rooms and laboratories, central 
instrumentation facilities, centenary grants to 
the universities, purchas es, repair and 
maintenance of existing equipments and 
computers etc. NISAGENET to develop t he 
database of information of all the universities 
Niche Area of Excellence  Twenty two Niche Area of Excellence supported 
to strengthen research capabilities in the 
universities, at present 
Experiential Learning To promote entrepreneurial skills for UG 
students 376 modules  established 
Curriculum development and 
delivery & strengthening of UG/PG 
Preparation of quality instructional material, 
practical manuals and e-resources; contingency 

61 
 
Teaching 
 
grants for UG/PG practicals 
Student and staff amenities  Study tours, agri -sports, agri -fests, teaching 
technology laboratory, placement cells, 
examination and e ntrance test facilities, 
merit/performance-based support: university 
level text book writing, personality development; 
counseling of  students and tutorials for SC/ST 
students 
Library Strengthening Learning resources, internet connectivity, text 
books, ha ndbooks, reference books, book 
banks, journals other than CERA -subscribed 
and ICT strengthening 
Modernization of AU Farms For augmenting facilities/infrastructure of 
instructional farms to scale up research and 
teaching capabilities; 48 AUs have been 
supported. 
Faculty Development Faculty  development, Facilitating within country 
participation in  symposia, seminars, training 
(other than CAFT);  HRD for technical and 
administrative staff; Best Teacher Award; 
Adjunct and visiting faculty, 
 Centres of Advanced Faculty 
Training (CAFT) 
For faculty development in specific areas of 
agriculture and allied sciences, 31 CAFT have 
been established. 
Summer & winter schools/short 
courses 
Need-based faculty development  by organizing 
63  Summer & winter schools/short courses 
Emeritus Scientists To provide continuity of research work by  
superannuated scientists in key areas, 50 
positions are existing.  
ICAR National Professors 
(including Borlaug Chair) 
For promoting research by renowned scientists 
and develop school of thought, 10 Chairs are 
established.  
ICAR National Fellows  To promote the middle -level scientists to 
intensify research in emerging key areas, 25 
positions are existing. 
Overseas Fellowships For forging global competitiveness among 
students, 15 fellowships are awarded annually 
for pursuing studies abroad by Indian students 
and foreign students in India 
National Fellowships Annually, JRF (475); SRF (202) Merit cum 
Means scholarship; internship for veterinary 
students; stipend for Rur al Agricultural Work 

62 
 
Experience, National Talent Scholarship 
All India Entrance Examination for 
UG/PG programmes (2013) 
Total no. of applicants : UG (95945); PG 
(23786); SRF (2266); Total (121992) 
Quality Assurance and 
Accreditation 
 
Review and reforms: periodic review of course 
content; review of regulatory mechanisms such 
as Model Act and norms, standards, academic 
regulations and governance. Evaluation 
Manpower/resource assessment, Impact 
assessment  (outsourcing and peer reviews),  
accreditation of universities/colleges and quality 
reforms 
Capacity Building at NAARM Three Foundation Courses for Agricultural 
Research Service (FOCARS) and 45 senior -
level training programmes including 
Management Development  & Executive 
Development Programmes   are being  offered. 
Post Graduate Diploma in Technology 
Management in Agriculture (PGDTMA) is also 
offered through Open Distance Learning. 
ICAR National Professors 
(including Borlaug Chair) 
For promoting research by renowned scientists 
and develop school of thought, 10 Chairs are 
established.  
ICAR National Fellows  To promote the middle -level scientists to 
intensify research in emerging key areas, 25 
positions are existing. 
Overseas Fellowships For forging global competitiveness among 
students, 15 fellowships are awarded annually 
for pursuing studies abroad by Indian students 
and foreign students in India 
National Fellowships Annually, JRF (475); SRF (202) Merit cum 
Means scholarship ; internship for veterinary 
students; stipend for Rural Agricultural Work 
Experience, National Talent Scholarship 
All India Entrance Examination for 
UG/PG programmes (2013) 
Total no. of applicants : UG (95945); PG 
(23786); SRF (2266); Total (121992) 
Quality Assurance and 
Accreditation 
 
Review and reforms: periodic review of course 
content; review of regulatory mechanisms such 
as Model Act and norms, standards, academic 
regulations and governance. Evaluation 
Manpower/resource assessment, Impact 
assessment  (outsourcing and peer reviews),  
accreditation of universities/colleges and quality 
reforms 

63 
 
Capacity Building at NAARM Three Foundation Courses for Agricultural 
Research Service (FOCARS) and 45 senior -
level training programmes including 
Management Development  & Executive 
Development Programmes   are being offered. 
Post Graduate Diploma in Technology 
Management in Agriculture (PGDTMA) is also 
offered through Open Distance Learning. 
 
4.22 The Committee when asked about the impact of reduced allocati on of Major 
Head Agricultural Education at BE stage on various schemes , t he Department 
submitted that  n o new works/Purchase of equipment has been undertaken by the 
universities for strengthening and development of Higher Agricultural Education 
during the current financial year. However, all the programmes formulated, 
including the infrastructural support to provide quality education, shall be taken up 
during the remaining period of XII plan, after the finalization of the EFC. 
 
(E) HUMAN RESOURCES 
 4.23 Development of Human Resources, is key to ushering Agriculture growth.  
The Committee when asked about the details of the schemes/projects initiated for 
the development of Human Resource  in Central Agricultural Universities/ICAR 
Institutes etc. and the mod alities/plan of action of the govt. to share agricultural 
research with State Agricultural Universities, the Department submitted that there is 
only one CAU located at Imphal, Manipur and has its jurisdiction over the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Sikkim, Tripura, Meghalaya and Manipur with 
integrated programme of teaching, research and extension education. The 
University offers 8 UG, 25 PG & 8 Ph.D. programmes in the disciplines of 
Agriculture, Veterinary and Animal Husbandry, Fishery Science, Home  Science, 
Horticulture, Forestry, Agriculture Engineering and Food Processing Engineering. 

64 
 
The seven different colleges with total intake capacity of 358 students in UG, 169 in 
PG & 18 Ph.D. programmes are  
1. College of Agriculture, Imphal, Manipur 
2. College of veterinary Sciences & AH, Selesih, Aizwal, Mizoram 
3. College of Fisheries, Lembucherra, Tripura 
4. College of Horticulture and Forestry, Pasighat, Arunachal Pradesh 
5. College of Home Sciences, Tura, Meghalaya 
6. College of Engineering & Post Harvest Technology, Ranipool, Sikkim 
7. College of Post Graduate Studies, Barapani, Umiam, Meghalaya 
 
 
4.24 The 4 ICAR Deemed to be Universities (DU) i.e. IARI (New Delhi), IVRI          
(Izatnagar), NDRI (Karnal) and CIFE ( Mumbai) are the National level Institutions 
imparting Higher Agricultural Education. 
The total number of disciplines and intake capacity of DUs is given below: 
Name of DU No.of Discipline Annual Intake 
capacity 
IARI 24 115 
IVRI 22 140 
NDRI 1(UG); 
13(PG) 
22 
132 
CIFE 11 77 
 
4.25 The multi -disciplinary and multi locational agricultural research is being 
taken up by funding research programme through specific All India Coordinated 
Research Projects/ Network projects which are located mostly in the Universities. 
The Niche Area of Exc ellence programme is also supported under Higher 
Agricultural Education to attain excellence in cutting edge areas like microbial 
diagnostics, bio-prospecting, pesticidal gene products, bio -agents, sustainable fish 
farming, metagenomics, drought resistant strategies, molecular breeding and 
rainfed agriculture etc. A comprehensive capacity development framework based 
on required competencies has been put in place for the development of Human 

65 
 
Resources in ICAR from entry level to senior managers. The framewor k and 
programmes have been approved. A draft training policy for the organization is also 
proposed.  
(F) VACANT POSTS IN DARE/ICAR  
4.26 The Committee in Post Evidence query asked the details of faculty at CAU, 
Imphal and seven different colleges and four Deemed to be Universities also the 
intake and actual number of students enrolled.   
4.27 In their written submission the Department has stated that the number of 
Faculty, intake capacity & actual numbers of student enrolled at UG, PG & Ph.D. 
levels at Central Agricultural University, Imphal and its seven different colleges are 
as below:  
Name of College Number of 
Faculty  
Intake Capacity Students 
Enrolled 
 Sancti
-oned 
In 
posit 
ion 
UG PG Ph.D. UG PG Ph.D. 
College of Agriculture, 
Imphal 
48 39 88 48 4 63 27 3 
College of Veterinary 
Science & Animal 
Husbandry, Aizwal, 
Mizoram 
65 
 
50 66 48 6 53 13 3 
College of Fisheries, 
Tripura 
33 23 35 20 - 24 13 - 
College of Horticulture & 
Forestry, Pasighat 
63 41 75 8 - 52 6 - 
College of Home 35 18 32 - - 15 - - 

66 
 
Science, Tura 
College of Agricultural 
Engg. & PHT, Sikkim 
45 25 62 - - 32 - - 
College of Post 
Graduate Studies, 
Barapani 
55 22 - 45 8 - 29 8 
 
4.28 The discipline wise intake capacity of the four ICAR Deemed -to-be-
Universities, the actual students enrolled in each of the discipline and the number 
of teachers/faculties engaged by these Universities are given at Annexure-VI. 
 
4.29 In reply to written reply the Department has submi tted the information 
related to Scientific, Technical and Administrative posts lying in DARE/ICAR, its 
affect on research and other activities and the number of posts filled in 2012 -13 
and proposed to fill in    2013-14. The Department submitted as follows: 
Category Sanctioned In Position Vacant %age vacant 
Scientific 6472 4577 1895 29.27 
Technical 6635 5744 891 13.42 
Administrative 4891 4311 580 11.85 
 
4.30 Retirement and recruitment is a continuous process. Presently the R&D 
programmes are being managed through judicious deployment of the available 
scientific manpower.  In other categories the services are appropriately outsourced 
as per operational needs and requirements.  In the Scientific category 302 
positions in diffe rent levels have been filled up in the year 2012 -13.  In the 
Administrative and Technical category 292 and 248 positions respectively have 
been filled up during this period. 

67 
 
 
4.31 All the posts in the Scientific category and Group ‘A’ posts in the 
Administrative category are got filled up in the ICAR system centrally through the 
Agricultural Scientists’ Recruitment Board (ASRB).  Requisitions for these positions 
have been forwarded / are being forwarded to the ASRB to get these positions 
filled up on top priority basis. In the year 2013-14, 431 positions of Scientists in the 
entry-level are expected to be filled up based on the results of the ARS 
Examination 2012.  75 selectees are availing joining time for completion of their 
Ph.D. and are likely to join in  2013-14.  Besides 441 requisitions are in various 
stages of process in the Agricultural Scientists’ Recruitment Board for which the 
recommendations are expected in this year.  Requisitions for the remaining posts 
are under process for being forwarded to the ASRB.  
 
4.32 In all other cases wherein recruitment is decentralized and delegated, 
instructions have been issued to all the Institutes for filling up the approved 
vacancies expeditiously.  Efforts are being made to fill up these vacancies and the 
status is closely monitored. 
 
4.33 In Post Evidence reply the Department has submitted the following Division -
wise Scientists manpower figures:  
 
 
(As on 31.03.2013) 
SCIENTISTS 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Division Number of 
Institutes / 
PDs NRCs 
Sanctioned In position 
1. Crops Division 26 2061 1469 
2. Horticulture 23 872 664 
3. Animal Science 18 1019 756 

68 
 
4. NRM 14 1038 719 
5. Extension 09 68 61 
6. Fisheries 08 683 448 
7. Engineering 06 436 230 
8. Education 02 85 47 
9. ICAR Headquarters 01 51 46 
10. RMPs  159 137 
Total 107 6472 4577 
 
(G) AGRICULTURE ENGINEERING 
 
4.34 Improvement in farm practices, use novel agricultural implements, are  pre-
requisite for improving agricultural output.  The Department has in their written 
reply submitted the major schemes/projects initiated under Agricultural Engineering 
leading to improvement in farm practices and development of agricultural 
implements for improving agricultural outputs are as follows:   
 
1. Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal 
2. All India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Farm Implements and 
Machinery  
3. AICRP on Ergonomics  and Safety in Agriculture  
4. AICRP on Utilisation of Animal Energy for enhanced system efficiency 
 
The physical targets and achievements of the above mentioned schemes are as 
follows; 
 
1. CIAE, Bhopal 
Targets Achievements  
Design/development, 
refinement of farm equipment 
and crop production 
technology 
Mechanization of nursery media filling and sugarcane 
bud-chip settlings in protrays 
Size reduction machine for arecanut sheath for feed 
Development of pre-emergence herbicide strip-
applicator as an attachment to sowing devices for 
wide spaced crops 
Power weeder for cassava planted in mounds in slopy 
terrain 
Performance evaluation of 
farm equipment including 
irrigation equipment 
Performance evaluation of surface and sub surface 
drainage (SSD) systems 
Evaluation of platform type fruit harvesting system 
Manufacturing and supply of 
CIAE developed technologies 
Production and supply of equipment/ technologies: 
4461 Equipment/technologies costing Rs 78.985 lakhs 

69 
 
 
2. AICRP on Farm Implements and Machinery Physical Achievements 
(2012-13) 
Target Achievement 
Research & Development 
 Design,  development  and 
evaluation of tractor drawn  
turmeric digger 
 
 
 
Developed tractor drawn  turmeric digger and 
commercialised 
Design and development of 
power weeder for weeding on 
ridges and furrows 
 
Designed and developed a power weeder for 
weeding on ridges and furrows and is being 
tested. 
 Development of tractor operated 
Cassava harvester 
 
Designed and developed tractor operated 
Cassava harvester 
 Development of light weight 
thresher for hilly regions 
 
Developed light weight thresher for hilly region 
and tested for threshing of cowpea. 
 Prototype Manufacturing  
Fabrication of 3000 prototypes 
of manually operated, 65 animal 
drawn and self -propelled/power 
operated equipment under 
Prototype Manufacturing 
Workshop 
3,688 manually operated, 78 animal operated 
and 65 self -propelled/power operated 
equipment were manufactured under 
Prototype Manufacturing Workshop 
Frontline Demonstration of Farm Equipment 
Conduct frontline demonstration 
of 35 farm equipment at farmers' 
field 
Thirty five equipment were taken for 
demonstrations on farmers' fields, 5500 ha 
area was covered,  used for 450 h of threshing 
operation, tree climber was demonstrated on 
350 trees, 1720 pits were dug and 56 
demonstrations of horticultural tools were 
conducted. 
 
3. AICRP on Ergonomics and Safety in Agriculture 
Target Achievement 
Development of safety gadgets for 
farm machines/  workers- 2 Nos. 
Carried out studies on two safety gadgets for 
farm machines/ workers and work will 
complete in 2013-14. 
Ergonomic evaluation of 
tools/equipment and their 
refinement- 2 tools/equipment 
Carried out ergonomical evaluation and 
refinement of two tools/ equipment. 
Women friendly tools and 
equipment  
Developed two women friendly 
tools/equipment. 
Technologies for Hill area 
agriculture- 
Low cost gravity ropeway for hilly terrain has 
been developed. 
Demonstrations/ FLD programmes 
on farm safety awareness, 
ergonomically improved 
Carried out 115 demonstrations/ FLD 
programmes on farm safety awareness, 
ergonomically improved equipment and 

70 
 
equipment and women friendly 
equipment- 100 Nos. 
women friendly equipment. 
 
4. AICRP on Utilization of Animal Energy 
Target Achievements 
Adoption of animal drawn two row 
seed drill for use by bullocks of 
Sikkim region for sowing wheat 
and mustard. 
Two row animal drawn seed cum fertilizer 
drill was adopted for sowing of wheat and 
mustard crop in narrow terraces of hills of 
Sikkim.   
Refinement and adoption of 
animal drawn seed drill for sowing 
of wheat crop under zero tillage 
conditions. 
A two row zero till seed cum fertilizer drill 
was developed for sowing of wheat crop 
after paddy under zero tillage conditions in 
narrow terraces of hills  
Development of model energy 
village (in areas where availabilit y 
of grid electricity is limited and 
farmers depend on animal power) 
and promotion of DAP based 
technologies for sustainable 
livelihood of resource poor 
farmers. 
Four villages were selected in Raichur, 
Allahabad, Udaipur and Jorhat  districts 
where each vil lage was saturated with 
package of animal drawn implements. 
 
 
4.35 The outlay of Rs. 75.00 crore has approved at BE stage against the 
proposal of Rs. 99.30 crore which is more than 25 % of the proposal of the 
Division.  The Committee when asked about the reasons and the manner in which 
the programmers of various institutes  are likely to be affected  and the corrective 
measures taken by the Department , the Ministry in their written submission stated 
that initial a demand for funds at Plan BE 2013-14 stage was received from various 
units/ schemes under the SMD of Agricultural Engineering , approximately to the 
tune of Rs. 92 .00 Crore. This formed the basis of proposing an allocation of         
Rs. 99.30 Crore to the SMD of Agricultural Engineering. The ground o n which this 
was done was to fulfill the aspirations of the Schemes during the year 2013 -14.  
The demand being on higher side was scaled down.   A t the end of financial year 
2012-13, when most of the activities had accomplished, and a realistic picture 

71 
 
emerged, it was felt that there is a need to critically analyze the progress and then 
match the demand for the year 2013 -14, the outlay of Rs. 75 .00 Crores for BE 
2013-14 was then proposed.  
  
CIAE + Network APCAEM, Bhopal and NIRJAFT, Kolkata 
 
4.36 The reduction is only in respect of the items under CAPITAL budget head --
Equipment and Civil works which will require the approval of EFC/SFC in XII Plan 
document of the respective Institutes. 
 
AICRP on RES, Bhopal and AICRP on PHT, Ludhiana 
 
4.37 The justific ation for reduction holds good on two grounds i.e. firstly, initial 
allocation in November, 2012 had amount under the head ‘Equipment’ subject to 
the condition of the same being approved as a part of the EFC which by February, 
2013 was evidently not accomp lished. Secondly, the Establishment Charges were 
reduced as it was evident in February, 2013 that some vacancies will not be filled.  
 
  4.38 The pace of the research activities in the areas of Farm Mechanisation, 
Development of Post Harvest and Renewable Energy Technologies and 
Development of Technologies for diversified use of jute and allied fibres will be 
affected. 
 
4.39 Apart from the Plan funding of the schemes, the new R & D areas will also 
be addressed through Extramural Funded Projects and followin g Consortia 
Research Platforms: 
 Farm Mechanisation and Precision Farming 
 Secondary Agriculture (Processing and Value Addition) 
 Health Foods 

72 
 
 Energy in Agriculture 
 Processing and Value Addition in Natural Fibres 
 
 
4.40 From the documents supplied to the Committee it has been noticed that out 
of allocation of Rs. 52 .00 crore R E for 2012 -13 the Division has been able to 
utilized Rs. 34.32 crore upto January, 2013 and they has submitted that there were 
certain units with low expenditures up to 31.01.2013 bec ause of less expenditure 
reported up to January, 2013 under the head ‘Establishment Charges’. However, 
there has been an increase in expenditure up to the month of February, 2013, 
under the head ‘Establishment Charges’ and this has led to expenditure 
enhancement. 
4.41 The Department has further stated that the following steps has been taken 
to ensure complete utilization of funds by the end of financial year 2012-13: 
 
 Monthly monitoring of the head-wise expenditure  
 Meetings with Directors and Project Coordinators 
 Re-appropriation among the sub -heads of Capital budget head and sub -
heads of Revenue budget head, wherever justifiably required, within an 
Institute/AICRP; and reallocation at RE. 
 
 
(H) NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
 
4.42 Indian Institute of Soil Science including their ACIPRs, Network Project on 
organic Farming and NRCAF including its AICRP have made significant 
achievements in improving soil health, promoting organic farming and agroforestry, 
respectively. These Institute s/AICRPs have fully achieved the physical and 
financial targets including GIS -based soil fertility maps, technology packages, 
agroforestry models, farmer trainings and demonstrations.  

73 
 
4.43 There has been the reduction of 11 %  under the Division at BE sta ge for 
2013-14 but the it has been noticed that BE allocation of some of the 
institutes/centres has  been reduced by more than 11 % .  When the Committee 
desired to know the reasons for such variations , the Department submitted that the 
NRM Division ha d proposed a n allocation of Rs. 351.4 crore  to meet the 
requirements of its Institutes/AICRPs including NICRA. An outlay of Rs. 310 .00 
crores in BE 2013-14 was made due to reduced overall budgetary allocation. 
 
4.44 The reduction in allocation of the NBSS &LUP, Nagpur, CSWR&TI, 
Dehradun, AICRP on IFS, Modipuram, NRC on AF, ICAR Research Complex, 
Goa, NIASM, Baramati and NICRA was apparently due to the overall cut imposed 
which had to be shared by all the Institutes/AICRPs/NICRA under NRM division 
rationally. 
 
4.45 In view of the reduced budgetary provisions, meetings have been held with 
the Directors and Project Coordinators of AICRPs to review and prioritize the 
proposed schemes/activities during 2013 -14 to ensure taking up of important 
activities and achieve the target to a large extent. 
 
4.46 In regard to utilization of f unds by the Division during 2012 -13, when 
Committee desire d to know the reasons for non utilization of funds by various 
centres/institutes the department submitted that several approved item s of works/ 
equipments could not be completed because of the codal formalities involved. 
Fund utilization is being monitored regularly. The Divisional  Directors’ meeting to 
review the utilization of funds  was conducted on 11 th and 12 th March 2013. Fund 
utilization is likely to be 100% during this financial year. 

74 
 
 
(I) ANIMAL SCIENCE  
4.47 Management and improvement of livestock is one of the thrust areas of 
Agriculture.  When t he Committee  desired to know the schemes/projects, 
undertaken to improve /reproductive / proficiency/livestock and achievements 
during Financial Year 2012 -13, the Department stated that improving productivity, 
production and reproductive efficiency in livestock and poultry are the major thrust 
areas of Animal Science  Division of ICAR. These issues are addressed by the 18 
animal science institutes comprising of 2 Deemed Universities, 5 Central Research 
Institutes, 01 National Bureau, 4 Project Directorates and 6 National Research 
Centers. The Division also coordinates 7 All India Coordinated Research Projects 
and 7 Network Research Programmes.  In addition, 2 Outreach programmes and 4 
mega seed projects (poultry, sheep, goat and pig) are also being operated in 
different parts of the country at different ICAR institutes,  State Agricultural / 
Veterinary Universities and Non-Governmental Organizations.  
4.48 The major achievements during the year 2012-13 are: 
A total of 144 documented breeds of livestock and poultry registered, 
paternity verification kits developed, conservation of KilaKarsal sheep and 
Krishna valley breeds done successfully,‘Mahima’ a female calf has been 
successfully borne to handmade cloned,  Garima buffalo at NDRI, Karnal, 
‘Noorie’ unique pashmina goat cloned in J&K. indigenous sheep breeds 
improved through farm and field based units and elite germplasm  made 
available to farmers flocks, Buffalo improved by field progeny testing, 
developed Fr ieswal strain  yielding 3000 kg of milk per lactation, evolved 
new and improved backyard strains of rural poultryShrinidhi and Pratap, 
developed Resource based region specific feeding schedules for coastal 
and rain -fed agri -eco zones, carried out Rumen mic robial diversity in 
domesticated and wild ruminants, triplets in Muzzaffarnagri sheep achieved, 
twin in vitro fertilized goat kids produced, prepared database for sequential 
information on livestock feeds and feeding, developed vaccines against 
sheep and g oat pox Hemorrhagic septicemia, Loop -mediated isothermal 
amplification (LAMP) test for rapid detection of IBR virus in bovine semen 

75 
 
and also for detection of PPR virus from clinical samples, recorded highly 
pathogenic avian influenza virus (H4N1) among exo tic disease in crows in 
addition to chicken and ducks, malignant catarrhal fever was diagnosis in a 
wild bison and cattle from veterinary hospital at Bengaluru. Molecular 
Beacon based real -time PCR assay was developed for detection of 
Crimean-Congo Hemorrh agic fever, Identified H5N1 viruses, Prepared 
Spreadsheet modules for economic impact analysis for different diseases, 
produced value added  products(shawls) using angora wool  blended yarns 
and quality blankets and felts produced using sheep wool yarn, de veloped 
Value added milk products at NDRI. 
 
4.49 The Division has been able to utilize Rs. 132 .00 crore out of Rs. 194 .00 
crore upto January, 2013.  The Committee when desire d to know the reasons and 
steps taken by the Division for utilization of remaining funds in the remaining period 
of financial year, it was informed that there were several proposals regarding works 
and equipments under consideration/approval at different levels. However, some 
proposals could not be completed by that time because of the codal formalities 
involved.  As regards steps for full utilization, all the institutes were advised for 
initiating necessary steps to speed up the utilization in order to achieve 100 % 
target. The budget utilization in different schemes is being monitored on regular 
basis. 
4.50 During the year 2013-14 out of the proposal of Rs. 280 .00 crore an outlay of 
225.00 crore has approved.  The Committee desired to know the extent to which 
various programmers/schemes are likely to  be affected , due to such reduction, 
reasons for variations and  contingency  plan of the Division to overcome funds 
constraints.  The Department in their written reply submitted that t he major 
schemes affected due to budget reduction are conservation of indigenous animal 
genetic resources un der Network Project on Animal Genetic Resources, Field 
progeny testing centres under Buffalo Network Project, genetic improvement of 
indigenous breeds under All India Coordinated Project on cattle, production and 

76 
 
distribution of improved germplasm of rural  poultry under project Directorate on 
Poultry and the construction of new campus of central Avian Research Institute and 
surveillance and monitoring of disease data under Network on Gastro -intestinal 
Parasitism. 
 
4.51 The budget allocated at BE stage during 2013-14 was reduced from 280 .00 
crores to Rs 225 .00 crores which has resulted in reduced allocation for different 
schemes.  In order to overcome the budgetary constraints it is proposed to 
prioritize the purchase of equipments and works to be taken up under different 
schemes would be barest minimum looking into the immediate need and utility. 
Some of the equipments would be shared between schemes. The manpower 
would be judiciously utilized and essential manpower and services would be out 
sourced for specific work 
 
4.52 The civil works will be prioritized and around 15 % of budget under works 
would be spent on renovation, repair and maintenance of existing structures.  The 
list of equipments will be prioritized and only essential equipments will be 
purchased in XII Plan.  The Institutes have been advised to build central instrument 
facilities for optimal utilization and to avoid duplication to minimize the expenditure 
on equipments. Out of total outlay under present budgetary situation, emphasis 
would be  given to provide more recurring expenses including scientist’s 
contingency and provision of RA/SRFs on contract basis for facilitating the 
research programmes.  Efforts would be made to share the skills of scientists 
through multidisciplinary and inter -institutional collaborations to utilize the 
resources more efficiently.   

77 
 
(J) FISHERIES   
4.53 The Budgetary allocation of Rs. 85 .00 crore against the proposal of Rs. 
104.80 has been approved for fisheries division in the ongoing fiscal.  The 
Committee when asked the Department the reasons for reduction in allocation of 
various institutes/centres of the division, its affect, steps to o vercome funds 
constraints and also the reasons for increase in BE of Central Inland Fisheries 
Research Institute, Barrackp ore.  The Department submitted that s ince there was 
reduction in allocation of Plan Funds for ICAR, the Plan Fund allocation for 
Fisheries Division was re -adjusted and reduced from Rs. 104.80 crores to Rs. 
85.00 crores at RE stage.  
4.54 Central Marine Fisheries Institute, Kochi has been allocated Rs. 1870 lakhs 
against the demand of Rs. 2310 lakhs (19.05% less); Central Institute 
Brackishwater Acquaculture, Chennai allocation of Rs 1050 lakhs against Rs. 1310 
lakhs (19.89% less); Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, Kochi Rs. 770 lakhs 
against Rs. 960 lakhs (19.79% less) and National Bureau of Fish Genetic 
Resources, Lucknow  Rs. 760 lakhs against Rs. 870 lakhs (12.64% less).  
4.55 As regard to  impact of reduction in allocation, the Committee was informed 
that the shortage of funds may have some impact on some of the program ms like 
Networking Programs on Mariculture and  Aquatic Anim al Health Management, 
Species & System diversification and intensification of culture practices in 
freshwater and brackishwater.   To overcome shortage, for initial period, t he work 
items and equipment of the institutes will be prioritized. The new initiati ves 
(Network Programmes) will be initiated only during the current financial year and 
once enough funds are received, the anticipated progammes will be taken up.  

78 
 
Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, Barrackpore has a regional centre at 
Guwahati, devoted for working in the NEH region.  The BE of the institute has been 
increased, due to higher allocation under NEH programmes.    
4.56 The Fisheries Division has not able to utilize more than Rs. 50.14 crore upto 
the end of January 2013 out of RE alloca tion of Rs.69 .00 crore.  The Committee 
desired to know the reasons for non utilization of funds and steps taken for 
utilization of balance funds in the remaining period.  The Department has submitted 
that the process of purchase of  equipment and execution of work was in  progress 
in the Institutes during January 2013. Discussions have been held in Divisional 
meeting on 15th March 2013 and action has been taken for full utilization  of Plan 
funds.  Monthly monitoring of utilization of funds are being done at t he Division and 
discussions with Directors of the institutes were held for full utilization of funds. 
 
CROP SCIENCE 
4.57 Development of new crop varieties, with improved yield and nutritional 
quality alongwith technical support are some of the mandate assigned to 
ICAR.   The Committee note that for Crop Science Division an Outlay of Rs. 
468.00 crore was approved against the proposal of Rs. 628.01  crore.  The 
financial proposals of the National Institute of Biotic Stress Management, 
Indian Institute of A gricultural Biotechnology,  Central Institute of Cotton 
Research, Nagpur and Indian Grassland and Fodder Research Institute, 
Jhansi have been drastically down -sized by almost 93.33 %,  92.5 %, 77.56 % 
and 64.78 % respectively.  On the other hand some of th e programmes and 
projects have received enhanced allocations at BE stage.  The Department 
has lamented that the reduction would influence the procurement of research 

79 
 
materials and cost of the laboratory/field work force. Further, upon 
reassessment of the operational cost upward revision effected in some of the 
projects.  Such unprofessional and casual approach at planning stage itself 
points towards mismanagement in the Crop Science Division which resulted 
in either drastically reducing the allocation or re vising the cost upwards.  
They therefore, recommend the Department to reapprove the projects so that 
need based provision made for the purpose. 
 
4.58 The Committee also notice  that only 52.13 % of the funds were utilized 
by the Division upto January, 2013 and the factors responsible for such slow 
phase were time taken in completion of processing of official procedures to 
procure spill over equipments.  To utilize the RE, the Di vision has made re -
appropriation amongst sub -heads for Grant for Capital/Salary/General 
through Divisional meetings.  The Committee strongly recommend the 
Department to strengthen the monitoring  mechanism of expenditure of the 
Crop Science Division to ensure   that the Budget Estimates allocation of the 
Division are fully utilized in a time bound manner. 
 
HORTICULTURE 
4.59 Genetic resource management and development of improved varieties 
of horticulture crop, biotic and abiotic resistance, export -value, as also 
standardization of technique for rapid propagation and horticulture based 
cropping pattern are some of the issues connected with Horticulture 
Division.     

80 
 
 The Committee note that the Department have not made any changes 
in the proposals of the H orticulture Division for 2013 -14.  The Division has 
been able to utilize 73.86 % of their RE grant  (upto January 2013).    Some of 
the institutes like Central Institute of Sub Topical Hortiulture, Lucknow, 
Central Institute of Arid Horticulture, Bikaner, Central Plantatio Crops 
Research Institute, Kasargod and Director of Floriculture, New Delhi unable 
to utilize more than 26 %  of their allocation upto January, 2013 which 
improved belatedly in the month of February, 2013.  Under utilization of funds 
is a cause of concern to the Committee.  For the purpose of finalization or 
reallocations, prioritization and also EFC’s clearances , discussions were 
held in March, 2013.  The Committee, desire the Department to complete the 
finalization of EFC / SFC and other formalities of various schemes of the 
Division.  Further, there is an imperative need to strengthen the 
implementation mechani sm of the Horticulture Division so that the targets 
assigned for of the Twelfth Five Year Plan are realised.  At the same time, 
corrective actions need to be taken to ensure utilization of funds prudently.     
 
AGRICULTURE EXTENSION 
4.60 Agriculture Extension has a major scheme of disseminating knowledge 
and information to the farmers.  The Krishi Vigyan Kendras during 2012 -13, 
assessed  refined and demonstrated technologies through 29,428 on -farm 
trials, 1.31 lakh front -line demonstrations in different far ming system.  Under 
NICRA project 100 KVKs also demonstrated climate resilient technologies 
through 23441 demonstrations in the country.  The Committee further find 
that out of 632 KVKs in the country, the Department has been able to provide 

81 
 
Administrative buildings to 554 KVKs, trainees hostel to 490 KVKs, staff 
quarters to 442 KVKs, demonstration units to 394 KVKs and soil and water 
testing facilities to 389 KVKs.   The Committee find major deficiencies in the 
operation of KVKs.  At places they are non -operational for want of project 
coordinator/specialist and other administrative staff, lack of infrastructure 
etc.  Some of KVKs have failed to extend professional advise expected from 
them.  Bridging the yawning gap recorded at demonstration and farmers 
field, is another area of the concern.  The Committee desire that the 
functioning of KVKs be relooked into and the specific pitfalls brought so in 
the Report be made good.  At the same time, the infrastructure such as 
Administrative buildings, trainees hostel , staff quarters, demonstration units 
and soil and water testing facilities, be provided in a time bound manner in 
the remaining KVKs.  The bottlenecks in achieving demonstration level yields 
at farm levels by identified and appropriate actions taken to na rrow the 
productivity gap further.  The Committee find that private participation in 
agriculture extension through the institutions of Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) 
has not yielded the desired results, since the private players allegedly, 
pursue limited agend a of promoting their products driven by profit motives 
under the guise of agriculture extension.  Such deficiencies were admitted by 
Secretary, DARE during his deposition before the Committee.  Under such a 
scenario, the private participated KVK do not att end to major components of 
extension services, leaving farmers in a lurch.  The holistic approach of 
dissemination of information and farm knowledge to farmers, through KVK, 
which is a guiding philosophy, is given a decent burial by the private 
participated KVK.  The Committee view this with all the seriousness, it 

82 
 
deserves and would like the Dep artment to appraise the quality and reach of 
extension services rendered by private players.  The Committee desire that 
Government should ensure that KVK including private KVKs provide all the 
mandated activities to the farmers, without any exception.  At the sam e time 
the allocations for KVKs be stepped up, so as to ensure that only State 
supported KVKs function, in the country.   
4.61 The Committee note that the entire expenditure of the KVKs is booked 
under Plan H ead and is reported to be the main cause for del ay in making 
provision for infrastructure developments.  They therefore, desire the 
Department to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance so as to fund 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras from Non-Plan allocation.   
 
4.62 During 2012-13 out of Rs. 450.00 crore RE the Division has been able to 
utilize only Rs. 291.26 crore upto January, 2013.  This shows  the tardy trend 
in the expenditure in the Division.  The Committee desire the Department to 
revisit the funds utilization and monitoring mechanism of tha t Division so as 
to utilize the funds prudently so as to meet the targets of Twelfth Five Year 
Plan. 
 
4.63 The Committee have observed that in the context of drought prevailing 
in various parts of the country, ICAR has developed a number of 
technologies, f or drought proofing.  Similarly, demonstration and training 
organised by CAZRI, Jodhpur and CRIDA, Hyderabad in drought affected 
districts of Maharashtra, Karnataka, Gujarat and Rajasthan, as part of NICRA.  
District level contingency plan to meet aberrant  weather contingency like 
delay in monsoon, mid -seasonal break in monsoon, unseasonal rain, heavy 

83 
 
floods, cyclone, cold waves, heat waves prepared for 400 districts.  While 
appreciating the work of ICAR in mitigating sufferings of farmers, the 
Committee desire that KVKs should disseminate information / knowledge in 
the districts under their jurisdiction, so as to contain the ill effects of 
drought. 
AGRICULTURE EDUCATION 
4.64 The Agriculture Education is being imparted in the country by 55 
Agriculture Univer sities, 5 Deemed to be Universities and 4 Central 
Universities having Agricultural faculties.  To promote the talent, an All India 
Entrance Examination for Admission to UG level course for 15 % seats and to 
PG level courses for 25 % seats are held annually .  The ICAR supports 
strengthening and development of agricultural education to develop student 
amenities like Educational Museum, Sports complex, Smart Class Rooms, 
Examination Hall, Boys and Girls Hostel etc. supports to promote niche area 
of excellence, hands on training, Library for education quality and reforms.  
Due to reduced allocation no new works, purchase of equipment has been 
undertaken by the universities for strengthening and development of Higher 
Agriculture Education during the current Fisca l.  The Committee appreciate 
the assistance being provided by the DARE/ICAR.  They further desire the 
Department to utilize funds expeditiously and raise additional funds under 
the Head at RE stage.   
 
4.65 The Committee have taken serious note of lack of enthusiasm amongst 
youth of the country, to take agriculture, as a career and profession, probably 
on the grounds of limited employment opportunities, unfavourable returns as 

84 
 
compared to service sector etc.  This calls for in trospection of whole gamut 
of agriculture education system in the country and employability.  The 
Committee feel that being agrarian economy, expansion of agriculture 
education should not halt.  The avenues of employment be raised 
exponentially.  At the sa me time, policy on Central Agriculture University as 
recommended by the Committee each be expedited.   The Committee would 
like to be apprised of action taken in the matter. 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE 
4.66 Development of Human Resources,  is key to ushering Agriculture 
growth.  To meet the challenge and future requirement of agriculture scientist 
the Department has set up CAU at Imphal and four Deemed to be Universities 
i.e. IARI, New Delhi IVRI, Izatnagar, NDRI, Karnal and CIFE, Mumbai.  The 
Committee have taken note of intake and manpower of some of the 
Agricultural Institutes.  It has been noted that there exists an annual intake 
capacity of 545 in CAU Imphal and 115  UG & 128 PG, 140 UG & 97 PG, 22 UG 
& 132 PG, and 166 at IARI, IVRI, NDR I and CIFE respectively.  Against this 
intake, the actual enrolment in CAU Imphal is 331 which are supervision of 
218 teachers/faculties.  Similarly in IARI, against 241 students there are 542 
teachers/faculties.  In IVRI against 222 students, there are 23 2 
teachers/faculties, NDRI against 227 there are 146 teachers/faculties and 
CIFE against 129 students there are 52 teachers/faculties.  The Committee 
have a growing feeling that number of teachers/faculties engaged in all these 
needs to be reviewed by the Department and the Committee be apprised of 
the outcome thereof. 
 

85 
 
SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER  
4.67 From the latest information furnished by the Department regarding the 
vacant position the Committee note that there are 1895 vacancies in the 
Scientific Cadre agai nst the sanctioned 6472 posts.  In the Technical cadre  
the situation is not very good it has 891 vacancies out of 6635 sanctioned 
posts.  On Administrative side out of total 4891 posts 580 are vacant.  The 
Divisions like  Crops Science, Animal Science, NR M, Fisheries, Engineering 
and Education are the worst suffer of the shortage of Scientists.   The 
Committee have been greatly concerned about the vacancies in scientific, 
technical and administrative cadres in ICAR and had urged upon Government 
to take app ropriate administrative measures.  However, result oriented 
action, has not been taken so far.  29% vacancy in scientific cadre is a great 
cause of concern since it directly impact the pace and quality of R&D work in 
Agriculture Sector.  As an interim measures, ICAR should consider extension 
of services of scientists of proven merit, with national / international track 
record of research.  At the same time, the Department should strengthen the 
existing recruitment procedure and prepare an action plan to fil l the vacant 
posts in a time bound manner. 
 
FARM MECHANIZATION / AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING 
4.68 Farm mechanization and availability of adequate farm power are 
crucial for timely farm operations, handling the crop produce, increasing 
production and productivity and reducing post harvest losses.  With the 
increase in intensity of copping, the turnaroun d time is drastically reduced, 
which demands availability of adequate power for time farm operations so 
that land is made available for subsequent crop.   Similarly, for precision 

86 
 
farming, increasing area under irrigation, conservation tillage, straw 
management and diversification of agriculture, more power is required for 
water lifting and precision placement / application of agricultural inputs such 
as seed, fertilizer, irrigation water, plant protection chemicals etc.   The 
Committee desire that farm mec hanization should be accorded a higher 
degree of priority so as to address the issue of scarcity of farm labour during 
peak agricultural season. 
 
4.69 A sum of Rs. 75.00 crore has been allocated under Major Hea d 
Agricultural Engin eering for the current Fiscal against the proposal of Rs. 
99.30 crore.  The demand of funds for approximately Rs. 92 .00 crore was 
received from various units/schemes of the Division.  These demands was 
made while the financial year 2012-13 has completed only six to eight months 
and therefore, the demand was on the higher side for the year 2013 -14.  The 
Committee was shocked to know that the Division has prepared their 
proposals on the higher side and not in realistic manner.  They therefore, 
recommend the Departm ent to review the Budget estimation system of 
Agriculture Engineering Division.  The Committee noted that the Division has 
utilized Rs. 34.32 crore upto January, 2013 out of RE allocation of Rs. 52 .00 
crore while submitting clarification regarding non -utilization of funds upto 31 
January, 2013 was due to less expenditure reported by certain units under 
establishment charges.  The Committee took serious view and recommend 
the Department to rework on the priorities of the Division and strengthen the 
funds uti lization mechanism so that the targets of XII Five Year Plan in 
respect of the Divisions are achieved in remaining period of plan.   
 

87 
 
NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
4.70 Institutes under Natural Resource Management Division have made 
significant achievements in improving soil health, promoting organic farming 
and agroforestry.  There has been the reduction of 11 % funds at RE stage.  
Against the proposal of 351.40 crore an outlay of Rs. 310.00 crore has 
allocated.  The Committee noted that National Bureau of S oil Survey and 
Land Use Planning, Nagpur, Central Soil and Water Conservation Research & 
Training Institute, Dehradun, AICRP on Integrated Farming System + Organic 
Farming, Modipuram, NRC Agroforestry, ICAR Research Complex, Goa, 
NIASM, Malegaon and NICRA has registered a reduction of 34.16%, 60%, 
23.52%, 20%, 33.33%, 22.5%, 21.97 and 18.18% respectively.  The Committee 
have a growing feeling that the such a huge reduction of allocation of certain 
Institutes on the plea of reduction in over all allocation indicates a degree of 
ad-hocism in the financial management.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
that rather than waiting ti ll the RE stage, DARE/ICAR should reconsider the 
proposals of these institu tes at the earliest and apprise  the outcome.   The 
Division has been able to utilize only 66.47 % of their RE allocation upto the 
end of January, 2013 several approved items of works / equipments could not 
be completed because of the codal formalities involved.  They strongly 
recommend the Department to review their internal funds utilization 
mechanism at the earliest so that the funds allocated to the Division are 
utilized fully. 
ANIMAL SCIENCE 
4.71 Management and improvement of livestock is one of thrust area of 
Agriculture in the Country.   To improve productivity, production and 

88 
 
reproductive efficiency in livestock and poultry are major areas which are 
addressed by 18 animal scien ce institutes   comprising of 2 Deemed 
Universities, 5 Central Research Institutes, 01 National Bureau, 4 Project 
Directorates and 6 National Research Centr es. The Division also coordinates 
7 All India Coordinated Research Projects and 7 Network Research 
Programmes.  In addition, 2 Outreach programmes and 4 mega seed projects 
(poultry, sheep, goat and pig) are also being operated in different parts of the 
country at different ICAR institutes, State Agricultural / Veterinary 
Universities and Non -Governmental Organizations.  Against the proposal of 
Rs. 280 crore an outlay of Rs. 225 .00 crore BE which is 19.64 % lower has 
been approved.   The Committee noted that programmers of Network Project 
on Animal Genetic Resources, Karnal, National Dairy Research Institute, 
Karnal including Network on Research & Development, Central Sheep and 
Wool Research Institute, Avikanagar, Central Institute for Research on Goats, 
Makhdoom, Central In stitute for Research on Buffaloes, Hissar, Network on 
Buffaloes Hissar, National Institute on Animal Nutrition and Physiolgy, 
Bengaluru, NRC on Camel, Bikaner, NRC on Equine, Hissar, Veterinary Type 
Culture, AICRP on Cattle Research, Meerut, Central Avian Research Institute 
Izatnagar, Project Directorate on Poultry, Hyderabad, Network on Gastro 
Intestinal Parasitism, Izatnager and NRC on Mithuu, Jharnapani Nagaland 
Animal Science Institutes, are likely to be affected due to the lower allocation 
to the tune of 76.47%, 31.35%, 41.66, 50.76, 47.5%, 53.75%, 51.14%, 34.78%, 
45.71%, 33.33%, 37%, 56.75%, 50%, 66.25%, funds, respectively.  The projects 
of Animal Science Division assumes special significance, as they directly 
impact small and marginal farmers.  The C ommittee, therefore, recommend 

89 
 
the Department to review the proposals of these Centres and consider re 
appropriation of funds with the Divisions so that the priority research of 
these Centres do not suffer in the current Fiscal. 
 
FISHERIES 
4.72 Against the proposal of Rs. 104.80 crore an outlay of Rs. 85 .00 crore 
BE has approved.  The Committee note that the allocation of Fisheries 
Division has reduced to 18.89 % at BE stage and there has an impact of 
34.03%, reduction on the funds of Central Marine Fisheries Institutes, Kochi, 
28.57% funds Central Institute Bracki shwater Aquaculture, Chennai, 20.61% 
Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, Kochi and 20.83% National Bureau 
of Fish Genetic Resources, Lucknow.  The shortage of funds will have impact 
on various important programmes like Networking Programs on Mariculture 
and Aquatic Animal Health Management, Species & System diversification 
and intensification of culture practices in freshwater and brackishwater.   The 
Committee, therefore, desire the De partment to revisit the funds 
requirements of these Centres and Institutes and consider their proposals 
before RE stage.  The Committee also noted that out of allocation of Rs. 69 
crore the Fisheries Division has been able to utilize only Rs. 50.14 crore u pto 
the end of January, 2013 and to monitor the funds utilization the Division 
initiated action on 15 March, 2013.  The Committee desire the Department to 
strengthen the funds utilization mechanism of Fisheries Division so that the 
funds allocated are fully utilized. 
 
NEW DELHI;                  BASUDEB ACHARIA 
17 April, 2013                                   Chairman, 
27 Chaitra, 1935 (Saka)                                         Committee on Agriculture  

 
 
 
70 
 
 
        
Annexure-I 
Quarterly PAO Expenditure for the year 2012-13 under Plan 
         
(Rs. in lakhs) 
Sl.No. Division 
Revised 
Estimates 
2012-13 
1st Qtr 
Expenditure 
(Apr-Jun 
'12) 
2nd Qtr 
Expenditure 
(Jul-Sep '12) 
Progressive 3rd Qtr 
Expenditure 
(Oct-Dec 
'12) 
Progressive 4th Qtr 
(upto 
Feb'13) 
Progressive 
1 Crop Science 41300.00 25000.01 0.00 25000.01 1500.00 26500.01 14276.72 40776.73 
2 Horticulture #REF! 12000.00 0.00 12000.00 0.00 12000.00 1395.66 13395.66 
3 Agril. Extension #REF! 25350.01 0.00 25350.01 6500.00 31850.01 6735.25 38585.26 
4 Agril. Education 54600.00 29150.00 0.00 29150.00 2800.00 31950.00 3780.00 35730.00 
5 Agril. Eco. Stat. 350.00 250.00 0.00 250.00 0.00 250.00 100.00 350.00 
6 Agril. Engg. 5200.00 3900.00 0.00 3900.00 0.00 3900.00 920.00 4820.00 
7 ICAR Hdqrs. 9600.00 10000.00 0.00 10000.00 1000.00 11000.00 -1400.00 9600.00 
8 NFBSFARA 5500.00 4000.00 0.00 4000.00 0.00 4000.00 1500.00 5500.00 
9 NAIP/EAP 15000.00 6550.00 0.00 6550.00 4000.00 10550.00 203.00 10753.00 
10 CSWRC&TI 300.00 350.00 0.00 350.00 0.00 350.00 -50.00 300.00 
11 Other NRM Instts. 18200.00 13500.00 0.00 13500.00 1500.00 15000.00 2790.27 17790.27 
12 CRAI / NICRA 7500.00 5500.00 0.00 5500.00 1000.00 6500.00 1000.00 7500.00 
13 Animal Science 19400.00 12500.02 0.00 12500.02 1000.00 13500.02 5091.61 18591.63 
14 Fisheries 6900.00 5150.00 0.00 5150.00 1000.00 6150.00 750.00 6900.00 
  Total: ICAR  #REF! 153200.04 0.00 153200.04 20300.00 173500.04 37092.51 210592.55 
                    
DARE                   
1 CAU, Imphal 8500.00 2600.00 2600.00 5200.00 2858.00 8058.00 0.00 8058.00 
2 CAU, Barapani 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
3 CAU, Bundelkhand 99.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
4 CAU, Bihar 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
5 Other Programmes 50.00 4.71 19.64 24.35 16.72 41.07 0.00 41.07 

 
 
 
71 
 
  Total: DARE 8650.00 2604.71 2619.64 5224.35 2874.72 8099.07 0.00 8099.07 
                    
  Total ICAR + DARE #REF! 155804.75 2619.64 158424.39 23174.72 181599.11 37092.51 218691.62 
Note:  Excess drawn funds of Rs. 14.00 Cr and .50 Cr  in r/o ICAR Hqrs and CSWCR&TI, respectively, was refunded as their RE w ere reduced. 
 
  

 
 
 
72 
 
 
      
Annexure-II 
  
Quarterly PAO Expenditure for the year 2012-13 under Non-Plan 
         
(Rs. in lakhs) 
Sl.No. Division Revised Estimates 
2012-13 
1st Qtr 
Expenditure 
(Apr-Jun '12) 
2nd Qtr 
Expenditure 
(Jul-Sep '12) 
Progressive 
3rd Qtr 
Expenditure 
(Oct-Dec 
'12) 
Progressive 4th Qtr (upto 
Feb'13) Progressive 
1 Crop Science 62187.00 36731.33 0.00 36731.33 10446.39 47177.72 13848.85 61026.57 
2 Horticulture 24233.00 15005.10 0.00 15005.10 4267.44 19272.54 4818.08 24090.62 
3 Agril. Extension 390.00 214.07 0.00 214.07 60.88 274.95 72.05 347.00 
4 Agril. Education 4654.00 3357.68 0.00 3357.68 954.92 4312.60 341.40 4654.00 
5 Agril. Eco. Stat. 3287.00 2156.59 0.00 2156.59 613.33 2769.92 517.08 3287.00 
6 Agril. Engg. 7950.00 4839.91 0.00 4839.91 1376.47 6216.38 1732.62 7949.00 
7 ICAR Hdqrs. 14194.00 8178.92 0.00 8178.92 2326.09 10505.01 3179.11 13684.12 
8 CSWRC&TI 3254.00 2002.00 0.00 2002.00 569.37 2571.37 5406.28 7977.65 
9 Other NRM Instts. 25677.00 16056.82 0.00 16056.82 4566.57 20623.39 52.96 20676.35 
10 Animal Science 41465.00 24287.66 0.00 24287.66 6907.41 31195.07 9065.35 40260.42 
11 Fisheries 21799.00 12636.17 0.00 12636.17 3593.73 16229.90 5252.30 21482.20 
  
Sub-Total: Non-Plan 
ICAR  209090.00 125466.25 0.00 125466.25 35682.60 161148.85 44286.08 205434.93 
1 AP Cess funds  50.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 50.00 50.00 0.00 50.00 
  
Grand Total: Non-Plan 
ICAR  209140.00 125466.25 0.00 125466.25 35732.60 161198.85 44286.08 205484.93 
                    
1 DARE-Secretariat 377.00 113.43 90.00 203.43 88.23 291.66 63.87 355.53 
2 Contribution 483.00 0.00 5.25 5.25 34.47 39.72 -0.10 39.62 
  Total: DARE (Non-Plan) 860.00 113.43 95.25 208.68 122.70 331.38 63.77 395.15 
  Total: ICAR + DARE 210000.00 125579.68 95.25 125674.93 35855.30 161530.23 44349.85 205880.08 
 
 

 
 
 
73 
 
Annexure-III 
 
 
 
Demand No. 2- DERPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION 
Statement showing Monthly Expenditure Plan for 2012-13 
                                                                                                                   Rs inLakhs 
Month  Plan  Non -plan  Total  Cummulative Total  
APrii  52499 36012 88511 88511 
May 0 164 164 8867 
June 105651 89870 195521 284196 
July 0 '163 163 284359 
August 2850 164 3014 287373 
September 0 163 163 287536 
October 79200 36037 115237 402773 
November 0 164 164 402937 
December 2600 164 2764 405701 
January 76600 53972 130572 536273 
February 2600 164 2764 539037 
March 0 163 163 539200 
Total BE 2012-13 322000 217200 539200  
 
  

 
 
 
74 
 
Annexure-IV 
 
                                             Major schemes/projects undertaken in Horticulture Science in terms of physical and financial progress 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Scheme/ 
Programme 
Targets Achievements 
1 2 3 4 
1. Main Scheme- 
IIHR, Bangalore 
Including two 
out reach progs. 
 Leaf spot 
diseases 
 Sap Sucking 
Pests 
 
Sub-scheme- 
 
i. NRCB 
ii. NRCC 
 
 Enrichment of field gene 
bank 
 Development of improved 
varieties. 
 Development of suitable 
technologies for improving 
input use efficiency and 
reducing cost of cultivation. 
 Development of eco -friendly 
IPM modules. 
 
 Trait specific explorations for regularity 
and bunch bearing in mango (2), 3 scion 
cultivars of sweet orange, mandarin, one 
salt tolerant in banana and one with high 
potential for juice making in grapes were 
collected. 
 Two varieties one each of guava and 
papaya were identified with superior 
horticultural traits. 
 A high yielding clone of jackfruit 
isolated. 
 Site specific nutrient management 
schedule worked out in sweet orange. 
 The IPM schedule developed for litchi, 
grapes, citrus 

 
 
 
75 
 
iii. AICRP (TF) 
 2. CISH, 
Lucknow  
i. NRCG 
ii. CITH 
including 
Network 
iii. NRCL 
iv. AICRP 
(STF) 
 
 Collection, conservation and 
evaluation of genetic 
resources. 
 Development of high 
yielding and superior quality 
varieties  
 Standardization of agro 
techniques for fruits and 
vegetables. 
 
 Two trait specific lines (red peel and pink 
flesh) in Guava, seven exotic collections 
of litchi, were collected. 
 Double hedge row system of planting 
worked out for guava. 
 Site specific nutrient management 
schedule developed in mango and guava. 
 
3. Main 
schemeCIAH, 
Bikaner 
 
 
 
 Sub-schemes 
NRC 
Pomegranate, 
Solapur  
 
AICRP on AZF 
 
 
 Collection, conservation and 
evaluation of genetic 
resources 
 Development of suitable 
varieties for higher yield and 
quality.  
 Standardization of agro -
techniques including 
fertigation, organic farming 
and development of suitable 
IPM schedules. 
Post harvest handling, 
processing and development 
of value added products. 
 Eight new germplasm collections of arid 
fruit crops,which includes early 
maturing ber (2) and aonla (2), prolific 
bearer bael (2) were adde d into 
repository. 
 Two varieties namely Thar Sevika and 
Thar Bhubhraj were promoted. 
 Arid fruits and vegetable based cropping 
systems standardized. 
 Drip irrigation system standardized for 
arid fruit crops. 
 IPM schedules worked out for ber, aonla 
 

 
 
 
76 
 
4.  Main 
SchemeIIVR, 
Varanasi 
 
Sub-schemes 
Directorate of  
Mushroom 
Research, Solan  
 
Directorate of 
Onion & Garlic, 
Rajgurunagar 
including network 
 
AICRP 
Vegetables 
including NSP 
 
AICRP 
Mushroom 
 
 Collection, conservation and 
evaluation germplasm of 
vegetables and mushroom. 
 Development of suitable 
varieties of different 
vegetables for biotic and 
abiotic resistant. 
 Standardization of organic 
farming in vegetables. 
 Development of suitable 
IPM modules. 
 Development of techniques 
for increasing shelf life of 
produce. 
 Demonstration of varieties 
and technologies on 
farmers’ field. 
 
 12 new lines of brinjal, 6 lines of bottle 
gourd, 10 lines of tomato, 5 types of 
mushrooms collected and  maintained 
for evaluation. 
 Genetic material of 4 underexploited 
vegetables (leafy types) was purified. 
 The IPM schedules for cucurbitaceous 
crops were standardized. 
 Water and nutrient management modules 
were developed for tomato and brinjal. 
 
 Seed germination enhancement 
techniques were also standardized. 
Low cost technologies based local 
agricultural wastes were developed for 
production of mushroom for different 
regions. 
 

 
 
 
77 
 
5. Main Scheme 
CPRI, Shimla 
 
Sub-Schemes 
CTCRI, 
Trivandrum  
 
AICRP Potato 
 
 
AICRP Tuber 
crops 
 
 Survey, collection and 
conservation of genetic 
resources.  
 Development of potato 
varieties for early maturity, 
late blight resistance and 
chip making. 
 Development of technology 
for integrated management 
of pest and diseases. 
 Standardization of 
techniques for value added 
products. 
 In tuber crops, 14 indigenous, 3 exotic 
accessions of sweet potato and 19 yams 
were collected. 
 Kufari Frysona variety for French fry 
developed. 
 Protocol for In -vitro conservation of 
potatoes standardized. 
 Decision support system and Disease 
forecasting modules developed. 
 Vegetable based intercro pping systems 
tested with garlic. 
 
6. Main 
schemeCPCRI, 
Kasaragod 
 
Sub schemes 
Directorate of 
Cashew Research, 
 Germplasm conservation of 
coconut, arecanut, cacoa, 
cashew and oil palm. 
 Identification of high 
yielding varieties with 
desirable traits. 
 Molecular characterization 
of germplasm. 
 Development of coconut 
 A total of 18 accession s in coconut and 
oil palm were collected. 
 New varieties of coconut namely 
Kalpatharu, Kalpa Samrudhi were 
identified for release. 
 PGPR were identified for foliar disease 
management in coconut. 
 Areca nut based cropping system model 
with spices and banana were validated. 

 
 
 
78 
 
Puttur 
 
Directorate of Oil 
Palm Research, 
Pedavegi 
AICRP on Palms.  
AICRP on 
Cashew. 
based farming systems. 
 Development of horticultural 
tools for improving farm 
efficiency. 
 
 The coconut based inter cropping was 
also standardized. 
7.  CARI Portblair 
  Conservation of germplasm 
of various horticulture crops. 
 Feasibility evaluation of 
buffaloes rearing. 
 Standardization of 
production technologies of 
flowers and vegetables. 
 
 Standardized low cost rearing technology 
of pig. 
 Demonstrated water resource 
development through rain water 
management on large scale. 
 Released two varieties of coconut and 
one of  areca nut. 
 Standardized technique for cage culture 
in creeks and bays. 
 Feasibility evaluation of buffaloes 
rearing in Island ecosystem. 
 Demonstrated water resource 
development through rain water 
management on large scale. 
8. Main 
schemeIISR, 
Calicut 
Including 
 Collection conservation and 
evaluation of germplasm of 
spices. 
 Identifying high yield, 
disease resistant and 
 48 accessions of different spices (ginger, 
turmeric, seed spices) germplasm were 
added in repository for evaluation 
purpose. 
 

 
 
 
79 
 
Outreach 
Phytophthora, 
fusarium and 
ralstonia 
Sub-Schemes 
NRC Seed Spices 
Aimer 
 
AICRP on Spices 
processing varieties of 
spices. 
 Development of spices 
based cropping systems. 
  
 New strains of PGPR isolated and 
purified for biological control in spices. 
 Turmeric processing technology 
developed. 
 Mulching technology with black 
polythene reduced chilli wilt and 
increased yield. 
 
 
9. Main 
schemeDirectora
te of Floriculture 
Research, New 
Delhi including 
AICRP on 
Floriculture 
 
Sub schemes 
 
NRC Orchids, 
Sikkim 
Directorate of 
 Collection, evaluation and 
assessment of germplasm 
and unexplored flowers 
 Development of new and 
improved varieties in rose, 
gladiolus, chrysanthemum, 
tuberose and gerbera, 
orchids. 
 Technologies for flower 
crop prod uction including 
control of pests and diseases 
and post harvest 
management.  
 Enrichment of field 
collection block of 
medicinal and aromatic 
plants. 
 Development of package of 
 9 germplasm lines of chrysanthemum, 
12 ca rnation and 6 orchids were 
collected for further evaluation. 
 Conservation of 46 rare and endangered 
species of orchid in clonal repository.  
 8 New Germplasm accessions of giloy 
and tulsi were collected.  
 New Gladiolus cultivar Arka Kesar 
recommended for commercial 
cultivation. 
 Gerbera-Arka Krishna, Rose -Arka 
Parimala and carnation -Arka Flame 
were released for commercial 
cultivation. 
 Vasana Kapoori a Betelvine cultivar was 
identified. 
 Integrated nutrient management 
schedule for commercial flower crops 

 
 
 
80 
 
Medicinal & 
Aromatic Plant 
Research, Anand 
Network on 
Medicinal & 
Aromatic Plants 
& Betelvine 
practices for various 
medicinal plants. 
 
worked out were developed. 
 Good agricultural practices and good 
field collection practices were 
standardized for various medicinal 
plants.   
 Schedule for management of 
Anthracnose of orchid worked out 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
81 
 
 
 
Annexure V 
List of districts for which contingency plans are completed so far (400 )   
           
S. No. State Names of Districts completed Number of 
districts 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Guntur, Chittoor, East Godavari, Adilabad, Kadapa, Krishna, Kurnool, Mahaboobnagar, Medak, 
Nalgonda, Nellore, West Godavari, Srikakulam, Anantapur, Karimnagar, Khammam 
Prakasam, Rangareddy, Visakhapatnam, Warangal, Nizamabad, Vizayanagaram 
22 
2 Karnataka Bagalkot, Udupi, Bengaluru, Bidar, Koppal, Bijapur, Dharwad, Gulbarga, Gadag, Raichur, 
Chickballapur, Chickmagalur, Dakshina kannada, Davangere, Kolar, Mandya, Shimoga, 
Chamarajnagar, Ramanagara, Tumkur, Belgaum, Haveri, Uttara Kannada, Mysore, Bellari, Yadgir, 
Chitradurga, Hassan, Kodagu 
29 
3 Kerala Kozhikode, Palakkad, Kollam, Ernakulam, Waynad, Trissur, Alapuzha, Kannur, Pathanamthitta, 
Trivendrum, Malappuram, Kottayam, Kasargod, Idukki 
14 
4 Tamil Nadu Kancheepuram, Thiruvallur, Vellore, Caddalore, Erode, Karur, Dindigal, Theni, Thanjavur, 
Tiruchirapalli, Pudukkottai, Thirunelvelli, Thoothukudi, Thiruvarur, Tiruppur, Thiruvannamalai, 
Krishnagiri, Coimabattore, Dharmapuri, Kanyakumari, Nagapattinam, Namakkal, Nilgiris, 
Peramballur, Ramanathapuram, Salem, Ariyallur, Sivaganga, Viluppuram, Virudhunagar, Madhurai 
31 
5 Gujarat Banaskantha, Mehsana, Junagadh, Bhavnagar, Jamnagar, Porbandar, Surendranagar, Kutch 
Patan, Sabarkantha, Anand, Dahod, Panchamahals, Vadodara, Bharuch, Dangs, Narmada 
25 

 
 
 
82 
 
Navsari, Valsad, Amreli, Surat, Tapi, Rajkot, Ahmedabad, Kheda 
6 Maharashtra Akola, Buldhana, Gondia, Washim, Amravathi, Chandrapur, Nagpur, Yavatmal, Wardha, Bhandara, 
Gadchiroli, Sangli, Nandurbar, Dhule, Solapur, Jalgaon, Nasik, Satara, Ahmednagar, Kolhapur, Pune, 
Thane, Raigarh, Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg, Aurangabad, Beed, Hingoli, Parbhani, Jalna, Nanded, 
Osmanabad, Latur 
33 
7 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Badawani, Bhopal, Burhanpur, datia, Dewas, guna,  Gwalior, Jabhua, Khandwa, Khargone, 
Mandsour, Morena, Neemach, Raigarh, ratlam, sehore, shajapur, shoepur, shivapuri, 
Ashoknagar, Bhind,  dhar, Ujjain, Indore 
24 
8 Rajasthan Kota , Sikar, Jhunjhunu, Sriganganagar, Jhalawar, Nagaur, Jaipur, Tonk, Ajmer, Chittorgarh, Udaipur, 
Bhilwar, Rajsamand, Baran, Bundi, Jodhpur, Dausa, Barmer, Jaisalmer, Jalore, Bikaner, Churu 
Banswara, Dungarpur, Hanumangarh, Alwar, Bharatpur, Sawai madhapur, Dholpur, Karauli, Pali, 
Pratapgarh, Sirohi 
33 
9 Haryana Hisar, Karnal, Faridabad, Kurukshetra, Panipat, Sirsa, Jhajjar, Sonipat, Rewari, Mahendragarh, Jind, 
Bhiwani, Fatebad, Gurgaon, Ambala, Kaithal, Panchkula, Rohtak, Yamunanagar 
19 
10 Punjab Amritsar, Bathinda, Faridkot, Hoshiarpur, Ludhiana, Barnala, Gurudaspur, Moga, Jalandhar 
Mansa, Patiala, Ropar, Sangrur, Ferozpur, Fatehgarh Sahib, Tarntarn, Kapurthala, SriMuktsar Sahib, 
SBS Nagar 
19 
11 Orissa Angul, Cuttack, Deogarh, Kalahandi, Nayagarh, Puri, Sambalpur, Sonapur, Sundargarh, Bargarh, 
Bhadrak, Bolangir, Gajapati, Ganjam, Boudh, Malkangiri, Dhenkanal, Jagatsinghpur, Jajpur, 
Jharsuguda, Kandhamal, Koraput, Nuapada, Mayurbhanj, Keonjhar, Rayagada, Balasore, Kendrapara, 
Khurda, Nabaranaga 
30 
12 West Bengal Birbhum, Hooghly, Murshidabad, North 24 Parganas, Bankura, Purulia, Nadia, Bardhaman, South 24 
paraganas, Pashim Medinipur, East Medinipur, Howrah, Jalpaiguri, Darjeeling, Dakshin Dinajpur, 
18 

 
 
 
83 
 
Malda, Uttar Dinajpur, Coochbehar 
13 Uttar Pradesh Badaun, Baghpat, Bareily, Bijnor, Bulandshahar, Muzaffanagar, Pilibhit, Rampur, Saharanpur, 
Shahjahanpur, Deoria, Ghazipur, Gorakhpur, Jaunpur, Kushinagar, Maharajganj, Sant Ravidas Nagar, 
Chandauli, Mirzapur, Sonbadhra, Varanasi, Ghaziabad, Moradabad, Meerut, Jyotiba Phule Nagar, 
Gautam Budh nagar 
26 
14 Assam Cachar, Dhemaji, Lakhimpur, Dibrugarh, Kokrajhar, Karimganj, Sonitpur, Golaghat, 
Bongaigaon, Dhubri, Kamrup, Karbi Anglong, Nagaon, Nalbari, Sivasagar, Tinsukia, 
Hailakandi, Barpeta,  Darrang, Jorhat 
20 
15 J & K  Anantnag, Bandipora, Baramulla, Budgam, Ganderbal, Kargil, Kulgam, Kupwara, Leh, 
Pulwama, Shopian, Srinagar 
12  
16 Bihar Aurangabad, Dharbhanga, Samastipur, Nawada, Saharsa, Katihar, Jamui, Gopalganj, Saran  9 
17 Chattisgarh Bastar, Bijapur, Kabirdham, Raigarh, Raipur, Rajnandgaon, Durg, Janjgir 8 
18 HP Una, Bilaspur, Hamirpur, Kangra,  Kullu, Lahul & spiti, Mandi, Sirmaur 8 
19 Jharkhand Garhwa, Palamu, Chatra, Deoghar,  East Singhbhum, Godda, Hazaribagh, Jamtara, Koderma, 
Lohardaga, Pakur, Ranchi, Sahibganj, Saraikela, Simdega, West Singhbhum 
16 
20 Sikkim East Sikkim,North Sikkim,South Sikkim,West Sikkim 4 
 TOTAL  400 
 
 

 
 
 
84 
 
Annexure VI 
Details of Discipline wise intake capacity of the 4 ICAR Deemed-to-be-Universities, 
the actual students enrolled in each of the disciplines and the number of teachers/ 
faculties engaged by Deemed Universities. 
1. INDIAN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE (IARI), PUSA NEW DELHI 
 
Sl.No. Discipline Masters Ph.D No. of 
Faculties 
Engaged Intake 
Capacity 
Actual 
Enrollment 
Intake 
Capacity 
Actual 
Enrollment 
1.  Agricultural Chemicals 6 6 6 5 15 
2.  Agricultural Economics 5 5 5 5 11 
3.  Agricultural Engineering 6 6 7 7 16 
4.  Agricultural Extension  5 5 6 5 17 
5.  Agricultural Physics 3 3 4 3 15 
6.  Agricultural Statistics 7 7 9 9 33 
7.  Agronomy 5 5 4 8* 22 
8.  Biochemistry 4 4 4 3 10 
9.  Computer Application 7 7 - - 16 
10.  Entomology (Agri. Entomology) 4 4 6 9* 19 
11.  Environmental Sciences 5 5 5 5 16 
12.  Genetics 5 5 7 8* 49 
13.  Horticulture 8 8 11 11 48 
14.  Microbiology 5 5 5 5 17 
15.  Molecular Biology &  
Biotechnology  
5 5 5 5 28 
16.  Nematology 3 3 4 4 16 
17.  Plant Genetics Resources 4 4 5 5 66 
18.  Plant Pathology 5 5 7 6 30 

 
 
 
85 
 
19.  Plant Physiology 4 4 5 4 15 
20.  Seed Science & Technology 4 4 6 6 24 
21.  Soil Science & Agril. Chemistry 4 4 7 7 17 
22.  Water Science & Technology 2 2 4 3 09 
23.  Post-Harvest Technology 3 3 6 5 10 
24.  Bioinformatics 6 4 - - 23 
Total 115 113* 128 128 542 
 
                      *Difference in no. of seats available and actual seats filled in some disciplines is due to 
transfer of seats in SC/ST/OBC/PH category.  
 
 
2.  INDIAN VETERINARY RESEARCH INSTITUTE (IVRI), IZATNAGAR, BAREILLY 
(U.P.) 
 
Sl.No. Discipline Masters Ph.D No. of 
Faculties 
Engaged Intake 
Capacity 
Actual 
Enrollment 
Intake 
Capacity 
Actual 
Enrollment 
1.  Animal Genetics and Breeding 8 8 6 4 10 
2.  Animal Nutrition 8 8 6 6 13 
3.  Veterinary Animal Physiology 7 7 4 4 8 
4.  Animal Biochemistry 7 4 5 5 11 
5.  Animal Biostatistics 4 4 2 2 6 
6.  Animal Biotechnology 8 7 7 5 20 
7.  Epidemiology 3 3 - - 3 
8.  Veterinary Extension Education 5 5 4 4 7 
9.  Livestock Product Technology 4 4 3 2 4 
10.  Poultry Science 10 10 7 5 29 

 
 
 
86 
 
11.  Veterinary Bacteriology 6 6 5 5 11 
12.  Veterinary Gynecology & 
Obstetrics 
7 6 5 5 10 
13.  Veterinary Immunology 6 6 3 2 9 
14.  Veterinary Medicine 7 7 6 5 8 
15.  Veterinary Parasitology 8 8 5 5 17 
16.  Veterinary Pathology 8 8 6 6 11 
17.  Veterinary Pharmacology 6 6 5 4 7 
18.  Veterinary Public Health 6 6 5 5 9 
19.  Veterinary Surgery & Radiology 7 7 4 4 10 
20.  Veterinary Virology 8 8 6 6 19 
21.  Livestock Production & 
Management 
5 5 3 3 8 
22.  Livestock Economics 2 2 - - 2 
Total 140 135 97 87 232 
 
3. NATIONAL DAIRY RESEARCH INSTITUTE (NDRI), KARNAL, HARYANA 
 
Sl.No. Discipline Masters Ph.D No. of 
Faculties 
Engaged Intake 
Capacity 
Actual 
Enrollment 
Intake 
Capacity 
Actual 
Enrollment 
1.  Dairy 
Microbiology 
8 8 8 10* 12 
2.  Dairy 
Chemistry 
7 7 6 6 8 
3.  Dairy 
Technology 
8 9* 8 8 13 
4.  Dairy 
Engineering 
3 3 0 0 4 
5.  Animal 
Biochemistry 
10 7 9 10* 9 

 
 
 
87 
 
6.  Animal 
Genetics & 
Breeding 
9 11* 10 11* 8 
7.  Livestock 
Production & 
Management 
8 8 7 8* 12 
8.  Animal 
Nutrition 
11 11 13 7 11 
9.  Animal 
Physiology 
7 7 6 6 12 
10.  Dairy 
Economics 
10 10 5 3 11 
11.  Dairy 
Extension 
Education 
9 8 10 11* 11 
12.  Animal 
Biotechnology 
10 11* 10 11* 11 
13.  Forage 
Production 
4 4 - - 3 
 Sub Total 104 104 92 91 125 
Courses offered and number of seats for admission at Southern Regional 
Station, NDRI, Bangalore, Karnataka 
1.  Dairy 
Chemistry 
1 1 1 1 2 
2.  Dairy 
Technology 
5 5 5 5 4 
3.  Dairy 
Engineering 
3 3 2 3 2 
4.  Animal 
Genetics & 
Breeding 
2 2 2 2 2 
5.  Livestock 
Production & 
Management 
1 1 - - 2 

 
 
 
88 
 
6.  Animal 
Nutrition 
1 1 - - 1 
7.  Diary 
Economics 
1 1 1 1 2 
8.  Diary 
Extension 
1 1 - - 1 
 Sub total 15 15 11 12 16 
 Total 
(Karnal+ 
Bangalore) 
119 119 103 103 141 
Courses offered and number of seats for admission at Eastern Regional Station, 
NDRI, Kalyani, West Bengal 
 
1.  Livestock 
Production & 
Management 
1 1 - - 1 
2.  Animal 
Nutrition 
2 2 - - 2 
3.  Animal 
Biotechnology 
1 1 - - 1 
4.  Dairy 
Economics 
1 1 - - 1 
 Sub Total 5 5 - - 5 
 Grand Total 124 124 - - 146 
                 *Increase in number is due to nomination of foreign/ in-service  students. 
 
4. CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF FISH ERIES EDUCATION (CIFE), MUMBAI, 
MAHARASHTRA 
Sl.No. Discipline Masters Ph.D No. of 
Faculties 
Engaged Intake 
Capacity 
Actual 
Enrollment 
Intake 
Capacity 
Actual 
Enrollment 
1.   Fisheries 
Resources 
8 9 6 7 5 

 
 
 
89 
 
Management 
2.   Aquaculture 12 14 9 11 9 
3.   Fisheries 
Extension 
6 6 2 3 4 
4.   Aquatic 
Environmental 
Management 
6 7 2 3 5 
5.   Post-Harvest 
Technology 
7 8 4 7 6 
6.   Genetics and 
Breeding 
6 6 3 1 4 
7.   Fish 
Physiology 
and 
Biochemistry 
6 6 2 2 3 
8.   Fish Nutrition 
and Feed 
Technology 
6 6 3 3 3 
9.   Aquatic 
Animal Health 
Management 
8 8 4 5 7 
10.   Fish 
Biotechnology 
6 6 3 3 3 
11.   Fisheries 
Economics 
6 6 1 2 3 
 Total 77 82* 39 47* 52 
*The difference in intake is due to additional admission of in-service candidates/ fellowship holders 
of DST-INSPIRE/ICAR-SRF/Overseas students as per ICAR guidelines. 
 
 
  

 
 
 
90 
 
APPENDIX -I 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the  01 April, 201 3 from 1 100 hours to  
1305 hrs. and from 1400 hrs to 1705 hours in Room  No. ‘53’, Parliament House,          
New Delhi. 
                         PRESENT 
 
    SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri R.S. Kambo   - Joint Secretary 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Premdas  Katheria 
4.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
6.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
8.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
9.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
  
                                   RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
11.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
12.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 

 
 
 
91 
 
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)  
 
       S.No.       NAME OF THE OFFICER              DESIGNATION 
     
          
PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
Dr. Surinder Singh,    Adviser (Agriculture) 
 
2. At the out set, the Chairman welcomed the m embers of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research 
and Education) and Planning Commission to the Sitting.  
 
1. Dr. S. Ayyappan,  Secretary (DARE) & DG (ICAR) 
2. Shri Arvind R. Kaushal, AS (DARE) & Secretary (ICAR) 
   
3. Shri P.K. Pujari,  AS & FA (DARE/ICAR) 
4. Dr. S.N. Puri,  VC, CAU, Imphal 
5. Dr. Swapan K. Datta, DDG (CS) 
6. Dr. K.M.L. Pathak,  DDG (AS) 
7. Dr. K.D. Kokate, DDG (Extn.) 
8. Dr. M.M. Pandey,  DDG (Engg.) 
9. Dr. Arvind Kumar, DDG (Edn.) 
10. Dr. B. Meenakumari, DDG (Fy.) 
11. Dr. N.K. Krishna Kumar, DDG (Hort.) 
12. Dr. D. Rama Rao, ND (NAIP) 
13. Dr. A.K. Vasisht, ADG (PIM) 
14. Dr. T.P. Rajendran, ADG(PP), ICAR 
15. Dr. R.K. Tomar, RFD Coordinator, ICAR 

 
 
 
92 
 
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, t he Secretary briefly highlighted 
the act ivities / achievements made by the Department during the Eleventh Plan 
Period and preceding Financial Y ear. The proposed outlay for Twelfth Plan, 
including various schemes to be taken up was also discussed.  T he Committee , 
thereafter, took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) on Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of the Department.  
 
 [At around 1305 hours the Committee adjourned for Lunch.  The Sitting resumed 
at 1400 hours] 
 
4. The C hairman and m embers of the Committee raised queries on several 
issues concerning progress made and the Demands for Grants of the ongoing 
Fiscal and proposed projection for Financial Year 2013 -14.  The witnesses replied, 
thereto. 
 
5. The Chairman, thereafte r thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by them.  He also 
directed them to furnish information on points on which the Department could not 
clarify during the Sitting, to the Committee Secretariat by 08 April, 2013.  
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 

 
 
 
93 
 
APPENDIX - II 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 17 th April, 2013 from 1500 hours to 1600 
hours in Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
                                     PRESENT 
                              Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
    MEMBERS 
                                                 LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6.  Shri P. Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
10.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
  
                             RAJYA SABHA 
11.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
12.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
13.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
14.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
15.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 

 
 
 
94 
 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
     2. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  They Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft Report(s) for 
consideration:  
 
(i) xxxx            xxxx                  xxxx                  xxxx                     xxxx 
(ii) draft Report Demands for Grants (2013 -2014) relating to the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education); and 
(iii) xxxx            xxxx                  xxxx                  xxxx                     xxxx 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Report(s) with some 
modifications.  They also authorized the Chairman to finalis e the above Draft Report(s) in the 
light of the factual verifications got done by the concerned Departments of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and present them to the Parliament.   
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
             
* Matter not related with this Report 