 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                 
                                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & CO-OPERATION) 
              
 
THE MULTI - STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
         
        
 
FORTY FIRST REPORT 
  
 
         
               
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
 
41 

2 
 
FORTY FIRST REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(20012-2013) 
          
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION) 
         
                 
THE MULTI - STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
  
         
Presented to Lok Sabha on    20.12.2012 
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on  20.12.2012 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)  
 


3 
 
COA No.  
 
 
         
         
                
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
 
 
         
     
 
© 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  

4 
 
<CONTENTS>             
      PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………2010-11   (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………2011-12   (v) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………2012-13   (vii) 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………   (ix) 
REPORT…………………………………………………………………  1 
        
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) 
held on 04.01.2011       20 
II. Minutes of the Twenty-second Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) 
held on 04.01.2011       24    
III. Minutes of the Twenty-second Sitting of the Committee 
 (2011-12) held on 03.02.2012     26 
IV. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee (2012-13) 
held on 17.10.2012       28 
V. Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee (201-13) 
held on 26.10.2012       30 
VI. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee (2012-13) 
held on 05.11.2012       32 
VII. Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee (2012-13) 
held on 16.11.2012       36 
VIII. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee (2012-13) 
held on 29.11.2012       38 
IX. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee (2012-13) 
held on 06.12.2012       41 
X. Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Committee (2012-13) 
held on 19.12.2012       43 
 
ANNEXURES 
I.  The Multi-State Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010 45 
II. Letter D.O.No.L-11012/1/1/2008-L&M dated 04.03.2011  
received from Minister of Agriculture and Food Processing  
Industries, Government of India.     74 
III.  The Constitution (Ninety-seventh) Amendment Act, 2011  76 
IV.  List of Orgnisations/Individuals who submitted return Memoranda  
  to the Committee       81 
V.  Written submission furnished by Ministry of Law and Justice  
  (Department of Legal Affairs) dated 04.12.2010   82 
                                 (i)  

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2010-11) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
6.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
7.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
9.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Prabodh Panda  
15.  Shri Premdas  
16.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
18.  Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19.  Shri Uday Singh 
20.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
21.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
23.  Shri Narendra Budania 
24.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 (iii)  
  

6 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-12) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
11.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12.  Shri Premdas  
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
15.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
16.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
17.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
18.  Shri Laxman Tudu 
19  Shri D. Venugopal 
20.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
21.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
*23.  Shri Narendra Budania 
*24.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
*26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
*Nominated to the Committee on 04.05.2012 
 
 
 
(v) 
  

7 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2012-13) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas  Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey „Vinnu‟ 
21.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
30.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

8 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the report on their behalf, present this Forty -first Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on „The Multi-State Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill 2010‟.  
 
2. The Multi-State Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was introduced in 
Lok Sabha on 15 November, 2010. The Speaker under Rule 331E (1) (b) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha referred the Bill to the Committee on 
16 December, 2010 for examination and Report. 
 
 3. The Committee were briefed by the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Co -operation) on the Bill on 04 January, 2011. During 
the course of this meeting the Committee observed several  commonalities and 
contradictions between some of the proposed clauses of the Bill under examination and 
„The Constitution (One Hundredth and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009‟ on which the 
Committee had already presented their Twelfth Report to Parliament on 30 August 2010. 
The Committee, therefore, felt that unless and until the final shape of The Constitution 
(One Hundredth and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009 was known, a thorough and in -
depth examination of MSCS (Amendment) Bill, 2010 would not be possible. Accordingly, 
the Committee decided to defer the examination of the MSCS (Amendment) Bill, 2010 till 
the enactment of „The Constitution (One Hundredth and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 
2009‟.  The Committee further decided that the Chairman may bring the const raints 
being faced by them in examination of the Bill to the notice of Speaker, Lok Sabha in an 
appropriate manner.  The matter was accordingly placed before Speaker, Lok Sabha by 
the Chairman.  Speaker, Lok Sabha concurred with the decision of the Committ ee to 
defer the examination of MSCS (Amendment) Bill, 2010 till the enactment of the 
Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2009 on 9 February, 2011.  The Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture & Co-operation) were, thereafter informed about the decision 
of the Committee and they also decided to invite suggestions/views of various 
stakeholders  on the Bill through an advertisement in the media. 
 
4. The Department through a communication dated 23 January, 2012 informed the 
Committee Secretariat that Th e Constitution (Ninety -seventh Amendment) Act, 2012 
after receiving the assent of the President of India on 12 January, 2012 had been 
published in the Gazette of India on 13 January, 2012.  The Communication further 
requested that the Committee on Agricult ure may (now) kindly consider taking up „The 
MSCS (Amendment) Bill, 2010‟ and make their Recommendations at the earliest.  The 
request of the Department was considered by the Committee at their Sitting held on 3 
February, 2012.  It was decided to resume examination of the Bill 
 
5. A press release seeking the views/suggestions of the stakeholders on the Bill 
was issued in newspapers and audio-visual media on 18 February, 2012.  In response to 
it, written suggestions/memoranda were received from 18 individual s/organizations. The 
Committee at their Sittings held on 05 November, 2012 took evidence of the 
representatives of National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), 
Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative Limited (IFFCO) and National Cooperative Union 
of India (NCUI) 
 
(ix) 
 

9 
 
6. The Committee also sought the views of State Governments of Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh and Punjab on various provisions of the Bill during their Study Visit to 
these States from 15 to 20 June, 2012.   
7. The Committee took or al evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Cooperation (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) on 16 
November, 2012 and further oral evidence of the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperation 
(Department of Agriculture and Coope ration) and Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) on 29 November and 06 
December, 2012. 
8. The Committee at their sitting held on 19 December, 2012 considered and 
adopted the Report.  
9.  The Committee also benefitted from the views/suggestions of 
Individuals/Experts/Organisations and expressed their thanks to all of them who 
furnished Memoranda and tendered evidence before the Committee as referred to in 
Para 5.  
10. The Committee wish to  express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Co -operation) and Ministry of Law and 
Justice (Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) for placing before them 
the material and information in connection with examination of the Bill.  They also 
express their thanks to the State Governments of Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and 
Punjab who gave their suggestions/views on various clauses of the Bill.  
11. The Committee also place on record their appr eciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                 
NEW DELHI;                 BASUDEB ACHARIA 
19 December, 2012                                                             Chairman, 
28 Agrahayana,1934 (Saka)                    Committee on Agriculture. 
  

10 
 
R E P O R T 
 
“The Multi -State Co -operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010” 
(Annexure-I) was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 15 November, 2010 .  The Bill 
was referred to the Committee on Agriculture by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 16 
December, 2010 for examination and Report within three months. 
2. The Committee have been informed tha t the Multi -State Co -operative 
Societies Act, 2002 repealing the earlier law, that is, the Multi -State Co-operative 
Societies Act,1984 was enacted with a view to consolidating the provisions 
relating to the multi-state co -operative societies  registered wit h objects not 
confined to one State and serving the interests of members in more than one 
State; to facilitate the voluntary formation and democratic functioning of co -
operatives as people‟s institutions based on self -help and mutual aid ; to enable 
them to promote their economic and social betterment ; and to provide functional 
autonomy.  The Multi -State Co-operative Societies Act,  2002 came in force with 
effect from the 19th August, 2002. 
3. With the passage of time and developments in the co-operative movement 
in the country, certain difficulties have been experienced by the multi-state  
co-operative societies in the implementation of the Multi -State Co -operative 
Societies Act, 2002.   A Conference of the State Co-operative Ministers was held 
on the 7 Decem ber, 2004 to, inter alia, ascertain the difficulties experienced by 
the multi-state co-operative societies.  In pursuance of the resolution passed in 
the said Conference, a High Powered Committee o n Co-operatives was 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri S. G. Patil. 

11 
 
4. The Department have informed the Committee that i n view of the 
recommendation made in the report of aforesaid High Powered Committee and 
suggestions received from the co -operative sector and other stake holders and 
considering the importance of multi-state co -operative soci eties in the national 
economy and the experience gained during the last e ight years of 
implementation of the Multi -State Co -operative Societies Act, 2002 it has been 
felt that the said Act should be amended to keep the legislation in tune with the 
changing economic policies and to facilitate the multi-state co-operative societies 
to take advantage of the new and emerging opportunities and to keep pace with 
other economic entities and facilitate raising of resources by the  
multi-state co -operative s ocieties more efficiently and effectively by making 
appropriate provisions for promoting their functional autonomy. 
5. The Department have further stated that the Bill proposes to amend the 
Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002, inter-alia, to –  
(a) make the management of these co -operative societies more 
responsible to the mem bers and accountable by making provision for  
(i) constitution of Interim Board, (ii) accounting standards, (iii) constitution 
of Interim (iv)  calling for information or explanation by the Central 
Registrar of the Multi-State Co-operative Societies, (v) Special Audit; 
(b) strengthen the provision relating to election of the members of the 
board of multi-state co-operative societies; 

12 
 
(c) make provisions for broad based representation in the board of the 
multi-state co-operative societies by providing reservation for the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women; 
(d) take certain measures which would facilitate the building of self -reliant, 
democratic and professionally efficient co-operative institutions; 
(e) bringing transparency in the functio ning of the multi-state co-operative 
societies by making provision for appointment of Co -operative Information 
Officer, Chief Information Officer for providing information about the affairs 
and management of the multi-state co-operative societies and also make 
provision for appeal. 
6.  During the course of briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) on 4 January, 2011 on 
the various clauses of the Bill, the Committee observed several commonaliti es 
and contradictions between some of the proposed clauses of the Bill under 
examination and „The Constitution (One Hundredth and Eleventh Amendment) 
Bill, 2009‟ on which the Committee had already presented their Twelfth Report to 
Parliament on 30 August 2 010.  The Committee, therefore, felt that unless and 
until the final shape of The Constitution (One Hundredth and Eleventh 
Amendment) Bill, 2009 was known, a thorough and in -depth examination of 
MSCS (Amendment) Bill, 2010 would not be possible. Accordingly, the  
Committee decided to defer the examination of the MSCS (Amendment) Bill, 
2010 till the enactment of „The Constitution (One Hundredth and Eleventh 
Amendment) Bill, 2009‟.  The Committee further decided that the Chairman may 
bring the constraints being faced by them in examination of the Bill to the notice 

13 
 
of Speaker, Lok Sabha in an appropriate manner.  The matter was accordingly 
placed before Speaker, Lok Sabha by the Ch airman.  Speaker, Lok Sabha 
concurred with the decision of the Committee to defer the examination of MSCS 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 till the enactment of the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 
2009 on 9 February, 2011.  The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture 
& Co-operation) were, thereafter informed about the decision of the Committee.  
The Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha were also informed about the fact of deferment 
through Parliamentary Bulletin Part -II Para 48291 and Lok Sabha Bulletin Part -II 
Para No. 2571, both dated 8 March, 2011, respectively.   
7. In the meantime, the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Food 
Processing Industries addressed a DO letter dated 4 March, 2011 (Annexure -II) 
to Speaker, Lok Sabha on the subject matter.  The Minister stated in his 
communication that the amendments proposed in MSCS (Amendment) bill, 2009 
were based on the recommendations of High Powered Committee on 
Cooperatives and extensive consultation held with the stakeholders and public 
representatives as w ell as feedback received from various quarters.  He further 
stated that t he Bill is also in line with the proposed Constitutional Amendment 
Bill, which has already been examined by the Committee on Agriculture.  Since 
the proposed amendments were intended to address certain crucial issues 
related to multi -state cooperative societies the Bill needed to be considered 
urgently, without linking it to enactment of „The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 
2009.  The Minist er had, accordingly, requested Speaker, Lok Sa bha to kindly 
reconsider and advise the Committee on Agriculture to take up the examination 
of MSCS ( Amendment) Bill, 2010 and make their recommendations at the 

14 
 
earliest so that the Bill may be taken up for consideration and passing either 
during the current Session or in the ensuing Monsoon Session of the Parliament.   
8. The said Communication of the Minister was referred to the Committee for 
their consideration.  During their Sitting held on 24 March, 2011 after an in -depth 
discussion, the Committee felt that since some of provisions of „The Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill, 2009, which was yet to be enacted, had a bearing on MSCS 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010, they would not be in a posi tion to arrive at a well 
considered conclusion on the latter.  The Committee, therefore, decided that as 
there was not material change in the interregnum between the their decision 
taken in January, 2011 to defer consideration of the Bill and now, the situ ation 
did not warrant any change in their previous decision to postpone examination 
and Report of the MSCS (Amendment) Bill, 2010.  The decision of the 
Committee was concurred with by Speaker, Lok Sabha on 5 April, 2011.  The 
Department were also apprised on the decision of the Committee on 13 April, 
2011.   
9. The Department through a communication dated 23 January, 2012 
informed the Committee Secretariat that The Constitution (Ninety -seventh 
Amendment) Act, 2012 (Annexure-III) after receiving the assent o f the President 
of India on 12 January, 2012 had been published in the Gazette of India on 13 
January, 2012.  The Communication further requested that the Committee on 
Agriculture may (now) kindly consider taking up „The MSCS (Amendment) Bill, 
2010‟ and ma ke their Recommendations at the earliest.  The request of the 
Department was considered by the Committee at their Sitting held on 3 February, 
2012.  It was decided to resume examination of the Bill and for that purpose 

15 
 
Speaker, Lok Sabha be requested to gr ant extension of time till the last day of 
Budget Session, 2012 for presentation of Report to the Parliament.  Speaker, Lok 
Sabha acceded to the request of the Committee on 9 February, 2012. 
10.  A press-release seeking the views/suggestions of the stakeholders on the 
Bill was issued in newspapers and audio -visual media on 18 February, 2012.  
The particulars of memoranda received from various stakeholders are at 
Annexure-IV.   
11. During the course of their examination of the Bill the Committee at their 
Sitting held on 17 May, 2012 decided to seek views of the State Government of 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Punjab on various provisions of the Bill during 
their Study Visit scheduled to these States from 15 to 20 June, 2012 .  They also 
decided to request Speaker, Lok Sabha to grant extension of time till the last day 
of the Monsoon Session, 2012 for presentation of the Report on the Bill.  
Speaker, Lok Sabha acceded to the request of the Committee on 12 June, 2012.  
12. The term of the Committee (2011 -12) end ed on 30 August, 2012 , 
therefore, the examination of the Bill remained incomplete.  Consequent upon the 
reconstitution of the Committee (2012 -13), it was decided at their Sitting held on 
17 October, 2012 that Speaker, Lok Sabha be requested to grant extension of 
time till the last day of Winter Session, 2012 for presentation of the Report on the 
Bill to Parliament.  Speaker, Lok Sabha acceded to the request of the Committee 
on 7 December, 2012. 
13. As has been stated previously in this Report, the Committee had observed 
contradictions in the provisions  contained in MSCS (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and 

16 
 
the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2009 leading to deferment of examination of 
the former till the enactment of the latter.  The Committee while analysing the 
various provisions of the M SCS (Amendment) Bill, 2009 observed that some of 
them were in contravention of The Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 
2012.  The apprehensions of the Committee were further confirmed from the 
Memoranda submitted by the various stakeholders as als o during the oral 
depositions of some of the stakeholders before the Committee.  
14. During the course of the Sitting of the Committee on 5 November, 2012 
when these concerns were voiced before the Secretary of the Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation he replied: 
“Sir, as you are aware, this Ministry was working on both the 
Constitutional Amendment and the MSCS Act at the same time. We were 
fully aware of what is contained in the provisions of the Constitutional 
Amendment. To the best of our ability we have tried to see that there is no 
contradiction either in the intent or in the actual purpose of the contents of 
both Legislations. I do not think there is any contradiction. As and when 
the MSCS Bill comes back to us, we will have to consult with the Mi nistry 
of Law to ensure that there are no contradictions or overlapping. What the 
Constitutional Amendment does is to provide a framework under which 
this Act is also one of its various instruments. This is under the over -
arching umbrella of the Constituti on. I do not think there is any 
contradiction.  As I said, we will have to refer this to the Ministry of Law 
when we get the recommendations of the Committee. As a lay person, as 
a non-legal man I think there is no contradiction.”  
15. Probed further as to  whether he was sure that if the Act would stand 
scrutiny of law, if challenged, the witness said: 
 “Yes.” 

17 
 
16. During the examination of the Bill the attention of the Committee was 
drawn in particular to the addition of the new Section, i.e. 41A, which inter-alia 
states that, “where a multi-state cooperative society is declared sick, under Sub -
section (1), the Central Government may on the recommendations of Central 
Registrar, constitute an interim board for a maximum period of five years 
consisting of experts in the field of cooperation, management, finance, 
accounting and in other areas relating to such multi-state cooperative society for 
the purpose of preparing and implementing a Scheme for a re habilitation or 
survival of such multi-state cooperative society”. 
17. The Committee found this to be in direct contravention of Article 243ZL(1) 
of the „The Constitution (Ninety-Seventh Amendment) Act, 2011‟ which stipulates 
that “notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no 
Board shall be superseded or kept under suspension for a period exceeding six 
months”. 
18. About the justification for the proposed amendment he stated during the 
further Oral Evidence on 29 November, 2012: 
“The provisions that we have made in the present legislation that has 
come up for consideration is, precisely to enable sound and professional 
management to be put in place for revival of sick cooperatives.  We had 
proposed this arrangement of an interim board because no working 
institution can be revived in a matter of six  months, it is not possible.  So, 
the experience that we have gained during the working of the BIFR for the 
industry sector is ample testimony to that.  That is why we, in our 
legislation, proposed keeping the existing Board dormant and put an 
interim boar d of qualified professional s to revive the cooperatives in its 
place. 

18 
 
Now, of course, that matter is being examined by the Ministry of Law.  As 
of now, we have no other mechanism for revival of sick cooperatives.”   
19.  During their oral deposition before the Committee  on 5 November, 2012  
the representative s of Indian  Farmers Fertilizers Cooperative Limited (IFFCO) 
and National Cooperatives Union of India (NCUI) were in agreement with the 
misgivings of the Committee.  
20. When a clarification was sought on this specific aspect,  the Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation in their written submission stated that they are of the 
view that the proposed amendment, i.e. Section 41A is not in contravention to 
Article 243ZL of „The Co nstitution (Ninety -Seventh Amendment) Act, 2011‟.  
However, the Department would again consult Law Ministry on this specific 
issue.  The insertion of a new section 41A  has been proposed in the Multi -State 
Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010 with the objective to have 
enabling provision for undertaking measures for rehabilitation & revival of sick co-
operative societies.  Institutio n of professionally competent Board of 
Management and giving them adequate operational freedom is essential 
prerequisite for implementing measures identified for revival of sick co -operative 
societies.  This becomes even more important if the sick cooperative is provided 
assistance under CRRF or Government.  Many a times, the elected board lacks 
the required expertise to revive the sick cooperative societies and is itself 
responsible for causing sickness.  As per the provision of section 41A (3) the 
Board of Directors of sick multi -State co -operative society, after constitution of 
interim board, shall not function and disc harge its function as such.  However, 
sub-section 41(a) (4) clearly provides as follows:  

19 
 
“The Central Registrar, if at any time during which the interim board 
has been constituted, is of the opinion that the society has become viable, 
it may dissolve such  interim board and thereafter the board of directors 
existing before constitution of interim board shall function as per 
provisions of this Act.” 
The purpose of this section is to create a mechanism for revival of 
sick societies by putting in place a rehab ilitation plan and professionally 
competent interim board for its efficient implementation.  The elected 
board is not proposed to be suspended.  I t will only be kept in a dormant 
state and will not discharge its function till the interim board is in place.   It 
is proposed that the interim board will be dissolved and the management 
will be handed over to the elected board as soon as the society becomes 
viable.   
Section 41A does not propose to suspend the elected board of a 
co-operative society.  It only pro poses to keep the elected board in a 
dormant state till the interim  board is in place.  The interim board will be 
dissolved and the management handed over to the elected board as and 
when the society becomes viable.   
21. During the course of the Oral Evidence on 16 November, 2012 , the 
Secretary, on being asked to clarify further on this aspect stated: 
“Please allow me to clarify. This draft legislation was cleared and vetted by 
the Ministry of Law. So, on the face of it, we should have no problem   in 
saying that it is in conformity with the Constitution. Having said that, my 
personal opinion is that I am a bit uncomfortable with idea that the Board 
of a Cooperative can be replaced by an interim Board without being 
suspended or superseded but by saying that it is kept in a dormant state. 
The logic that has been taken by this Ministry is that the board of 
these cooperatives will be kept dormant -it will not be suspended and it will 
not be kept in abeyance. It will be kept dormant till such time this i nterim 

20 
 
board is in a position to rehabilitate the cooperative and put it back in 
working order. 
I am slightly uncomfortable and I am not sure about it but it has been 
cleared by the Ministry of Law. But, since this issue has been raised in the 
last meeting, I fe el that we need to again get this re -examined by the 
Ministry of law mainly to reassure ourselves”. 
 
22.  On being apprised of the Committee‟s scepticism regarding the proposed 
new Section 41A being able to stand legal scrutiny, the Secretary further stated: 
“I share your scepticism. I am not disputing what you are saying. I am 
equally uncomfortable with this part. Since this has been cleared by the 
Ministry of Law and it has said that it is in conformity with all practices of 
jurisprudence, I think we will go back to them”. 
 
23. Queried further as to how the Government perceived such an incredulous 
situation where inspite of the existence of an elected board, which is neither 
suspended nor super seded, there would be another board to replace it, which 
would function on behalf of the former and the former would also co -exist, the 
witness admitted:  
“I am not disputing what you are saying. What I am saying is that the 
Ministry of Law has cleared thi s; I am still uncomfortable as the hon. 
Committee seems to be. I will go back to the Ministry of Law and discuss it 
in greater detail.” 
 
24. Asked further if the Ministry of Law and Justice had been consulted in the 
matter, the witness stated further:  

21 
 
“If you recall, it was on the 5 th of this month when we discussed this. I 
would request you to give us some time because it was just on the 5 th. 
After that we have been trying to complete the questionnaire sent to us by 
you. So, we will go back to the Ministry of Law. Ministry of Law may not 
always be correct. There have been instances where there were 
legislations which have been struck down by the Court.” 
25. During the course of further Oral Evidence on 29 November, 2012 when 
the Committee desired to  know about the outcome of the Department‟s efforts 
towards identifying provisions in the Bill that were in contravention of Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012 Secretary of the Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation stated:  
“I would submit that  as was discussed during the last meeting, we had 
referred the issue of any possible contravention in the provisions of the 
Draft MSCS (Amendment) Bill and the provisions of the Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill with specific reference to the issue that was discussed 
last time whether an existing Board can be kept in a dormant state for 
more than six months, replaced by an Interim Board and be revived after 
six months if the Constitutional provision is that for six months a Board 
cannot be kept inactive or suspended or kept in abeyance. We had 
referred to the Ministry of law this issue. In addition to that, I would think 
that probably this is an opportune time for the entire Bill to be once again 
looked at by the Ministry of Law. But that wi ll obviously take a slightly 
longer spell. After last meeting, we had specifically requested the Ministry 
of Law to look at this particular aspect which has agitated the Members 
during the last meeting. A lot of concern and apprehensions were 
expressed then. Maybe, my colleagues from the Ministry of Law would be 
in a better position to answer  what  is their assessment  regarding the 
validity of the MSCS provisions vis-à-vis the Constitutional Amendment.”  
 

22 
 
26.  The representative of the Ministry of Law (De partment of Legal Affairs) 
when asked to tender his considered view on the matter stated during the further 
Oral Evidence: 
“Sir, I would submit that this aspect was not possibly examined because 
when this Bill was considered in the Department of Legal Affairs and the 
Legislative Department, it was some time in February, 2010. Then, the 
Constitution Amendment 243 (z) was assented to by the hon. President of 
India on 12th January. This came to be enforced from February, 2012. So, 
there has been no occasion earlier to examine this conflict aspect with this 
provision. But, on this reference as directed by the august Committee, 
there had been an occasion to look at this. Prima facie , a view may be 
taken that there are certain reasons specifically mentioned un der Article 
243 (z ) for  what reasons a Multi -State Cooperative Society can be 
superseded or suspended. This provision, in fact, is about revival and 
rehabilitation of a sick society which is running into losses. So, this is a 
grey area and this requires a specific, formal examination because the 
view which the Committee is taking is quite reasonable. So, a formal 
examination may be necessary because there may be overlapping of the 
reasons for declaring the society to be sick. So, if the reasons are those 
which are mentioned in the Constitutional provision, then, it is to be said 
that it is in conflict”. 
 
27. The Committee acceded to the request of the witness and the 
Government was granted time till 5 December, 2012 to furnish information on this 
matter. 
28. The Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) in their 
written submission furnished to the Committee (A nnexure-V) on the issue of 
whether insertion of proposed new Section 41A being in contravention of Article 

23 
 
243ZL of „The Constitution (N inety-Seventh Amendment) Act, 2011‟,  submitted 
that in their considered view, there may be cases  where a society may become 
sick and declared as such for one or more of the reasons stated in Article 243ZL 
and an interim board may be constituted. In such c ases, it would be reasonable 
to view such action as an indirect method of superseding or suspending the 
board though using a different nomenclature of making it non -functional, which is 
not permissible under the provisions in the said Article. Moreover, it may also be 
said that through this Section 41A, an attempt is also made to widen the scope of 
power to supersede or suspend the elected board (in the name of declaring a 
society as sick), as the same would apply to all the coo -operative Societies 
whether  there is any Government shareholding or not. Hence, the provisions in 
Section 41A as discussed above may be reasonably viewed as being in 
contravention with the intent of Article 243ZL. 
29. It was further submitted that if the proposed  Section 41A contains suitable 
provisions for declaring a particular society as sick on account of the reasons 
other than mentioned in Article 243ZL, the same would not be considered against 
the intent and spirit of this constitutional provision. 
30. On being queried by the Committee if other provisions of the Amendment 
Bill were in contravention of „The Constitution (Ninety -Seventh Amendment) Act, 
2011‟, the representative of Department of Legal Affairs during the course of 
Further Oral Evidence stated: 
“Sir, the present issue has been examined with reference to Clause 17 
only where specific submissions were made by me last time. Clause by 
Clause, the Bill has not been examined because as our practise is that 

24 
 
unless we are told by the administrative Departm ent or by one sister 
Department that this particular clause may be looked at from the legal and 
constitution angle, we see only from the policy side; and then the Bill is 
prepared by the Legislative Department in consultation with the 
administrative Depart ment. That is the reason why this has not been 
examined.” 
 
31. In response to a specific query as to whether the Department wanted to 
examine The Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010  clause 
by clause again to remove the contradictions between the Bill under 
consideration and „The Constitution (Ninety-Seventh Amendment) Act, 2011‟, the 
witness replied: 
“My humble submission is that each and every provision in the Bill may be 
re-looked b y the administrative Department sitting with the Legislative 
Department, who have drafted the Bill; and if they make a formal 
reference to us, this will actively be examined on priority and this 
Committee properly assisted”. 
32. The Committee are extremely  disappointed with the perfunctory and 
unprofessional manner in which the instant piece of legislation , touted to 
keep the MSCS Act  in tune with the changing economic policies and to 
facilitate the multi-state co-operative societies to take advantage of the new 
and emerging opportunities and to keep pace with other economic entities 
and facilitate raising of resources by the multi -state co-operative societies 
more efficiently and effectively by making appropriate provisions for 
promoting their functional au tonomy from top to bottom in the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)  has been dealt 
with. 

25 
 
33. The Committee at the very first glance on the Bill had the foreboding 
of it not passing the muster and for justifiable reasons.  T wo Bills viz. ‘The 
Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009 and ‘Multi -
State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010’ , both germane to the 
Cooperative Sector in the Country , were proposed by Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation in an overlapping time frame.  Both these Bills 
were referred to the Committee for examination and Report on                            
24 December, 2009  and 16 December, 2010, respectively.  The Committee 
presented their Twelfth Report on ‘The Constitution (One Hundred and 
Eleventh Amendment) Bill’, 2009 on 30 August, 2010.  Before this Bill was 
enacted the Government introduced ‘The Multi-State Co-operative Societies 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 ’.  The  Committee, in their very first Sitting to 
consider this Bill were convinced that some of its provisions 
contradicted/contravened the provisions contained in the Constitution al 
Amendment Bill.  They, therefore, felt that until the Constitution al 
Amendment Bill was enacted it would not be worthwhile to continue 
examination of ‘The Multi -State Co -operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 
2010’ as there was a serious risk of contradictions between the tw o 
enactments.  The Committee in their wisdom, therefore, deferred the 
examination of ‘The Multi -State Co -operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 
2010’ till ‘The Constitution  (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment)  Bill, 
2009 was enacted and its exact provisions were known and understood.  
34. The Department was accordingly asked to do the needful s o that the 
Committee could resume the examination of the Bill at the earliest.  Instead 

26 
 
of heeding to the advice of the Committee, the Minister of Agricul ture and 
Food Processing Industries chose to seek the interventio n of Speaker, Lok 
Sabha on 4 March, 2011 in advising the Committee to present their Report 
on the Bill to the Parliament without linking it with  the enactment of 
Constitutional Bill as ‘The Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) 
Bill, 2010’ was purportedly in line with the former which has already been 
examined by the Committee ’.  The Committee considered the entire mat ter 
in the light of the Communication of the Minister to the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
during their Sitting held on 24 March, 2011.  Howeve r, since the 
contradictions between the certain clauses of the two Bills were so glaring 
that they concluded that without the enactment of ‘The Constitution ( One 
Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009 ’ they could not proceed 
further with the examinatio n and Report on ‘The Multi -State Co -operative 
Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010’. 
35. The Committee resumed the examination of ‘The Multi -State 
Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010 ’ once the Department 
informed them on 23 January, 2012 that ‘The Constitution ( One Hundred 
and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009 had been enacted as ‘The Constitution 
(Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 201 2’ after receiving assent of the 
President of India on 12 January, 2012. 
36. Based on their in-depth examination as also the inputs received from 
various stakeholders in writing as also when some of them tendered Oral 
Evidence before the Committee on the Bill , the Committee observed that 
some of the provisions of ‘The Multi -State Co -operative Societies 

27 
 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010’  were seemingly in contravention of ‘ The 
Constitution (Ninety -seventh Amendment) Act, 201 2’.  Time and again, 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation was confronted by the 
Committee with their reservations and apprehensions over these clauses 
of the prop osed Bill.  Regrettably, however, the Department at the initial 
stages tried to brazen out in the matter by saying that the proposed Bill 
was totally in conformity with ‘ The Constitution (Ninety -seventh 
Amendment) Act, 2012’.  It was only when the Committe e pointed out as an 
illustration, the inherent contradictions between the Clause 41A of the 
proposed Bill and Article 243ZL of the Constitution that the Department 
very belatedly realised their mistake.  It is inexplicable as to how the 
incredulous situati on of an elected board co -existing in a ‘dormant state’ 
with another board of professionals imposed by Government was missed 
out by the Government.  The Committee’s apprehensions about the 
Department having come up with a piece of legislation which was flawed 
since inception were proved prophetic by the evidence tendered by the 
Ministry of Law and Justice in the matter who in fact have opined that each 
and every provision in the Bill may be relooked by the Administrative 
Department sitting with the Legislation Department. 
37. The Committee unequivocally deprecate the mat ter in which the 
Government had planned to bring about changes in t he fortunes of the 
Cooperative Sector through such a laissez faire  approach.  Ideally, the 
Department should have in the light of the decision of the Committee to 
defer the examination of ‘The Multi -State Co -operative Societies 

28 
 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010’ due to the inherent contradictions between the two 
Bills, withdrawn ‘The Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 
2010’ and after enactment of ‘The Constitution ( One Hundred and Eleventh 
Amendment) Bill, 2009’  should have introduced a fresh Bill en suring that 
none of its provis ions contravene d the Constitution.  The Government 
however continued to proceed with its flawed view about everything being 
spic and span in the proposed Bill.  
38. Since the Government have not withdraw n the Bill , the Committee 
hereby return the MSCS (Amendment) Bill, 2010 to the Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation with the recommendation that each and every 
clause of the Bill may be analysed and evaluated in consultation with the 
Ministry of Law and Justice so that not even a word in the Bill contravenes 
the Constitution.  A fresh Bill taking into consideration the concerns and 
interests of all the stakeholders, the interactions of the Department with the 
Committee, for and in connection with ‘The M ulti-State Co-operative 
Societies (Amendment)  Bill, 2010 not excluded , may thereafter be 
introduced in the Parliament.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
19 December, 2010                                          Chairman, 
28 Agrahayana,1934 (Saka)                     Committee on Agriculture. 
  

29 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 4 th January, 2011 from 1510 
hours to 1640 hours in Committee Room ‟C‟, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Smt Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Premdas 
8. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
12. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
13. Shri A. Elavarasan 
14. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
15.    Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
16.    Shri Upendra Kushwaha 

30 
 
17.     Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
18.     Shri S. Thangavelu 
    
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri P. V. L. N. Murthy  - Director  
Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
           (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND CO-OPERATION) 
 
1. Shri P. K. Basu   Secretary 
2. Shri G. C. Pati   Additional Secretary 
3. Shri D. N. Thakur   Director 
2. The Sitting commenced with the Chairman wishing the Members a 
very happy New Year and welcoming them and the representatives of the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation). After 
introducing themselves, the witnesses briefed the  Committee on the „The 
Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010‟.  
3. The Members raised several queries pertaining to the Bill including 
ramifications of some of the proposed clauses on the recommendations 
made by the Committee in their T welfth Report on the Constitution (One 
Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009  and the witness responded 
to them. 

31 
 
4. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairman thanked the witnesses 
for appearing before the Committee. He also directed them to send 
information on points on which information could not be provided by them 
during the Sitting to the Secretariat of the Committee latest by 11 January, 
2011. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
5. Thereafter, the Committee held an internal meeting on the matter. 
After deliberating for a while, the Committee were of the unanimous view 
that due to commonality on several vital issues an indepth examination of 
the Bill in question could not be undertaken till “The Constitution (One 
Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill , 2009”, on which the Committee 
on Agriculture (2009 -10) had presented their Twelfth Report to both 
Houses of Parliament on 30 th August, 2010, was enacted. They also felt 
that in the absence of information about  
the action taken by the Government on recom mendations contained in 
their 12th Report, a thorough examination of the present Bill would be pre -
emptive. They, therefore, decided to defer the examination of the present 
Bill, till such time the Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh 
Amendment) Bill, 20 09 was enacted. They also authorized the Chairman 

32 
 
to apprise the Hon‟ble Speaker about the constraints being faced by the 
Committee in the matter in an appropriate manner. 
A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept separately. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
/---------------------/ 
  

33 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 24th March, 2011 from 1500 
hours to 1535  hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi.  
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite 
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Premdas 
9. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
10. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
13. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 
 
 Secretariat 
 
1.      Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma  -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy          -     Director 
3.     Shri P.C. Koul             -    Additional Director 
 
 
 

34 
 
-2- 
*2.  xxxxx     xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up Memoranda No. 10 pertaining to the  
Multi-State Co -operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010 for consideration.  The 
Chairman explained to the Committee  the  chronology  of  events  right  from the 
reference of the Bill  by the Speaker, Lok Sabha to the Committee for examination and  
Report  on  20  December,  2010  till  date.  He also recounted the reasons necessitating 
the deferment of examination and Report of the Bill.  He further informed the members 
about the Lette r addressed by Minister of Agriculture and Minister of Food Processing 
and Industries to Hon. Speaker, Lok Sabha requesting for reconsideration and advising 
the Committee to resume the examination of the Bill and make their Recommendations 
at the earliest, so that the Bill may be taken up for consideration and passing during the 
Current Session or in the ensuing Monsoon Session of the Parliament.  
4. The matter was discussed indepth and the Committee felt that since some of the 
provisions of „The Constituti on (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009‟, 
which was yet to be enacted, had a bearing on „The Multi -State Co-operative Societies 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010‟, they would not be in a position to come to a well considered 
conclusion on the latter.  The Committee, therefore, decided that as their was no 
material change in the interregnum between their decision to defer consideration of Bill 
and now, the situation did not warrant any change in their previous decision to postpone 
examination and Report of t he Multi -State Co -operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 
2010.  They also authorised the Chairman to convey the decision of the Committee to 
Hon. Speaker, Lok Sabha in the context of the Letter written by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Minister of Food Processing and Industries.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 
 
  

35 
 
APPENDIX-III 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 03 February, 2012 from 1500  hours to            
1750 hours in Room No. „53‟, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Thangso Baite 
4.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
7.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
8.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
   
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
9.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
10.  Shri Narendra Budania 
11.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
12.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
13.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
14.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
15.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P. V. L. N. Murthy - Director 
 3. Shri P.C. Koul   - Additional Director 
 4. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 

36 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up Memorandum No. 3 pertaining to  „The 
Multi-State Co -operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010 for consideration.  The 
Chairman explained to the Committee the chronology of events right from the date of 
reference of the Bill by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 20 December, 2010  to the 
Committee for examination and Report as well as the reasons guiding the Committee to 
pend further action on the Bill till enactment of „The Constitution (One Hundred and 
Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009‟. 
3. He further informed that „The Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh 
Amendment) Bill, 2009‟, was passed by the  Lok Sabha on 22 December, 2012, as „The 
Constitution (Ninety Seventh Amendment) Act, 2011‟  which had received the assent of 
the President on 12 January, 2012.  In view of this development  the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooper ation) have requested the Committee 
to kindly consider resuming of the examination of „The Multi -State Co -operative 
Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010‟.  
4. After some deliberations the Committee decided to accede to the request of the 
Department.  They also  decided that for presentation of Report on the Bill extension of 
time till the last day of the Budget session 2012 may be sought from Hon‟ble Speaker.  It 
was further decided that public opinion on various provisions of the Bill from various 
stakeholders may be sought and a Press Communication for the purpose may be 
issued.   
 
*5. xxxxx     xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx 
*6. xxxxx     xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx 
*7. xxxxx     xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx  
*8. xxxxx     xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 
  

37 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 17 th October, 2012 , from 1500 
hours to    1715 hours in Committee Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6. Shri Premdas Katheria 
7. Shri P. Kumar 
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
10. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
11. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
12. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
13. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey „Vinnu‟ 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
14. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
15. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
16. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
17. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
18. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*2. xxxxx    xxxxx     xxxxx               xxxxx 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up Memoranda No. 3 pertaining to „The 
Multi-State Co -operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010‟ for consideration. 
The Chairman explained to the Committee about the reference of the Bill by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha , to the Committee for examination and Report. He also 
recounted the reasons necessitating the postponement of examination of the Bill.  
The Committee then authorized the Chairman to request the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha, for grant of extension of time for examination and Report on the Bill till 
the last day of the Winter Session, 2012.    
 
*4. xxxxx    xxxxx    xxxxx                    xxxxx 
 
*5.  xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx                    xxxxx 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 
  

39 
 
APPENDIX-V 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 26 th October, 2012, from 1100 hours to            
1130 hours in Room No. „53‟ Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7. Shri Premdas Katheria 
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
10. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
11. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey „Vinnu‟ 
12. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
14. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
15. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
16. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
17. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
18. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
19. Shri S. Thangavelu 
20. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 

40 
 
- 2 - 
 
2. All the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of 
the Committee.  He then informed them about the sudden indisposi tion of the 
Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries and the 
consequent change in  the agenda of the Sitting from a briefing on the Subject 
“Development of Fisheries – A  Review” to examination of  „The Multi -State 
Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010‟. 
3. The Committee then deliberated upon the memorandum received from 
various stakeholders on the Subject under consideration. After some 
deliberations it was felt that the views of some of the stakeholders be heard in 
person s o as to have a holistic view of the subject.  It was decided to hold a 
sitting on 5 November, 2012 for the purpose.   
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

41 
 
 APPENDIX-VI 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 5 th November, 2012, from 1500 hours 
to 1755 hours in Committee Room „C‟ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri L. Raja Gopal 
6. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
7. Shri Premdas Katheria 
8. Shri P. Kumar 
9. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
10. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
11. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12. Shri Devji M. Patel 
13. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
14. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey „Vinnu‟ 
15. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
17. Shri A. Elavarasan 
18. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
19. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
20. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
21. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
22. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 

42 
 
 
- 2 - 
 
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND CO-OPERATION) 
 
S.No.    NAME OF THE OFFICER DESIGNATION 
 
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna  Secretary  
2. Shri A.K. Thakur    Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Rajender Kumar Tiwari Joint Secretary 
 
NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
1. Dr. Prakash Bakshi   Chairman  
2. Shri P.V.S. Suryakumar  Chief General Manager  
 
INDIAN FARMERS FERTILISER COOPERATIVE LIMITED 
 
1. Dr. U.S. Awasthi Managing Director 
2. Shri Rakesh Kapur   Joint  Managing Director 
 
NATIONAL COOPERATIVE UNION OF INDIA 
 
1. Dr. Chandra Pal Singh Yadav   President  
2. Dr. Dinesh    Chief Executive 
3. Dr. Bijender Singh   Chairman, NAFED 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Chairman directed that the representatives of the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) be ushered 
in. The Chairman then welcom ed the representatives of Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation and asked them to introduce themselves. Once the 
introductions were over the Secretary of the Department briefed the Committee 
on „The Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010‟.  
 
3. The Members raised several queries pertaining to the Bill including 
ramifications of some of the proposed clauses viz-a-viz „The Constitution (Ninety-
seventh Amendment) Act, 2011‟ to which the witness duly responded to. 
 
  

43 
 
-3- 
4. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee. 
He also directed them to send information on points on which information could 
not be provided by them during the Sitting to the Secretariat of the Committee 
latest by 9 November, 2012. 
(At about 1605 hours the representative of Department of Agriculture and Co-
operation withdrew and the representatives of NABARD were ushered in). 
 
5. After introducing themselves, the principal witness briefed the Committee 
on the various amendments moved by the Gove rnment in „The Multi -State Co -
operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010‟ as well the views of NABARD on 
these amendments.  The Members sought several clarifications from the witness, 
which were responded to. 
(At about 1635 hours representatives of NABARD withdrew and the 
representatives of IFFCO were ushered in.) 
 
6. Once the introductions were over the representatives of IFFCO made on  
audio-vidual presentation before the Committee. They, thereafter, briefed the 
Committee about the various changes/modific ations in the Bill suggested by 
them in their written memorandum submitted to the Committee.  The Members 
sought several clarifications from the witnesses, which were duly responded to. 
(At about 1720 hours the representatives of IFFCO withdrew and the 
representatives of NCUI were ushered in.) 
 
7. The representatives of NCUI after having introduced themselves, briefed 
the Committee on the proposed Amendments in the Bill under consideration and 
the views of NCUI on the same.  The Members sought several clari fications on 
the various suggestions contained in the memorandum submitted by the 
organization.  The witnesses responded to them. 
 
(At about 1730 hours the Chairman withdrew from the Sitting and Shri Hukamdeo 
Narayan Yadav, M.P. took  the Chair). 
  

44 
 
-4- 
8. Before the Sitting concluded, the Acting Chairman thanked the witnesses 
for appearing before the Committee and sharing their views on the Subject.  The 
Acting Chairman directed them to send information on points on which 
information could not be readily pr ovided during the Sitting to the Committee 
Secretariat at the earliest.  
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
/---------------------/ 
  

45 
 
 APPENDIX-VII 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 16 th November, 2012, from 1530 hours 
to            1650  hours in Room No. 53, (F/F), Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri L. Raja Gopal 
6. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7. Shri Premdas Katheria 
8. Shri P. Kumar 
9. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
10. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
11. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
12. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
13. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey „Vinnu‟ 
14. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
16. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
17. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
18. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
19. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
20 Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
21. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

46 
 
- 2- 
 
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND CO-OPERATION) 
 
S.No.    NAME OF THE OFFICER DESIGNATION 
 
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna  Secretary  
2. Shri A.K. Thakur    Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Rajender Kumar Tiwari Joint Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, t he Chairman welcomed the witnesses to the Sitting.  
Thereafter, he directed the principal witness to introduce himself and his 
colleagues. The Chairman and Members of the Committee sought several 
clarifications on  „The Multi-State Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010‟. 
The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members.  
 
3. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairman thanked the witnesses for 
appearing before the Committee and sharing their views on the subject.  He also 
directed them to send information on points which could not be readily responded 
to by them during the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat by 26 November, 
2012. The Committee also decided to sit on 29 November, 2012 at 1500 hours to 
take further Oral Evidence on the Bill.  They further decided that the 
representatives of Ministry of Law & Justice be also summoned for the purpose 
on the said day. 
A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

47 
 
APPENDIX-VIII  
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29 th November, 2012, from 1500 
hours to 1600 hours in Room No. 62, (F/F), Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri L. Raja Gopal 
6. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7. Shri Premdas Katheria 
8. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
9. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
10. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
11. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey „Vinnu‟ 
12. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
14. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
15 Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
16. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
 
 
 
- 2- 
 
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND CO-OPERATION) 
 
S.No.    NAME OF THE OFFICER DESIGNATION 
 
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna  Secretary  
2. Shri A.K. Thakur    Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Rajender Kumar Tiwari Joint Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(i) (DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS) 
 
Shri M.K. Sharma   Additional Secretary 
 
 (ii) (LEGISLATIVE  DEPARTMENT) 
 
 1. Dr. S.D. Singh  Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
2. Dr. Rita Vasishta  Additional Legislative Counsel 
 
 
2. At the outset, t he Chairman welcomed the witnesses to the Sitting.  
Thereafter, he directed the principal witness to introduce himself and  his 
colleagues. The Chairman and Members of the Committee sought several 
clarifications on „The Multi-State Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010‟ . 
The witness responded to the queries raised by the Members . They also sought 
clarification from the representative of the Department of Legal Affairs as to 
whether the proposed amendments in the Bill were in line with the provisions of 
the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011. He submitted that some 
of these matters would require considerati on by Ministry of Law and Justice ab 
initio.  He, therefore, sought time for the purpose.  After some consultation, he 
was directed to furnish replies on all these aspects by 5 December, 2012 as the 
Committee have to present their Report on the Bill to the  Parliament during the 
ongoing Session. 
 

49 
 
 
- 3- 
 
3. The Committee also decided to sit on 6 December, 2012 at 1500 hours to 
take further Oral Evidence on the Bill.  
 
A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

50 
 
APPENDIX-IX 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 6 th December, 2012, from 1500 
hours to 1545 hours in Committee Room „B‟, (G/F), Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6. Shri Premdas Katheria 
7. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
8. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
9. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
10. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
11. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
  

51 
 
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND CO-OPERATION) 
 
S.No.    NAME OF THE OFFICER DESIGNATION 
 
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna  Secretary  
2. Shri Rajendra Kumar Tiwari Joint Secretary 
 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(i) DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
 
Shri M.K. Sharma  Additional Secretary 
 
 (ii) LEGISLATIVE  DEPARTMENT 
 
  Smt. Sharda Jain  Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
 
2. At the outset, t he Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting. The 
Committee then deliberated upon the Bill in the light of legal opinion submitted by 
Department of Legal Affairs.  Thereafter, the Chairman directed that the witness 
be ushered in. 
(At around 1525 hours the witness took their seats) 
 
3. The Chairman welcomed them to the sitting and asked them to introduce 
themselves. Once the introduction was over, the Chairman and Members sought 
clarifications regarding some amendments proposed in „The Multi -State 
Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010‟, being contradictory to the 
provisions of „The Constitution (Ninety -seventh Amendment) Act, 2011‟.  The 
witness of the Department of Legal Affairs tendered his opinion on a few clauses 
of the Bill.  However, he was of the view  that the Bill required a clause by clause 
analysis to ensure that the proposed amendments were in consonance with the 
provisions of  „The Constitution (Ninety -seventh Amendment) Act, 2011‟.  This 
had not been done previously as the concerned administrative Department had 
not sought such a review. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

52 
 
APPENDIX - X 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 19 December , 2012 from 1 000 
hours to 10 30 hours in Committee Room  „ B‟ (G/F), Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOKSABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Smt. Paramjit  Kaur Gulshan 
5.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
6.  Shri P. Kumar 
7.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
8.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
9.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
10.  Smt. Bhavana  Gawali (Patil) 
11.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
12.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
               RAJYA SABHA 
13.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
14.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
15.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
16.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
17.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
  

53 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri  R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up   xxxxx    xxxxx  
xxxxx                    xxxxx Draft Report on “The Multi State Coopera tive 
Societies (Amendment) Bill , 2010”. 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report(s) 
without any modification and authorized the Chairman to present both the 
Report(s) after getting them factually verified  from the concerned Departments. 
*4. xxxxx     xxxxx    xxxxx                  xxxxx 
*5. xxxxx     xxxxx    xxxxx                  xxxxx 
*6. xxxxx     xxxxx    xxxxx                  xxxxx 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
* Matter not related to this Report. 
 

54 
 
                                                                                        
 
 
  


55 
 
 
 
 


56 
 
 
 
 


57 
 
 
 
 


58 
 
 
 
 


59 
 
 
 
 


60 
 
 
 
 


61 
 
 
 
 


62 
 
 
 
 


63 
 
 
 
 


64 
 
 
 
 


65 
 
 
 
 


66 
 
 
 
 


67 
 
 
 
 


68 
 
 
 
 


69 
 
 
 
 


70 
 
 
 
 


71 
 
 
 
 


72 
 
 
 
 


73 
 
 
 
 


74 
 
 
 
 


75 
 
 
 
 


76 
 
 
 
 


77 
 
 
 
 


78 
 
 
 
 


79 
 
 
 
 


80 
 
 
 
 


81 
 
 
 
 


82 
 
 
 
 


83 
 
 
 
 


84 
 
 
 
 


85 
 
 
 
 


86 
 
 
 
 


87 
 
 
 
 


88 
 
 
 
 


89 
 
 
 
 


90 
 
ANNEXURE-IV 
 
List of Organisations/Individuals who Submitted  
Written Memoranda to the Committee 
 
1) Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative Limited, New Delhi. 
2) Shri D.P. Agrawal, Yamuna Vihar, Delhi. 
3) National Cooperative Union of India, New Delhi. 
4) National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, Mumbai. 
5) Dr. Frederick J. De Souza, Prabhadevi, Mumbai. 
6) Shri Fakira Deoram Sansare, Ahmednagar, Maharashtra, et. al. 
7) Shri T. Thandesan, 4/347, Vanjinadhan Nagar, Dheeran Nagar 
West Extension, Trichy-9, Tamil Nadu.  
8) Shri Wahengbam Inaocha Singh, IMphal, Manipur. 
9) Ashwini Sahakari Rugnalaya Ani Ani Sanshodhan Kendra Niy, 
Solapur, Maharashtra. 
10) Muslim All Backward Classes Organization, Ghatkopar, Mumbai. 
11) Shri Sham Lal Khera, Sector 22-B, Chandigarh. 
12) Shri A. Sethuraman, Thendral Nagar, Thiruchirapalli. 
13) Jharkhand Rajya Sahkarita Samanvaya Samiti, Ranchi. 
14) PRS Legislative research, Chanakyapuri, New Delh.i 
15) Shri S. Mohan, Laxminagar, Chennai. 
16) Shri Altaf Usman Batliwala, Moulvi House, Mumbai. 
17) CAMPCO Ltd, Mission Street, Mangalore. 
18) Shri T. Thandesan, 4/347, Vanjinadhan Nagar, Dheeran Nagar 
West Extension, Trichy-9, Tamil Nadu.  

91 
 
 


92 
 


93 
 


94 
 


95 
 
 
