 
 
 
      
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2010-2011) 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
APRIL, 2010/, VAISAKHA, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
9 

 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-2010) 
 
         (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-11) 
                    
 
                      Presented to Lok Sabha on    03.05.2010 
                   Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  03.05.2010    
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
APRIL, 2010/, VAISAKHA, 1932 (Saka) 
  


 
 
COA No. 232 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
        
         
 
 
Price:  Rs. 
         
         
         
          
 
  © 2010 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha  (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  

 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………         (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………          (v) 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I  OVERVIEW  OF DEMANDS 
(i) Introductory                
      
(ii) Analysis of Demands    
     
(iii) Allocation to North East Region   
    
(iv) Mid-Term Appraisal         
               
(v) Internal Evaluation and Perspective Planning 
               
 
CHAPTER II  EVALUATION OF SCHEMES  
   i Mega Food Park      
   II. Scheme for Technology Upgradation/Establishments   
    and Modernization of Food Processing Industries
   
III. National Institute of Food Technology,  
Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) 
        
   iv. Production of Processed Food    
  
   v. Fruit and Vegetable Processing   
   
   vi. Food Processing Training Centres  
    
   vii. Food Testing Laboratories     
   viii. Outcome Budget     
   ix. Utilisation Certificates    
   
 
(i) 

 
 
ANNEXURE 
I.  Scheme-wise Outlay and Expenditures during 11th Plan and  
 Budget Estimates for 2010-11      
   
II. State-wise Details of Food Processing Training Centres.  
    
III. State-wise number of Food Testing Laboratories in the Country. 
    
iv. State-wise details of Labs assisted by Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries.   
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Twenty-Fifth Sitting of the Committee held on 31 March,   
2010 
II. Minutes of the Twenty-Sixth Sitting of the Committee held on 9 April, 
2010 
III Minutes of the Twenty-Ninth Sitting of the Committee held on 30 April, 
2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2009-2010) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
  
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhry  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Narendra Budania  
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24. Shri A. Elavarasan  
25. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
*31. Vacant 
________________________________________________________________ 
*      Vice Shri Khekiho Zhimomi who ceased to be the Member of the 
Committee due to retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f 2 April, 
2010. 
(iii)  

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
        I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Ninth Report on the 
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Committee considered the Demands for Grants (2010 -11) of the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries which were laid in the Lok Sabha on 16 
March, 2010. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries and Planning Comm ission at their 
Sittings held on 31 March, 2010 and 9 April, 2010 respectively.  The Committee 
wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries and Planning Commission for appearing before the Committee and 
for fur nishing the information the Committee desired in connection with the 
examination of Demands for Grants of the Ministry. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting 
held on     30 April, 2010. 
 
4. For facility of reference, t he Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold at the end of each Chapter. 
         
            
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     BASUDEB ACHARIA 
30 April, 2010                                   Chairman, 
10 Vaisakha 1932 (Saka)                                          Committee on Agriculture
  
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 
 
C H A P T E R – I 
OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
I. Introductory 
  A major issue facing the country is how to ensure remunerative 
prices to the farmers for their produce. The issue could be addressed to 
an extent, if the surplus production of cereals, fruits, vegetables, milk, fish, 
meat and poultry etc. are processed and  marketed both inside and 
outside the country. A strong and dynamic food processing sector plays a 
vital role in diversification and commercialization of agriculture, enhances 
shelf life, ensures value addition to the agricultural produce, generates 
employment, enhances income of farmers and creates markets for 
exports of agro foods.  
 
1.2 Food processing involves any type of value addition to agricultural or 
horticultural produce and also includes processes such as grading, sorting, 
packaging etc. which en hances shelf life of the produce. The Industry provides 
vital linkages and synergies between industry and agriculture.  
 
1.3 India‟s agricultural production base is quite strong but at the same time 
wastage of agricultural produce is m assive. Processing le vel is very low i.e. 
around 2% for fruits & vegetables, 26% for marine 6% for poultry and 20% for 
buffalo meat, against 60 -70% in developed countries. India‟s export of 
processed food in global trade is only 1.5%. 
 

 
 
1.4 The Ministry  of Food Processing Indus tries are  concerned with 
formulation and implementation of the policies and  plans for the food 
processing industries within the overall national priorities and objectives. 
As stated in their Outcome Budget 2010 -11 the Ministry act  as a catalyst 
for bringing in greater investment into this sector, guiding and helping the 
industry, and creating a conducive environment for healthy growth of the 
food processing industry. Within these overal l objectives, the Ministry aim  
at: 
 
Better utilization and value addition of agricultural produce. 
 Minimizing wastage at all stages in the food processing chain by 
development of infrastructure for storage, transpor tation and 
processing of agro-food produce. 
 
 Induction of modern technology into the food processing 
industries. 
 
 Encouraging R&D in food processing for product & process 
development. 
 
 Providing policy support, promotional initiatives and facilities to 
promote value added exports. 
 
1.5 Food Processing Industry is facing constrains like non -availability of 
adequate infrastructural facilities, lack of adequate quality control & testing 
infrastructure, inefficient supply chain, lack of processable varieties of farm 
produce, seasonality of raw material, high inventory carrying cost, high taxation, 
high packaging cost, affordability and cultural preference of fresh food.  
 
1.6 The Ministry o f Food processing Industries have  accordingly been 
operating several plan schemes for development of pro cessed food industry. 
Taking into account the recommendations of the Working Group constituted by 

 
 
the Planning Commission, the constraints faced by the industry, the need to 
accelerate growth of the sector and the priority status accorded to food 
processing industry by Government, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
have stepped up operation of several Plan schemes and modified  some of them 
for implementation in Eleventh Plan to achieve higher value addition. 
 
 
II. Analysis of Demands 
 
1.7 Demand No. 17 pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
for the year 2010-11 was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 March, 2010. The Table 
below shows the Demands (2010-11) in brief: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Section Plan Non-Plan Total 
 
Revenue 
(i) Voted 
(ii)  Charged 
 
297.49 
00.00 
 
9.72 
00.00 
 
307.21 
Capital 
(i) Voted 
(ii)  Charged 
 
102.51 
00.00 
 
00.00 
00.00 
 
102.51 
00.00 
Grand Total 400.00 9.72 409.72 
 
 
1.8 It is noted from the above that a sum of Rs. 409.72 crore has been 
allocated to the Ministry for the Financial Year 2010-11. Out of this Rs.307.21 
crore is in the Revenue Section and the remaining Rs. 102.51 crore is in the 
Capital Section. The allocation in the Revenue Section consists o f Rs. 297.49 
crore on the Plan Side and Rs. 9.72 crore on the Non -Plan Side. In the Capital 
Section the entire allocation of Rs 102.51 crore is on Plan Side. 
 
 

 
 
1.9 A comparative statement of the Revised Estimates of the Fiscal gone by 
and the BE of the ongoing Fiscal is given in the Table below: 
 
Section RE 2009-10 BE 2010-11 
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
Revenue 
(i) Voted 
(ii) Charged 
 
240.00 
00.00 
 
11.57 
00.00 
 
297.49 
00.00 
 
9.72 
00.00 
Capital 
(i) Voted 
(ii) Charged 
 
40.00 
00.00 
 
00.00 
00.00 
 
102.51 
00.00 
 
00.00 
00.00 
 
1.10 The comparison of RE 2009-10 and BE 2010-11 reveals that  on the Plan 
side the BE allocation of Rs.400 crore for 2010-11 is almost 43% higher than RE 
2009-10 of Rs280 crore. The Non -Plan BE of Rs.9.72 crore this year is about 
19% less as compared to RE of Rs.11.57 crore for 2009 -10. The total BE 
allocation of Rs.409.72 crore for 2010 -11 is Rs.118.15 crore more than RE of 
2009-10, which stood at Rs.291.57 crore. In percentage terms the hike works 
out to about 40.5%. 
 
1.11 When asked  to furnish the amount of funds sough t by the Ministry, 
approved by Planning Commission and actually allocated during Eleventh Five 
Year Plan on both Plan and Non -Plan side and the amount actually spent, the 
Ministry stated that based on the recommendation s of the Working Group, set 
up for formulation of the Eleventh Plan, the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries have sought Rs.4816.00 crore  as Eleventh Plan allocation. Planning 

 
 
Commission allocated Rs.4031 crore for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. For the 
first 4 years of the Five Year Plan i.e. 2007 -08 to 2010 -11 the approved 
allocation was Rs.3385.00 crore for the Ministry. As against this allocation 
actually Rs.1280.00 crore  have been made available. The statement showing 
year-wise BE,RE and Actuals durin g Eleventh Plan till date is given at 
Annexure-I. 
 
1.12 Queried further as to how the Ministry fared in achieving of target fixed 
during these years, it was stated that the achievements under various activities 
are not in accordance with the target fixed due to the following reasons: 
 
1. Late approval of the schemes:  Most of the schemes were approved 
after about a year and half of commencement of the Eleventh Plan. 
2. Partial approval of the schemes:  Under schemes of Infrastructure 
Development as against a pproved 30 Mega Food parks, only 10 Mega 
Food Park were approved in phase I. In Cold Chain, Value Addition & 
Preservation Infrastructure as against 30 projects only 10 projects were 
approved in Phase I. In Moderniz ation of Abattoir as against approval of 
50 on ly 10 projects were approved for Phase I. As a result thereof, full 
volume activity of the sch emes could not be taken up. Hence, the 
progress has been adversely affected. 
 
3. Insufficient allocation of the funds: In almost all schemes the annual 
allocation has been far short of the demand placed by the Ministry as well 
as allocation made during Five Year Plan finalization. Consequently, the 
quantum of projects sanctioned got reduced and hence the financial & 
physical achievements we re low. The issue of insufficient allocation of 

 
 
resources have been highlighted by the senior most level of the Ministry 
from time to time. 
 
1.13 During the course of the Oral Evidence on the subject on 31 March 2010, 
when a question was put to the represe ntative of Planning Commission 
regarding the reasons behind the Ministry not being provided the approved  
Outlays in any of the years of the Eleventh Plan gone by, he stated: 
  
“If you look at the figures of outlays  and expenditure over the years, what 
we notice is that the outlays have been far less than what we have 
projected in the Eleventh Plan. But what is worrying is that even those 
smaller allocations could not be utilized fully. If you see the biggest 
component of allocation is on infrastructure de velopment and we find that 
by November 2009, only Rs.101 crore has been utilized, whereas the 
original allocation was Rs.2613 crore. But whatever allocations were 
made, could not be utilized. There is BE, which is less than what the 
Ministry has demanded, but in RE it has been brought down becau se 
there is no progress in the s ix months. That is the position. But we also 
find that there are certain areas where progress has been better. For 
example, take the case of technology upgradation where almost 50 per 
cent of the money projected in the Eleventh Plan has been utilized. Every 
year, there is a lower BE; at RE  stage, since the expenditure has been 
better, at RE has been given a higher allocation.  
 What I wish to submit is that if the Ministry perform bette r, if they 
are able to show better expenditure performance, the Planning 
Commission will be willing to  support them with higher allocations. That 
has been demonstrated for a couple  of components, but they have to 
focus on infrastructure development because that is the biggest part of 
the programme which involves Mega Food Parks and cold chain and 
abattoirs. If there is a better performance, more money will be given”. 
 
Elaborating further he added: 
“As the Committee has observed, the expenditure performance during the 
past has not been up to the mark. There are many reasons. I do not have 
any quarrel with that. It is heartening to note that this year the Ministry 
has performed much better. They are trying to break from the past where 
you had the situat ion that the Budget Estimates was larger than the 
Revised Estimates. This time, they had come up to the RE stage. What 
happened was, in allocation of the resources, at the time of budget 
formulation, the Planning Commission looks at the requirement project ed 
by the Ministry and also at the past performance, the performance in the 
immediate past and since until this year when this budget exercise was 

 
 
taken up, at that time the performance was not good enough, even in 
November, 2009 the figures were very low,  that is why it was pegged at 
Rs.400 crore. Now that they are showing better performance and if in the 
coming year, on the basis of this Rs.400 crore, if they perform by 
September, then it may be possible to provide larger allocation at the 
Revised Estimates stage, but they have to perform”.  
 
1.14 When asked to put forth the views of the Ministry on the aspect of the low 
funding pattern the Secretary of the Ministry stated during the further Oral 
Evidence held on 9 April, 2010: 
 “Sir, permit me to submit that to  compare the allocation the Five Year 
Plan with what I spend without going through the various processes and 
the processes which actually permit me to spend will not be a  very fair 
way of judging me. Just by making an allocation,  the entire chain is not 
convinced that this money is to be spent. The allocation has to be spent 
only in the system which we are following; in the system of Annual Plan 
Grants, of not relating it to what was given to me last year.  Perhaps, I 
may be given five or ten perce nt increase over this thing. At each point of 
time, the system is either they are accepting the arguments or rejecting 
the arguments. The system should be what is it which can be done now, 
what is the fair target to be given, what is the fair expectation f rom a  
Ministry.” 
 
Adding further he stated: 
 
“Kindly look at the third year. The figures before you are the expenditure 
of only up to 30.11.2009. If you kindly look at this year, while it is a fact 
that the BE of Rs.340 cro re was reduced to Rs.280 crore in  September, 
we were working on spending Rs.280 crore. As I have submitted already, 
we have spent nearly Rs.290 crore. Wh at I am submitting is that for each 
year, kindly look at the micro argument. When the schemes were 
approved only in October, 2008, kindl y do not punish this Ministry for the 
expenditure figure of 2007 -08. For the Five year Plan, neither the 
allocations were communicated nor the schemes were made”. 
 
1.15 In view of these claims and counter claims of the Ministry and the 
Planning Commission on the funds allocations to the Ministry, the Committee 
desired to know what was the way out of the vicious cycle of delayed approvals, 

 
 
delayed allocations, delayed and meager releases. In response the Secretary of 
the Ministry stated during the further Oral Evidence on 9 April, 2010: 
“I am ready to come out of the cycle because I am now at the performing 
stage. Let someone examine the position now. Whatever money was 
given to me in the RE, I have been able to spend it correctly. Based on 
that, what is my c apacity in the new year presuming that this is an area 
which has to be considered by itself. Once it was said, it is a sunrise area 
and it was initiated with a big allocation. It has to be looked from the point 
of view of my capacity to spend”. 
 
1.16 About the proportion of allocations made in favour of the Ministry from the 
Central Plan Outlay during the Eleventh Plan year -wise and a comparison of 
their allocation with the allocations of some other Ministries, the following 
statement was furnished by the Ministry to the Committee. 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
 
Central Plan Outlay 319992 375485 447921 524484 
Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries 
250 290 340 400 
% of allocation vis -à-vis 
Central Plan 
0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 
M/o Health & FW 14363 
(4.5 %) 
16534  
(4.4%) 
19534  
(4.3%) 
22300 
 (4.3%) 
M/o RD 41060 (12.8%) 49400 
(13.1%) 
80770  
(18%) 
89340  
(17%) 
M/o UD 5166  
(1.6%) 
5478  
(1.5%) 
5284  
(1.2%) 
7606 
 (1.8%) 
M/o HRD 28674 
(8.9%) 
34400 
(9.2%) 
36400 
(8.1%) 
42036 
(8.9%) 
M/o Road Transport & 
Highways 
14590 
(4.6%) 
17550 
(4.7%) 
20450 
(4.6%) 
25455 
(4.8%) 
 
III.  Allocation to North East Region 
1.17 Given the priority assigned to the North East Region by the Government 
the Committee desired to be apprised about the perfo rmance of the Ministry on 
this count. In response the Ministry stated in a written reply that as per the policy 
of the Government, 10% of the BE of the Ministry is to be utilized for NER. In 

 
 
certain schemes, enough proposals are not received to utilize 10% of the 
allocation in the concerned schemes. Ministry, therefore, allocate higher or lower 
than 10%  in the respective scheme, in accordance with the number of 
proposals likely to be received but total allocation for NER is kept at 10% of the 
BE of the Ministry. Out of BE of Rs.340.00 crore for 2009-10, Rs.34.00 crore has 
been shown as lump sum provision for NER. Out of Rs.148.83 crore i.e. the 
expenditure as on 30 November, 2009 the expenditure for NER was R s.5.54 
crore. 
 As the RE for the Ministry is Rs.290 crore, 10% of which is NER 
allocation. This Rs.29.00 crore has been allocated for different schemes.  
 
1.18 Inspite of the compulsory allocation of 10% of the allocation for North 
East Region it is seen that most of the times these funds remain unspent . Apart 
from a ffecting the developmental efforts,  this  under utilization of funds also 
creates a sense of being discriminated against among the people of the Region. 
When this was pointed out during the Oral Evidence on 31 March, 2010, the 
Secretary of the Ministry stated: 
“This year special attention has been paid towards the North East. 
Earlier, there was shortage of Food Testing Laboratories for the food 
factories there, but this year two -three laboratories have been started 
there. We are going to start one in Tripu ra and other in Tejpur University 
also during this year. Some additional research and development 
proposals have also been taken up. Two thousands cases for grant of 
25% subject to a cap of Rs. 50 lakhs and Rs.75 lakhs for the North East 
under our flagship scheme of setting up of industries, is pending with the 
Ministry. We have been able to get only Rs.70 -80 crores for the above 
scheme  whereas we want to raise it upto atleast  Rs. 200 crores so as to 
clear the cases lying pending for the last three years.  It is almost 
panicking times now. We have made efforts owing to which no valid 
application is pending with us in the North East. Now, we have decided it 
for the next year that the people from the North -East including Sikkim 
should be drawn towards the Sch eme and we propose to hold a 

 
 
conference of farmers and entrepreneurs. The Hon‟ble Minister has also 
admitted it and he is likely to visit three places there in the near future. 
We had held a meeting at Agartalla in this regard. It would be our 
endeavour to  hold meetings in respect of all States  before June, and 
then send for their applications by persuading the Banks. Earlier, we had 
invested upto Rs. 20 crores therein. Our  performance has been good. 
Now we are planning with a projection of Rs. 50 -60 crores for the North 
East on the basis of campaign base. For this the people over there are 
being provided literature in local language and an effort is being made to 
educate them about the schemes.” 
 
IV. Mid-Term Appraisal  
1.19 The Planning Commission had reviewed the performance of the Ministry 
in Mid Term Appraisal Review Meeting on 23 August,2009 . However, t he 
minutes of the Mid Term Appraisal Review Meeting conducted by the Planning 
Commission are yet to be received by the Ministry. 
1.20 When this matter was taken up by the Committee with the representative 
of the Planning Commission during the further Oral Evidence on 9 April, 2010, 
he replied: 
“Sir, the report regarding the exer cise of M id-Term Appraisal has been 
finalized. The meeting of the full Pla nning Commission was held recently 
in March and the report has been submitted to the Commission. Right 
now, it will be submitted to the Cabinet for approval then it will be 
available to us. I understand that is  likely to come up before the Cabinet 
within a period of six weeks”. 
  
Asked further as to how much time the entire process of Mid Term 
Appraisal usually took, he stated: 
“Sir, normally it takes one year”. 
 
When it was pointed out to him that if six months are taken to complete 
the review, already three years of the Plan would be over. And  if another year is 

 
 
spent in making available their comments to the Ministry, hardly a year would be 
left in the Five Year Plan for working on the suggestion/directions of the 
Planning Commission, he stated: 
“Sir, actually it was to be done by March itself. The meeting of the 
Planning Commission has been held and now it is to be placed before the 
Cabinet. I think it would get the Cabinet approval during the next six 
weeks and then it would be available. We are not very late”. 
 
V. Internal Evaluation and Perspective Planning 
1.21 Keeping in view the slippages  in the performance  of the Ministry during 
the first three years of the Eleventh Plan it was enquired as to whether any 
evaluation of the schemes had been  carried out. In response the Ministry stated 
that as regards evaluation, Ministry ha ve decided to evaluate all Schemes for 
period of four year (2005-06 to 2008-09) which is under way. 
 
1.22 Asked further as to whether any perspective planning for the Twel fth Plan 
was in the offing in view of the lessons learnt from their performance in the 
Eleventh Plan till now it was stated that the Ministry is in the process of 
undertaking a comprehensive evaluatio n of the implementation of the S chemes 
in the Tenth/Eleventh Plan Period. Planning for the Twelfth Five Year Plan  
would be undertaken after the results of this evaluation study are available so 
that the effectiveness of the on-going schemes can be better assessed. 
 
Food Processing Industry Sector 
 
  
1.23 The Committee note with concern the existing demographic and 
food production situation in the Country.  While, on one hand, we have a 

 
 
burgeoning population, on the other, the rate of food production is not 
keeping pace with it.  In such a grim scenario one  immediate way out is to 
somehow salvage, the huge amounts of agriculture produce that perishes 
each year due to lack of adequate food processing facilities in the 
Country.  Though no estimates of the agriculture and allied produce 
losses are available in totality, the estimated loss of Rs. 50000 crore per 
annum in just fruit and vegetables sector gives a fair idea of the colossal 
loss that might be taking place in the agriculture and allied produce sector 
as a whole, at the post harvest stage. Given these compulsions, 
development of the food processing industries sector becomes a sine qua 
non for ensuring the food security of the Country, albeit in an indirect 
manner.  Handled judiciously and more pro-actively, a well-developed food 
processing industries se ctor can also contribute handsomely, to the 
growth of household income at the micro level and at the macro level to 
the nation’s economy, through enhanced GDP and exports.  Unfortunately, 
however, as the succeeding narrative will prove, the Government thou gh 
being aware of the merits of the development of food processing 
industries sector has been affected by a strange inertia when it comes to 
initiating pro -active measures.  Resultantly, the sun of this avowedly 
sunshine sector of Country’s economy is, for decades together now, stuck 
in the eastern horizon. The Committee have made some very relevant 
recommendations on these matters recently in their Fifth Report on the 
Demands for Grants 2009-10 of the Ministry.  The Committee are confident 
that coupled with them, the recommendations made in the present Report, 
if implemented with a sense of purpose and sincerity, will at last, not only 

 
 
kickstart the much awaited ascent of sun in the eastern horizon but also 
take it to its zenith. 
 
Overview of Demands 
  
1.24 Coming to the immediate task of the examination of the Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry for the year 2010 -11, the Committee have 
extensively covered several matters pertaining to the Ministry in their Fifth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the Ministry, which was 
presented to the Hon’ble Speaker on 18 February, 2010 and presented/laid 
in the two Houses of Parliament on 3 March, 2010.  As not much time has 
elapsed since the Fifth Report was presented and the Action Taken 
Replies of the Government  on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Report are not yet due, the Committee in their present 
Report have either recommended additional measures which are 
warranted in matters already covered in their Fifth Report or on such 
matters which did not find mention in that  Report. 
 
 Having examined Demand No. 17 pertaining to the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industry, the Committee note that the Ministry have been 
allocated a sum of Rs. 400.00 crore on the Plan side.  Out of this Rs. 297.49 
crore is in the Revenue Section and the balance Rs. 102.51 crore in the 
Capital Section.  The allocation on the Plan side is about 43% higher than 
RE 2009-10 which stood at Rs. 280.00 crore. 
 
 The Ministry have also been allocated a sum of Rs. 19.72 crore on 
the Non-Plan side, which is all in the Revenue Section.  The Non -Plan 
allocation has seen an almost 19% decline from the RE 2009 -10 of Rs. 

 
 
11.57 crore. If maintained till the end of the Fiscal it would be a 
commendable effort.  
 
 Notwithstanding, the statisti cs quoted above, the Committee are 
hugely disappointed to find that as in the previous several years, the 
Ministry have been given a raw deal in allocation of funds for 2010 -11 as 
well.  The allocation of      Rs. 400.00 odd crore for 2010 -11 takes the tal ly 
of allocations in the first four years of the Eleventh Plan to a measly Rs. 
1280.00 crore.  What to speak of the Rs. 4816.00 crore initially sought by 
the Ministry for the Eleventh Plan, this amount is not even a patch on the 
total allocation of Rs. 403 1.00 crore approved by the Planning 
Commission. 
 
 The Committee can understand that the overall availability of 
resource position and the inter -se prioritization amongst various 
Ministries/Departments may cause some updowns in the actual 
allocations.  But the yawning gaps between the allocations made for the 
Eleventh Plan and the actual allocations in the context of the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries is indicative of a very disdainful attitude 
towards proper planning and management of finances by th e Government.  
This needs to be deprecated in the strongest terms.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should, without waiting till the 
Revised Estimates stage, immediately enhance the allocation of the 
Ministry for the year 2010 -11 to  at least Rs. 1500.00 crore.  This will not 
only provide much needed funds to the Ministry at a juncture, where they 
require it the most, but will also leave, as balance, manageable funds for 
the last year of the Plan. 

 
 
Plan Outlay and Annual Plan Allocations 
  
1.25 During the course of their examination of the Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry, the Committee considered the contentious issue of huge 
disparities between the Approved Outlay of the Ministry for the Eleventh 
Plan and the Actual Allocations made  to them in each of the Annual Plans 
of the Eleventh Plan. 
 
 The Planning Commission have justified the lower allocations, 
which are not at all commensurate with the total Plan Outlay of the 
Ministry, under the plea that it is mainly because the Ministry h ave not 
been able to utilize, in the previous years, even the lesser allocations 
made to them. 
 
 The Ministry on the other side have ascribed the low spending in 
successive years to the delays in the planning process and the 
approvals/clearances of their S chemes.  For instance, the Schemes for 
Eleventh Plan, which commenced from April, 2007, were approved in 
October, 2008.  The completion of other related formalities, etc. took 
further time.  The implementation proper of Schemes, therefore, 
commenced from F iscal 2009 -10, which happens to be the third year of 
Eleventh Plan.  As a consequence, the Ministry could not achieve, 
anything tangible in the first two years of the Plan.  The Committee note 
that with most of the approvals/clearances in bag the Ministry have 
acquitted themselves in a far better manner in the year 2009-10. 
 

 
 
 The Committee find a lot of merit in the argument of the Ministry that 
since most of the under spending in the initial years of Eleventh Plan was 
due to delays in approvals/clearances of the Schemes, their performance 
in these years, need not be the sole benchmark for the allocations in the 
subsequent years. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Planning 
Commission should not take a purely mechanical view while deciding the 
allocations for the next Annual Plan.  Apart from considering the spending 
in the previous year, the Planning Commission ought to consider the 
status of Schemes that were to be implemented, the release position of 
funds, the timing of approvals/clearances so t hat a fair target is given to 
the Ministry with a fair expectation and with a fair amount of money.  Apart 
from the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, the Committee have 
found a similar situation prevailing in the case of other 
Ministries/Departments under their jurisdiction.  It can be safely presumed 
that this situation might be prevailing in case of many more 
Ministries/Departments.  The Planning Commission would, therefore, be 
well advised to systemise, the advice of the Committee so that it is app lied 
on all Ministries/Departments uniformly and the situation that has, 
unfortunately, been witnessed till now in the Eleventh Plan is a thing of 
past.  
Allocation to North East Region 
 
1.26 The Committee observe that out of the BE of Rs. 340.00 for 2009 -10, 
the Ministry had made a provision of Rs. 34.00 crore for the North East 

 
 
Region.  With the allocation of the Ministry getting reduced to Rs. 290.00 
crore at the RE stage the mandatory 10% allocation to the NE Region has 
also gone down to Rs. 29.00 crore .  Sadly, however, out of the actual 
spending of Rs. 148.83 crore till 30 November, 2009, the expenditure for 
NE Region has been a mere Rs. 5.54 crore which is not even 4% of the 
total.  
 It has been the experience of the Committee that for various 
reasons, the funds allocated for the North East Region, remain unspent 
and are, thereafter, mechanically transferred to the Non -lapsable NER 
Fund.  This is a worrisome situation.  The non -utilisation of funds in the 
NE Region apart from affecting the developmenta l efforts also creates a 
sense of being discriminated against among the people of the Region.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly deprecate the casual approach of the 
Ministry towards implementation of schemes in the NE Region and 
recommend that since the NE Region is brimming with raw materials for 
the food processing industries sector, the Ministry should urgently 
reorient their strategy for the Region with a view to ensure that inspite of 
the constraints being faced, their Schemes meant for the Region ar e 
successfully implemented. 
 
 
Mid Term Appraisal 
 
1.27 The Committee note that the Mid Term Appraisal Review Meeting of 
the performance of the Ministry, halfway through the Eleventh Plan, was 
held on        23 August, 2009.  The Minutes of the said meeting are yet to be 
received by the Ministry for implementat ion.  Queries with the 

 
 
representative of the Planning Commission during the Oral Evidence 
revealed that normally this procedure takes about a year.  The Mid Term 
Appraisal being such a long winding process, for whatever reasons, the 
Committee feel that its  results cannot be put to optimal use by the 
Ministries/Departments in the extant form.  In the instant case though the 
MTA was to be readied by March, 2010, it is supposed to take another six 
weeks for Cabinet approval.  It can be safely assumed that the remaining 
formalities may take a few more weeks if not months.  Thus, no inputs 
from could provided to the Ministry for the Fourth Year Annual Plan of the 
Eleventh Plan which commenced from 1 April, 2010.  At best these can be 
utilized while drawing the An nual Plan for 2011 -12 i.e. the last year of 
Eleventh Plan.  But then the inputs based on the performance of the 
Ministry in 2010-11 would be of more relevance.  The Committee find this a 
very unsatisfactory state of affairs.  The MTA is a tool for performa nce 
assessment and recommending mid course corrections.  If it is lingered 
on for months together or a year, the very purpose and relevance of MTA 
is lost.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government and 
the planners should put their heads tog ether and devise ways and means 
to ensure that the MTA is completed at the soonest after the Five Year Plan 
is halfway through, and the mid course corrections are suitably co -opted 
at the first available opportunity in the Annual Plan or the RE stage, as t he 
case may be. 
[ 
 
Internal Evaluation and Perspective Planning 
 
1.28 The Committee, with a view to evaluate the internal evaluation 
mechanism of the Ministry, had sought information about any evaluation 

 
 
of the Schemes being done, in view of the slippages in implementation 
during the first three years of the Eleventh Plan.  They have been informed 
that the Ministry are already evaluating all Schemes for the period of four 
years from 2005 -06 to 2008 -09.  The Committee find it inexplicable, as to 
what purpose such an evaluation will serve, when it is covering two years 
of the Tenth Plan and two years of the ongoing Eleventh Plan.  Moreso, 
when several Schemes/components of the Tenth Plan have been 
discontinued or revamped and new Schemes which were not there i n the 
Tenth Plan have been started in the Eleventh Plan.  The Committee are of 
the opinion that in order to make a more realistic and to the point 
assessment, the Ministry should evaluate the performance of their 
Schemes in the first three years of the Ele venth Plan.  This will not only 
enable them to understand the shortcomings and constraints being faced 
in their implementation but also facilitate corrective measures down the 
line and perspective planning for the Annual Plan 2011-12 and Twelfth Five 
Year Plan. 
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
EVALUATION OF SCHEMES 
 
I. Mega Food Parks 
 
 The Mega Food Parks is a Component of the new Infrastructure 
Development Scheme of the Ministry. The CCEA accorded in principle appro val 
for taking up 30 Mega Food P ark proposals for assistance during the Eleventh 
Plan period. However, in the first phase if approved only 10 such proposals on 
pilot basis. 
 
2.2 The Ministry when asked about the response to scheme for setting up 
Mega Food Parks during the first three years of the Eleventh  Plan and how they 
planned  to deal with these request expeditiously to ensure that proposals are 
not withdrawn/cancelled  due to delays in consideration/processing stated that 
the scheme for setting up of ten Mega Food Parks (MFP) in 10 States (Andhra 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Punjab, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, West 
Bengal, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh and North East) was approved in 2008. In 
principle approval was accorded to all the 10 Parks after completing the 
selection process which involved calling for expression of interest (EoI), scrutiny 
of the proposals by Technical Committee and approval of the proposals by Inter-
ministerial proposals by Technical Committee . Subsequently, 5 special purpose 
vehicles (SPV) submitted the DPR and after its appraisal  by the professional 
Program Management Agency, those DPRs were accepted and final approval to 
five projects (Jharkhand, Uttaranchal, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and North 
East) were accorded on 31.3.2009. Subsequently, two more projects (Tamil 

 
 
Nadu and West Bengal) were also given final approval in 2009 -10. Of the seven 
projects accorded final approval, four have started construction work after 
completing various formalities, which include obtaining various clearances from 
the State Government etc. The MFP  in Uttaranchal has already started partial 
operations and another project in Andhra Pradesh is progressing fast. 
 
2.3 Of the seven proposals accorded final approval, one of the SPVs 
(Maharashtra) requested for withdrawal from  the project. It considered a nd 
accepted by the Ministry. Earlier, the SPV promoting the MFP in U.P had also 
requested withdrawal of approval immediately after in -principle was accorded, 
which was accepted by the Ministry. Two other proposals (Punjab and 
Karnataka), who were given “in-principle” approval, could not submit the DPR as 
they could not identify and acquire the requisite land within stipulated time. 
Thus, fresh Eols were invited for four states (Punjab, Karnataka, U.P. and 
Maharashtra) and the selection process is being completed.  
 
 Ministry has so far released an amount of Rs.35.00 crore as grant 
assistance to the SPVs. 
 
2.4 Ministry selects the most eligible project proposals for setting up of Mega 
Food Parks through a transparent and competitive procedure after a rigorous  
scrutiny of proposals by a professional agency based on predefined evaluation 
criteria in a time bound manner. Capability of the proposed SPV members, 
viability of the cluster where the project is proposed to be set up, availability of 
raw material, seaso nality and product mix to ensure optimal utilization of 
facilities created, availability of credit linkages, financials of the project, O&M 
aspects and other critical issues of DPR are duly evaluated and appraised while 

 
 
accepting the DPR to ensure that the  implementation and thereby 
operationalization of project  is as envisaged and are not withdrawn/cancelled 
due to delays in consideration/processing. 
 
2.5 Elaborating  further in the matter it was stated that the Ministry received 
total 42 Expression of In terest for setting up Mega Food Parks in these 10 
States. 10 best eligible proposals were selected and “in -principle” approval 
conveyed on 15.12.2008 to the applicants requesting them to submit the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) expeditiously for acceptance  by the Ministry. 
DPRs in case of Andhra Pradesh (Chittoor), Assam (Nalbari), Jharakhan d 
(Ranchi), Uttarakhand (Haridwar), West Bengal (Jangipur) and Tamil Nadu 
(Dharmapuri) have been submitted by the SPVs and accepted by the Ministry. 
1st tranche of 1st instalment of grant has been released in the case of 5 projects 
at Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhan d, Uttarkhand and West Bengal. 2 nd 
tranche of 1 st installment has also been released in the case of  M/s Srini Food 
Park Pvt. Ltd. in Andhra Pradesh.  Request  for release of 2 nd tranche of 1 st 
installment has been received from M/s Patanjali Food & Herbal park Pvt. Ltd. 
Haridwar. Ministry has also received the  request for release  of 1st tranche of 1st 
installment of grant from M/s Tamil Nadu Mega Food Park Lt d. In case of 
Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh, the applicant could not be able to take the 
projects forward and requested the Ministry for withdrawal, which was accepted 
by the Ministry. In case of Punjab and Karnataka, the ap plicants could not 
submit the  final DPR even after the expiry of extended time period, hence 
Ministry had to cancel their “in -principle” approval. In all these 4 cases, Ministry 
has gone  for re -bidding and has received 37 Expression of Interests, which are 
under process for short listing of the most eligible applicant. 

 
 
2.6 For up -scaling the scheme to take up additional projects during the 
remaining period of 11 th Plan the EFC  memorandum were prepared and 
circulated to the related Ministries/Departments for obtaining their comments. 
Comments have been received and based on the comments final EFC 
document is being finalized to be sent to Ministry of Finance for  convening the 
EFC meeting. 
 
2.7 None of the Mega Food park has become operational by now. The 
expected project completion period  is about 24 months from the release of fist 
installment of grant. All the 6 projects are under rapid progress. It is expected 
that all these 6 Mega Food parks will become operational within the timeline 
prescribed in the guidelines. 
 
2.8 During the course  of the Oral Evidence the Committee desired to know 
from the representative of the Planning Commission as to why the Ministry‟s 
hand were tied -up in the context of enhancing the am bit of Mega Food Park 
Component, he stated: 
“We thought it should start as a  pilot project with 10 Mega Food Parks. 
This is how normally all projects start. They do not start full scale right at 
the beginning. Unfortunately, in the present case of mega parks, out of 
ten which were assigned, work on only, perhaps, six has been take n up 
because two parties withdrew and two were cancelled.  So, a re -bid has 
been done.  I believe that substantial progress has taken place in one 
only.  Unless and until some substantial progress is shown, it would be 
difficult to say that, „yes‟, you are now ready go forward”. 
 
2.9 When queried about the status of rebidding in the four States where the 
initials proposals did not firm up it was stated that re -bidding has been invited by 
the Ministry for setting up of Mega Food Parks in 4 States, viz. Karna taka, 
Punjab, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh, Re -bidding was necessitated as a 
result of withdrawal by two of the SPVs of Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh and 
non-fulfilling of conditions prescribed in the operational guidelines by the other 

 
 
two SPVs of Karnat aka and Punjab. 37 Expression of interest have been 
received in response to Ministry‟s advertisement inviting applications for setting 
up of Mega Food Park in these four States. The most eligible project proposals 
are likely to be selected one each in thes e four States by the Ministry within a 
months time and “in -principle‟ approval will be granted Ministry will take 
necessary steps to facilitate completion of all these four Food Parks within the 
time limit. 
2.10 Asked about the safety clauses or penal prov isions in the Scheme like 
judicial or back guarantees so that the SPV would not back out from it 
responsibilities without completing the Mega Food Park, a representative  of the 
Ministry stated during the Oral Evidence: 
 
“Initially, proposals of E.O.I are invited from them and an E.M.D. of Rs. 
Ten lakh is taken from the m and there is a provisio n of retaining the 
E.M.D. in cas e of skipping. We have retained the E.M.D. of those who 
have failed”. 
 
2.11 According to the Ministry the Mega Food Parks are Capital intensive and 
manpower intensive projects. The Committee, therefore, were keen to know if  
there was any in -built component of training in related activities  for the various 
Human Resources in the extant scheme of Mega Food Parks or were the 
Ministry cont emplating introduction of any such component in the scheme to 
facilitate in-house training and ensure availability of sufficient  trained manpower 
for various activities being undertaken in the Mega Food Parks. 
 
2.12 In this connection, the Ministry informed the Committee that although 
inbuilt training  programme is not one of the components for which Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries  grant is provided, the Mega Food Park project has 
a component for setting up fa rm proximate infrastructure namely Primary 
Processing Centers (PPC) and Collection Centers (CC). These components of 
the Mega Food Park (MFP) are aimed at facilitating  backward linkages for the 
Central Processing Center of the Mega Food Park.  Even though  there is no 
direct cost head for capacity building, the Special Purpose  Vehicles (SPVs) 

 
 
implementing the MFP is expected to conduct capacity building programmes at 
the level of PPCs and CCs . This will be in the nature of in -house as well as on-
field training. This is expected to cater to the needs of skill development/capacity 
building of related stakeholders along the value chain. 
 
II. Scheme for Techn ology Upgradation/Establishment  
and  Modernization of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2.13 The  scheme for  Technology Up -gradation/Establishment/Modernisation 
of Food Processing Industries is aimed at up -gradation of processing 
capabilities. This scheme is continued from Tenth Plan without any modifications 
in pattern of assistance. During the Tenth Plan, the applicant  units engaged in 
setting up, technology upgradation, and modernization of food processing 
industries were required to submit the proposal to the Ministry through the State 
Nodal Agencies which are State Government departments/corporations. In th e 
Eleventh Plan period i.e. w.e.f. 1 April, 2007 the Scheme has been decentralized 
through banks/financial institutions on an c-portal supported electronic system to 
provide a thrust and wide coverage for foo d processing industries in the 
Country. This is in accordance with the direction of the Planning  Commission. 
The scheme provides  25% of the cost of plant & machinery and technical civil 
works subject to maximum of Rs.50 lakhs in general areas and 33.33% up to 
Rs. 75 lakhs in difficult areas ( Jammu & Kah smir, Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, Sikkim, North Eastern States, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, 
Lakshdweep and Integrated Tribal Development Project (ITDP) areas. 
 
 
 

 
 
2.14 The Budgetary allocation under the scheme during the Eleventh Plan are 
as follow: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual 
2007-08 72.00 113.50 119.36 
2008-09 90.00 91.50 91.03 
2009-10 60.00 69.851 73.48 
2010-11 69.25   
 
 During the year 2009 -10 BE was Rs.60.00 crore which was enhanced to 
Rs.69.851 crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure by the Ministry under 
the Scheme was Rs.73.48 crore. 
 
2.15 The Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing Industries added the 
following about this Scheme during the further Oral Evidence on 9 April, 2010: 
 
“Sir, I will start with our assistance and our involvement in setting up of 
food processing industrial units. The basic and the mainstay of our 
Ministry is a scheme for setting up and modernisation of any food 
processing unit where 25 per cent of their project cost is given to the 
entrepreneur by way of subsidy. It has an upper limit of Rs. 50 lakh”.  
 
2.16 Noting the insufficiency of the amount provided by the Ministry as grant 
for the Capital intensive food processing sector, the Committee wanted to know 
whether the Ministry at least had any system of hand holding or assisting the 
prospective entrepreneur in securing his remaining requirement as a bank loan 
at reasonable interest.  In response he stated: 
“We do not have a consultancy wing which takes care of a middle level 
entrepreneur. We assist them in two different ways. One is by making the 
tax regime better for our sector, by approaching the Finance Ministry so 
that the income -tax, the duty on import of foreign machinery, the excise 
duty etc. are kept at a lower level and the project becomes more an d 
more viable. That is one role which the Ministry plays by way of policy 
support. Secondly, we do interact with the banks, try to prevail upon them 
and try to bring them around to giving more loans for the food processing 
sector, trying to convince them t hat your non -functioning assets, your 
investment in the agriculture sector can only improve if you support the 
food processing industries in a bigger way. Many of the banks react 

 
 
positively. They have been in touch. We are now asking them to get 
associated with small clusters where we do direct handholding and 
training of the entrepreneurs who are new and who need this kind of 
assistance”. 
 
III. NIFTEM 
 
2.17 The National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and 
Management(NIFTEM) is one of the ambitious projects of the Ministry under the 
Scheme for S trengthening of Institutions. When asked about the present status 
of NIFTEM and when it was  likely to become fully functional, the Ministry 
informed the Committee that the CCEA, in it‟s meeting on 3 1.8.2006 had 
approved the setting up NIFTEM at Kundli (Haryana) at an estimated cost of Rs. 
244.60 crore . NIFTEM has hired Office in the premises of the Association of 
Municipalities and Development Authorities (AMDA) building, 7/6, Sirifort 
Institutional Area, August Kranti Marg, New Delhi till the construction of NIFTEM 
campus at Kundli is completed. 100 acres of land has been acquired from 
Haryana State Industrial and infrastructure Development Corporation at Kundli, 
District Sonepat Haryana in August, 2007. The work for design, architecture and 
construction  of NIFTEM campus  at Kundli, Sonepat, Haryana has  been 
awarded to National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd. (NBCC) on turnkey 
basis. 
 
2.18 The structure of NIFTEM as provided originally was subsequently 
reviewed with a view to ensure that they are in line with the best international 
practices. NIFTEM has signed a collaborative a greement with Cornell University 
in USA for improving the existing design of the Institute. As a result, the cost of  
the project shall increase from it‟s original approved cost of Rs.244.60 core. The 

 
 
Ministry is in the process of firming up the revised cost so that the necessary 
approvals can be taken expeditiously.  
 
2.19 The academic civil infrastructure is nearing co mpletion. The design of 
other technical facilities lik e laboratories, pilot plants, IT  infrastructure is in 
advanced stage. The Institute is in the process of finalizing the course structure, 
detailed syllabi and other related matters like selection of students, etc. 
 
2.20 NIFTEM‟s mandate, as approved by the Government, is to establish an 
international cent er of excellence in teaching and research which will work 
synergistically with industry and other institutions within India and abroad. As 
such, the Institute was designed to be an autonomous institution in the form of a 
„deemed University‟. The Ministry is making all efforts to ensure that the Institute  
obtains all regulatory approvals before the start of the academic session in 
2010-11. 
 
2.21 Elaborating further, a representative of the Ministry stated the following 
during the Oral Evidence held on 31 March, 2010: 
“The last is a very ambitious project which the Ministry has and it is the 
National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and 
Management. In the Food Processing Sector we had a long gap wherein 
there was no institution which could serve as a single -point problem -
solving agency for food processing sector. That is why this institution has 
been conceptualized. It is being established on a  hundred acre plot in 
Kundli just across Delhi border in Haryana. The buildings for 
Administrative Block, the Academic Block, and laboratories are almost 
complete. The institute will have mainly three activities -(1) academic 
activities like running B.Tech. , M.Tech., and Ph.D. courses in food 
technology; (2) entrepreneurship Training Programmes for training 
entrepreneurs in Food Processing Sector; and (3) research in frontier 
areas like nanotechnology. Though that technology is not being used in 
our country for strengthening of food, it can be one area for research and 
can be the third important area for this institute. The institute is going to 
launch its first academic programme of B.Tech. this year September. This 
institute is coming up. There has been a c ost revision because we have 
taken the Cornell University of the US as our knowledge partner. With the 

 
 
knowledge gained from them the scope has widened. So, the project has 
become a little bigger. We are taking it to the EFC and to the CCA later 
for the ap proval of the improved project. This is what we have in the 
strengthening of institutions project”. 
 
2.22 It was pointed out to the Ministry that in the same context, in the 
information submitted by them  in connection with the examination of Demands  
for Grants 2009 -10, it was stated that based on the inputs provided by Cornell 
Sathguru Foundation for Development, it was considered appropriate to review 
the concept and design. Accordingly, it is proposed to revise the estimated cost 
from Rs.244.60 cro re to Rs.604.75 crore. In this regard, the civil construction 
cost will be enhanced from Rs.75.10 crore to Rs. 314.16 crore owning to 
escalation in the cost, increase in areas of construction and creation of 
additional facilities not provided in the original DPR. 
 
2.23 In view of the foregoing when asked that once these estimates had 
already been worked out previously what circumstance have necessitated a 
reworking on the revised cost now, the Ministry stated that NIFTEM‟s mandate, 
as approved by the Government is to e stablish an international center  of 
excellence which will work synergistically with industry and other institutions 
within India and abroad. The College of Agriculture and Life Sciences at Cornell 
University (CALS), a global leader in agr iculture and food research and 
education through Cornell Sathguru Foundation for Development, Hyderabad 
were engaged for knowledge sharing partnership for design of facilities, course 
curricula, faculty training and internship, developing a strategic frame  work for 
nurturing research, development of intellectual property  and technology transfer 
policy and strategic plan for technology transfer and enterprise development, 
training centre for continuing education and design of food enterprise incubator 

 
 
with the approval of the Project Approval Committee of the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries. An agreement was signed with Cornell Sathguru 
Foundation (CSF) in this regard on 08.01.2008. 
 
The original estimate of Rs. 244.6 crore was based on the DPR prepar ed 
by RABO India Ltd. CSF reviewed  the RABO DPR and functional requirements 
of NIFTEM to fulfill its mandate, which envisaged the following additional focus 
areas, which were not conceived in the RABO Report. 
 
 Focus on comprehensive spectrum of food scien ce and food technology 
such as food chemistry, food molecular biology, food nutrition, food 
process engineering and food laws as distinct research disciplines with 
requisite research labs for each of the core disciplines of food science 
and technology. 
 Creation of comprehensive incubators for grains, Fruits and vegetables, 
Meat products and dairy products  in order to validate technologies 
developed by NIFTEM researchers and transfer such technology to small 
and medium enterprises. 
 Creation of tenancy area within the Incubator, where in enterprises can 
incubate their research projects and work in tandem with NIFTEM faculty 
for product research. 
 Creation of Bio resource centre, Sensory facility, culinary kitchen and 
other essential research facilities that is  essential to deliver advance d 
courses in food science and food technology. 

 
 
 Creation of a continuing education cent ers with state of the art 
equipments that can help to re -skill industry professionals and Scientists 
in modern food science and food process technologies. 
 State-of-the art symposium and auditorium facility that is essential for a 
center of excellence to conduct symposiums and workshops. 
 
2.24 Based on the suggestions received Revised Cost Estimates were 
prepared by Ministry of Food Processing Industries at estimated cost of Rs. 
604.75 c rore. Draft EFC memo was circulated to all concerned 
Ministries/Departments and Planning Commission for their comments on 
29.09.2009. Ministry of Food Processing Industries received  suggestions from 
Planning Com mission and the Ministry of Finance on the Revised Cost 
Estimates. We have examined all aspects in detail and shall firm up the cost in 
respect of certain components of the NIFTEM campus shortly. 
 
2.25 Queried further as to when the Ministry expected the revised cost to firm 
up and to what extent was this reworking of revised cost going to affect the 
implementation of the project it was stated that every efforts are being made to 
make the Institute operational within the implementation schedule approved by 
CCEA to avoid time over-run of the project  during 2010-11. 
 
2.26 To the question as to whether Deemed University status had  been 
granted to NIFTEM by the University Grant s Commission, the Ministry replied 
that NIFTEM was approved to be setup as a Section  25 Company Under Indian 
Companies Act, 1956. As per the existing instructions the Institutes Registered 
Under Indian Societies Act, 1860 are eligible for obtaining Deemed to be the 
University Status and Recognition of Courses by AICTE. In view of the lega l 

 
 
hurdle, a Draft Cabinet Note for change of legal status  of NIFTEM from a 
Section 25 Company to that of a Society to be registered under Indian Societies 
Act, was prepared and circulated to the various Ministries for their comments. 
Comments have been re ceived.  Final Cabinet Note is being prepared and will 
be submitted to Cabinet Secretariat shortly. 
 
2.27 As regards the queries of the Committee about academic activities 
commencing in the Institute as Scheduled from academic session 2010 -11; 
details of courses offered and the intake in each course for academic  year 
2010-11; the University  to which  the Ins titute  has been affiliated pending grant 
of Deemed University status; the sanctioned staff strength in various grades in 
the faculties and other services in the Institute the actual staff strength faculty -
wise/service-wise as on date; and the date when do  the Ministry plan filling up 
all the posts in the Institute  the Ministry  replied that the issues will arise after 
approval of the Cabinet is received. 
 
IV. Production of Processed Food 
 
2.28 During the course of the examination of the Demands for Grants (2010-
11) the Ministry were asked about  the quantity of processed food exported 
during each of the last 3 years and the value thereof. They were also asked as 
to what percentage did these export constitute of the total  processed food in the 
Country. 
 
2.29 In response the figures relating to exports during last three years were 
furnished by the Ministry to the Committee. However, as regards, what 
percentage these export constituted of total food processed in the Country, it 

 
 
was stated that the figures of d omestic production of processed food are not yet 
maintained by this Ministry, therefore, the division is unable to work out the 
percentage of the exported processed food to total processed food. 
 
V. Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
 
2.30 The Ministry when asked about the present installed processing capacity 
of fruits and vegetables in the Country , the quantum of  fruits and vegetables 
actually processed in these units;  and the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure 
food processing units a re set up in those areas where there is substantial 
availability of fruits and vegetables stated that according to Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India, ;the installed processing capacity of fruits an d 
vegetables in the Country as on 01.01.2009 was  3089243 MT. Quantity of fruits 
& vegetables product manufactured during calendar year 2007 was 1292399 
MT. 
 
2.31 They further stated that Government have formulated and is 
implementing several Plan Schemes to provide financial assistance for the 
establishment and modernization of food processing units, creation of 
infrastructure, support of R&D, Human Resource Development  besides other 
promotional measures to encourage development of f ood processing industries. 
In t his Scheme due care is taken to ensure l ocation of FPI in areas having 
proper raw material base. Moreover, the Government have taken several steps 
like tax reduction, waiver/reduction of excise duty, reduction of custom duty on 
specific food items with a view to encourage  the growth of Food Pro cessing 
Industries and make them more competitive. Further, the Ministry under their 
Plan Scheme of establishing Food Testing Labs, Implementation of Quality 

 
 
Systems such as Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points (HACCP),  Promotion 
of Research and Develo pment, Capacity Building and Human Resource 
Development  provide assistance to Food Processing Industries. To enable 
them to compete in the international market. 
 
2.32 When asked to state the number of fruits and vegetables processing 
industries assisted d uring each of the last three years the Ministry replied that 
total number of fruits and vegetables processing industries assisted during each 
of the last three years i.e. 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 are as under: 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Total Number 
of units 
Financial assistance 
provided  
(Rs. in lakhs) 
1 2007-08 122 1919.48 
2 2008-09 98 1553.39 
3 2009-10 
(till date) 
144 2200.71 
 
 Asked further as to whether any evaluation been done of the performance 
of the units thus assisted so as to know the results of  Capital/Technological 
infusions made and the results of such the evaluation it was stated that Ministry 
of Food Processing Industries have not conducted any study in respect of 
evaluation of loss due to the poor food processing facilities in the industry.  
However, the level of wastage of agricultural food items is estimated to be about 
Rs.30,000 crores occurring at various stages of handling due to fragmented 
farming , provisions of Agricultural Produce Marketing (Development & 
Regulation) Act, lack of col d chain facilities, poor transportation, lack of proper 
storage and processing facilities etc. Vision Document 2015 finalised by the 
Ministry envisages tripling the size of the processed food sector by increasing 
the level of processing of perishables from  6% to 20% value addition from 20% 
to 35% and share in global food trade from 1.5% to 3% by 2015. 

 
 
VI Food Processing Training Centres 
2.33  The objectives of setting up of Food Processing Training Centres 
are development of rural entrepreneurship and transfer of technology for 
processing of food products by utilizing locally grown raw material and providing 
“Hand-on” experience at such production cum training centres. 
2.34 Central or State Government Organisations, Educational & Training 
Institutions, Schools and Colleges, ITIs, NGO‟s, Co -operatives are eligible for 
grant to set up Food Processing Training Centre (FPTC). The Ministry provides 
grant-in-aid of Rs. 6.00 lakh for single line FPTC i.e. Rs. 4.00 lakh for fixed 
capital cost and Rs. 2.00 lakh a s revolving seed capital and Rs. 15.00 lakh for 
setting up of multi line FPTC i.e. Rs. 11.00 lakh for fixed capital cost and Rs. 
4.00 lakh as revolving seed capital. 
Asked  about the total number of food processing training centres set up 
in the Country, S tate-wise and how many of them w ere fully functional as on 
date, it was stated that the Ministry have so far assisted 533 Food Proc essing 
Training Centres in the c ountry. State-wise details are at Annexure -II. As far as 
the number of fully functional FPTC‟ s are concerned, the Ministry have planned 
an evaluation to ascertain the extent of functional FPTC‟s. 
2.35 About the number of new food processing training centres that are likely 
to be set up in the Country during 2010 -11, S tate-wise, the Ministry inform ed 
that they proposed to assist setting up of at least 30 food proc essing training 
centres in the C ountry during 2010 -11. The setting up of these FPTC‟s in the 
various States will depend on t he proposals received from the S tates. However, 

 
 
the emphasis will  be to assi st FPTC‟s in each S tate as far as possible, with 
special emphasis on NE region. 
2.36 Since the Food Processing Industry Sector is witnessing substantial 
expansion the Committee desired to know whether the existing number of Food 
Processing Training Centres would suffice or more Centres are required to be 
set up and the deadline for the purpose. In response the Ministry stated that 
since food processing sector is witnessing substantial growth, the Ministry has 
planned an evaluation to ascertain th e adequacy of existing number of Food 
Processing Training Centres. However, during EFC meeting, a total of 270 
FPTC‟s were proposed during the Eleventh Plan period. 
VII. Food Testing Laboratories 
2.37 The Committee sought a detailed note on sufficiency or otherwise of food 
testing laboratories in the Country, particularly in North-Eastern States. 
 In response it was submitted that the Ministry had conducted a 
comprehensive study through TUV South Asia India Pvt. Ltd. In 2006  evaluation 
of existing laborato ries, identification of gaps in infrastructure, manpower, and 
suggestions for setting up of Food Testing Lboratories. As per the report there 
were 312 fo od testing laboratories in the C ountry, out of which 10 food testing 
labs were in the North -Eastern States (Details at  Annexure -III). The report 
suggested setting up/upgradation of 620 laboratories as under:- 
 National Laboratories  :  Atleast 02 labs 
 Regional Laboratories  :  Atleast 05 labs 
 State  Laboratories   :  Atleast 28 labs 
District Laboratories   :  Atleast 285 labs 

 
 
2.38 The Ministry have so far provided grant for setting up/upgradation of 45 
food testing labs in the Country including 2 labs in NE Region. State-wise details 
are as Annexure -IV. Durin g 2010 -11, the Ministry propose  to provide fina ncial 
assistance for setting up/upgradation of 10 food testing labs. The number of 
food testing labs are not sufficient in the C ountry as a whole and extremely 
insufficient in NE Region. 
2.39 About the criteria for setting up of Food Testing L aboratories a nd  by 
when the Ministry expected  Food Testing L aboratories would be set up in each 
State/Union Territory , the Committee were informed that the Central/State 
Government and its Organisations/Universities (including deemed universities) 
and private sector can avail financial assistance for setting up/upgradation of 
existing food testing labs. Central/State Government and its 
organisations/Universities (including deemed universities) are eligible for grant -
in-aid of entire cost of laboratory equipments requi red for labs. All other 
implementing agencies/private sector organisations will be eligible for grant -in-
aid of 50% of cost of laboratory equipments in general area and 70% in difficult 
areas. In addition, they would also be eligible for 25% of the cost of  technical 
civil works to house the equipments and furniture and the fixtures associated 
with the equipments for general areas and 33% for difficult areas. 
2.40 The scheme also provide 5% of the grant amount as professional fees for 
Programme Management Ag ency (PMA) engaged for providing advisory and 
implementation services to Food testing/ Quality Control Laboratories and follow 
up actions. 
2.41 It is expected that in the next 5 year, the Ministry would be able to provide 
financial assistance for setting up/upgradation of food testing lab in each state 

 
 
subject to submission of appropriate proposals. However, the Ministry is taking 
adequate measures to publicise its scheme of setting up of food testing labs by 
way of publicity campaigns from time to time, in order to invite appropriate 
proposals. During the course of the Oral Evidence on 9 April,2010 when the 
Committee desired to know the reasons be hind only 45 out of 312 Food Testing 
Laboratories being provided assistance by the Ministry , the Secretary of the 
Ministry informed the Committee:  
“The Food Testing Labs are mostly commercial enterprises in the private 
sector. It has been noticed that good labs are not available in our Country 
for food processing. There are no testing facilities but labs existed where 
they were generating demands in the uncovered areas where the figure 
of existing position has been shown as 312. The Government sch eme 
has been worked out  in view of the condition of labs in the country. 
Therefore, we give 100 percent help. These include Government 
organizations and labs of the universities. Wherever, the market is 
expanding we provide 50 percent assistance for impro vement in private 
labs. It depends on as to where the market is coming up and where the 
requirement is growing. We receive proposals for setting up of new labs 
and upgradation of existing labs and we approve them after checking 
their suitability of the lab oratory equipments through the technical 
Committees. Sir, there are 45 cases wherein assistance has been 
provided. Similarly we expect to support 12 -12, 15-15 private labs every 
year and in the uncovered areas like the North East where there are a 
few labs, we propose to set up labs through Governmental organizations. 
Our work is already in progress at two places”. 
 
Queried further as to why in some States no laboratories had been set 
up/provided assistance he clarified: 
“Sir, from this very view point as I  have already told you I think, there 
exists lab only in Assam among these  six States. Therefore, we have 
recently approved a new lab in Tripura by going out of way. Now we shall 
visit the remaining States and it is our endeavour to see that there is at 
least one Food Testing Lab there at every place or in every area”. 
 
 

 
 
VIII. Outcome Budget 
2.42 As per general practice, the Ministries/Departments lay their Outcome 
Budget of the relevant fianancial Year in the Parliament along with their 
Demands for Grants.  However, the Ministery not been able to do so when their 
Demands for Grants were laid in Lok Sabha on 16 March, 2010. Asked about 
the constraints due to which this could not be done and when was the Ministry 
likely to do the needful it was stated that sin cere efforts were made to provide 
complete information in the Outcome Budget about the performance of the 
Ministry up to 31.03.2010. The performance of the schemes being implemented 
are required to be reflected in detail for which information has to be com piled 
and collated by respective officers handling the schemes. This process has 
unfortunately taken more time and therefore, the Ministry could not complete the 
exercise within the time schedule. We regret the delay and inconvience caused 
to Hon‟ble Members of the Committee. 
 
2.43 The outcome Budget 2010 -11 in English is submitted before the Hon‟ble 
Committee for kind consideration. It will be laid in the Parliament immediately in 
the next sitting of the Lok Sabha in the ensuing session. The Secretary of t he 
Ministry further stated on this aspect during the Oral Evidence as follows: 
“ About the Outcome Budget, it was delayed this year. But then since we 
are already at the end of the year, we are thinking of including all what we 
have been able to perform by  the end of the year and fianlise it now. Our 
draft Annual Report is all ready, and it has now been submitted. We will 
be finalizing it and presenting it to Parliament the moment Parliament 
resumes its sitting.” 
 
 

 
 
IX. Utilisation Certificates 
2.44 The Committee had observed substantial pendency of Utilisation 
Certificates while examining Demands for Grants 2009 -10 of the Ministry and 
recommended expeditious liquidation of the same. 
 Asked whether all the UCs for 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 had been received 
by the Ministry and their number and value, the  replied in negative and stated 
that efforts are being made by the divisions handling the schemes in 
coordination with State Nodal Agencies implementing schemes to recover 
pending UCs. The Position of outstandin g UCs in respect of Grants paid up to 
31.03.2008 and due as on 31.03.2009 is given below. 
No. of UCs pending-2117 
Amount-Rs. 330.65 crores 
 
2.45 As regards the steps contemplated by the Ministry against defaulters it 
was stated that in the Ministry regular  monitoring is being undertaken by all the 
divisions concerned and all State Nodal Agencies have been advised to assist in 
retrieving the pending UCs from the grant receiving bodies. Individual officers 
have been allotted respective States to make regular visits for monitoring the 
implementation of the projects as well as timely submission of the pending UCs. 
When asked to furnish the details of the ten oldest pending UCs, the 
Ministry failed to do so.  
 
Mega Food Parks 
2.46 The Committee note that the Mini stry was implementing a Scheme 
of Food Parks in the Ninth and Tenth Plans with a view to boost the food 

 
 
processing industry sector.  56 Food Parks were covered under the 
Scheme by the Ministry over the years.  The Scheme, as per own 
admission of the Minist ry, did not yield the desired results because of 
certain inherent limitations.  In the Eleventh Plan, the Ministry started a 
new Mega Food Parks (MFPs) component under the Infrastructure 
Development Scheme.  To do away with the shortcomings of the Food 
Park Scheme, the Mega Food Parks, as the name suggests are on a 
substantially larger canvas and Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) driven 
entities.  Apart from the large and all encompassing infrastructure, they 
will also be having sufficient backward and forward linkages to ensure 
their viability. 
The Committee further note that though the CCEA had approved in 
principle 30 MFPs during the Eleventh, only ten have been approved in the 
first stage on pilot basis.  The Ministry received bids for all the ten MFPs.  
However, four of the proposals relating to setting up of MFPs in Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, Punjab and UP could not proceed beyond shortlisting stage. 
While the SPVs, themselves, sought withdrawal in cases of Maharashtra 
and UP.  Two remaining ones in Karnataka and Punjab forfeited their claim 
being unable to submit the Detailed Project Report , as they could not 
identify and acquire the requisite land within the stimulated time.  As a 
consequence, the earnest money amount of    Rs. 10.00 lakh deposited by 
each of these SPVs has been retained by th e Ministry as per the bidding 
conditions.  The Committee find that fresh Expression of Interest have 
been invited by the Ministry in respect of these four places for selection of 
fresh SPVs.  Till date, the Ministry have released a sum of Rs. 35.00 crore 

 
 
as grant assistance to the remaining SPVs.  Being cost and time intensive 
projects the MFPs require 24 to 30 months for completion.  The Committee 
have been informed by the Ministry that due to delay in 
approvals/clearances none of the MFPs is complete as o f now.  The 
earliest, they expect some of them to be completed somewhere in the last 
year of the Eleventh Plan viz. 2011-12. 
The Committee feel that the Mega Food Parks component, though 
intended to be an improvement over the failed erstwhile Food Parks 
Scheme still have several rough edges to be smoothened.  The 
Government have, therefore, rightly decided to sanction assistance for 
only ten out of 30 MFPs in the first phase on pilot basis. Since these 
projects are having a long gestation period, any glitch es at any interim 
stage, delay the entire process.  The Committee, therefore, feel that the 
Government should constantly monitor the execution of the ten proposals, 
that have been approved for assistance in first phase on pilot basis, before 
taking further initiatives in the matter.   
The Committee also feel that these projects should have better 
collateral guaranties from the side of the SPVs rather than the modest 
amount of Rs. 10.00 lakh as earnest money.  As can be seen from the four 
cases which did not go beyond the short listing stage, the bidders have to 
only face the risk of forfeiting the earnest money of Rs. 10.00 lakh but the 
projects have been delayed for months together, as the entire thing is to 
be started afresh.  Besides, this exercise though infructuous would surely 
have been a big drain on the Government resources, time and money.  

 
 
 The Committee would also advise the Ministry that if they have to 
take the concept of Mega Food Parks forward, they would have pursue the 
implementation of the te n sanctioned projects with all sincerity and sense 
of purpose.  To begin with the rebidding of the projects at Maharashtra, 
Punjab, Karnataka and U.P. are to be finalized with urgency but with 
utmost caution and care to avoid a recurrence of the past biddi ng.  The 
follow-up should also include a monthly progress monitoring system with 
the tasks to be achieved indicated in clear cut terms.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the concrete action taken by the Ministry on 
these aspects from time to time.  
 
Scheme for Technology Upgradation/Establishment and Modernisation of 
Food Processing Industries 
  
2.47 The Committee note that the Scheme for Technology Upgradation 
/Establishment and Modernisation of Food Processing Industries is meant 
for upgradation and modernization of processing capabilities.  Being a 
continuing Scheme from the Tenth Plan, it was lucki ly not stuck in the 
maze of approvals/clearances at the beginning of Eleventh Plan.  
Therefore, the Ministry have performed satisfactorily in implementation of 
this Scheme.  In fact, as stated previously in this Report, this Scheme has 
also caught the eye of the Planning Commission, as all allocated BE funds 
have not only been utilized additional infusions were also required at the 
RE stages.  The Committee, however, find two areas of concern in this 
Scheme.  The Committee feel that the Cap of Rs. 50 lakh a s subvention on 
cost of plant and machinery and civil works in general areas  and Rs. 75 
lakh in difficult areas is grossly insufficient.  The modern food processing 

 
 
industries sector is a capital intensive sector where such small doses of 
financial assist ance are not going to prove effective. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should enhance this sum to 
Rs. 1.00 crore in the general areas and to Rs. 1.5 crore in the difficult 
areas, with immediate effect. 
 
 The second shortcoming that has come to the notice of the 
Committee is the absence of a consultancy mechanism in the Ministry.  
There is nothing available in the system to provide hand holding to the 
prospective entrepreneur or to advise, facilitate and guide him/her on the 
matters p ertaining to this Scheme, particularly on how to go about the 
balance funding of the project proposal through banks/financial 
institutions.  The Committee can well imagine the plight of a prospective 
or even an existing entrepreneur who has to wade through  a stream of 
formalities in banks/financial institutions to reach the Ministry for securing 
the subvention part and, thereafter, go through another round of similar 
formalities to secure the balance funds from various sources.  The 
Committee, therefore, de sire that the Ministry should give a serious 
thought to this matter and workout a consultancy mechanism, immediately 
for the purpose, so that the entrepreneurs approaching them are provided 
a much needed Single Window Clearance System for the Scheme.  
 
NIFTEM 
 
2.48 The National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and 
Management (NIFTEM) is one of the components of the Scheme 
‘Strengthening of Institutions’.  The cost of the project which was 

 
 
originally estimated to cost of Rs. 244.60 crore is set to escalate 
substantially to Rs. 604.75 crore due to certain changes in civil works, 
technical facilities, etc. suggested by the knowledge sharing partner viz. 
Cornell Sathguru Foundation for Developm ent, Hyderabad.  The 
Committee, concerned with such a high jump in estimates, have already 
recommended, a careful consideration of the same by the Government, in 
their Fifth Report on Demands for Grants 2009-10.  
 Apart from the cost factor, they have also  noted that the CCEA had 
fixed an implementation schedule for the opertionlisation of NIFTEM 
according to which the Institute ought to have been fully functional by 
academic  session 2010 -11.  For this purpose NIFTEM has to be granted 
the deemed University  status by University Grants Commission, it has to 
also have a faculty, furthermore being an institution offering technical 
degrees also, a recognition of its courses by AICTE will be required.  The 
Committee are, however, shocked to note that the Ministry  have not been 
able to make any headway in these crucial matters.  A Cabinet note to 
change legal status of NIFTEM from a Section 25 Company to that of a 
society to be registered under Indian Societies Act is being submitted to 
the Cabinet Secretariat shor tly.  The Ministry have informed the 
Committee, that any further action on issues like Deemed University 
status, filling up of faculty and other positions, recognition by AICTE, etc. 
will arise only after the approval of Cabinet is received.   
The Committe e are aware of the time consuming nature of all the 
issues referred to above.  They, therefore, can say without thinking twice 
that the Ministry will not be able to meet the deadline of starting academic 

 
 
activity in NIFTEM from 2010 -11 Session.  The Commit tee feel that if the 
Ministry plan it very professionally and in a highly time bound manner, 
they can at best think of making NIFTEM fully operational by the next 
academic session viz. 2011-12 only.  Noting the lack of clarity in the matter 
of how to proce ed further with the Project the Committee would like the 
Ministry to come out with a blue print in the matter and submit the same to 
the Committee on priority. 
 
Food Processing Training Centres 
 
 
2.49 The Committee note that the objectives of setting up of  Food 
Processing Training Centres (FPTCs) include development of rural 
entrepreneurship, transfer of technology for processing of food products 
by utilizing locally grown produce and providing hand -on experience. The 
FPTCs basically function as production -cum-training centres.  The 
Ministry have a Scheme for providing grant -in-aid for setting up of FPTCs.  
Till date, the Ministry have assisted 533 FPTCs in the Country.  However, 
when queried about the FPTCs, which are fully functional, they have 
informed that they planned an evaluation in this regard.  With regards to 
adequacy or otherwise of the existing FPTCs the Ministry have again taken 
refuge behind the said ‘planned evaluation’.  Simultaneously, however, the 
Ministry have informed the Committee, that d uring EFC meeting, a total of 
270 FPTCs were proposed during the Eleventh Plan period.  The 
Committee are dismayed at the ad hoc manner in which the Scheme of 
FPTCs is being implemented.  The food processing industries sector is 
witnessing substantial grow th.  If the growing requirements of trained 
manpower for the Sector are to be ensured, the FPTCs are to be set -

 
 
up/revamped on a priority basis.  The Committee wonder, why the aspect 
of FPTCs augmentation, in a desired manner, has not stuck, the Ministry 
even when they came out with the grandiose Vision – 2015.  Being 
production-cum-training centres, the FPTCs have a vital role in further 
progression of the food processing sector.  On one hand, they will ensure 
a regular supply of trained and skilled manpowe r for the sector on the 
other, they will also add to the processed food production capacity.  The 
Committee have a feeling that the Ministry’s belated intention to evaluate 
the Scheme, seems to have occurred only when the Committee prodded 
them for the inf ormation in the matter.  Notwithstanding, whatever has 
happened, the Committee recommend that the Ministry may complete the 
planned evaluation within three months of presentation of this Report to 
the Parliament and come back to the Committee with a detail ed feedback 
on the FPTCs. 
 
Food Testing Laboratories 
 
2.50 The existing Food Testing Laboratories (FTLs) network in the 
Country came out as another major area of concern during the 
examination by the Committee.  There is an acute shortage of food testing 
laboratories.  As per a study conducted at the Ministry’s behest in 2006, 
there were 312 food testing laboratories in the Country with only 10 of 
them located in the NE Region.  The study had recommended setting 
up/upgradation of 620 laboratories.  The brea k-up being at least 2 National 
Laboratories, 5 regional laboratories, 28 State laboratories and at least 285 
labs at the district levels.  Unfortunately, however, the Scheme of FTLs has 
not been accorded the requisite priority in the scheme of things of th e 

 
 
Ministry.  Till date, they have provided grant to only 45 FTLs out of 312 
under the Scheme meant for the purpose.  Only 2 of these laboratories are 
in NE Region.  The Committee feel that the increasing importance of 
quality control, standardization and a ccreditation in the global context, 
demands a comprehensive network of FTLs which are dotted all over the 
Country at easily accessible distances to facilitate the food processing 
sector.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Ministry 
should come out with detailed road map on how to ensure the coverage of 
all districts of the Country under the FTL Scheme on a priority basis within 
three months of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.  If need be 
further incentives may be added to achieve this goal at the earliest. 
 
 
Outcome Budget 
 
 
2.51 The Outcome Budget, which is the successor of Performance 
Budget of yore, contains details of performance of any 
Ministry/Department on both the physical and financial parameters.  It also 
contains the salient features of the forthcoming Annual Plan and ot her 
relevant details pertaining to the Demands for Grants, financial 
projections, physical targets, etc.  By virtue of the information it contains, 
the Outcome Budget is an important tool for the Departmentally Related 
Standing Committees in assessing the performance of the 
Ministry/Department in question, more so, in the context of the 
examination of the Demands for Grants.  It is because of the time bound 
requirements of reporting on the Demands for Grants to the Parliament 
that the Outcome Budget is inva riably presented to the Parliament 
alongwith the Demands for Grants.  

 
 
  The Committee, are, however, unhappy to note that in the instant 
case, the Ministry did not lay the Outcome Budget alongwith the Demands 
for Grants 2010 -11, laid in the Lok Sabha on th e last day (16 March, 2010) 
of the first half the ongoing Budget Session.  Copies of the Outcome 
Budget were provided to the Committee only during the Oral Evidence of 
the Ministry on 31 March, 2010.  The Oral Evidence, therefore, remained 
inconclusive on that day and further Oral Evidence was necessitated on 9 
April, 2010.  Inspite of the assurance of the Secretary of Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries during the Oral Evidence on 31 March, 2010, that the 
Outcome Budget will be laid in the Parliament im mediately in the next 
Sitting (15 April, 2010) of the Lok Sabha in the ensuing Session, this was 
done  only on 29 April, 2010.   
 
 
 The Committee consider this as a serious lapse on the part of the 
Ministry. If timely submission of documents to the Parliam ent and its 
entities is not ensured by the Government, the concept of the 
accountability of the executive to the legislature is severely dented, which 
is a matter of grave concern.  While cautioning the Ministry to ensure that 
there is no recurrence of suc h nature in future, the Committee also desire 
a report in the instant matter within one month of presentation of this 
Report. 
 
 
Utilization Certificates 
 
 
2.52 The Committee find that the Ministry have to cover a lot of ground in 
the matter of liquidation of pending Utilization Certificates (UCs).  There 
are 2117 UCs amounting to a huge Rs. 330.65 crore pending in respect of 

 
 
grants paid up till  31 March, 2008 and due as on 31 March, 2009.  This is a 
substantial amount for a Ministry, whose Annual Budget ha d been           
Rs. 290.00 crore last year and who have barely reached the Rs. 400.00 
crore BE allocation mark in the ongoing Fiscal.  What is a matter of further 
concern to the Committee, is the fact that the Ministry did not/could not 
furnish to them th e number and value of the UCs received by the Ministry 
during 2008-09 and 2009-10.  Likewise, they also did not/could not furnish 
to the Committee, details of the ten oldest pending UCs.  The Committee 
deprecate this tendency of laissez fairie  of the Minis try, on an important 
issue like the liquidation of pending UCs.  It should be clearly understood 
that the responsibility of the Ministry does not end merely with release of 
grants.  Their proper utilization is rather more important.  The Committee, 
therefore, exhort the Ministry to pursue the liquidation of pending UCs 
with all seriousness so that such huge backlog is cleared at the earliest.  
They would also like to be apprised about the two matters referred to 
above, on which information is still pending. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
                   BASUDEB ACHARIA 
30 April, 2010            Chairman, 
10 Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka)            Committee on Agriculture 
  

 
 
  

 
 
Annexure-II 
STATESWISE DETAILS OF FOOD PROCESSING TRAIN ING CENTRES ASSISTED 
UPTO 31-03-2010. 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the States Total 
1. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 01 
2. Andhra Pradesh 23 
3. Arunchal Pradesh 01 
4. Assam 27 
5. Bihar 30 
6. Delhi 07 
7. Gujarat 04 
8. Haryana 21 
9. Himachal Pradesh 11 
10. J&K 09 
11. Karnataka 19 
12. Jharkhand 03 
13. Kerala 09 
14. Maharashtra 30 
15. Madhya Pradesh 45 
16. Manipur 04 
17. Mizoram 07 
18. Meghalya 01 
19. Nagaland 02 
20. Orissa 78 
21. Punjab 04 
22. Rajasthan 08 
23. Tamil Nadu 44 
24. Tripura 01 
25. Uttar Pradesh 111 
26. West Bengal 27 
27. Uttarkhand 06 
 Total 533 
 
  

 
 
Annexure-III 
State Wise numbers of Food testing laboratories in the country as per study 
conducted by M/s. TUV South Asia Pvt. Ltd. Mumbai in 2006. 
 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the States No. of Food Testing 
Laboratories 
 
1. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 1 
2. Andhra Pradesh 19 
3. Assam 4 
4. Bihar 3 
5. Delhi 27 
6. Gujarat 19 
7. Goa 1 
8. Haryana 10 
9. Himachal Pradesh 6 
10. J&K 5 
11. Karnataka 21 
12. Jharkhand 2 
13. Kerala 15 
14. Maharashtra 47 
15. Madhya Pradesh 13 
16. Manipur 3 
17. Meghalya 1 
18. Nagaland 1 
19. Orissa 4 
20. Punjab 7 
21. Rajasthan 16 
22. Tamil Nadu 30 
23. Tripura 1 
24. Uttar Pradesh 31 
25. West Bengal 19 
26. Chandigarh 5 
27. Pondicherry 1 
 Total 312 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Annexure-IV 
STATEWISE DETAILS OF LABS ASSISTED BY MFPI 
S. 
No. 
Name of the State Total 
1. Andaman & Nicobar Islands Nil so far 
2. Andhra Pradesh 4 
3. Arunachal Pradesh Nil so far 
4. Assam 2 
5. Bihar Nil so far 
6. Delhi 6 
7. Gujarat 3 
8. Haryana 3 
9. Himachal Pradesh Nil so far 
10 J&K 1 
11. Karnataka 2 
12 Jharkhand 1 
12. Kerala 1 
13. Maharashtra 4 
14 Madhya Pradesh 2 
15 Manipur Nil so far 
16 Mizoram Nil so far 
17. Meghalaya Nil so far 
18. Nagaland Nil so far 
19 Orissa Nil so far 
20 Punjab Nil so far 
21 Rajasthan 2 
22 Tamil Nadu 3 
23 Tripura Nil so far 
24 Uttar Pradesh 6 
25. West Bengal 4 
26 Uttrakhand 1 
 Total: 45 
 
 

 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
            The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 31st March, 2010 from 1100 hours to 
1308 hours in Committee Room „E‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Premdas 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri Narendra Budania 
12. Shri A. Elavarsan 
13. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
14. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
15. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
16. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
17. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar      -      Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.C. Koul             -      Additional Director 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
1. Shri Ashok Sinha        - Secretary 
2. Shri Chaman Kumar        - Addl. Secretary & Financial  
      Advisor 
3. Shri Ajit Kumar        - Joint Secretary 
4. Shri K. Rajeswara Rao      - Joint Secretary   
5. Shri Amrit Lal Meena        - Joint Secretary  
 
Planning Commission 
1. Shri Naveen Kumar  -Principal Adviser  
2. Shri M.M. Chanda  -Adviser 

 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries and Planning Commission 
to the Sitting. The Chairman then asked the witnesses to introduce themselves.  
2. Once the introductions were over the Chairman enquired from the Principal 
Witness about the circumstances due to which submission of documents relevant to the 
Oral Evidence was delayed and some of them were circulated in the Sitting itself. The 
Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing Industries explained the reasons behind the 
delay in submission of documents.  Most of the Members were of the view that due to 
delayed submission of documents and non-submission of some documents in Hindi, the  
conclusive examination of the Demands for Grants 2010-11 of the Ministry would not be 
possible.  It was, therefore, decided that the post lunch session of the day may be 
cancelled and part  evidence on the subject may be scheduled a few days later.  The 
Chairman, then directed the representatives of the Ministry to make the audio -visual 
presentation on the Demands for Grants 2010-11 and related matters. 
3. The Committee thereafter took the o ral evidence of the representatives of the 
Department and other witnesses for and in connection with examination of Demands for 
Grants (2010 -11) of the Ministry. Several queries were raised by the Chairman and 
Members of the Committee on  issues concerning  the Demands for Grants. The 
witnesses replied thereto. 
 
4. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee on 
the subject. He also directed them to submit documents sought by the Committee in the 
context of the subject, complete in all respects and appear before the Committee again 
on 9 April, 2010 for further Oral Evidence on the subject.    
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 9 th April, 2010 from 1505 hours to 1640 hours 
in Committee Room „E‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi –  Acting Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite 
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
6. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
8. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
9. Shri Prabodh Panda 
10. Shri Premdas 
11. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
12. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
13. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
14. Shri Uday Singh 
15. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
16. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
17. Shri Narendra Budania 
18. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
20. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
21. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar      -      Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.C. Koul             -      Additional Director 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
6. Shri Ashok Sinha        - Secretary 
7. Shri Chaman Kumar        - Addl. Secretary & Financial Advisor 
8. Shri Ajit Kumar        - Joint Secretary 
9. Shri K. Rajeswara Rao      - Joint Secretary   
10. Shri Amrit Lal Meena        - Joint Secretary  
 

 
 
Planning Commission 
1. Shri Naveen Kumar  -Principal Adviser  
2. Shri M.M. Chanda  -Adviser 
           
At the outset the Joint Secretary, Lok Sabha Secretariat informed the Members 
that due to unavoidable circumstances the Chairman would not be able to attend the 
Sitting. The Committee, therefore, chose Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi, M.P.(Rajya Sabha) 
to act as Chairman for the Sittin g under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
2. The Acting Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the Sitting 
and asked the representatives of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries and 
Planning Commission to be ushered in. Once the witnesses took their seats the Acting 
Chairman welcomed  them to the Sitting.  
3. After introduction of the officials, the Acting Chairman announced that since the 
Committee had taken part evidence on the subject on 31 March,  2010, the witnesses 
may straightaway respond to the further queries of the Members.     
4. The Committee thereafter took the further oral evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry and other witnesses for and in connection with examination of Demands  
for Grants (2010 -11) of the Ministry. Several queries were raised and clarifications 
sought by the Acting Chairman and Members of the Committee on issues concerning 
the Demands for Grants. The witnesses responded thereto. 
5. The Acting Chairman, thereafte r, thanked the witnesses for appearing before 
the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee 
on the subject. He also directed them to submit documents sought by the Committee in 
the context of the subject, complete in all respect latest by 16 April, 2010.    
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20 th April, 2010 from 1500 hours to 1700 
hours in Room „62‟, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite  
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
8. Shri Premdas 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
11. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
13. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
15. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
16. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
17. Prof.  M.S. Swaminathan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIAN DAIRY ASSOCIATION 
 
1.      Dr. N. R. Bhasin            -  President, Indian Dairy 
Association 
2.      Dr. A.K. Srivastava        -  Member, Central Executive      
Committee of IDA 
3.       Dr. R.S. Khanna           -                 Member, ZEC (NZ),IDA 
4.       Mr. Arun Patil               -                 Chairman, (WZ),IDA 
5.       Shri K.L. Arora             -                  Member, Central Executive   
            Committee of IDA 
6.       Dr. Raja Rathinam       -                  Member, Central Executive  
Committee of IDA 
 

 
 
2. At the outset the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the Draft Report on Demands for Grants 
(2010-2011) relating to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -
operation) for consideration. After some minor corrections, the Committee adopted the 
said Draft Report. 
3. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the above Draft 
Report  after getting it factually verified from the concerned Department and present the 
same to the Parliamen t.  The Chairman, thereafter directed that the representative of 
the Indian Dairy Association be ushered in. 
(At about 1525 Hours representatives of the Indian Dairy Association 
took their seats in the Committee Room). 
4. After introducing themselves the r epresentatives of the Indian Dairy Association 
made an audio -visual presentation before the Committee on „Sustainable Growth of 
Dairy Farmers in the Country‟. They also briefed the Committee on several issues 
relating to the development of dairy sector in the Country.  
5. The members sought several clarifications on various aspects of the 
presentation. The representatives of the Indian Dairy Association responded to the 
same. 
6. Before the sitting concluded, the Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing 
before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the 
Committee on the presentation.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned.  
*********** 
 