1 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & CO-OPERATION) 
              
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-2012)  
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2010-2011)} 
 
         
        
 
TWENTY- EIGHTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February 2012/Magha, 1933 (Saka) 
 
 
 
28 

2 
 
TWENTY - EIGHTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
          
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
                 
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION) 
         
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2011-2012) 
          
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty - Second Report of the Committee on 
Agriculture (2010-2011) 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker Lok Sabha on       16.02.2012 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                             29.03.2012 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                           29.03.2012 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
February 2012/ Magha, 1933 (Saka)  


3 
 
COA No. 251 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

4 
 
<CONTENTS> 
 
 
                   PAGE 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………    (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………   (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have   
   been accepted by the Government ……………     19 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..     43 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….     44 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….     51 
 
                                    ANNEXURES 
 
I.  Details of suggestion of Agriculture Finance Corporation 
  in the Modified ATMA Scheme.                                                            56 
 
II.  Minutes of the 23rd  Sitting of the Committee      58 
held on 10 February, 2012. 
       
III.  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the     60 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Second Report              
 (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2010-2011).  
 
(i)

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-12) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
11.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12.  Shri Premdas  
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
15.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
16.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
17.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
18.  Shri Laxman Tudu 
19  Shri D. Venugopal 
20.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
21.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
23.  Shri Narendra Budania 
24.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 
 (iii) 

6 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

7 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (2011 -2012) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this Twenty - 
Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -Second Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2011 -2012) pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation). 
 
2. The Twenty -Second Report of t he Committee on Agriculture (20 10-2011) on 
Demands for Grants (2011 -2012) pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the table of 
Rajya Sabha on 2 9 August, 2011.  The Action Taken Replies on the Report were 
received on 26 December, 2011. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 10 February, 2012. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -Second Report of the 
Committee is given in Annexure- III.   
 
 
 
             
                                                                                          
NEW DELHI;                   BASUDEB ACHARIA 
10 February, 2012                          Chairman, 
21 Magha, 1933 (Saka)                                                Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
  
 
  
(v) 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER I 
Report 
 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second  Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture on Demands for  
Grants – 2011-12 pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 29 August, 2011.   
 
2. The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation) have 
furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 18 recommendations/observations 
contained in the Report.  These have been categorised as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Recommendation Nos. 1.4, 2.27, 2.28, 2.29, 3.40, 3.41, 3.43, 3.45, 3.46, 
3.48, 3.49 and 3.51 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply:  
Recommendation Nos. Nil  
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
Recommendation Nos. 2.26, 3.42, 3.44, and 3.50 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited.   
Recommendation Nos. 3.47 and 3.52. 
 

9 
 
3. The Committee  trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the observations/recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation.  The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and Chapter V of this Report be furnished to them at an 
early date.  
4. The Committee will  now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
PRESENT STATE OF INDIAN AGRICULTURE 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.26) 
 
 
5. The Committee had noted that despite six decades of planning, a plethora of 
schemes and various measures initiated by successive Governments all is not well with 
Indian Agriculture as is evident from the fact that  that although agriculture sector is the 
principal source of livelihood for more tha n 58% of the population, yet its contribution to 
the nati onal GDP has declined to 14.4% and the gap between the minority of 
economically well off farmers and the majority of economically weak farmers has 
widened as is epitomized by various incidents of farmers suicides in the country. Having 
further noted that reckless use of chemical fertilizers was resulting in declining soil 
health and resulting in instances of soil poisoning thus leading to a crisis situation, the 
Committee opined that Indian Agriculture is in need of a stimulus, and desire d the 
Government and the Planning Commission to keep this in mind while chalking out the 

10 
 
framework for the Twelfth Five Year Plan so as to focus on inclusive growth and breathe 
new life into agriculture by according it the priority it rightly deserves. 
 
6. The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, in their action taken note have 
stated that performance of the farm sector (agriculture & allied activities) in the Eleventh 
Plan is better than in t he Tenth Plan.  The farm sector has grown at an average rate of 
around 3.2 percent during the first four years of the Eleventh Plan. Provided conditions 
remain favourable in 2011, the farm sector may achieve overall growth of about 3.8% 
during the Eleventh  Plan. This is despite the fact that the Country suffered drought in 
several States in 2009 -10 and 2010 -11.  Overall, investment in agriculture sector has 
increased substantially from 10% of agri -GDP in 2002 -03 to 21% of agri -GDP in the 
current fiscal year, which is a healthy sign. 
 Since agriculture is a ‘State’ subject, a lot depends upon how the State 
machinery substantiates the efforts of Government of India in increasing agricultural 
production in the Country. 
 
7. The Committee note that the measures i nitiated by the Department resulted 
in the farm sector witnessing an average growth rate of about 3.2 percent during 
the first four years of the Eleventh Plan.  While sharing the optimism of the 
Department that subject to conditions, the farm sector may ac hieve overall 
growth rate of about 3.8 percent during the Eleventh Plan they would, however, 
like to await the final figures as the Country witnessed drought in several States 
in the years 2009 -10 and 2010 -11.  Statistics apart, the pitiable condition of t he 
majority of the farming community causes them deep anguish as farmers are still 

11 
 
committing suicides in different parts of the Country due to varied reasons.  What 
further aggravates their anguish is the stance of the Department that Agriculture 
being a State subject a lot depends upon how the State machinery substantiates 
the efforts of the Government of India in increasing agricultural production in the 
country.  They are of the firm opinion that if Indian Agriculture has to reinvigorate 
itself and brea k free from the shackles presently hampering its growth, the 
Central and the State Governments have to work in unison and not work with 
plurality of objectives as is evident now.  They, therefore, impress upon the 
Central and State Government’s to strive f or a commonality of goals during the 
Twelfth Plan and work in unison to ensure that Indian Agriculture is finally 
revitalized.  This would ensure unanimity in policy resulting in a focused 
approach towards the problems besetting Agriculture in India and en sure its 
effective and expeditious solution.  They would like to reiterate further that the 
roadmap for providing a real and quick stimulus to the Indian Agriculture at least 
in the Twelfth Plan be drawn in real quick time on which the reply is silent and 
apprise them of the same at least at the time of examination of DFG – 2012-13 is 
taken up by them. 
 
 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.27) 
 
 
8. The Committee had observed that variance between the funds earmarked and 
actually allocated stood at Rs. 4,441.28 crore during the first four fiscals of Eleventh 
Plan and were totally bewildered by this rather strange method of allocation by the 

12 
 
Planning C ommission and the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for a 
Department whose utilization of funds had  always crossed 90%, save for the fiscal 
2007-08. They had therefore, desired desire that all agencies involved in the planning 
process pay hee d to their Recommendation and Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation be given its full due in terms of allocation of funds in the ensuing Twelfth 
Plan.   
 The Committee further impressed upon the Department to motivate the 
States/UTs to send their propo sals as well as utilization certificates timely so as to 
ensure uniform pace of utilization of funds throughout the Fiscal year to enforce 
financial discipline and also compel those involved in the planning process to keep 
away their snipping scissors in the Twelfth Plan period. 
 
 
9. The Department in the Action taken note  stated that their Plan allocation has 
increased considerably from Rs.5560.00 crore in 2007 -08 to Rs.17122.87 
crore in 2011 -12 (inclusive of state plan scheme RKVY).  This is about 
208% increase over plan allocation of 2007 -08.  Total plan allocation for 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation for Eleventh Five Year Plan 
comes to Rs.61600.05 crore which is 91.63% of the approved outlay.  
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation continuousl y monitors 
implementation of the schemes by the State Governments and pursues 
them for timely submission of utilization certificates along with physical 
progress. In fact, timely submission of utilization certificates and progress 
report is pre -requisite f or release of funds to the States.  

13 
 
 
10. Irrespective of the explanation putforth by the Department that the 
allocation of the Department has increased by about 208 percent in the fiscal  
2011-12 in comparison to the fiscal 2007 -08, the Committee would like  the 
Department to introspect on the  fact that there is a marked variance in the 
earmarked funds and actual allocation during the course of the Eleventh Five 
Year Plan and take up this issue at the highest level with the Planning 
Commission and the Minist ry of Finance to ensure that the variance in the 
earmarked funds and actual allocation is minimal during the course of the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan.  At the same time, the Committee stress upon the importance of 
timely and uniform release of funds and their utilization across all the quarter s in 
a fiscal.  They further desire the Department to impress upon all States/UTs to 
exercise financial discipline and ensure timely submission of utilization 
certificates as well as fresh proposals, to ensure that the agr iculture sector is 
accorded its due which it greatly deserves in terms of monetary allocations. 
 
 
NEW SCHEMES 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.28) 
 
11. Expressing their deep anguish on observing that the current practice of granting 
approvals and clearances to a Scheme was time consuming and resulting in staggering 
of timelines, cost overruns and back loading of funds as was evident from the fact that 
out of the fifteen New Schemes introduced in the Eleventh Five Year Plan 3 Schemes 
were approved in the year 2007, 2 in 2008, 3 in 2009, 3 in 2010 and 4 Schemes are still 

14 
 
under consideration stage till date, through the Eleventh Plan is in its terminal stage and 
guided by the view that the system of granting approvals and clearances to a Scheme is 
in the urgent need of an overhaul as in its  absence the authorities would continue to 
draw flak and this flawed system is bound to collapse ultimately, t he Committee, had 
recommended the Planning C ommission to take up this issue seriously and  streamline 
this rather tedious process of multi -level clearance to a Scheme before its 
implementation.  
 
12.  In their Action Taken Notes, the Department have stated that introduction of any new 
scheme is through an established procedure. After formulatio n of the scheme, it is 
appraised by the relevant Departments/Ministries of the Government and Planning 
Commission.  Thereafter, the proposal is evaluated by EFC before being approved by 
CCEA.  Effort of DAC is to complete the process in the shortest possib le time through 
constant monitoring of the appraisal stage. The concern of Committee has 
already been communicated to Planning Commission.  
 
 
13. Notwithstanding the reply of the Department, the Committee are of the firm 
opinion that the present process of multi -level clearance to a scheme before it is 
finally implemented has failed the test of time.  This is clearly evident from the 
fact that out of the fifteen new schemes introduced in the Eleventh Five Year Plan 
4 are still under consideration stage though the Plan is nearing its end.  The so 
called established procedures which they are well aware of, has contributed to 

15 
 
repeated staggering of timelines and thus needs to be done away with at the 
earliest.  The Department rather than educating them about the well established 
procedures of approvals and clearances with regard to introduction of New 
Schemes should strive to arrive at a new process preferably a single  window 
clearance system which would ensure that the time lag between introduction and 
implementation is reduced to a great extent at least in the Twelfth Plan period so 
as to ensure avoiding staggering of timelines, cost overruns and back loading of 
funds. 
 
 
PLANNING FOR TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.29) 
 
14. The Committee were glad to note that the Planning Commission had  already 
sprung in to action and constituted a number of Working Groups for Agriculture and 
Allied Sectors so as to ensure that the Twelfth Plan Document is finalized well before 1 
April, 2012. They were further heartened to note that the Department would go for about 
ten focussed Schemes like National Food Security Mission, National Horticulture 
Mission, National Mission on Micro-irrigation, etc. and the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
Window which will aid in improved monitoring of Schemes  and extended their full 
support to the Department and hope d that the Planning Commission and other 
concerned agencies would do their bit in streamlining the planning process and ensure 
timely finalization of the Twelfth Plan Document.  
 They further desire d that emphasis be lai d upon inclusive growth and  
categorically emphasise d upon the Planners and Government  to finalize  the Twelfth 
Plan and convey the same  to all line Ministries / Departments well in advance and not 

16 
 
later than 31 December, 2011 so as to enable them to complete  necessary formalities 
at their end in the last quarter of this Fiscal and be in readiness to implem ent the 
Twelfth Plan Schemes from day one i.e. 1 April, 2012.   
 
15. The Department in their Action Taken Notes have stated that the Approach 
Paper for the Twelfth Five Year Plan has been prepared by the Planning Commission 
on the basis of extensive discus sions, both in -house and with stakeholders including 
State Governments, Civil Society, Panchayati  Raj Institutions etc. The Approach paper 
proposes faster, more inclusive and sustainable growth during the Twelfth Plan. The 
Approach Paper was approved by the Full Planning Commission in its meeting held on 
20th August 2011. The Draft Approach Paper was approved by the National 
Development Council on 22nd October, 2011. 
 
16. The Committee are appreciative of the fact that finally the Planning 
Commission and other agencies involved in formulation of the Twelfth Five Year 
Plan have acted upon the Committee’s recommendation to be pro -active in 
finalizing the Twelfth Plan well before its slated commencement i.e. 1 April 2012.  
They however, are constrained to note that though the action taken notes were 
furnished to them on 26 December, 2011, they fa il to shed any light on the 
developments that have taken place after 22  October, 2011 in the matter.  They, 
therefore, would like to be apprised of the latest status on the draft Approach 
Paper after its approval by the National Development Council and the  readiness 
of the Department to implement the Twelfth Plan Schemes from 1 April, 2012. 
 

17 
 
COOPERATION 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.42 & 3.44) 
 
17. The Committee had noted that Cooperative Sector plays a significant role in 
disbursing agricultural credit, providing market support to farmers, distribution of 
agricultural inputs and imparting cooperative education and training etc. They were 
further pained to noticed that though the BE 2011 -12 saw a quantum enhancement at 
Rs. 192.00 crore,  yet three schemes, namely, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction  of 
potentially viable sick Cooperatives, Interest Subvention on loans provided by NCDC to 
Cooperative and support to NAFED which have been allocated sums of  Rs.25, Rs.80 
and Rs.2 crore  respectively have not been accorded the necessary 
approvals/clearances till date and  apprehended that at RE stage, the Ministry of 
Finance would definitely reduce the aforementioned  allocations. Being in full agreement 
with the stand of the Department that the Cooperative Sector n eeds to be revitalized to 
a sound state of health for overall developm ent of the Agriculture Sector and being of 
the firm opinion that  the Scheme of revival of sick cooperatives needs to be 
implemented at the earliest so as to ensure empowerment of farmers in the true sense, 
the Committee urged the Department to leave no stone unturned to ensure that these 
three pivotal aforementioned Schemes are accorded approvals/clearances with 
promptitude by all the agencies concerned. 
 
18. The Department have in their action taken note stated that approved outlay for 
Cooperation Division during Eleventh Five Year Plan  was Rs.469 crore. For  the 
Scheme of  Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of Cooperatives , the  Department had 

18 
 
proposed implementation of the same during the last two years of the current Five Year 
Plan, keeping in view the need for reviving such units in the overall interest of the 
agricultural sector and in particular the cooperative sector.  EFC Memo for the Scheme 
was prepared on 26.4.2010, and meeting of E FC held on 21.7.2010 which 
recommended the proposal.  Thereafter, the proposal was sent to Ministry of Finance 
for their approval.  The Ministry of Finance however has conveyed on 4.4.2011 that they 
do not agree to the formulation of the above scheme.  
In so far as Scheme relating to Interest subvention on loans provided by NCDC 
to cooperatives is concerned, this Department had proposed implementation of the 
same during the last two years of the current Five Year Plan, keeping in view the need 
for  such a s cheme in the overall interest of the agricultural sector and in particular the 
cooperative sector.  EFC Memo for the Scheme was prepared on 3.6.2010, and 
meeting of EFC held on 1.9.2010 which recommended the proposal.  Thereafter, the 
proposal was sent to Ministry of Finance for their approval.  The Ministry of Finance has 
conveyed on 4.4.2011 that Ministry of Finance do not agree to the formulation of the 
above scheme.    
As regards Budget provision of Rs.2.00 crore for support to NAFED, it is stated 
that a token provision of Rs.1.00 crore as loans and advances and Rs.1.00 crore as 
investment was kept in anticipation of approval of financial restructuring package to 
NAFED for which an EFC meeting was to be held on 26 August, 2011 but the same was 
postponed by Department of Expenditure.    As such, the scheme has not been 
approved so far. 
 

19 
 
19. The Committee are at pains to comprehend the reasons guiding the 
Ministry of Finance in not granting approval to the formulation of the schemes of 
Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of Cooperatives’, Interest Subvention on loans 
provided by NCDC to Cooperatives even after the Expenditure Finance 
Committee had recommended these proposals on 21 July and 1 September, 2010 
respectively.  The scheme of support to NAFED however  is yet to be considered 
by EFC.  It is interesting to note that the first two proposals which have been 
approved, the Secretary Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance himself 
chairs the EFC.  They, therefore, fail to understand the development tha t takes 
place subsequently wherein the same proposals are not agreed to by the Ministry 
of Finance.  They reply of the Department too fails to clear this dichotomy in the 
matter.  Keeping in view the pivotal nature played by the cooperative sector in 
empowerment of the farming community, the Committee again recommend that 
the Department take up this issue with the Ministry of Finance at the highest level 
to ensure that these three schemes are finally accorded clearance and thus pave 
way for their implementa tion, though belatedly in the ensuing Twelfth Five Year 
Plan.  They would further like to be apprised of the rationale behind the 
contradictory positions as obtaining above in the matter at an early date. 
 
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.47) 
 
20. The Committee had expressed their happiness over the fact that the Planners 
had finally acted, though belatedly, upon their specific recommendation for streamlining 

20 
 
the process of according clearances/approvals  to a Scheme in good time so as to 
increase its viability by its timely implementation as was evident by the doubling of BE at  
Rs.500.00 crore for 2011-12 for the State Extension Programmes etc. and desired the 
Department to motivate the States to come forward and avail maximum funds for 
strengthening their respective programmes for Extension Reforms. 
On being informed that Department of Agriculture & Cooperation have embarked 
upon monitoring and evaluation of the said Scheme in 28 States/UTs, but only t he 
States of Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Punjab, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh and West 
Bengal have submitted their study reports an d the others are in the process, t he 
Committee had impressed upon the Department to earnestly take up this issue with the  
defaulting States/UTs and get the same expedited with promptitude . They further 
desired   the Department to furnish them a status report on the action initiated on the 
study carried out by an independent agency AFC within three months of presentation of 
this Report to Parliament. 
 
21. The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in their action taken note have 
stated that the States have been encouraged to accelerate the implementation of the 
Scheme and avail maximum funds for strengthening their Extension Program mes in a 
Review Workshop held on June 3-4, 2011, Zonal Input Conference for Rabi was held on 
11.09.2011 & 13.09.2011 and National Rabi Conference was held on September 14-15, 
2011. Consequently, the pending Utilization Certificates up to 200 9-10 have been 
settled for all S tates except Delhi & Jharkhand and a sum of Rs.249.86 crore has been 
released to the States during 2011-12.  

21 
 
Third Party Monitoring and Evaluation is an in -built component of the Scheme.  
13 states namely, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh , Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Kerala, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttrakhand and West 
Bengal have already undertaken this exercise.  
It is submitted that the Department has addressed all major suggestions made by 
Agriculture Finan ce Corporation (AFC) as indicated below in the Modified ATMA 
Scheme which is at Annexure-I. 
22. The Committee express their satisfaction on being apprised that not only is 
the scheme of Support to State Extension Programmes for Extension Reforms 
witnessed the doubling of its allocation but also the fact that the Department of 
Agriculture has addressed all major suggestions made by the Agriculture Finance 
Corporation (AFC) and incorporated the same in the modified ATMA Scheme.  
They also complement the Department’s pro -active response in the instant case.  
However, much to their chagrin they are pained  to observe that out of the 28 
States/UTs where the evaluation and monitoring of this scheme has been 
embarked upon only 13 States have undertaken this exercise.  They, therefore, in 
the first instance would like to be apprised  of the reasons due to which  the other 
15 States have not yet embarked upon the evaluation and monitoring of the 
scheme inspite of this factor being an in -built component of the scheme.  They 
are of the firm opinion that constant evaluation and monitoring of a scheme helps 
to smoothen the rough edges and increases it viability as well .  The Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and stress upon the Department to obtain 
the evaluation reports from the defaulting States at the earliest and after 

22 
 
analysing it incorporate the sa me to the possible extent.  They would also like to 
be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
  
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY MISSION 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.50) 
 
 
23. The Committee had observed that the phy sical achievements for the year  
2009-10 and 2010 -11 were nowhere near the target set.  During the year 2009 -10, the 
severe drought afflicting the major rice growing States during Kharif 2009, had resulted 
in large rice areas being left unsown which led to under achievement of targets.  Also, 
the figures for 2010 -11 were based on State reports up to November /December, 2010 
and the final achievement would be reflected in the progress report of March, 2011.  
Deprecating this delay in updating of data in today’s era of information technology  
where updated data is available at the click of the button , they had  desired the 
Government to initiate steps to ensure that all States/UTs being covered under this 
Scheme collect data accurately and forward the same online to the Nodal Agency with 
due pr omptitude, so that the true picture prevalent on the ground can be timely 
assessed. 
 
24. The Department have stated that State Governments have been repeatedly 
requested to furnish the Monthly Progress Reports of implementation of Schemes by 
the 10th of the following month as well as submit the progress report on-line. 
 
25. The Committee strongly deprecate the rather casual reply of the Ministry in 
response to their instant recommendation.  It is either reflective of the fact that 

23 
 
the Ministry are unable to  obtain the requisite data from the States/UTs or they 
are not at all bothered whether data is forwarded to them or not.  In both the 
cases, it reflects very poorly on the nodal Department.  It is anybody’s guess as 
to how in the absence of data, the nodal  Ministry is able to analyse the short 
comings/plus points of their pivotal scheme of National Food Security Mission.  
The Committee therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation and impress 
upon the Government to initiate steps to ensure that all State s/UTs comply with 
the request of furnishing Monthly Progress Reports by the 10 th of every month as 
this will go a long way in enabling a timely and accurate analysis of this scheme, 
remove any inherent shortcomings and make it more viable. 
 
OUTSTANDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.52) 
 
 
26. The Committee had expressed their displeasure on being informed that about 
481 cases of Outstanding Utilization Certificates (UCs) in respect of grants released by 
them to States/UTs from the ye ar 1990-91, till date, amounting to Rs.1749.87 crore and 
that this pendency was due to non-submission of UCs. This was in spite of the fact that 
the Department was constantly taking up  the issue of liquidation of theses outstanding 
UCs from the grantees  through letters issued by concerned divisions and personal 
visits. They were further informed that at present the only way out is constant monitoring 
and pushing the States/UTs to furnish their UCs . The Committee strongly felt that there 
is an urgent need to revisit this mechanism, and had desired the Department to initiate 

24 
 
corrective measures well before the next Plan commences and apprise them of the 
action taken in this regard.  
 
 
27.  In their Action Taken Notes, the Department have stated that detailed list of 
States and Agencies against whom UCs are outstanding are prepared.  The defaulting 
States/Agencies are regularly requested to liquidate their outstanding UCs, or else face 
the prospect of withholding of release of further funds. The monitoring of UC s is also 
done regularly by Principal Accounts Office.   An exercise to conduct the audit of the 
defaulting grantee units (Agencies) by the Internal Audit Wing of CCA has been initiated 
to verify the actual utilization of Grants released to them.   
 
28. From the reply of the Ministry it is evident that action is going on to ensure 
liquidation of past outstanding utilization certificates.  The Ministry on their part 
prepares a detailed list of defaulting States/UTs and Agencies and periodically 
requests th em to liquidate their outstanding UCs or face the prospect of their 
funds being withheld.  However, inspite of this till date cent percent liquidation of 
the same has not been achieved.  The Committee have further been apprised that 
the Internal Audit Wing  of the CCA has initiated an exercise to conduct the audit 
of the defaulting grantee units as well as verify the actual utilization of grants 
released to them.  They appreciate this step initiated by the Ministry and would 
like to be apprised at the earlie st about the outcome of the said exercise and its 
impact in terms of reducing the pendency of outstanding utilization certificates.  
They further desire that all such cases be liquidated before the Twelfth Five Year 

25 
 
Plan commences so as to start with a cle an slate when the Plan commences from 
1 April, 2012. 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.4) 
 
 The Committee  note  that the Action Taken Notes regarding the action taken by 
the Government on Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee 
were furnished by the Government within the stipulated three months.  Similarly, the 
Statement of the Minister under  Direction 73A was made within the stipulated six 
months period.  The analysis of the action taken by the Government reveals that 67% 
Recommendations have been implemented.  22% Recommendations have not been 
implemented and 11% of Recommendations are in va rious stages of implementation.  
The Committee expect the Government to take conclusive action in the context these 
six Recommendations and furnish further action taken notes to the Committee 
expeditiously. 
 
Reply of the Government 
1) Recommendation Para No. 1.30   
As informed earlier, the approved outlay for DAC increased dramatically from 
Rs.13,200 crore in the Tenth Five Year Plan to Rs.66,577 crore in the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan.  91.63% of this enhanced outlay has so far been allocated 
to/utilized by the Department.  
 
 
2) Recommendation Para No.1.33  
 As informed earlier, on the basis of report subm itted by the Working 
Group for Agriculture & Allied Sector, Planning Commission has prepared the 
Approach Paper for the Twelfth Five Year Plan with the objectives of faster, more 
inclusive and sustainable growth.  The Approach Paper was approved by the Ful l 

27 
 
Planning Commission in its meeting held on 20 th August, 2011.  The Draft 
Approach Paper was approved by the National Development Council on 22 nd 
October, 2011. 
 
 
 
3)  Recommendation Para No.1.37  
Further to the action taken report submitted, it is stated th at this scheme 
has been continued during 2011 -12 with an outlay of Rs. 400 crore as a special 
sub-scheme of RKVY.  A specific plan of action comprising water management, 
high yielding seeds and large scale demonstrations of paddy has been taken up 
in all s even States.  An amount of Rs.272.50 crore has so far been released to 
the concerned States to implement this plan of action.   As explained earlier, the 
allocations under normal RKVY & NFSM are also available to the Eastern States 
for serving the same objective. 
 
 
 
4)  Recommendation Para No. 2.45  
 As part of the Agriculture Census, Input Survey is also conducted at five 
yearly intervals.  The data collection schedule of Input Survey 2011 -12 (Phase-III 
of Agriculture Census 2010 -11) has been revised by incor porating provision for 
collection of data on soil health.  
 
 
 
5)  Recommendation Para No.2.50  
 The Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) was 
approved by Government of India for implementation on pilot basis in 50 districts 
from Rabi 2010-11.  Subsequently, the scheme has been implemented by twelve 
States in 34 districts during Rabi 2010-11 season and  by 13 States in 35 districts 
during Kharif 2011 season.  The scheme is expected to be implemented by 17 
States in 50 districts during Rabi 2011-12. 
The scheme will be evaluated by an  independent agency before further 
expansion of the pilot Scheme. 
  

28 
 
 
6)  Recommendation Para No. 2.51  
 The details of institutional credit flow to farmers and share of small and 
marginal farmers therein during 2010-11 (provisional) are given below:- 
                                                                                    
                                                                                                (Rupees in crore) 
                                                  2010-11    (provisional) 
Agencies Total Loan Out of which 
SF/MF 
% of SF/MF 
Commercial 
Banks 
332705.98 100867.67        30.32 
Cooperative 
Banks 
 70105.30  35115.89       50.09 
Regional Rural 
Banks 
 43967.70  27206.09       61.88 
 446778.98 163189.65       36.53 
 
 
             [Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                            OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
 
 
 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
 
Recommendation Para No. 2.27 
 
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants pertaining to the first 
four fiscals of the Eleventh Plan, the Committee have observed that though the 
Planning Commission had approved an Outlay of Rs.66,577 crore for the Department 
during the Eleven th Plan.  However, the actual allocation for the first four fiscals 
amounts to Rs.45,012.85 crore and if the current BE of Rs.17,122.87 crore is included, 
the total amounts to Rs.62,135.72 crore, thus leading to a gap of about Rs.4,441.28 
crore between the  funds earmarked and actually allocated.  This strange method of 

29 
 
allocation of funds by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Expenditure) is bewildering as, the Department’s utilization of funds has 
always crossed 90%, save fo r the fiscal 2007 -08.  The Committee empathize with on 
this issue and have time and again been recommending to the Planning Commission 
and the Ministry of Finance to give them their due to enable them to carry out their 
mandate successfully.  However, regr etfully these pleas have fallen on deaf ears going 
by the past performance.  The Committee are pretty sanguine that though the BE will be 
enhanced at RE stage, yet the Department would not be allocated the leftover amount 
of Rs.4,441.28 crore.  Furthermore , the additional allocation at RE stage would be as 
always, too little, too late.  What further anguishes them is the lack of cogent replies 
from those concerned with the planning process on this issue, though they fully 
comprehend that allocation of funds is done on the basis of past performance as well as 
inter-sectoral priorities.  What the Committee unequivocally stress upon is that these 
sums earmarked for the Department for the entire duration of a Plan period need to be 
allocated to them, as the Planning Commission would have arrived at these figures after 
a detailed exercise.  However, the Committee observe that the proclivity of the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance has been always to allocate an amount which is 
lesser than the figure they  had arrived at earlier.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
all agencies involved in the planning process pay heed  to their Recommendation and 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation is given its full due in terms of allocation of 
funds in the ensuing Twelfth Plan. 
 
 The Committee also impress upon the Department to motivate the States/UTs to 
send their proposals as well as utilization certificates timely so as to ensure uniform 

30 
 
pace of utilization of funds throughout the Fiscal year.  In the opinion of the Committee 
such a step would not only help in enforcing financial discipline but also compel those 
involved in the planning process to keep away their snipping scissors in the Twelfth 
Plan period. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 Plan allocation for Departm ent of Agriculture and Cooperation has 
increased considerably from Rs.5560.00 crore in 2007 -08 to Rs.17122.87 
crore in 2011 -12 (inclusive of state plan scheme RKVY).  This is about 
208% increase over plan allocation of 2007 -08.  Total plan allocation for 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation for Eleventh Five Year Plan 
comes to Rs.61600.05 crore which is 91.63% of the approved outlay.  
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation continuously monitors 
implementation of the schemes by the State Governments and pursues 
them for timely submission of utilization certificates along with physical 
progress. In fact, timely submission of utilization certificates and progress 
report is pre -requisite for release of funds to the States.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 10 of Chapter I of this Report. 
  

31 
 
NEW SCHEMES  
 
Recommendation Para No. 2.28 
 
The Committee observe that fifteen New Schemes were introduced in the current 
Five Year Plan.  Out of these 3 Schemes were approved in the year 2007, 2 in 2008, 3 
in 2009, 3 in 2010 and 4 Schemes are still under consideration stage till date, through 
the Eleventh Plan is in its terminal stage.  The Committee are deeply anguished at this 
rather sordid state of affairs prevalent in granting approval to a Scheme from all 
agencies concerned before it finally sees the light of the day as is evident in the 
Schemes of National Mission on Seeds, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of 
Cooperatives, Interest Subvention on loans provided by NCDC to cooperatives and 
Support to NAFED.  Perturbed at this sorry state of affairs, the Committee in their First 
Report had concur red with the Department’s suggestion that the time taken by each 
Department / Agency to expedite clearance of proposals through rigorous adherence to 
time limits was worth a shot.  However, much to their chagrin no positive action seems 
to be forthcoming.  The Committee, however, feel that in the instant case nothing would 
be achieved by pointing fingers at the concerned parties.  It is their strong view that the 
system of granting approvals and clearances to a Scheme is in the urgent need of an 
overhaul as in its absence the authorities would continue to draw flak and this flawed 
system is bound to collapse ultimately.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Planning commission take up this vexed issue seriously whilst deliberating upon the 
modalities and framework for the Twelfth Plan so as to streamline this rather tedious 
process of multi -level clearance to a Scheme before its implementation thereby 
ensuring avoiding staggering of timelines, cost overruns and backloading of funds. 

32 
 
 
Reply o f the Gove rnment  
 Introduction of any new scheme is through an established procedure. After 
formulation of the scheme, it is appraised by the relevant Departments/Ministries of the 
Government and Planning Commission.  Thereafter, the proposal is evaluated by EFC 
before being approved by CCEA.  Effort of DAC is to complete the process in the 
shortest possible time through constant monitoring of the appraisal stage. The 
concern of Committee has already been communicated to Planning 
Commission.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 13 of Chapter I of this Report. 
 
 
 PLANNING FOR TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN 
 
Recommendation Para No. 2.29 
  
With a view to ascertain the preparedness of the Department for the ensuing 
Twelfth Plan as well as to avoid those factors / reasons impeding their performance in 
carrying out their mandate, and to ensure that the Twelfth Plan Document is finalized 
well be fore 1 April, 2012, the Committee had sought the latest position / progress 
achieved in this regard.  They are glad to note that the Planning Commission has 
already sprung in action and constituted a number of Working Groups for Agriculture 
and Allied Sect ors.  What heartens them is that action initiated by Department of 

33 
 
Agriculture & Cooperation in this regard.  It has finally dawned upon Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation that having 53 odd Schemes is not the best way to go about 
and guided by prudence they have initiated on pruning them to a few focused Schemes 
like National Food Security Mission, National Horticulture Mission, National Mission on 
Micro-irrigation, etc. and the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana Window.  In all, the 
Department would go fo r about ten Schemes which will aid in improved monitoring of 
Schemes.  Going by the past record, the Committee choose to be guided by the adage 
“Discretion is the better part of Valour” and would wait for the inception of the Twelfth 
Plan before passing an y judgment.  In the meantime, they extend their full support to 
the Department in this exercise and hope that the Planning Commission and other 
concerned agencies would do their bit in streamlining the planning process and ensure 
timely finalization of the  Twelfth Plan Document.  They further desire that emphasis be 
laid upon inclusive growth as well.  Before concluding on this crucial matter the 
Committee like to categorically emphasise upon the Planners and Government that the 
Twelfth Plan should be finalized and conveyed to all line Ministries / Departments well in 
advance and not later than 31 December, 2011 so that they are able to complete 
necessary formalities at their end in the last quarter of this Fiscal and are in readiness to 
implement the Twelft h Plan Schemes from day one i.e. 1 April, 2012.  They would 
expect to be apprised of the progress made in this direction at the earliest. 
 
  

34 
 
Reply of the G overnment  
The Approach Paper for the Twelfth Five Year Plan has been prepared by the 
Planning Commission on the basis of extensive discussions, both in -house and with 
stakeholders including state Governments, Civil Society,  Panchayati Raj Institutions 
etc. The Approach paper proposes faster, more inclusive and sustainable growth during 
the Twelfth Plan. The Approach Paper was approved by the Full Planning Commission 
in its meeting held on 20 th August 2011. The Draft Approach Paper was approved by 
the National Development Council on 22nd October, 2011. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 16 of Chapter I of this Report. 
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION ESTIMATES 
Recommendation Para No. 3.40 
 The Committee are happy to note that the Country has recorded an all time high 
of 235.88 million tonnes in production of foodgrains during 2010-11.  Wheat, Pulses and 
Oilseeds too witnessed an all time production high of 84.27, 17.29 and 30.25 million 
tonnes respectively.  They express their deep gratitude to the farming community’s 
selfless toil resulting in this bumper harvest.  Sim ilarly, the Ministry of Agriculture 
deserves their kudos for their on field interventions and monetary allocations for the 
various Schemes being implemented by them have also attributed in abundant measure 
to the record production of foodgrains.  Whilst im pressing upon the Ministry to continue 

35 
 
its good work relentlessly, they also desire Government to work upon their weak areas 
as well. 
Reply of the Government 
 As appreciated by the Committee on Agriculture, the primary role in producing a 
bumper harvest is  of the farming community.  The Ministry of Agriculture facilitates 
these efforts by taking appropriate measures to raise the production and productivity of 
agricultural crops.  One important area which requires special attention is the erratic 
nature of t he monsoon which affects crop production. The Department is taking pro -
active measures for the development of area -wise contingency plans as well as 
sensitizing the State Governments to keep them in the state of readiness to deal with 
different scenarios of monsoon rainfall.  These measures have helped in minimizing the 
impact of natural calamities on the agricultural production in the country. 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
 
SCIENTIFIC METHOD FOR ESTIMATING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION 
Recommendation Para No. 3.41 
 Notwithstanding the fact that this year the Country has recorded an all time high 
in production of foodgrains amounting to 235. 88 million tonnes, yet doubts are being 
raised at the veracity of the current process of estimations of agricultural production, 
weaning the sheen from the figures which perturbs the Committee no end.  The 
Committee are well aware that as this is a statist ical exercise based on statistical 
models and involving statistical tools and there are bound to be errors in this process.  

36 
 
In particular, their attention is drawn to the Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) which as 
admitted by the Government is a weak point,  as in some cases without conducting 
CCEs, data is concocted from the field, ultimately clouding its accuracy.  The 
Committee are unable to fathom the reasons impeding the Government to move 
towards a scientific approach to collection of data when it is ea sily available with them.  
In particular, the Committee draw the attention of the Department towards the technique 
of Satellite Imagery used by Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO).  Further, they 
urge them to implement the recommendations of the Comm ittee set up to  suggest 
alternative methodology with due promptitude to ensure higher accuracy in collection of 
data thereby making them reliable and authentic. 
Reply of the Government 
 The conventional system of collection of agricultural statistics is based on 
standard scientific principles which have stood the test of time.  However, sometimes 
these statistics get distorted due to non -sampling errors creeping in the estimation 
process as a result of implementation problems in the field.  It has been ob served that 
on several occasions field workers are over -burdened with other activities and are not 
able to devote the desired attention to collection of statistics. To improve the above 
situation, Government is implementing a number of schemes such as Time ly Reporting 
Scheme (TRS), Establishment of an Agency for Reporting of Agricultural Statistics 
(EARAS), Improvement of Crop Statistics (ICS) etc., to minimize these non -sampling 
errors. 
 In addition to the above, the Department is also making use of the la test 
technological tools such as Remote Sensing to generate alternative independent 

37 
 
assessment of crop production in the Country.  Since 1987 -88, the Ministry in 
collaboration with Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) is engaged in 
development of Remo te Sensing Methodology to forecast agricultural production in the 
Country.  A Central Sector Plan Scheme “Forecasting Agricultural Output Using Space 
Agro meteorology and Land based observations (FASAL)” is in operation since 2006 
under which Remote Sensing Methodology has been developed and operationalized by 
Indian Scientific Research Orgainzation (ISRO).  The Department is now establishing a 
National Centre for Crop Forecasting (NCCF) to operationalise Remote Sensing 
Methodology on crop forecast and drou ght assessment developed by ISRO and also 
integrate the inputs of agricultural statistics generated by various sources.  All these 
measures will further improve the reliability and authenticity of the official estimates of 
crop production prepared by the Department. 
 A Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Prof. Vaidyanathan, a noted 
Agricultural Economist, has also examined in detail the problems in the quality of data 
generated by the official system involving reporting of data by State Governme nts.  It 
has suggested independent collection of data by the Central Ministry of Agriculture for 
State and National level estimates by engaging exclusive personnel in the field rather 
than depending on the patwari who is over -burdened with multiple respons ibilities 
assigned by revenue authorities.  The Government is taking necessary action for direct 
collection of data by Ministry of Agriculture as recommended by Prof.  Vaidyanathan  
Committee for generating better quality estimates of agricultural crops. 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 

38 
 
COOPERATION 
Recommendation Para No. 3.43 
 The Committee note with concern that the BE figures for 2011-12 as furnished by 
the Department are at variance with each other.  On page 25 of their Basic Material, BE 
(2011-12) is shown as Rs.85.00 crore, whereas in their Written Reply the same is 
furnished as Rs. 192.00 crore (page 11) a difference of Rs.107.00 crore.  The 
Committee  caution  the Department to be careful while submitting information to 
Parliament and its entities and ensure that in future any information furnished to the 
Committee is cons istent across all documents so that any ambiguity as in the instant 
case is avoided. 
 
Reply of the Government 
It is mentioned in this regard that the figure of Rs. 85 crores in Budget Estimate 
2011-12 is in respect of existing two Schemes of the Cooperatio n Division of the 
Department viz. Central Sector Scheme for Cooperative Education and Training and 
Central Sector Scheme for assistance to NCDC for Cooperatives.  An amount of Rs. 
107 crores was also provided in the Budget Estimate 2011 -12 in anticipation of 
approvals in respect of three new schemes viz. Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of 
Cooperatives (Rs. 25 crores), Interest Subvention on loans provided by NCDC to 
cooperatives (80 crores) and support to NAFED (Rs. 2 crores).  However, since the 
aforesaid three Schemes have not been approved by the Government, the amount of 
Rs. 107 crore is proposed to be re -appropriated in the Revised Estimate 2011 -12 for 
utilization in some other schemes of the Department.   
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 

39 
 
COOPERATION 
Recommendation Para No. 3.45 
 The Committee would finally like to advise the Department on a far more 
germane matter in regard to Cooperatives.  The Committee presented their Twelfth 
Report on ‘The constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009 to the 
Parliament almost a year ago on 30 August, 2010.  The Bill is, however, yet to be 
enacted  till date.  In fact another Bill viz. ‘The Multi -State Cooperative Societies 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010, though referred to them on 16 December, 2010, is also 
pending consideration at the Committee’s end because of the delay in enactment.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions made by the Standing Committee have been examined in the 
Department in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice. A Note for the Cabinet for 
the proposed offi cial amendments to the Constitution (One Hundred & Eleventh 
Amendment) Bill, 2009 pending in the Lok Sabha was prepared by the Department and 
sent to the Cabinet Secretariat on 09 -09-2010 for seeking approval of the Cabinet.  The 
Cabinet approved the offic ial amendments to the Bill in its meeting held on 01.12.2010.  
Accordingly, official amendments to the Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh 
Amendment) Bill, 2009 have been moved and notices for the same sent to the 
Secretary General, Lok Sabha.  The Bill was listed for business on 25.2.2011 and on 
06-09-2011 but could not come up. The Bill has since been passed by the Lok Sabha 
on 22.12.2011 and is expected to shortly come up for consideration of Rajya Sabha. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 

40 
 
 
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS 
Recommendation Para No. 3.46:  
The Committee Note that the scheme of Support to State Extension Programmes 
for Extension Reforms was launched in 2006 and aimed at making extension system 
farmer driven and farmer accountable by way of new institutional arrangements for 
technology dissemi nation in the form of an Agricultural Technology Management 
Agency (ATMA) at district level to operationalize extension reforms. However, the 
Committee observes that Budget Outlays for the first four fiscals were always revised 
downward at Revised Estimate  stage. This was attributed to procedural delays by 
various agencies involved in according clearances/ approvals for this revised scheme, 
which lead to timelines being staggered for this scheme till 19 th March, 2010. Appalled 
at this shoddy state of affairs, the Committee in their sixth Report had recommended 
that approval to the scheme be expedited and the damage being done due to the 
prevalent lacunae be stemmed at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The scheme Support to State Extension Programmes for Extension Reforms was 
launched in 2005 -06. With the approval of CCEA on 19.03.2010, the Scheme became 
fully operational in 2010-11. The following milestones have been completed in 2010-11:- 
 Sharing the broad provisions and modalities of implementation of the Modified ATMA 
scheme through a Govt. Circular in April, 2010 (16.4.2010). 

41 
 
 Formulation of detailed Guidelines of Modified Scheme including mechanism for 
engaging/ deployment of manpower in June, 2010 (29.6.2010). 
 Orientation of Senior State Officials [Pr. Secretary Agriculture/ State Nodal Officer] 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (A&C) in August, 2010 (Aug 3-4, 2010). 
 Further fine tuning of the Guidelines on the basis of the feedback from States; 
printing and sharing of Final Guidelines with States, Districts and Blocks. 
The following actions have been taken for manpower deployment under the scheme  
o Communication to Chief Secretaries from the level of Secretary (A&C). 
o Review of manpower deployment in RKVY Conference on 15.1.2011 and that of 
N.E. States on 31.1.2011 & 1.2.2011. 
o Review of manpower deployment in Zonal Conferences held on 8.2.2011 and 
10.2.2011. 
As a consequence of the concerted efforts taken by the Division, over 31.72 lakh 
farmers hav e been benefitted during 2010 -11 through various activities such as 
Trainings, Exposure Visits, Demonstrations and Kisan Melas. Further, as against 17400 
posts sanctioned during 2011 -12, 6447 posts have been reported to be filled -up by 18 
States so far. So me other states are in advanced stages of deploying the sanctioned 
manpower. Once the sanctioned positions are filled up by the States, the speed & 
quality of implementation of the Scheme is likely to improve further. 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
 

42 
 
STRENGTHENING AND MODERNIZATION OF PEST MANGEMENT IN INDIA 
Recommendation Para No. 3.48  
 The major thrust areas of the Scheme are promotion of Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM), ensuring availability of safe and quality pesticides for sustaining 
crop production from the ravages of pests and diseases, streamlining quarantine 
measures for preventing entry of exotic pests and human resource development in plant 
protection skills.  The funds allocated at BE stage during the first four fiscals have 
always been revised upwards at the RE stage and the actual expenditure till date 
stands at Rs.63.74 cro re.  In response to a specific query of the Committee, the 
Department have admitted that as the Expenditure Finance Committee approved this 
Scheme only in July, 2010 no new projects could be taken up before.   This resulted in a 
curtailed expenditure, whereby actual expenditure was lower than the BE.  Further, due 
to the delayed approval, a reduction in requirement/ demand of funds from the States/ 
UTs was witnessed.  The Committee are anguished to observe that procedural delays 
have hampered the implementa tion of this Scheme and made our agriculturists 
vulnerable to the threat of pest attacks which could be calamitous to our agricultural 
production.  
 They, however, want the Department to break free from the jinxed past and 
adopt a pro -active role in this r egard as the Scheme is now under implementation.  
They expect the Department to expeditiously cover lost ground and ensure that 
maximum utilization of funds occurs in the current Fiscal and this momentum is also 
carried forward to the ensuring Twelfth Five Year Plan.  
 The calamitous effects of the Chemical Pesticides Endosulfan in Kasargod 
District of Kerala are a matter of extreme concern to them and they express their deep 

43 
 
anguish at the sufferings caused to the people in several areas of Kasargod.  They  are 
further appalled to know that in spite of being aware about its detrimental effect, this 
pesticide was still widely being used in India, prior to its ultimate ban in several States 
due to the Kasargod calamity.  The Committee strongly feel that it is high-time the 
Government took a final call on the detrimental effects of chemical pesticides on soil, 
crop, cattle, humans, water, the environment and embark upon a strict mechanism/ 
protocol with a view to ensure minimal, strictly need based use of chemic al pesticides in 
the country in future.  Side -by-side they also impress upon the Government to take up 
the issue of use of bio -fertilizers on a larger scale, to reduce dependence on chemical 
pesticides, which in their considered opinion cause more harm tha n good to all 
components of agriculture, its practitioners, and users and environment as well.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  The recommendation has been noted and all efforts are being made to ensure 
maximum utilization of funds in the current fiscal year as  well as carrying forward the 
momentum in the ensuing 12th Five Year Plan. 
 Plant protection measures, including use of chemical and bio pesticides, are 
necessary to minimize crop losses due to pests and diseases.  India’s consumption of 
pesticides is 2% o f the total world consumption.  Per hectare consumption of pesticide 
in India is 381 grams which is low as compared to the world average of 500 grams.   
India has an established system to regulate use of insecticides under the Insecticides 
Act, 1968.   The  Central Insecticides Board constituted under section 4 of the Act 
advises Central Government and State Governments on technical matters which inter 

44 
 
alia include safety measures necessary to prevent risk to human beings or animals in 
manufacture, sale, sto rage, distribution and use of pesticides.  The Registration 
Committee constituted under section 5 registers insecticides for import and manufacture 
in the country after scrutinizing formulae, verifying claim of efficacy and safety to human 
beings and anima ls, specifying precautions against poisoning and any other health 
hazards.   Wherever it is not satisfied about the safety and efficacy of the products, the 
registrations are refused.  The Government keeps on reviewing information available on 
insecticides by appointing Expert Committees or through the Registration Committee. 
As a result of such reviews, several insecticides/formulations have been banned  for  
import and manufacture in  the  country.  In addition, the Government has taken steps to 
promote u se of bio -pesticides through adoption of integrated pest management 
approach and facilitating faster registration of bio -pesticides.  C onsumption of bio -
pesticides has increased from 123 metric tons in 1994 -95 to 3,366 metric tons during 
2009-10 even as co nsumption of chemical pesticides has declined over the same 
period.  The Pesticides Management Bill, which provides for a stronger framework for 
regulation of pesticides, has been introduced in the Parliament.  
 Use of Endosulfan, a broad spectrum insectic ide, has been reviewed by several 
committees in the past against the backdrop of illness in certain villages of Kasargod 
district of Kerala, reportedly caused by aerial spraying of Endosulfan over cashew 
plantation contrary to normal protocol.  In view of lack of consensus amongst various 
experts on this issue, the Government constituted another committee under Dr. C.D. 
Mayee, the then Agriculture Commissioner, in September, 2004 to examine previous 
reports and to make recommendations regarding future use o f Endosulfan. The review 

45 
 
conducted in 2004 inter alia concluded that use of Endosulfan was not clearly linked to 
the alleged health problems in Kasargod district of Kerala.  The Committee accordingly 
recommended its continued use.  However, in the State of  Kerala it was kept on hold 
vide notification dated 31.10.2006.   It has been decided by consensus in 5 th 
Conference of Parties (COP) to the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic 
Pollutants held on April 25 -29, 2011 to list Endosulfan in Annex A for e limination of its 
production and use globally.   COP also decided to provide specific exemptions under 
Article 4 of the Convention which would allow countries opting for such exemption to 
phase out Endosulfan over a period of five years, which can be exten ded for a further 
period upto five years by COP.  COP -5 has also adopted a decision to request 
Persistent Organic Pollutant Review Committee (POP - RC) to undertake an 
assessment of safe and cost effective alternatives to Endosulfan which will be submitted 
to COP -6 to be held in 2013.   Countries such as Australia, Brazil and USA have 
decided to end use of Endosulfan over a period of time, i.e., by 2012, 2013 and 2016 
respectively and not abruptly.    
 The Supreme Court, in Writ Petition (Civil) 213 of 2011 “Democratic Youth 
Federation of India vs Union of India & Ors”, passed an interim order on 13.05.2011 
banning the production, use and sale of Endosulfan all over India till further orders.  The 
Court also appointed a Joint Committee headed by the Director General of Indian 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the Agriculture Commissioner to conduct a 
scientific study on the question whether the use of Endosulfan would cause any serious 
health hazard to human beings and environmental pollution.  The Committee would also 

46 
 
suggest alternative(s) to Endosulfan.  In a subsequent order, the Supreme Court has 
allowed export of limited stocks of Endosulfan.  The matter continues to be sub judice.   
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY MISSION 
Recommendation Para No. 3.49 
 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National Food Security Mission (NFSM) 
was launched from Rabi 2007 -08 to increase production of rice by 10 million tonnes, 
wheat by 8 million tonnes  and pulses by 2 million tonnes by the end of the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan i.e. March, 2012 and is presently under implementation in 476 Districts 
of 17 States.  The Committee, however, note with concern that under this Scheme, BE 
2009-10 of Rs.1354.00 crore was reduced at RE stage to Rs.1074 crore and the actual 
expenditure was Rs.1019.16 crore only.  Similarly, during 2010 -11 BE of Rs.1350.00 
crore was revised downward to Rs.1277.13 crore.  The gap between BE and final grant 
has been attributed to less expenditure under MH -2552 for North East Region (NER) as 
only one State viz. Assam has been included from this Region under the Mission.  The 
Committee opine that if this is the bottleneck hampering optimum utilization of funds, 
then the Department should increase, the coverage of this Scheme in NER by bringing 
all the States of th is Region under the ambit of National Food Security Mission, so that 
precious funds earmarked for the purpose don’t go abegging. 
  

47 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The objective of the Scheme is to increase production of rice by 10 million 
tonnes, wheat by 8 million tonnes and pulses by 2 million tonnes by the end of the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan. The districts in which this programme is to be implemented 
have been identified on the basis of  certain specified criteria.  NFSM was sanctioned 
for implementation in several districts in Assam which fulfilled this criteria. In view of the 
importance of increasing productivity in NER, the General Council of NFSM has also 
extended this programme to two districts in Tripura, which have a substantial area 
under rice cultivation.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
INTEGRATED NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT 
Recommendation Para No. 3.51 
 The Committee note that the Department has introduced a new Scheme 
‘National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility (NPMSHF) from 2008-09 to 
promote balanced and judicious use of fertilizer in conjunction with organic manure on 
soil test basis.  The approved Eleventh Plan Outlay for the Scheme is Rs.429.85 crore. 
 They are constrained to note that expenditure during the first four fiscals of the 
current Plan period is Rs.79.72 crore only.  Similar is the fate of achievement of physical 
targets w here in 448 Static/Mobile Soil Testing Laboratories (STLs)/Fertilizer Quality 
Control Laboratories (FQCLs) being strengthened / set up against the target figure of 

48 
 
1198 STLs/FQCLs.  What has held the Committee’s undivided attention in the instant 
case is that apart from the usual standard replies like delay in obtaining clearance of the 
CCEA resulting in staggered timelines, thereby having a detrimental effect on utilization 
of funds, as well as achievement of physical targets, is that the popularity of the  
Schemes like ‘Macro Management of Agriculture’(MMA) and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 
Yojana (RKVY) has caused under achievements under NPMSHF.  The Department’s 
own admission that though expenditure under the National Project on Management of 
Soil Health and Fe rtility has been low, yet the expenditure on soil testing and related 
activities under MMA and in particular RKVY has been impressive as States find it more 
convenient to utilize the window of RKVY for undertaking the activities included in the 
project on soil health and fertility speaks volumes about the efficacy or otherwise nay 
the very utility of this new Scheme launched after considerable effort and with lot of 
fanfare is squandered.  The Committee consider this to be another instance where the 
Department have worked out a Scheme in isolation and without taking a holistic view. 
 The Committee are of the considered opinion that this is an eye -opener for the 
Department and they need to do a serious rethink on the plethora of Schemes being run 
by them.  Ra ther than being guided by their own convenience they must be guided by 
the convenience of the States/UTs who are actually implementing the Schemes.  They 
are of the firm opinion that the Department would be well advised to expand  the scope 
of the RKVY and reduce the number of Schemes for the Twelfth Plan as this would help 
in judicious and optimum utilization of funds, thereby increasing the viability of the 
Schemes of the Department. 
  

49 
 
Reply of the Government 
 States have been demanding that schemes and interventions in the field of 
agriculture and allied sectors should be implemented on RKVY pattern.  A review has 
been carried out of all the schemes implemented by the Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation and  several schemes, including National Project on Management of Soil 
Health and Fertility, have been proposed to be merged and implemented under RKVY 
and a new proposed State Plan Scheme, National Agriculture Infrastructure & Assets 
Development Programme (NAIADP) in the 12th Plan. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011]  

50 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NO DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS ACTION TAKEN REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

51 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
PRESENT STATE OF INDIAN AGRICULTURE 
 
Recommendation Para No. 2.26 
 
 Despite six decades of planning, a plethora of schemes and various measures 
initiated by successive Governments all is not well with Indian Agriculture.  This is 
evident from the fact that although agriculture sector is the principal source of livelihood 
for more than 58% of the population, yet its contribution to the national GDP has 
declined to 14.4%.  This further gets compounded by the fact that with only 2.3% share 
in World’s total land area, it has to ensure food security to its population  which forms 
17.5% of World population.  Though Indian Agriculture has made rapid strides in terms 
of increased outputs, yet the gap between the minority of economically well off farmers 
and the majority of economically weak farmers has widened and the sam e is not 
lessening either.  This is epitomized by various incidents of farmers suicides in the 
Country.  The declining soil health due to reckless use of chemical fertilizers is 
spreading in epidemic proportions resulting in instances of soil poisoning.  A ll these 
factors further get aggravated by vagaries of climate change brought about by 
industrialization.  Today not only does agriculture face a crisis situation from its 
constituent elements but externally the challenges posed by industrialization also l oom 
charge.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that Indian Agriculture is in need of a 
stimulus, real quick and desire the Government and the Planning Commission to keep 
this in mind while chalking out the framework for the Twelfth Five Year Plan so as  to 
focus on inclusive growth and breathe new life into agriculture by according it the priority 
it rightly deserves.  The rapid increase in industry and services sectors have caused the 
decline in the fortunes of the agriculture sector and there is a pres sing need to hand 
hold the hand that has been feeding the Country at great personal cost and suffering. 
  

52 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Performance of the farm  sector (agriculture & allied activities) in the Eleventh 
Plan is better than in the Tenth Plan.  The  farm sector has grown at an average rate of 
around 3.2 percent during the first four years of the Eleventh Plan. Provided  conditions 
remain favourable in 2011, the farm  sector  may achieve overall growth of about 3.8% 
during the Eleventh Plan. This is d espite the fact that the Country suffered drought in 
several States in 2009 -10 and 2010 -11.  Overall, investment in agriculture sector has 
increased substantially from 10% of agri -GDP in 2002 -03 to 21% of agri -GDP in the 
current fiscal year, which is a healthy sign. 
 Since agriculture is a ‘State’ subject, a lot depends upon how the State 
machinery substantiates the efforts of Government of India in increasing agricultural 
production in the Country. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 7 of Chapter I of this Report. 
 
COOPERATION 
Recommendation Para No. 3.42 & 3.44 
 Cooperative Sector plays a significant role in disbursing agricultural credit, 
providing market support to farmers, distribution of agricultural inputs and imparting 
cooperative education and training etc.  Against an approved Outlay of Rs.646 crore  for 
the Cooperative Division, the actual allocation for the last four fiscals amounts to 

53 
 
Rs.336.90 crore and the actual expenditure during these years is Rs.330.05 crore.  The 
overall utilization of funds is a healthy 98 percent.  In view of the fact that  the Schemes 
under this Division are Central Sector Schemes where the entire funding is borne by the 
Central Government, the difference between the approved outlay of Rs.646 crore and 
actual expenditure of Rs.330.05 crore is glaring and cannot be overlooke d by the 
Committee.  Going solely by past performance, the Committee are pretty sure that 
enhancement at RE stage during the current fiscal would not bridge this disparity.  The 
Committee further notice that though BE 2011 -12 sees a quantum enhancement at 
Rs.192.00 crore, yet three schemes, namely, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction  of 
potentially viable sick Cooperatives, Interest Subvention on loans provided by NCDC to 
Cooperative and support to NAFED which have been allocated sums of  Rs.25, Rs.80 
and Rs .2 crores respectively have not been accorded the necessary 
approvals/clearances till date and at RE stage, the Ministry of Finance would definitely 
reduce the aforementioned  allocations.  The committee are pained at this sorry state of 
affairs and urge t he Government to get their house in order and ensure that funds 
allocated for this vital sector are utilized optimally and evenly in future, as the small and 
marginal farmers rely heavily on this sector for funding on which their sustenance is 
solely dependent. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As regards approved outlay for Cooperation Division during 11 th Five Year Plan 
is concerned, it is clarified that approved outlay was Rs.469 crores and not Rs.646 
crores as mentioned in the text of recommendation.   

54 
 
 In so far as the Scheme relating to Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of 
Cooperatives is concerned, this Department had proposed implementation of the same 
during the last two years of the current Five Year Plan, keeping in view the need for 
reviving such units in the overall interest of the agricultural sector and in particular the 
cooperative sector.  EFC Memo for the Scheme was prepared on 26.4.2010, and 
meeting of EFC held on 21.7.2010 which recommended the proposal.  Thereafter, the  
proposal was sent to Ministry of Finance for their approval.  The Ministry of Finance 
however has conveyed vide their letter dated 4.4.2011 that they do not agree to the 
formulation of the above scheme.  
In so far as Scheme relating to Interest subvention on loans provided by NCDC 
to cooperatives is concerned, this Department had proposed implementation of the 
same during the last two years of the current Five Year Plan, keeping in view the need 
for  such a scheme in the overall interest of the agricultural sector and in par ticular the 
cooperative sector.  EFC Memo for the Scheme was prepared on 3.6.2010, and 
meeting of EFC held on 1.9.2010 which recommended the proposal.  Thereafter, the 
proposal was sent to Ministry of Finance for their approval.  The Ministry of Finance ha s 
conveyed vide their letter dated 4.4.2011 that Ministry of Finance do not agree to the 
formulation of the above scheme.    
As regards Budget provision of Rs.2.00 crore for support to NAFED, it is stated 
that a token provision of Rs.1.00 crore as loans an d advances and Rs.1.00 crore as 
investment was kept in anticipation of approval of financial restructuring package to 
NAFED for which an EFC meeting was to be held on 26 th August, 2011 but the same 

55 
 
was postponed by Department of Expenditure.    As such, th e scheme has not been 
approved so far. 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 19 of Chapter I of this Report. 
 
Recommendation Para No. 3.44 
  
The Committee  are in full agreement with the stand of the Department that the 
Cooperative Sector needs to be revitalized to a sound stat e of health for overall 
development of the Agriculture Sector.  In particular, the Scheme of revival of sick 
cooperatives needs to be implemented at the earliest which in their unanimous view 
would ensure empowerment of farmers in the true sense.  They, th erefore, urge the 
Department to leave no stone unturned to ensure that these three pivotal 
aforementioned Schemes are accorded approvals/clearances with promptitude by all 
the agencies concerned. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In so far as Schemes relating to Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of 
Cooperatives is concerned, this Department had proposed implementation of the same 
during the last two years of the current Five Year Plan, keeping in view the need for 
reviving such uni ts in the overall interest of the agricultural sector and in particular the 
cooperative sector.  EFC Memo for the Scheme was prepared on 26.4.2010, and 
meeting of EFC held on 21.7.2010 which recommended the proposal.  Thereafter, the  

56 
 
proposal was sent to Ministry of Finance for their approval.  The Ministry of Finance has 
conveyed vide their letter dated 4.4.2011 that they do not agree to the formulation of the 
above scheme.  Similarly, the proposed schemes relating to “Interest subvention on  
loans provid ed by NCDC to Cooperatives” and “Support to NAFED” have also 
not been agreed to by Ministry of Finance. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 19 of Chapter I of this Report. 
 
 
NATIONAL FOOD SECUTIRY MISSION 
Recommendation Para No. 3.50 
 The Committee observe that the physical achievements for the year 2009-10 and 
2010-11 were nowhere near the target set.  During the year 2009 -10, the severe 
drought afflicting the major rice growing States during Kharif 2009, resulting in large rice 
areas being left unsown lead to under achievement of targets.  So far as the figures for 
2010-11 are concerned, these are based on State reports up to November /December, 
2010 and the final achievement would be reflected in the progress report March, 2011.  
The Com mittee deprecate this delay in updation of data in today’s era of information 
technology where updated data is available at the click of the button.  They, therefore, 
desire the Government to initiate steps to ensure that all States/UTs being covered 
under this Scheme collect data accurately and forward the same online to the Nodal 

57 
 
Agency with due promptitude, so that the true picture prevalent on the ground can be 
timely assessed.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 State Governments have been repeatedly requested  to furnish the Monthly 
Progress Reports of implementation of Schemes by the 10 th of the following month as 
well as submit the progress report on-line. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 25 of Chapter I of this Report. 
  

58 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
 WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
 ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENTION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS 
Recommendation Para No. 3.47:  
The Committee express their happiness over the fact that the Planners have 
finally acted, though belatedly, upon their specific recommendation for streamlining the 
process of according clearances/approvals to a Scheme in good time so as to increase 
its viability by its timely implementation. This fact is further strengthened by the doubling 
of BE for 2011 -12 which stands at Rs.500.00 crore. They would like Department to 
motivate the States to come forward and avail maximum funds for strengthening their 
respective programmes for Extension Reforms.  
 
The Committee have also been informed that Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation have embarked upon monitoring and evaluation of the said Scheme in 28 
States/UTs, but only the States of Himachal Pradesh, Rajasth an, Punjab, Orissa, 
Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal have submitted their study reports and the others are 
in the process. The Committee would like to impress upon the Department to earnestly 
take up this issue with the States/UTs that have not furnished the ir study reports and 
get the same expedited with promptitude. They would also like the Department to 
furnish them a status report on the action  initiated on the study carried out by an 

59 
 
independent agency AFC within three months of presentation of this Rep ort to 
Parliament. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The States have been encouraged to accelerate the implementation of the 
Scheme and avail maximum funds for strengthening their Extension Programmes  in a 
Review Workshop held on June 3 -4, 2011, Zonal Input Conference for Rabi held on 
11.09.2011 & 13.09.2011 and National Rabi Conference held on September 14 -15, 
2011. Consequently, the pending Utilization Certificates up to 2009 -10 have been 
settled for all states except Delhi & Jharkhand and a sum of Rs.249.86 crore has been 
released to the States during 2011-12.  
Third Party Monitoring and Evaluation is an in -built component of the Scheme.  
13 states namely, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Kerala, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttrakhand and West 
Bengal have already undertaken this exercise.  
It is submitted that the Department has addressed all major suggestions made by 
Agriculture Finance Corporat ion (AFC) as indicated below in the Modified ATMA 
Scheme:- 
1. Decentralization of Planning process with Farmers Advisory Committees 
(FACs) playing a more proactive role in deciding extension priorities:  
Modified ATMA Scheme includes Setting up of Farmer Advi sory Committees at 
Block, District and State level. As per latest reports received from States 3317 
Block Farmer Advisory Committees (BFAC), 245 District Farmers Advisory 
Committees (DFAC) and 8 State Farmer Advisory Committees (SFAC) have 
been constituted so far. 

60 
 
2. Strengthening Extension Mechanism at Block/Village level: 
Extension Mechanism at Block and village level has been strengthened by 
supporting a team of three Extension Functionaries, viz.  one Block Technology 
Manager and two Subject Matter Specialists at the Block level. A Farmer Friend 
@ 1 over every two villages has also been provided for under the modified ATMA 
Scheme. 
3. Involvement of KVKs/ SAUs for Research -Extension-Farmer (REF) 
Linkages:  
Guidelines for effective convergence between Agr iculture Research and 
Extension have been issued jointly by Secretary (A&C) and Secretary (DARE) to 
all the States in the shape of a booklet. 
4. Convergence of Extension Activities: 
The modified ATMA Scheme provides for approval of the State Extension Work 
Plans by State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) headed by Chief Secretary 
set up to approve RKVY plans. It is also ensured that Strategic Research & 
Extension Plans are inextricably linked to comprehensive District Agriculture 
Plan. 
Further, the Guidelines  of Modified ATMA Scheme provide for working of field 
level extension functionaries under different programmes/ schemes of DAC in 
conjunction with the dedicated manpower being supported under ATMA Scheme 
under the umbrella of Block Technology Team (BTT) or  Agricultural Technology 
Management Agency (ATMA), as the case may be. 
5. Deployment of a dedicated manpower for ATMA work: 
          Modified ATMA Scheme provides for committed manpower at State /  
         District and Block level to take up requisite Extension Activities at these  
          levels. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 22 of Chapter I of this Report. 

61 
 
 
OUTSTANDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES 
Recommendation Para No. 3.52 
 The Department have informed the Committee about 481 cases of Outstanding 
Utilization Certificates (U Cs) in respect of grants released by them to States/UTs from 
the year 1990 -91, till date, amounting to Rs.1749.87 crore.  Further, they have been 
informed that this pendency has occurred due to non -submission of UCs.  The 
Department have been taking up the issue of liquidation of theses outstanding UCs from 
the grantees and letters have been issued by concerned divisions and personal visits 
made in this regard as well.  They also attribute this trend to the budget increasing year 
after year.  At present, th e only way out is constant monitoring and pushing the 
States/UTs to furnish their UCs.  The Committee express their displeasure at this all 
pervading morass, as it is abundantly clear that the present mechanism for follow -up 
being practiced by the Department for liquidation of unspent balances by the States has 
not served the intended purpose.  They strongly feel that there is an urgent need to 
revisit this mechanism and introduce necessary correctives at the earliest so that the 
States are persuaded to fol lowing financial discipline and take cogent measures to 
liquidate the out standings in a time bound manner and further release of funds from the 
department to initiate corrective measures in this respect well before the next Plan 
commences to avoid its recurrence and apprise them of the action taken in the matter. 
 
  

62 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Detailed list of States and Agencies against whom UCs are outstanding are 
prepared.  The defaulting States/Agencies are regularly requested to liquidate their 
outstanding UCs, or else face the prospect of withholding of release of further funds. 
The monitoring of UCs is also done regularly by Principal Accounts Office.   An exercise 
to conduct the audit of the defaulting grantee units (Agencies) by the Internal Audit Wing 
of CCA has been initiated to verify the actual utilization of Grants released to them. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-8/2011-B&A Dated the 26th  December, 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 28 of Chapter I of this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
10 February, 2012           Chairman 
21 Magha,1933 (Saka)                    Committee on Agriculture 
  

63 
 
Annexure-I 
 
Details of suggestion of Agriculture Finance Corporation in the Modified 
ATMA Scheme. 
 
1. Decentralization of Planning process with Farmers Advisory Committees 
(FACs) playing a more proactive role in deciding extension priorities:  
Modified ATMA Scheme includes Setting up of Farmer Advisory Committees at 
Block, District and State level. As per latest reports received from States 3317 
Block Farmer Advisory Committees (BFAC), 245 District Farmers Advisory 
Committees (DFAC) and 8 State Farmer Advisory Committees (SFAC) have 
been constituted so far. 
2. Strengthening Extension Mechanism at Block/Village level: 
Extension Mechanism at Block and village level has been strengthened by 
supporting a team of three Extension Functionaries, viz.  one Block Technology 
Manager and two Subject Matter Specialists at the Block level. A Farmer Friend 
@ 1 over every two villages has also been provided for under the modified ATMA 
Scheme. 
3. Involvement of KVKs/ SAUs for Research -Extension-Farmer (REF) 
Linkages:  
Guidelines for effective convergence between Agriculture Research and 
Extension have been issued j ointly by Secretary (A&C) and Secretary (DARE) to 
all the States in the shape of a booklet. 
 

64 
 
4. Convergence of Extension Activities: 
The modified ATMA Scheme provides for approval of the State Extension 
Work Plans by State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC ) headed by Chief 
Secretary set up to approve RKVY plans. It is also ensured that Strategic 
Research & Extension Plans are inextricably linked to comprehensive 
District Agriculture Plan. 
Further, the Guidelines of Modified ATMA Scheme provide for working of field 
level extension functionar ies under different programmes/ schemes of DAC in 
conjunction with the dedicated manpower being supported under ATMA Scheme 
under the umbrella of Block Technology Team (BTT) or Agricultural Technology 
Management Agency (ATMA), as the case may be. 
5. Deployment of a dedicated manpower for ATMA work: 
Modified ATMA Scheme provides for committed manpower at State /District and 
Block level to take up requisite Extension Activities at these levels. 
 
  

65 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 10 February, 2012 from 1430  hours to 1810  
hours in Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
5. Shri Devji M. Patel 
6. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
7. Shri D. Venugopal 
 
 Rajya  Sabha 
 
8. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
9. Shri Narendra Budania 
10. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
11. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
12. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
13. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P. V. L. N. Murthy - Director 
 3. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 4. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

66 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for 
consideration : - 
(i) Action taken by the Government on the  Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-second  Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2010-
11) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation); 
 
*(ii) ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
*(iii) ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports without any 
modifications.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports 
after getting them factually verified from the concerned Ministry/Depart ment.  The 
Committee also decided that since the House is not in Session these Reports may be 
presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
*4. ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
*5. ****  ****  ****  ****  
 
*6. ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
*7. ****  ****  ****  ****  
 
*8. ****  ****  ****  ****  
 
*9. ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
*10. ****  ****  ****  ****   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
* Matter not related to this Report. 

67 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE TWENTY- SECOND REPORT (15th LOK SABHA) OF  
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2010-11)    
 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations                        18 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 1.4, 2.27, 2.28, 2.29, 3.40, 3.41, 3.43, 3.45, 3.46, 
                      3.48, 3.49 and 3.51.  
 
Total                  12 
 
Percentage                                     66.67% 
  
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Total                          NIL 
       
Percentage                                     0% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos.  2.26, 3.42, 3.44 and 3.50 
 
Total                 4  
Percentage                         22.22% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para No.  3.47 and 3.52 
 
Total                  2   
Percentage                        11.11% 
 
 