 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING & FISHERIES) 
              
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-2012)  
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-fourth Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2010-2011)} 
 
 
THIRTY-FIRST  REPORT 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February 2012 / Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 
 
31 

2 
 
THIRTY – FIRST  REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
          
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING & FISHERIES) 
         
                 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2011-2012) 
          
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty - fourth Report of the Committee on 
Agriculture (2010-2011) 
 
PRESENTED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 01.3.2012   
PRESENTED TO LOK SABHA ON   29.3.2012  
LAID ON THE TABLE OF RAJYA SABHA ON 29.3.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February 2012 / Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
 
 
 
COA No. 254 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
 
© 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 382 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN LOK SABHA (FOURTEENTH EDITION) AND PRINTED BY  
 

4 
 
CONTENTS 
                  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….    (iii) 
         
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………    (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have   
   been accepted by the Government ……………    20 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..     50 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….     51 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….     58 
 
                                    ANNEXURES 
 
I.  Minutes of the 24th Sitting of the Committee    60 
held on 21 February, 2012. 
 
II.  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the   62 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-fourth Report 
 (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2010-2011). 
 
 
(i)  

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-12) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
11.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12.  Shri Premdas  
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
15.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
16.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
17.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
18.  Shri Laxman Tudu 
19  Shri D. Venugopal 
20.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
21.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
23.  Shri Narendra Budania 
24.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 (iii) 

6 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

7 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, THE CHAIRMAN, STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-2012) HAVING BEEN AUTHORIZED 
BY THE COMMITTEE TO SUBMIT THE REPORT ON THEIR BEHALF, PRESENT THIS THIRTY-FIRST REPORT ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS      (2011-2012) 
PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING & 
FISHERIES). 
 
2. THE TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2010-2011) ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS (2011-2012) PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING & FISHERIES) WAS PRESENTED TO LOK SABHA AND LAID ON THE TABLE OF 
RAJYA SABHA ON 29 AUGUST, 2011.  THE ACTION TAKEN REPLIES ON THE REPORT WERE RECEIVED ON 
23 DECEMBER, 2011. 
 
3. THE REPORT WAS CONSIDERED AND ADOPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 21 
FEBRUARY, 2012. 
 
4. AN ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE IS GIVEN IN ANNEXURE- II. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                   BASUDEB ACHARIA 
21 February, 2012                          Chairman, 
2  Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Agriculture 
  
 
 
(v) 
 

8 
 
CHAPTER  I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the  recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2010 -11) on 
Demands for Grants 2011 -12 pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) which wa s 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 29 August, 
2011. 
 
1.2 The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have 
furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 21 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the R eport. These have been categorized as 
under :- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government : 
 Recommendation Nos. 1.4, 2.30, 2.31, 2.32, 2.33, 2.34, 2.35, 
2.36, 3.30, 3.31, 3.32, 3.33, 3.35, 3.36, 3.38 and 3.39  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply : 
 Recommendation Nos.  NIL 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which action 
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by t he 
Committee : 
 Recommendation Nos.  3.27, 3.28, 3.34  and 3.37  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited : 
 Recommendation Nos. 3.29  

9 
 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken notes 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and Final 
Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of 
this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Annual Plan 2011-12 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 2.30, 2.31, 2.32 and 2.33) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed that Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries sectors are contributing about 29.7% of the total value of output of 
agriculture and allied sectors i.e. milk’s contribution is Rs.2,08,809 crore while 
paddy was contributing Rs.1,35,307 crore. Inspite of this fact, this sector was 
suffering due to the continued apathy of the planner and policy makers alike. 
The Committee had also noted that out of the approved allocation of Rs.8,174 
crore the Department had actually been allotted Rs.5,910 crore which is about 
72% of the approved allocation. 

10 
 
 In regard to actual utilization of funds they observed that out of Rs.4,310 
crore allocated to the Department during the first four fiscals, actual 
expenditure was only Rs.3,677 crore and even if the Department were to utilize 
the entire Rs.1,600 crore allocated in the current fiscal, the actual expenditure 
during the Eleventh Plan would be above Rs. 5277 crore i.e. 89% of the 
reduced actual allocation. The main reasons attributed for this under-utilization 
were delay in granting approval to schemes and States retaining huge unspent 
balances, which as on 1 April, 2010 has reached Rs. 595 crore. Observing that 
the present mechanism for follow -up being practiced for  liquidation of unspent 
balances by States was not serving the purpose and feeling that there was an 
urgent need to revisit this mechanism, the Committee desired the Department 
to initiate corrective measures in this respect well before commencement of 
the next Plan. 
Noting that the State Governments routinely park their funds so as to 
help them in their ways and means position, which resulted in funds remaining 
unspent, the Committee recommended that a system for regular online 
monitoring of funds released by the Department be put in place urgently, so as 
to ensure that funds are utilized for the designated purposes only.  To ensure 
the same they also desired that this issue be taken up at the highest level with 
all State Governments about the problems pose d as a result of parking of 
funds for unintended purposes. 
1.6 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of animal Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries) in their Action Taken Note have stated that the Planning 
Commission has constituted the Working Group of Ani mal Husbandry and 
Working Group on Fisheries for this Department for the 12 th Five Year Plan. 

11 
 
Both Working Groups had submitted their reports to Steering Committee on 
Agriculture and Allied Sector. Based on the recommendations given by 
Steering Committee, the Department will consider the recommendations in 
respect of the finalization of the 12 th Five Year Plan. The Department partially 
supports RKVY pattern in respect of implementation of schemes. However, the 
activities which are already funded by ongoing/ existing schemes/programmes 
of this Department should not be funded to avoid duplication of resources and 
efforts. The Department is confident of full utilization of the allocated funds 
during the current fiscal. The department is regularly monitoring the full 
utilization of funds and monitoring the progress of the schemes through weekly 
expenditure review meetings, video conferencing with the States, State visits 
by the senior officers of this Department.  
1.7 The Committee are constrained to note that the   with regard to 
progress made in the direction of further consideration of the report of 
Working Groups by the Steering Committee on Agriculture and Allied 
Sector is yet to see the light of the day as is evident from the reply 
submitted in the last week o f December, 2011.  This has resulted in non -
finalization of the Twelfth Plan proposals of the Department.  The above 
stated position has virtually negated their recommendation to the effect 
that the Department ought to complete all formalities preparatory to the 
implementation of Twelfth Plan and communicate the same to the line 
Ministries/Departments latest by Decembers, 2011.  Further, they find 
that the reply is silent on the action taken with reference to aspects of 
State specific orientation of Schemes  and giving flexibility in 
implementation which would have resulted in timely submission of 

12 
 
structured proposals by States.  They, therefore, reiterate that the 
Department on their part need to consult States/UTs before devising a 
particular scheme focusin g on the regional diversities and giving the 
States/UTs some flexibility, as is currently being done under the 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana. 
Furthermore, they note that the Department’s reply does not reveal 
anything new than what they know and the steps taken to revisit and 
revise/review the mechanism of follow up being practiced for liquidation 
of unspent balances by States.  They, therefore, urge the Department to 
review this mechanism urgently and introduce correctives so as to 
liquidate unspent balances at the earliest.  They also reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that clear cut instructions at the highest level be issued 
to States to desist parking funds meant for the Schemes of the 
Department to tide over their ways and means position leading to  funds 
meant for Schemes remaining unspent.  The Committee are pretty 
sanguine that if all concerned act upon their instant recommendation in 
real earnest, this sector would witness an improvement in their economic 
status during the next five years i.e. th e Twelfth Plan period (2012 -17) 
resulting in not only the animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sector 
getting its rightful due, but also be able to standout as another sunshine 
sector of our economy. 
 
Schemes in Eleventh Plan 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.34) 
 

13 
 
1.8 The Committee observed that out of 15 Schemes proposed for 
implementation, three major schemes of the Department viz. National Dairy 
Plan, Food Safety and Traceability and Strengthening Livestock Extension and 
Delivery System were yet to be appr oved even in the terminal year of the 
Eleventh Plan. The Committee had recommended quick and conclusive action 
on all the three pending Schemes, so that as assured by the Department, the 
implementation proper of these Schemes begins at least in the last ye ar of the 
Eleventh Plan. 
1.9 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that the 
proposal for National Dairy Plan was considered by Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) on 25.07.2011. The estimated outlay of the scheme as 
recommended by EFC is Rs .2242 crore comprising Rs.1584 as IDA credit, 
Rs.176 crore as Government of India share, Rs.282 crore as share of End 
Implementing Agencies (EIAs) that will implement the project in participating 
States and about Rs.200 crore by NDDB and its subsidiaries f or providing 
technical and implementation support to the project. A note for Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs is under preparation and the same will be 
circulated shortly. 
This Department had approached FAO to devise a strategy for animal 
identification and traceability system in India.  The FAO had sent to the 
Department a study proposal under technical cooperation programme on 
Animal Identification and Traceability (AI&T) system for India. The proposal 
has been accepted in the Department and accordin gly now funds have been 
released to FAO for Government of India contribution to the project The TCP 
has a total outlay of Rs. 1.82 crores out of which Indian share is Rs. 1.1 crore.  

14 
 
An amount of Rs. 1.0 crore has already been released to FAO and the balan ce 
of Rs. 10 lakh will be released in December –January, 2011.  The Technical 
Cooperation (TCP) has seven months duration under which FAO will draft a 
strategy and an action plan for an animal identification and traceability system 
in India. The recommendat ions in terms of the strategy and action plan for 
AI&T are expected to be available in seven months period (i.e. February, 2012) 
and scheme in the form of a pilot project is expected to be formulated within 
this financial year (2011 -12) in one or two state s. The scheme shall be 
implemented in phased manner over a period of ten years. 
The EFC on Livestock Extension and Delivery Services was circulated 
to the appraisal agencies and comments were received from all the agencies. 
The proposal included creation of a large number of posts at Central and State 
level which was to be curtailed to a desirable level. Accordingly, a Brain 
Storming session was held on 16 -7-2010 under the Chairpersonship of Joint 
Secretary (Extension). On the basis of the Brainstorming ses sion, the number 
of vacancies was reduced to a more reasonable level. The revised EFC was 
circulated to the appraisal agencies on 31.1.2011. The meeting of the SFC/ 
EFC was taken on 05.05.2011 in New Delhi. The representative of the 
Planning Commission who also attended this meeting expressed the view that 
being the last year of 11th Plan, no new schemes may be taken up in 2011 -12. 
Planning Commission also advised to take this up as a part of one of the 
ongoing CSS scheme namely `Intensive Dairy Development  Programme’. 
DADF is of the view that the proposed new scheme on Livestock Extension 
cannot be clubbed with any of the ongoing CSS whether it is in the dairy, 
fishery or small ruminants sector. In order to give it a significant boost, DADF 

15 
 
would like to ta ke up the new scheme as a stand -alone proposal. Discussion 
with Planning Commission is going on and efforts are made to launch the 
scheme early in 12th Plan. 
 
1.10 The Committee’s anguish at the present system of according multi 
level clearances to a scheme before it gets implemented, which has been 
repeatedly conveyed by them to the Department as well as Planning 
Commission, Ministry of Finance during the course of the Eleventh Plan 
period seems to have fallen on deaf ears.  This is epitomized by the 
status of the three schemes i.e. National Dairy Plan, Food Safety and 
Traceability and Strengthening Livestock Extension and Delivery System,  
conveyed by the Department through their Action Taken Notes which is 
not vastly different from the status intimated to  them by the Department 
at the time of examination of Demands For Grants 2011 -12.  The National 
Dairy Plan is still stuck at approvals stage as a note for Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs is under preparation to be circulated 
shortly.  This is so, whe n the Twelfth Five Year Plan is  knocking at the 
doors for implementation from 1 April, 2012.  The fate of the scheme of 
Food Safety and Traceability is the same as it was proposed to be 
formulated within this fiscal and that too as a pilot project with a limited 
coverage.  The scheme of Strengthening Livestock Extension and 
Delivery System is also likely to be launched early in the Twelfth Plan.  In 
view of tohe adverse impact of this prolonged delay in granting multi 
level clearance to a scheme in terms o f staggering of timelines, cost 
overruns and back loading of funds etc. the Committee once again urge 

16 
 
the Planning Commission to take up this issue seriously while 
deliberating upon the modalities and framework for the Twelfth Plan, so 
as to streamline thi s process and reduce the time lines for approval of a 
new scheme for its implementation at least in the Twelfth Plan period. 
Allocations to the Animal Husbandry Sector 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.27) 
 
1.11 The Committee observed that the allocation of the Department in the 
last three financial years had been reduced at the RE stage and the 
Department was not even able to spend this reduced allocation. They also 
noted that animal husbandry sector holds immens e promise and potential for 
the welfare of the deprived sections of our population including small and 
marginal farmers, the rural landless, the urban poor. More importantly, it can 
provide the much needed financial help to the women folk of these segments  
of society. They were constrained to note that the Department, in spite of being 
in existence for decades together have not even been able to create a sound 
financial base for the sector and have regularly failed to show case the sector 
in its full potent ial and dimensions to the planners and policy makers. The 
Committee, had therefore, desired the Department to work out a detailed  
roadmap to project the animal husbandry sector in its entirety so that it could 
claim its rightful place in the economy and t he developmental process and 
expected all alacrity in this regard from the Department and hoped that they 
would do the needful when the Twelfth Five Year Plan is being formulated. 
1.12 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that the  
schemes of the Department are basically intended to assist the States in the 
development of infrastructure and provide policy directives for promotion of 

17 
 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sectors.  Therefore, the Department 
constantly takes up the m atter with States for quick absorption of funds and 
thus to spend the entire allocations. However, the Department has developed 
the roadmap for boosting the Animal Husbandry Sector in 12 th Plan document 
which is to be finalized by Planning Commission. 
1.13 The Committee note with regret the tone and tenor of the 
Department’s reply wherein they have shrugged off their responsibility 
on to the States/UTs by advancing the argument that the schemes of the 
Department are basically intended to assist the States i n the 
development of infrastructure and provide policy directives for 
promotion of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sectors.  In their 
considered opinion, the Department should not only give policy 
directives but also handhold and work in unison wi th the States to 
achieve the best possible results.  They are however glad to be informed 
that the Department though  have belatedly adopted a pro -active 
approach by developing the roadmap for boosting the Animal Husbandry 
Sector in the Twelfth Plan docume nt which is to be finalized by the 
Planning Commission.  They, therefore, desire the Department to get the 
same approved by the Planning Commission at the earliest and circulate 
it to all implementing agencies at the earliest so that all are in readiness 
to implement the Twelfth Five Year Plan from the date of its inception.   
They, however, would also like to be apprised of the details of the 
roadmap so developed at the earliest 
 
UTILISATION OF ALLOCATED FUNDS IN ANIMAL HUSBANDRY SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.28) 

18 
 
 
1.14 The Committee noted the under -utilization of funds during the last three 
years and opined that unless the Department gear themselves up 
appropriately, it would again be difficult for them to spend the allocated amount 
and this would ultim ately lead not only to reductions at the RE stage but also 
lead to the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance forming a definite 
opinion about the absorption capacity of the Schemes of the Department. The 
Committee, had therefore, desired the Depa rtment to schedule their spending 
and releases diligently and in close coordination with State Governments and 
other user agencies to ensure full utilisation of the allocated amount. 
 
1.15 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that as on 12 th 
December 2011, the Department has incurred the expenditure to the tune of 
Rs. 510.88 crore against the allocated sum of Rs. 874.36 crore for the Animal 
Husbandry Sector. The Department is confident to utilize the allocated funds 
during the current finan cial year. The Department is also monitoring the full 
utilization of funds through weekly expenditure review meetings, video 
conferencing with the States, State visits by the senior officers of this 
department for regular correspondence with the State Offi cials on 
implementation of the Schemes.  
1.16 The Committee do not share the confidence and the optimism of 
the Department of being able to utilize the entire allocation of Rs.874.36  
crore for the Animal Husbandry Sector when their utilization of funds as  
on 12 December, 2011 is only Rs. 510.88 crore i.e. 58.43% only, thus 
leaving about 41% of the allocation to be utilized during the last quarter 
of the current fiscal.  They apprehend that this level of utilization of funds 

19 
 
up to 12 December, 2011 might ha ve prompted Ministry of Finance to 
reduce the allocation at RE stage.  Guided by the past performance of the 
Department of the first four fiscals, the Committee are of the firm opinion 
that this year too, the final utilization would be on the lines of the pattern 
witnessed in the years gone by,  In the event, the Department are able to 
utilize the balance 41% during the last quarter of this fiscal, they also 
further apprehend adverse criticism on breach of set ceilings by Ministry 
of Finance in relation to last quarter/March end utilization levels.  The 
Committee, therefore, exhort the Department to ensure that utilization of 
funds by the implementing agencies not only picks up, but is also evenly 
spread through all four quarters of a fiscal, at least in the  Twelfth Five 
Year Plan which commences from 1 April, 2012.  This will enforce 
financial discipline among the State/UTs and will lead to lesser reduction 
of BE funds at RE stage. 
 
Poultry Development 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.29) 
 
1.17 The Committee noted  that in the Eleventh Plan, the Department had 
proposed the Scheme for Establishment of Poultry Estate in six estates though 
the EFC gave approval to only two estates viz. one broiler and one layer 
estate. While the broiler one is a proposal of Government of Sikkim, the layer 
one is a proposal of Government of Orissa. Delay in commencement of these 
two pilot projects is affecting the likely expansion of the Scheme in other States 
/ areas.  In view the high hopes expressed by the Department at the time of the 
examination of the Demands for Grants (2011 -12) as also the previous one, 
the Committee desired that the evaluation of the Scheme be done at the 

20 
 
earliest available opportunity, so that the further course of action is accordingly 
decided. 
 
1.18 In their A ction Taken Note the Department have stated that as Desired 
by the Committee, the evaluation of the ‘Poultry Estate’ component will be 
initiated as soon as the estates come into operation. 
 
1.19 The Committee are concerned to note that the Scheme for 
establishment of Poultry Estate one in Sikkim and the other in Odisha, 
according to the action taken note are yet to be operationalised 
whereupon their evaluation as earlier desired by them could be initiated.  
The Committee at the cost of sounding  repetitive,  express their strong 
displeasure on the tardy implementation of even the curtailed scheme on 
a pilot basis.  They, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
the scheme be implemented without any further delay so as to enable its 
evaluation an d further expansion to other States as envisaged earlier.  
They would like to be informed of the progress made in this direction. 
Dairy Sector 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.34) 
 
1.20 The Department is primarily involved in promotion of dairying activities 
in non -Operation Flood areas where they are assisting building up of 
cooperative infrastructure, revitalisation of sick dairy cooperative federations 
and creation of infrastructure in  the States for production of quality milk and 
milk products and are implementing four Schemes in the Dairy Sector. The 
Committee noted that during the last three Fiscals (upto 28 February, 2011), 
Dairying Sector could hardly spend Rs.250.00 crore or so pr imarily because 

21 
 
the National Dairy Plan (NDP) was in limbo all these years and this year since 
a sum of Rs.100.00 crore has been earmarked for NDP. The allocation has 
accordingly more than doubled to Rs.200.25 crore for Dairy Development.  
This being the terminal year of the Eleventh Plan, the Committee exhorted the 
Department to fully utilise this entire amount so that not only NDP is kick -
started at last but  sufficient funds  are also made available for the Dairy Sector 
by the Planning Commission in the Twelfth Plan. 
1.21 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that the Table 
below summarizes the financial performance of the Dairy Development 
schemes including Delhi Milk Scheme (DMS) Sector during the preceding 
three Fiscals and the BE in the current Fiscal: 
       (Rs. in Crore) 
*upto 21st November, 2011 
As against the Budget Estimate of Rs 289.83 crore during the last three 
years an amount of Rs 268.98 crore was released under Dairy Development 
schemes  indicating the about 93% of the BE  has been spent. During the 
current year 2011 -12 against Budget Esti mate of Rs 250.25 crore (which 
includes  budget provision  of Rs 100 crore under National Dairy Plan (NDP)  
the scheme is yet to be implemented) an amount of Rs.119.35 has been 
YEAR BE RE Actual Expenditure  
2008-09 98.99 99.09 97.90 
2009-10 102.09 90.23 85.93 
2010-11 88.75 88.75 85.15 
2011-12 250.25 - 119.35* 

22 
 
released upto 21st November, 2011 indicating expenditure of  48 % of the BE( 
79.4% excluding outlay of NDP) .  
The proposal for approval of National Dairy Plan (NDP) was considered 
by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on 25.07.2011. The estimated 
outlay of the scheme as recommended by EFC is Rs.2242 crore comprising 
Rs.1584 as IDA credit, Rs.176 crore as GoI share, Rs.282 crore as share of 
End Implementing Agencies (EIAs) that will implement the project in 
participating States and about Rs.200 crore by NDDB and its subsidiaries for 
providing technical and implementation support to t he project. A note for 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs is under preparation and the same will 
be circulated shortly. However, as the NDP is expected to be launched during 
December, 2011 the revised budget estimate proposed by Department is 
Rs.25.00 c rore. The revised budget estimate for the Dairy Development 
schemes has been proposed to be Rs.216.40 crore by the Department. The 
revised budget for Department is yet to be finalized by the Department of 
Expenditure. 
1.22 The following figures were furnis hed by the Department on Dairy 
Sector Schemes at the time of examination of Demands  For Grants    
2011-12: 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year  BE RE Actual 
2008-09  98.00 98.10 97.90 
2009-10 101.10 89.24 85.93 

23 
 
2010-11  87.76 87.56 64.49* 
2011-12 200.25   
 Upto 28 February, 2011 
A closer look at the BE and RE allocations in respect of Dairy Sector 
Schemes as shown above vis -à-vis the figures indicated by the 
Department ini the action taken notes reveals a very disturbing trend in 
that the figures under the head both  in BE and RE for the years 2008 -09 
and 2009 -10 have been changed.  These changes, however, are not 
confined too updating the actual figures for the year 2010 -11 to March, 
2011 as the final figures as at the end of March, 2011 would not have 
been available.  As their understanding of the extant procedures stands, 
the allocations at RE stage are final for the fiscal in respect of any 
scheme.  What is furthermore disconcerting is that the Department has 
also changed the BE figures of the years 2008-09 to 2011-12.  It would not 
be out of context to point out that based on these very figures, the 
performance of the Department was commented upon by them in the 
Twenty Fourth Report.  The attempt by the Department to negate and 
nullify their recommendation by this methodology is disconcerting and a 
highly deplorable practice.  They, therefore, unequivocally condemn this 
practice aimed at shoring up their spending performances of the years 
gone by.  The present action is a serious matter and they would like the 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance to probe the matter further 
and submit a detailed Report to them through the Department.  They 
further desire the Department not to club the report sought by them from 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance with replies to other 

24 
 
recommendation contained in this report on which no action from them 
is called for. 
1.23 The repeated procrastination on the part of the agencies involved 
in granting clearance to the National Dairy Plan Scheme causes them 
deep anguish.  T he development of Dairy Sector in spite of its better 
performance is being hindered by bureaucratic delays reflects very 
poorly on the Government and is bewildering.  They further shudder to 
contemplate the fate of those schemes whose performance is below par.  
No wonder, the overall utilization of funds by the Department during the 
course of the Eleventh Five Year Plan has been found wanting.  Keeping 
in view the fact that India is a world leader in milk production, the 
Committee impress upon the Departmen t to get the National Dairy Plan 
implemented at the earliest to not only ensure optimum utilization of 
funds, but also strive for increased allocation for the Dairy Sector during 
the Twelfth Plan period to maintain India’s status as a world leader in 
milk production. 
Delhi Milk Scheme 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.37) 
 
1.24 The Committee had noted that due to mismanagement, continued 
neglect of affairs of the Organisation, obsolescence of plant and machinery, 
the DMS continued to make losses year after year and though the Government 
have been toying with the idea of corporati zation of DMS for quite sometime 
now, they have not achieved any success.  Resultantly, DMS continues to 
suffer and is not able to function at its optimal best in stark contrast to other 

25 
 
players in milk and dairy products market.  The Committee had  felt t hat the 
approach of the Government with regards to handling the problems faced by 
DMS is far from reality.  Instead of the time consuming process of 
corporatization, the Committee felt that DMS can be turned around by a one 
time infusion of capital for acq uisition of State -of-the-art machinery and 
equipment and  reiterated that needful be done by the Government at the 
earliest so as to ensure that DMS is restored to a flourishing, profit making 
entity like Mother Dairy and others. 
1.25 The Department in the ir Action Taken Note have stated that a Cabinet 
note on Corporatization of DMS is under finalization with the Department. The 
proposed corporatization would enable the DMS to run its affairs on 
commercial lines with flexibility in decision making. 
For cont inuity of operations of DMS for processing of milk and 
manufacturing of milk products and Upgradation and modernization of DMS 
plant/acquisition of state of the art machinery and equipments, the funds are 
required for purchase / replacement machinery& equi pments, construction of 
booths, civil & electrical works and product diversification activities to the 
extent of Rs. 100 crore approximate. 
1.26 The Committee are shocked at the shoddy treatment being meted 
out to Delhi Milk Scheme by the Department as wel l as absence of urgent 
measures to help turn around the fortunes of DMS. What aggravates 
them further is the fact that while DMS is languishing presently, the dairy 
sector is witnessing a period of high growth as is evident from the 
diversification of dair y products that are being offered buy the other 
players in this sector.  The ever increasing brand value of Mother Dairy is 

26 
 
a poignant example.  The stand of the Ministry that a Cabinet note on 
corporatization of DMS is under finalization with the Department does not 
pass muster as in their considered opinion this process has not only 
become time consuming but also has not been able to deliver the desired 
results in quick time.  They again impress upon the Department to break 
free from their rigid mindset in devising a viable turnaround plan for DMS 
and act upon their instant recommendation of one time infusion of 
capital for acquisition of State-of-art machinery and equipment.  They are 
of the firm opinion that once this is done DMS would definitely be able  to 
establish its brand identity and develop a brand equity in the dairying 
sector in the long run. 
 
  

27 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.4) 
 
 The Committee note that the Action Taken Notes regarding the action 
taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the Seventh 
Report of the Committee were furnished by the Government within the 
stipulated three months. Similarly the statement of the Minister under Direction 
73 A was made within the stipulated six months period. The analysis of the 
action taken by the Government reveals that 78% Recommendations have 
been implemented. 11% Recommendations have not been  implemented and 
an equal percentage of Recommendations are in various stages of 
implementation. The Committee desire the Government to take conclusive 
action in respect of the six Recommendations commented upon in their 
Eighteenth Report and furnish furth er action taken notes to the Committee 
expeditiously. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department is now implementing the schemes on National Animal 
Disease Reporting System (NADRS), National Control Programme of Peste 
des Petits Ruminants (NCPPPR), Strengthening of Existing Hospitals  / 

28 
 
Dispensaries and National Control Programme of Brucellosis (NCPB) as part 
of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Livestock Health & Diseases Control” with 
effect from August, 2010.  
As regards Food Safety and Traceability, the recommendations in terms 
of the strategy and action plan for Animal Identification and Traceability (AI&T) 
are expected to be available in seven months period (i.e. February, 2012) and 
scheme in the form of a pilot project are  expected to be formulat ed within this 
financial year (2011 -12) in one or two states. The scheme shall be 
implemented in phased manner over a period of ten years.  
 
The EFC on Livestock Extension and Delivery Services was circulated 
to the appraisal agencies and comments were rec eived from all the agencies. 
The proposal included creation of a large number of posts at Central and State 
level which was to be curtailed to a desirable level. Accordingly, a Brain 
Storming session was held on 16 -7-2010 under the Chairpersonship of Joint  
Secretary (Extension). On the basis of the Brainstorming session, the number 
of vacancies was reduced to a more reasonable level. The revised EFC was 
circulated to the appraisal agencies on 31.1.2011. The meeting of the SFC/ 
EFC was taken on 05.05.2011 at  3.00 PM at Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi. The 
representative of the Planning Commission who also attended this meeting 
expressed the view that being the last year of 11th Plan, no new schemes may 
be taken up in 2011-12. Planning Commission also advised to take this up as a 
part of one of the ongoing CSS scheme namely `Intensive Dairy Development 
Programme’. DADF is of the view that the proposed new scheme on Livestock 
Extension cannot be clubbed with any of the ongoing CSS whether it is in the 

29 
 
dairy, fishery or  small ruminants sector. In order to give it a significant boost, 
DADF would like to take up the new scheme as a stand -alone proposal. 
Discussion with Planning Commission is going on and efforts are made to 
launch the scheme early in 12th Plan. 
 
Additional funds were not sought at RE stage under “Rural backyard 
Poultry Development” component of “poultry Development” scheme in 2010 -11 
as most of the States who were given the nearly 50% of the sanctioned 
amount as first installments as per Integrated Finance’ s direction could not 
furnish the utilization Certificates in time. As neither the second installments 
were released for most proposals sanctioned in 2010 -11 nor were any suitable 
proposals left to be considered, therefore, there was no scope for enhanced 
allocation.  
 
Regarding utilization of funds provided under MPLAD Scheme for 
construction of new dispensaries, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation has clarified that construction of veterinary hospitals is 
permissible under MPLAD funds subject to MPLAD guidelines.  Accordingly, 
States have been informed to take up/dovetail this activity with the MPLAD 
funds. 
 
This Department had approached FAO to devise a strategy for animal 
identification and traceability system in India.  The FAO had s ent to the 
Department a study proposal under technical cooperation programme on 
Animal Identification and Traceability (AI&T) system for India. The proposal 

30 
 
has been accepted in the Department and accordingly now funds have been 
released to FAO for Governm ent of India contribution to the project The TCP 
has a total outlay of Rs. 1.82 crores out of which Indian share is Rs. 1.1 crore.  
An amount of Rs. 1.0 crore has already been released to FAO and the balance 
of Rs. 10 lakh will be released in December –January, 2011.  The Technical 
Cooperation (TCP) has seven months duration to draft a strategy and an 
action plan for an animal identification and traceability system in India. The 
project agreement has been entered into between GOI  and FAO. FAO has 
started wor k on the project by initiating the recruitment of International 
Consultant with the approval of Ministry of External affairs. The process for 
recruitment of domestic consultants is under way. The action plan for Avian 
Influenza and Traceability (AI&T) unde r the project is this expected by July, 
2012 and scheme in the form of a pilot project is expected to be formulated 
within this financial year (2012 -13) in one or two states. The scheme shall be 
implemented in phased manner over a period of ten years.  
 
In order to run DMS as a commercial entity and make it financially 
viable, the Union Cabinet has given ‘in principle approval” to the Department’s 
proposal for corporatization of DMS. The Department has entrusted National 
Dairy Development Board (NDDB) with the task of finalization of modalities for 
corporatization of DMS. The NDDB in turn have engaged M/s IDBI Capital to 
conduct a feasibility study and submit a draft assessment report. The 
Department will bring a comprehensive proposal on corporatization of DMS 
before the Union Cabinet for formal approval. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 

31 
 
 
Annual Plan 2011-12 
(Recommendation Para Nos.: 2.30, 2.31, 2.32 and 2.33) 
 The Committee note that the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries is entrusted with the task of livestock production, preservation, 
protection and improvement of stocks, dairy development, matters relating to 
Delhi Milk Scheme, the National Dairy Development Board, Fisheries and the 
National Fisheries Developme nt Board. In the light of the crucial role that the 
animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors play in the socio -economic 
development of the Country and more importantly the sustenance of the 
majority of rural populace, the job of the Department is c learly laid out. They 
have to work out well thought off Schemes for holistic development of these 
three sectors and implement them in tandem with the State Governments with 
the aim of creating sustainable livelihoods for the rural populace and fringe 
elements in the urban and semi urban areas; socio -economic development, 
ensuring availability of affordable nutrition to public at large, etc. The animal 
husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors are contributing in significant 
measure to the total value of out put of agriculture and allied sectors. In fact 
their contribution in the recent past in this regard has been 29.7 percent of the 
total value. The fact that milk at Rs.2,08,809 crore is contributing far more than 
the contribution of paddy at Rs.1,35,307 cro re ought to be an eye -opener to 
the planners and policy makers. In such an encouraging situation, the 
development of animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors would have 
been a win -win situation for all. However, as the subsequent narrative will 
prove this could be sunshine sector has suffered due to continued apathy of 
the planners and policy makers alike. 

32 
 
The Committee note that the Department were allocated a sum of 
Rs.8,174.00 crore for the Eleventh Plan against Rs.17,695.00 crore proposed 
by them. Based on their expected requirements, the Department have sought 
a sum of Rs.8,998.00 crore during the five years of the Eleventh Plan. 
Unfortunately, however, they have been allocated only Rs.5,910.00 crore for 
the purpose.  This is 72% of the approved  allocation and less than 66% of the 
funds sought over the five years of the Plan by the Department.  Thus, the 
Department instead of an average allocation of Rs.1,635.00 crore in each year 
of the Plan got sums of Rs.910.00 crore, Rs.1,000.00 crore, Rs.1,100.00 crore, 
Rs.1,300.00 crore and Rs.1,600.00 crore as outlay in the five years of the 
Eleventh Plan.  It is thus apparent that they have barely touched the average 
annual allocation of Rs.1,635.00 crore only in the last year of the Plan. 
 As if the treat ment meted out by the planers was not enough, the 
Department on their part, have also not acquitted themselves well in the 
matter.  Out of the Rs.4,310 crore allocated to them during the four completed 
years of Eleventh Plan, they have been able to spend a  sum of Rs.3,677 odd 
crore only.  Even if they are able to spend the entire Rs.1,600.00 crore 
allocated to them this year  they would be able to touch only 89% of the 
drastically reduced actual allocation of Rs.5,910.00 crore.  The Committee 
understand tha t the delays in clearance of the Schemes of the Department 
meant for Eleventh Plan was an important factor in the underutilization of the 
earmarked funds.  However, they are not convinced by the other reasons 
extended by the Department for the less expendi ture.  It is a well known fact 
since the planning process commenced decades ago that release of funds 
cannot be evenly distributed throughout the year.  The Department have to, 

33 
 
therefore, time the availability and release of funds keeping in view these 
almost permanent constraints.  Besides, they have to also ensure that the 
various Schemes being implemented by them are also devised in such a way 
that they continue unimpeded in the given scenario.  The second reason 
extended by the Department about the Stat es retaining huge unspent 
balances, thereby, forcing the current financial arrangements go awry, is also 
not an insurmountable problem.  The unspent balances with the States 
amounted to Rs.518 crore plus on 1 April, 2009 and rose sharply to Rs.595 
odd cror e as on 1 April, 2010.  It is disconcerting to observe that unspent 
balances amount to half the annual allocation of the Department in the first four 
years of the ongoing Plan and is definitely a matter of grave concern.  It is 
apparent that the present me chanism for follow -up being practiced by the 
Department for liquidation of unspent balances by the States has not served 
the intended purpose.  The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to 
revisit this mechanism and introduce necessary correctives at  the earliest so 
that the States are persuaded to liquidate the unspent balances in a time 
bound manner and further release of funds from the Department continues 
unhindered. They, therefore, desire the Department to initiate corrective 
measures in this re spect well before the next Plan commences to avoid its 
recurrence and apprise them of the action taken in the matter. 
 Another difficulty being faced by the Department is that the State 
Governments routinely park their funds so as to help them in their way s and 
means position.  This also leads to funds remaining unspent.  Though a matter 
of concern, the Committee feel that this situation can also be overcome by 
regular online monitoring of the funds released by the Department so that they 

34 
 
are utilized only for the designated purposes.  While recommending such a 
system be put in place, post haste the Committee also desire the Department 
to also issue unambiguous instructions at the highest level to all State 
Governments pointing out how the unspent balances, ultimately lead to the 
curtailing of their further funding and for desisting them from parking of the 
funds released by the Department for implementation of their Schemes.   
 Another reason the Department attributed for less expenditure was late 
receipt of proposals and their not being structured as per the requirements of 
the Department.  The Committee, however, do not tend to agree with the 
Department on this count also.  Sufficient advance planning as well as State 
specific orientation of the Schemes to some extent alongwith some flexibility in 
implementation would in their considered opinion go a long way in streamlining 
the timely submission of properly structured proposals.  Both for their Central 
Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes, the Com mittee would like 
the Department to seriously consider whether a structure akin to Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana would be a better option than the existing strait jacket 
pattern which doesn’t provide the desired leeway to the executing agencies. 
 The Commi ttee also note that for the ongoing Fiscal, the Department 
have been allocated a sum of Rs.1,600 crore against Rs.1,953 crore (approx) 
sought by them.  With a view to ensure that maximum possible funds are 
utilized during the year, the Department have take n a slew of measures 
including closer coordination with State Governments and other implementing 
agencies; regional review meetings, visits by officers to States to monitor 
progress of Schemes, etc.  The Committee are sure that these measures 
alongwith tho se recommended by them would enable the Department to not 

35 
 
only utilize the allocated amount fully but also help them in obtaining additional 
funds at the RE stage as well as for the Twelfth Plan. 
Reply of the Government 
Planning Commission has constituted the Working Group of Animal 
Husbandry and Working Group on Fisheries for this department for the 12 th 
Five Year Plan. Both working has submitted the report to Steering Committee 
on Agriculture and Allied Sector. Based on the recommendations given by 
Steering Committee, the department will consider the recommendations in 
respect of the finalization of the 12 th Five Year Plan. The Department is 
partially support to RKVY pattern in respect of implementation of schemes. 
However, the activities which are already  funded by ongoing/existing 
schemes/programmes of this Department should not be funded to avoid 
duplication of resources and efforts. The Department is confident of full 
utilization of the allocated funds during the current fiscal. The department is 
regularly monitoring the full utilization of funds and monitoring the progress of 
the schemes through weekly expenditure review meetings, video conferencing 
with the States, State visits by the senior officers of this department.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of   
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
Schemes in Eleventh Plan 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.34) 
 During the course of the examination of the Demands for  Grants   
(2011-12) the Committee were informed that several Schemes of the 
Department have been scaled down due to paucity of funds. Moreover, out of 
the 15 Schemes proposed by the Department for implementation during the 
Eleventh Plan 3 are yet to be san ctioned. The Department, however, expects 
to roll out these Schemes to take place in the Eleventh Plan, itself. The 
Committee are really dismayed with the manner in which planning and 
approval of Schemes has been handled by the planners and the Government 
in the Eleventh Plan. They have extensively commented upon this aspect in 
almost all their previous Reports on the Demands for Grants from the year 
2009-10 onwards pertaining to the Ministries / Departments under their 
jurisdiction. To recapitulate, the Eleventh Plan Document was released in May, 
2008, whereas, the Plan had already commenced from 1 April, 2007. This led 
to disastrous consequences, as planning and approvals got staggered causing 
severe delays in actual implementation of the Schemes. The very same reason 
has manifest itself in the instant case, when three major Schemes of the 
Department viz. National Dairy Plan, Food Safety and Traceability and 
Strengthening Livestock Extension and Delivery System are yet to be 
approved when we are in the terminal year of the Plan. Having been witness to 
what happened to the developmental process during the Eleventh Plan, the 
Committee recommend quick and conclusive action on all the three pending 
Schemes, so that as assured by the Department, the implementatio n proper of 
these Schemes begins at least in the last year of the Eleventh Plan. 

37 
 
Reply of the Government 
The proposal was considered by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) 
on 25.07.2011. The estimated outlay of the scheme as recommended by EFC 
is Rs.2242 c rore comprising Rs.1584 as IDA credit, Rs.176 crore as 
Government of India share, Rs.282 crore as share of End Implementing 
Agencies (EIAs) that will implement the project in participating States and 
about Rs.200 crore by NDDB and its subsidiaries for prov iding technical and 
implementation support to the project. A note for Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs is under preparation and the same will be circulated shortly. 
This Department had approached FAO to devise a strategy for animal 
identification and traceability system in India.  The FAO had sent to the 
Department a study proposal under technical cooperation programme on 
Animal Identification and Traceability (AI&T) system for India. The proposal 
has been accepted in the Department and accordingly now  funds have been 
released to FAO for Government of India contribution to the project The TCP 
has a total outlay of Rs. 1.82 crores out of which Indian share is Rs. 1.1 crore.  
An amount of Rs. 1.0 crore has already been released to FAO and the balance 
of R s. 10 lakh will be released in December –January, 2011.  The Technical 
Cooperation (TCP) has seven months duration under which FAO will draft a 
strategy and an action plan for an animal identification and traceability system 
in India. The recommendations in  terms of the strategy and action plan for 
AI&T are expected to be available in seven months period (i.e. February, 2012) 
and scheme in the form of a pilot project is expected to be formulated within 

38 
 
this financial year (2011 -12) in one or two states. The scheme shall be 
implemented in phased manner over a period of ten years. 
The EFC on Livestock Extension and Delivery Services was circulated 
to the appraisal agencies and comments were received from all the agencies. 
The proposal included creation of a large number of posts at Central and State 
level which was to be curtailed to a desirable level. Accordingly, a Brain 
Storming session was held on 16 -7-2010 under the Chairpersonship of Joint 
Secretary (Extension). On the basis of the Brainstorming session, t he number 
of vacancies was reduced to a more reasonable level. The revised EFC was 
circulated to the appraisal agencies on 31.1.2011. The meeting of the SFC/ 
EFC was taken on 05.05.2011 at 3.00 PM at Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi. The 
representative of the Plan ning Commission who also attended this meeting 
expressed the view that being the last year of 11th Plan, no new schemes may 
be taken up in 2011-12. Planning Commission also advised to take this up as a 
part of one of the ongoing CSS scheme namely `Intensiv e Dairy Development 
Programme’. DADF is of the view that the proposed new scheme on Livestock 
Extension cannot be clubbed with any of the ongoing CSS whether it is in the 
dairy, fishery or small ruminants sector. In order to give it a significant boost, 
DADF would like to take up the new scheme as a stand -alone proposal. 
Discussion with Planning Commission is going on and efforts are made to 
launch the scheme early in 12th Plan. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of 
Chapter I of this Report. 

39 
 
 
Twelfth Plan – Systemic Improvements 
(Recommendation Para Nos.: 2.35 and 2.36) 
 
 In view of the glitches faced during the Eleventh Plan in implementation 
proper of the various Schemes of the Government, the Committee had 
recommended a slew of measures in their Second Report on the Demand for 
Grants (2009-10) of the Department. The Planning Commission were also in 
full agreement with the Recommendations of Comm ittee about going for a 
complete overhaul of the extant system of planning and approval of the 
Schemes. The Committee note with satisfaction that this time the Planning 
Commission have already prepared the Approach Paper for the Twelfth Plan 
and the same h as been presented in a meeting of the full Planning 
Commission chaired by the Prime Minister on 21 April, 2011. Eleven Working 
Groups have also been constituted on various aspects of agriculture and allied 
sectors for formulation of Twelfth Plan. Two of th ese Groups are for the 
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries. The Committee 
further note that these Groups will submit their reports by 30 September, 2011.  
Their reports will be considered by a Steering Committee, whose report will be 
the basis for the formulation of the Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Committee 
have also been apprised that the Planning Commission have constituted a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of one of their Member to suggest ways to 
reduce the number of Centrally Sponsored Schemes. 
 The Committee feel that good progress has been made in the direction 
of preparation of the Twelfth Plan. They are happy that there is a concerted 

40 
 
effort being made to reduce the number of Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The 
Committee are in full agreement that a smaller number of Schemes with larger 
allocation and broader objective will expedite sanctioning procedure as 
compared to larger number of Schemes with smaller allocations. The 
Committee are confident that with the present speed of prepar ations, the 
Twelfth Plan will be finalized and got approved from the National Development 
Council in the coming months. They are also confident, that as recommended 
by them in their previous Reports and as reiterated here, the Twelfth Plan will 
be intimate d to the line Ministries / Departments at the most by December, 
2011 so that all preparation are made by them with a view to implement the 
Plan from 1 April, 2012 positively and effectively. The Committee also expect 
the Department to complete all formalities preparatory to implementation of the 
Twelfth Plan well in advance so that not even a day is lost from 1 April, 2012 
on planning and approvals and the Schemes get full five years for their 
implementation. They desire to be apprised of the progress made in this 
direction at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
Noted for compliance. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
Central Sector Schemes  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.30) 
 The Committee are concerned to note that in most of the Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes, the performance of the Department has not been upto 
the mark during 2010 -11.  In fact in at least  six out of twelve Schemes 
analysed by the Committee,  there have been dr astic cuts in the allocations at 

41 
 
the RE stage.  In most of these cases, the Department have attributed low 
demand for funds by various agencies as the reason for the lower utilisation.  
The Committee, however, strongly feel that the lower demand for funds 
perhaps does also reflect on some shortcomings in the structuring of the 
concerned Schemes and planning.  The Department can, therefore, not 
escape some responsibility in this regard.  The BE of Rs. 18.50 crore for 
Livestock Census was almost halved to Rs.  9.36 crore; Control and 
Containment of Avian Influenza witnessed a spiralling down from BE of Rs. 
56.00 crore to RE of Rs.10.53 crore which is more than five times down sizing; 
Integrated Development of Small Ruminants and Rabbits Scheme was 
allocated Rs.  42.00 crore as BE which was curtailed at the RE stage to Rs. 
8.48 crore; the BE of Rs. 3 crore for Piggery Development was slashed to Rs. 
1.86 crore at the RE stage; the Scheme for Salvaging and Rearing of Male 
Buffalo Calves saw its BE of Rs. 27.70 crore  getting reduced to Rs. 5.51 crore; 
and the BE of Rs. 3.00 crore for Food Safety and Traceability Scheme was 
also more than halved to Rs. 1.10 crore at the RE stage. 
 The above narrative speaks volumes of the Department’s capacity to 
plan and manage their finances prudently.  While the user agencies may not 
be generating adequate demand, it is also incumbent on the Department to 
anticipate and plan in a manner that such drastic cuts are avoided to a large 
extent.  The Committee hope the Department will, in view of the experience 
gained over the years, improve upon this aspect of financial planning, so as to 
ensure that funds are managed in a more professional manner and such 
drastic cuts at the RE stage are avoided. 
 

42 
 
Reply of the Government 
1. Livestock Census 
a) At the BE stage (2010 -11), compulsory allocation of Rs.2.39 
crore was made for North-Eastern States  
b) Less requirement of funds was receiv ed from States during   
2010-11. 
 
Efforts are being made to propose realistic BE for the 12 th Five Year 
Plan on the basis of past trend of expenditure. 
 
2. Control and Containment of Avian Influenza: 
As regards to reduction of BE  from Rs.5467.00 crore to RE of Rs.10.53 
crore during 2010 -11, it is stated that  the funds were to be released to the 
United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), for the construction of two 
Bio-Safety Level - 3 (BSL-3) laboratories one each at Guwahati and Pune. The 
funds could not be released to UNOPS for the purpose as the drawing and 
design for the laboratories were not ready.  Now the funds would be released 
during 2011-12. The Department is awaiting the demand of funds from UNOPS 
which is the executive agency for two constructed BSLIII Laboratory..  
3.  Integrated Development of Small Ruminants and Rabbits, Pig  
Development and Salvaging and rearing of Male Buffalo Calves: 
 
Reduction of allocation of the Schemes Integrated Development of 
Small Ruminants and Rabbits, Pig Development and Salvaging and rearing of 
Male Buffalo Calves at RE stage is to be seen as part  of the planning process 
whereby precious Government funds are re -channelized to schemes which 
have higher potential to use them in a particular year. 
As per NABARD’s considered view, credit linked schemes have longer 
take off time than grants -in-aid or su bsidy oriented schemes.  After intensive 

43 
 
review of these schemes with NABARD, State -wise targets have been 
assigned which is showing promising results. 
4.  Food Safety and Traceability: 
 This Department had approached FAO to devise a strategy for animal 
identification and traceability system in India.  The FAO had sent to the 
Department a study proposal under technical cooperation programme on 
Animal Identification and Traceability (AI&T) system for India. The proposal 
has been accepted in the Department an d accordingly now funds have been 
released to FAO for Government of India contribution to the project The TCP 
has a total outlay of Rs. 1.82 crores out of which Indian share is Rs. 1.1 crore.  
An amount of Rs. 1.0 crore has already been released to FAO and the balance 
of Rs. 10 lakh will be released in January, 2012.  The Technical Cooperation 
(TCP) has seven months duration to draft a strategy and an action plan for an 
animal identification and traceability system in India. The project agreement 
has been e ntered into between GOI and FAO. FAO has started work on the 
project by initiating the recruitment of International Consultant with the 
approval of Ministry of External affairs. The process for recruitment of domestic 
consultants is under way. The action p lan for Animal Identification and 
Traceability (AI&T) under the project is thus expected in second half of  2012 
and scheme in the form of a pilot project shall be formulated in the financial 
year (2012-13) in one or two states in a phased manner over a pe riod of ten 
years.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
 
Livestock Health and Diseases Control Programme 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.31) 
 
 The Livestock Diseases and Health Control Programme consisted 
hitherto of four components viz. (a) Assistance to States for Control of Animal 
Diseases (b) National Project on Rinderpest Eradication (c) Professional 

44 
 
Efficiency Development and (d) Foot and M outh Disease Control Programme.  
However, the Committee find that four new components viz. (a) National 
Animal Disease Reporting System (b) National Control Programme on Peste 
des Petits Ruminants (c) Brucellosis and (d) Establishment and Strengthening 
of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries were added to it in August, 2010.  
The Committee observe that this important Scheme was allocated a sum of 
Rs. 1300.00 crore for the Eleventh Plan out of which, a sum of    Rs. 766.56 
crore only i.e. about 59% has been  spent during the first four years of the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan.  The Committee, even while sharing the optimism of 
the Department about being able to spend the entire amount of Rs.395.00 
crore earmarked for the terminal year of the Plan, know that only 89% of the 
earmarked allocation will be spent.  This is not a healthy sign, more so when 
these funds are meant for eight most vital aspects of the animal husbandry 
sector.  The Committee, therefore, recommend, the least the Department can 
do is to utilise funds far more promptly and gainfully so that additional funds 
are sought at the RE stage with a view to utilise as much allocated amount as 
possible. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Total allocation for Livestock Health & Disease Control Scheme for 11 th 
Five Year Plan was Rs 1300.00 crore. However, actual B.E. allocated for the 
Scheme was only 1099.93 crore. The year wise is as under: 
 
 
 
 

45 
 
11th Plan: Allocation, Expenditure and the % of Expenditure: 
(Rs in Crore) 
Year BE Actual Expenditure( 
as on 30.9.2011 
% of Exp. Against 
BE 
2007-08 82.96 122.19 147.29 
2008-09 120.00 147.14 122.62 
2009-10 128.07 139.77 109.14 
2010-11 373.90 353.43 94.53 
2011-12 395.00 212.55 53.81 
11th Plan 1099.93 975.08 88.65 
 
As against the BE of Rs. 1099.93 crore, a sum of Rs. 975. 08 crore has 
been spent. The actual expenditure is always more than the BE in all the 
years. During the current financial year a sum of Rs. 212.55 crore has been 
released against the BE of Rs. 395.0 0 crore (51.84 %) in the first 6 months of 
the year. Additional funds will be sought at RE stage depending on the 
absorption capacity/requirement of the States/UTs.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
 
Inadequacy of Veterinary Infrastructure 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.32, 3.33) 
 
 It is common knowledge that the Veterinary Infrastructure and services 
in the Country are in a pathetic state.  There are only 8732 veterinary hospitals 
and 18830 veterinary dispensaries in the Country .  Most of them even lacking 
in basic facilities and infrastructure.  As admitted by Secretary, Department of  
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries against the prescribed one 
veterinary doctor for every 5000 cattle units there is actually one for 14240  

46 
 
cattle units.  In such a bleak scenario, the Committee had recommended in 
their Seventh Report, which was presented to the Parliament on 24 April, 2010 
that the Government should start a 100% Central Scheme for the purpose.  
They had also recommended that  to begin with one veterinary dispensary be 
established under this Scheme in each block of the Country.  The Department 
it seems had made a presentation before the Planning Commission for 
providing 100% central assistance for the proposed Establishment and  
Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries component of the 
Livestock Health and Disease Control Scheme.  However, the Planning 
Commission modified the funding pattern for the component on 75:25 basis 
Central/State sharing except in the NE Sta tes where the proportion was 90:10.  
This new component is being implemented since August, 2010.  The 
Department on repeated probing has also suggested that the States can also 
avail funds for the purpose under the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana. 
 The Committee further note that during the year 2010 -11 against a BE 
of Rs. 69.00 crore a sum of about Rs. 97.00 crore was provided to the 
States/UTs under the new component.  Furthermore, a sum of Rs. 90.00 crore 
has been earmarked as BE for the component during 2 011-12.  
Notwithstanding the figures doled out and the circumstances explained by the 
Department, the Committee are still of the firm opinion that if the veterinary 
infrastructure and services are to be improved in the Country the Central 
Government has to take the lead admittedly though the veterinary services are 
primarily the responsibility of the State Governments.  The Committee strongly 
feel that the augmentation of veterinary infrastructure and services cannot be 
achieved in a piecemeal manner as the  State Governments cannot ensure a 

47 
 
focussed and integrated pan -India implementation of any Scheme meant for 
the purpose which has some or the other level of contribution from the State 
Government side.  It is, therefore, imperative that the Scheme be imple mented 
in a 100% central assistance pattern.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
Recommendation about having a 100% Central Scheme for the purpose in 
which to begin with one dispensary be established in each block of the 
Country.  This time around t he Committee expect the Department to put forth 
their case before the Planning Commission in a more forceful and purposeful 
manner so that the Scheme as envisaged by them becomes a part of the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to add ress the need for new veterinary hospitals and 
dispensaries and to strengthen/ equip the existing ones suitably, the 
Department has initiated a new component namely; Establishment/ 
Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries (ESVHD) as part of 
Centrally sponsored Scheme  ‘Livestock Health & Disease Control (LH&DC)’ 
since August, 2010.  Financial assistance is provided to States/ UTs on 75:25 
sharing basis between the Centre and States except NE States, where the 
grants are provided on 90:10 (Centre and States) basis.  
Regarding implementation of scheme on a 100% Central Share, it may 
be stated that the Working Group on Animal Husbandry & Dairying will be 
requested to include the proposal for 100% Central Assistance for this 
component in their reco mmendations for the 12 th Plan. The Scheme has been 
well accepted by the States and during 2010 -11, as against the BE of 
Rs.6890.00 lakhs, a sum of Rs.9726.50 lakhs has already been released to the 

48 
 
States/UTs for new construction/strengthening of veterinary  hospitals/ 
dispensaries under this component.  During 2011 -12 under this component, 
provision of Rs 90.00 crore has been kept at B.E. stage and expenditure of Rs 
5725.11 lakhs has already been incurred till 30.9.2011.  No State Government 
has communicated any problem in providing State matching Share under the 
component. However, the scope of the scheme will be enlarged in 12 th Plan for 
further facilities in the hospitals for better healthcare of animals.  
Regarding, establishment of one dispensary at leas t in each block, it is 
stated that establishment of veterinary hospitals, dispensaries, polyclinics etc. 
are the mandate of the States/ Union Territory Governments depending upon 
the livestock population in a particular area and availability of resources.  
However, to address the needs, revamped RKVY scheme namely National 
Agriculture Infrastructure and Assets Development Programme (NAIADP) will 
also fund the establishment of hospitals and dispensaries which is an essential 
infrastructure for animal health services. This will be over and above the 
funding by this department for ESVHD. The State can also avail the MPKLAD 
funds for establishment of veterinary hospitals and dispensaries which have 
already been clarified the States. These various avenues are now  opening up 
for this vital infrastructure in Animal Husbandry Sector.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
 
Incentivising Milk Production 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.35, 3.36) 
 
 The demand of milk and milk products is not only growing f or internal 
consumption but their exports are also growing at a steady rate.  To keep pace 

49 
 
with these growing requirements it is but essential that the production of milk 
stays ahead of the demand. The production of milk has been growing at the 
rate of abo ut 4 million tons per annum but this is not good enough. The 
Committee, however, are disappointed to note that the present environment is 
not conducive for the dairy sector to grow. As the dairying business is mostly 
the vocation of small and marginal farm ers and rural landless labour any 
increase in input costs discourages them from going beyond their own 
requirement and a little more to sell. With almost 70% of the cost of milk being 
attributed to cost of feed and fodder, this attitude is but understandab le. The 
situation is further compounded by the fact that 70% of milch animals are low 
input, low output one. And more than 70% farmers who are involved in dairying 
activities have hardly one to three animals. In such a scenario a two pronged 
approach is ve ry essential for ensuring a decent remuneration to the farmers 
involved in dairying activities. The availability of feed and fodder has to be 
improved manifold from the present levels. And Schemes that place such 
facilities at the disposal of farmer which encourage him to produce more and 
more good quality milk are to be devised and implemented with due 
promptitude. With the Twelfth Plan on the anvil, the Committee desire that a 
distinct roadmap for the purpose may be immediately worked out by the 
Department so that the extant shortcomings on both the counts are attended to 
in the Twelfth Plan. 
 While on the issue of increasing productivity and production of milk, the 
Committee would also like to touch upon the aspect of having a minimum 
support price for mi lk. The representative of the Department informed them 
that as of now there appears to be no thinking on the part of the Government 

50 
 
to have a support price for milk. However, he was one with the Committee on 
the need of ensuring that the farmer is not only  adequately compensated for 
whatever he produces but is also able to make a satisfactory profit on it.  
Though the idea is at the moment at the very nascent stage, the Committee 
would like the Department to consider it in all its ramifications in consultat ion 
with all agencies concerned and revert to the Committee with their views within 
three months of presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
Reply of the Government 
 As desired by the Committee the Department has consulted the 
National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) on the matter. NDDB has made 
the observation  that in case of crops, announcing a minimum support price at 
the beginning of the season helps ensure that fa rmers are provided the 
confidence to sow, so that they receive an assured minimum price for their 
produce. This also helps in contributing to stability at the regional and national 
level, as it helps in maintaining acreages over successive seasons.  
Unlike crops, milk is produced by animals round the year. It is highly 
perishable and needs to be sold by the milk producer twice a day. Where milk 
producers are directly linked to an efficient institutional structure, they receive a 
major share of the price rea lised from the market. Milk producers are 
periodically compensated for increase in cost of production through increase in 
the milk procurement price by the institutional networks to which they are 
affiliated with. Since April 2009, the milk procurement price has been increased 
by as much as Rs. 9 per litre. Also, in the case of quite a few cooperatives and 
some private dairies, milk producers receive technical inputs in the form of 
cattle feed AI delivery services, animal health care services etc. 

51 
 
 As milk is highly perishable and needs to be processed within a few 
hours from milking of the animals, implementing a minimum support price 
would require establishment of a large network of milk handling /processing 
facilities involving millions of milk cans, hund reds of silos to store millions of 
litres of milk, thousands of tankers to transport milk etc for handling the milk 
offered by the producers if they decide to supply it to the agency implementing 
a minimum support price. 
 The organised sector currently han dles only about a third of the 
marketable surplus of milk. Therefore there would be difficulties in enforcing a 
minimum support price, especially for the milk being handled by the 
unorganised sector which includes millions of milk vendors. 
 In view of the above, there would be significant practical difficulties in 
implementing a nation -wide minimum support price for milk and it would also 
introduce an element of distortion in the market if it is implemented. 
 India’s milk production has been growing at near ly twice the rate of 
growth in world’s milk production, resulting in not only it becoming the world’s 
largest milk producing country but also milk becoming the country’s largest 
agricultural commodity in terms of value of output. 
 However in order to furth er incentivise milk production, the dairy sector 
needs to be strengthened through a series of activities such as a) Production 
of high genetic merit bulls; b) Strengthening of existing semen stations/ starting 
new stations to produce high quality disease f ree semen doses; c) Setting up 
viable doorstep AI delivery services based on Standard Operating Procedures 
through a professional service provider, d) Ration Balancing Programme; e) 

52 
 
Demonstrations for fodder development; f) Village based milk procurement 
systems and; g) Capacity building and training. 
 These activities are being envisaged for funding under the National 
Dairy Plan – Phase I (NDP – I) which is in the process of approval. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
Fisheries Sector 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.38) 
 The Fisheries sector provides livelihood to a large section of 
economically weaker sections in the Country.  Approximately, 14.5 million 
people are dependent on this Sector which is not only an important income 
and employme nt generator but also stimulates growth of a number of 
subsidiary industries.  However, as in the case of the other two sectors under 
the jurisdiction of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries, the Fisheries Sector has also not received the necessary impetus so 
that its full potential is exploited.  As admitted by the Department before the 
Committee, there are several challenges facing the sector including need to 
develop sustainable technologies for fin and shell fish culture, fish seed  
certification, yield optimization, infrastructure for harvest and post harvest 
operations to cite a few.  Unfortunately, however, as in the case of animal 
husbandry and dairying, the fisheries sector too has received only a pittance 
as allocations.  Albeit, the Department have not been able to utilize even these 
nominal funds in any of the last three years.  Against the BE of Rs. 215.00 
crore, Rs. 298.50 crore and      Rs. 262.44 crore respectively in 2008-09, 2009-
10 and 2010 -11, the Department was able t o spend Rs. 178.53 crore, Rs. 
272.51 crore and Rs. 195.25 crore (upto 28 February, 2011) only. The 

53 
 
Committee, however, are satisfied to note that for the ongoing Fiscal, the 
Department intend to focus on enhancement of fish production and productivity 
for ensuring sustainability in aquaculture sector, adoption of culture based 
capture fisheries in reservoirs and under -utilized larger water bodies, etc.  
They are also confident that, if these issues are managed in a professional 
manner, the Department would definitely be able to optimally utilize the 
allocation of Rs. 298.00 crore earmarked for the current Fiscal. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department has utilized funds in increasing order for the last three 
years.  The expenditure figure    at the end of the financial year 2010 -11 has 
gone up to Rs.290.12 crore which is more than the amount spent in the 
previous years.  The Department of AHD & Fisheries has taken steps to 
enhance fish production and productivity in t he manner of sustainable 
aquaculture. A recently launched scheme ‘National Mission for Protein 
Supplements’ in which culture based capture fisheries in reservoirs and under -
utilized larger water bodies, fish and fish products would play major role.  In 
addition to meeting the domestic demand, we wish to explore ways to enhance 
our export earning potential in terms of value added products and ornamental 
fish trade.  
The Department has already been utilized, Rs. 169.92 Crore up to 31 -
10-2011 i.e. more than 50% of funds during the current financial year 2011 -12. 
Further the Department would manage all the challenges in a sustainable 
manner and definitely be able to optimally utilize the allocation of Rs. 298.00 
crore earmarked for the current Fiscal.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 

54 
 
National Institute of Fisheries Post Harvest Technology and Training, 
Kochi 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.39) 
 The National Institute of Fisheries Post Harvest Technology and 
Training (NIFPHATT), at Kochi envisag es processing, popularization and test 
marketing of unconventional varieties of fish.  The project also has a Centre at 
Visakhapatnam.  The Committee have been informed that during 2009 -10, 
146.23 tonnes of fish were processed and 103.27 tonnes were market ed.  In 
2010-11 (upto January, 2011) the Institute processed 128.33 tonnes of fish 
including job work for outside parties and sold 89.07 tonnes of fish and fish 
products valued at Rs. 47 lakh through stalls, mobile units, contractor sales, 
etc.  The Instit ute has imparted 8009 trainee days for self help groups and 
students in various disciplines during the year 2010-11.  The Committee during 
their programme of Study Visit in June -July, 2011 had also visited the Institute 
at Kochi.  They observed that the In stitute is contributing a lot towards 
processing and popularization of unconventional varieties of fish.  They, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should immediately conduct an 
exercise to identify areas with sizable availability on unconventional varieties of 
fishes and open regional  Centres of NIFPHATT, Kochi in coastal States in the 
first instance, if not in all States, for the benefit of self help groups and 
students.  They would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
Reply of the Government 
The National Institute of Fisheries Post Harvest Technology and 
Training (NIFPHATT) envisages the promotion of the best post harvest fish 
utilization and consumption with the least post harvest losses and delivery of 

55 
 
the best quality fish and fish products in all states of India through the proactive 
participation and partnership of NIFPHATT with all state fisheries departments 
of the country. The aim of the project is operational strengthening and the 
capacity building of cooperatives involved in the value chain in the marine and 
freshwater fisheries sectors in coastal and (North -Eastern States) to ensure its 
compliance with food safety and quality standards, thus expanding domestic 
market and export opportunities, and at the same time ensuring higher local 
consumer protection. 
Nearly one third of the fish landings are wasted due to the lack of 
awareness in the post harvest handling of fish both at sea and at shore, its 
preservation and transport. Lack of infrastructure facilities is also a setba ck in 
tapping the resources at optimum level. The catches are at present marketed 
either in fresh form in local markets or in chilled/iced form in surrounding 
markets. It is in this context the development and implementation of advanced 
methods of complete utilization assumes importance. To achieve these aims, it 
is necessary to impart proper training preferably in the co operative sector 
giving preference to fisherwomen. This training can be given at two levels. 
Those who are having minimum educational qua lifications can be trained as 
Master Resource Persons; who in turn, can transfer the knowledge so gained 
to the field level. Fisherwomen working at field level also may be considered 
for training of appropriate duration with emphasis on practical aspects. 
The Committee during their programme of Study Visit in June -July, 
2011 had also visited the Institute at Kochi.  They observed that the Institute is 
contributing a lot towards processing and popularization of unconventional 

56 
 
varieties of fish.  They, theref ore, recommend that the Department should 
immediately conduct an exercise to identify areas with sizable availability on 
unconventional varieties of fishes and open regional Centers of NIFPHATT, 
Kochi in coastal States in the first instance, if not in all States, for the benefit of 
self help groups and students.  They would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in the matter. 
In order to contribute towards processing and popularization of 
unconventional varieties of fish, it is suggested that to start with, one of the two 
states viz., Gujarat or Tamil Nadu may be considered for setting up this 
Regional centre. A proposal has already been received and the same is under 
process. As per the proposal, the preliminary estimated cost of the Regional 
centre is around Rs 500 lakhs including land and building. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
 
  

57 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
  

58 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Allocations to the Animal Husbandry Sector 
(Recommendation Para No.3.27) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Department have been allocated sums 
of Rs.481.00 crore, Rs.558.29 crore and Rs.792.15 crore respectively in the 
last three Financial Years. However, in all the three years there have been 
reductions at RE stage. In 2008 -09 RE was reduced by Rs.20.00 crore or so; 
in 2009-10 by almost Rs.100.00 crore and in the last Fiscal by about Rs.16.00 
crore. The Department has not even been able to spend these reduced 
amounts. The actual expenditure being Rs.444.54 crore, Rs.435.84 crore a nd 
Rs.717.35 crore respectively in these three yeas. The Department have 
justified the lesser utilisation on the plea that in percentage terms they have 
acquitted themselves reasonably. The Committee are, however, concerned on 
an altogether different plane . The animal husbandry sector holds immense 
promise and potential for the welfare of the deprived sections of our population 
including small and marginal farmers, the rural landless, the urban poor. More 
importantly, it can provide the much needed financia l help to the women folk of 
these segments of society. And the Department, in spite of being in existence 
for decades together have not even been able to create a sound financial base 
for the sector. Still being content with a budgetary allocation in hundr eds of 
crore, which the Committee consider is a pittance, the Department have 
regularly failed to show case the sector in its full potential and dimensions to 

59 
 
the planners and policy makers. The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Department to deeply introspect in the matter and work out a detailed roadmap 
to project the animal husbandry sector in its entirely so that it could claim its 
rightful place in the economy and the developmental process. The Committee 
expect all alacrity in this regard from the Depar tment and hope that they would 
do the needful this right now when the Twelfth Five Year Plan is being 
formulated. 
Reply of the Government 
The schemes of the Department are basically intended to assist the 
States in the development of infrastructure and pro vide policy directives for 
promotion of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sectors. Therefore, the 
department constantly take up the matter with States for quick absorption of 
funds and thus to spend the entire allocations. However, the Department ha s 
developed the roadmap for boosting the Animal Husbandry Sector in 12 th Plan 
document which to be finalized by Planning Commission. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of 
Chapter I of this Report.   
 
Allocations to the Animal Husbandry Sector 
(Recommendation Para No.3.28) 
 
 The Committee also note that this year the Department have been 
allocated a sum of Rs.874.36 crore for the Animal Husbandry Sector. From 

60 
 
their past performance of three years, the Committee feel that unless the 
Department gear themselves up appropriately, it would again be difficult for 
them to spend this amount. Such an unfortunate eventuality would ultimately 
lead not only to reductions at the RE stage but also to the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance forming a definite opinion about the 
absorption capacity of the Schemes of the Department, a situation the 
Department can ill afford at this juncture. The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Department to schedule their spending and releases diligently and in close 
coordination with State Governmen ts and other user agencies to ensure full 
utilisation of the allocated amount. 
Reply of the Government 
As on 12 th December 2011, the department has incurred the 
expenditure in the tune of Rs. 510.88 crore against the allocated sum of Rs. 
874.36 crore for t he Animal Husbandry Sector. The department is confident to 
utilize the allocated funds during the current financial year. The department is 
also monitoring the full utilization of funds through weekly expenditure review 
meetings, video conferencing with the States, State visits by the senior officers 
of this department fo r regular correspondence with the State Officials on 
implementation of the Schemes.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of 
Chapter I of this Report.  
 
 

61 
 
Dairy Sector 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.34)  
 
 India is number one producer of milk in the World.  Still the per capita 
availability of milk is 263 grams per day which is lower than the World average 
of 284 grams per day.  Dairying is mostly concentrated in cooperative societies 
a majority of whom are composed of small and marginal farmers and the 
landless labour.  Even in these segments a large population consists of 
women.  Dairying has become one of the important and dependable secondary 
source of income for millions of rural families.  A major problem facing the dairy 
sector is the low productivity of milch animals in the Country.  The 
Government’s effort, therefore, is mainly focussed on improving the 
productivity of the milch animals with  a view to increase production.  The 
Committee have been informed that the Department is primarily involved in 
promotion of dairying activities in non -Operation Flood areas where they are 
assisting building up of cooperative infrastructure, revitalisation of sick dairy 
cooperative federations and creation of infrastructure in the States for 
production of quality milk and milk products.  Towards these goals the 
Department are implementing four Schemes in the Dairy Sector. 
 The Committee note that during the last three Fiscals (upto 28 
February, 2011), Dairying Sector could hardly spend Rs.250.00 crore or so 
primarily because the National Dairy Plan (NDP), which has been discussed in 
the preceding Chapter, was in limbo all these years. This year since a sum of  
Rs.100.00 crore has been earmarked for NDP the allocation has accordingly 
more than doubled to Rs.200.25 crore for Dairy Development.  This being the 
terminal year of the Eleventh Plan, the Committee exhort the Department to 

62 
 
fully utilise this entire amou nt so that not only NDP is kickstarted at last but 
funds in sufficient amounts are also made available for the Dairy Sector by the 
Planning Commission in the Twelfth Plan. 
Reply of the Government 
The Table below summarizes the financial performance of the Dairy 
Development schemes including Delhi Milk Scheme (DMS) Sector during the 
preceding three Fiscals and the BE in  
the current Fiscal: 
(Rs. in Crore) 
     *upto 21st November, 2011 
 It may be observed from the table above that against the Budget 
Estimate of Rs 289.83 crore during the last three years an amount of Rs 
268.98 crore was released under Dairy Development schemes  indicating the 
about 93% of the BE  has been spent. During the current year 2011-12 against 
Budget Estimate of Rs 250.25 crore (which includes  budget provision  of Rs 
100 crore under National Dairy Plan (NDP)  the scheme is yet to be 
implemented) an amount of Rs 119.35 has been released upto 21st 
November, 2011 ind icating expenditure of  48 % of the BE( 79.4% excluding 
outlay of NDP) .  
YEAR BE RE Actual Expenditure  
2008-09 98.99 99.09 97.90 
2009-10 102.09 90.23 85.93 
2010-11 88.75 88.75 85.15 
2011-12 250.25 - 119.35* 

63 
 
The proposal for approval of National Dairy Plan (NDP) was considered 
by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on 25.07.2011. The estimated 
outlay of the scheme as recommended by EFC i s Rs.2242 crore comprising 
Rs.1584 as IDA credit, Rs.176 crore as GoI share, Rs.282 crore as share of 
End Implementing Agencies (EIAs) that will implement the project in 
participating States and about Rs.200 crore by NDDB and its subsidiaries for 
providing technical and implementation support to the project. A note for 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs is under preparation and the same will 
be circulated shortly. However, as the NDP is expected to be launched during 
December, 2011 the revised budget est imate proposed by Department is 
Rs.25.00 crore. The revised budget estimate for the Dairy Development 
schemes has been proposed to be Rs.216.40 crore by the Department. The 
revised budget for Department is yet to be finalized by the Department of 
Expenditure. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.22 of 
Chapter I of this Report.   
 
Delhi Milk Scheme 
(Recommendation Para No.3.37) 
 The Delhi Milk Scheme (DMS) has catered to the milk and dairy product 
requirements of NCT of Delhi for decades together now.  However, due to 
mismanagement, continued neglect of affairs of the Organisation, 
obsolescence of plant and machinery, the DMS cont inues to make losses year 

64 
 
after year.  The Government have been toying with the idea of corporatization 
of DMS for quite sometime now, with no success.  Resultantly, DMS continues 
to suffer and is not able to function at its optimal best in stark contrast to other 
players in milk and dairy products market.  The Committee, strongly feel that 
the approach of the Government with regards to handling the problems faced 
by DMS is far away from reality.  Instead of the time consuming 
corporatization, DMS can be, in the opinion of the Committee turned around by 
a one time infusion of capital for acquisition of State -of-the-art machinery and 
equipment.  The Committee, therefore, once again reiterate that needful be 
done by the Government at the earliest so as to ensure that DMS is restored to 
a flourishing, profit making entity like Mother Dairy and others. 
Reply of the Government 
A Cabinet note on Corporatization of DMS is under finalization with the 
Department. The proposed corporatization would enable the DMS to ru n its 
affairs on commercial lines with flexibility in decision making. 
For continuity of operation of DMS for processing of milk and 
manufacturing of milk products and Upgradation and modernization of DMS 
plant/acquisition of state of the art machinery and  equipments, the funds are 
required for purchase / replacement machinery& equipments, construction of 
booths, civil & electrical works and products diversification activities to the 
extent of Rs. 100 crore approximate. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.26 of 
Chapter I of this Report.  
 

65 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
Poultry Development 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.29) 
 
 The Scheme for Establishment of Poultry Estate could not make any 
headway during the first two years of the Eleventh Plan due to delays in 
approval, etc. Finally instead of the proposed six estates, the EFC gave 
approval to only two estates viz. one broiler and one layer estate. While the 
broiler one is a proposal of Government of Sikkim, the layer one is a proposal 
of Government of Orissa. Due to the delay in commencement of these two pilot 
projects, the Department are not in a position to confirm or otherwise the likely 
expansion of the Scheme in other States / areas. Thus, concrete inputs for the 
future of the Scheme during the Twelfth Plan would not be forthcoming at this 
stage. However, keeping in vie w the high hopes expressed by the Department 
during the examination of the Demands for Grants (2011 -12) as also the 
previous one, the Committee desire that the evaluation of the Scheme be done 
at the earliest available opportunity, so that the further cour se of action is 
accordingly decided. 
 
 
 
 

66 
 
Reply of the Government 
As desired by the Committee, the evaluation of the ‘Poultry Estate’ 
component will be initiated as soon as the estates come into operation. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2011-AHD (Coord) dated 23.12.2011.] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
  
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of 
Chapter I of this Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       BASUDEB ACHARIA 
21  February, 2012                      Chairman 
2  Phalguna, 1933, (Saka)                       Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
  

67 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 21 February, 2012 from 1500  hours to 1733  
hours in Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
7. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
 RAJYA  SABHA 
8. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
9. Shri Narendra Budania 
10. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
11. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
12. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
13. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P. V. L. N. Murthy - Director 
 3. Shri P.C. Koul   - Additional Director 
  

68 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of 
the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration  the Draft Report 
on Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty -fourth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2010 -11) on Demands 
for  Grants (2011-12) of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of  Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries). 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report without any 
modifications.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report  
after getting it  factually verified from the concerned Ministry/Department.  The 
Committee also decided that since  the House is not in Session this  Report may be 
presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha  so that the Government may benefit from 
the Recommendations of the Committee while finalizing the Budget and Demands for 
Grants of the Department. 
 
*4. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*5. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*6. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*7. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*8. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
The Committee then adjourned. 
________________________________________________________________ 
*Matter not related to this Report.   

69 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-12) PERTAINING TO MINISTRY 
OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING 
AND FISHERIES) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              21 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Para Nos. 1.4, 2.30, 2.31, 2.32, 2.33, 2.34, 2.35, 2.36 
 3.30, 3.31, 3.32, 3.33, 3.35, 3.36, 3.38 and 3.39  
Total          16 
Percentage                          76%
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Total                   NIL 
Percentage                              0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos.  3.27, 3.28, 3.34 and 3.37 
Total             4 
Percentage                 19% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para Nos.  3.29 
Total            1 
Percentage                  5% 
 