 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011)  
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND FISHRIES) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report 
of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-2010)} 
 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 
14 

 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND FISHRIES) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report 
of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-2010) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   08.03.2011 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 08.03.2011 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 

 
 
COA NO. 237 
 
 
         
         
         
              
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
       
 
 
© 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by

 
 
<CONTENTS> 
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government ……………    16 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies …………………..    52 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of  which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee ………….    55 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited …………………………………….      61 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 3 March, 2011.             62 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report                   64 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2009-2010). 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2010-11) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
6.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
7.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
9.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Prabodh Panda  
15.  Shri Premdas  
16.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
18.  Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19.  Shri Uday Singh 
20.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
21.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
23.  Shri Narendra Budania 
24.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
4. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (2010 -2011) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Fourteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Committee on Agriculture 
on Demands for Grants (20 09-10) pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture (Department 
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fishries). 
 
2. The Second Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2009 -2010) on 
‘Demands for Grants’ (2009 -10) pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fishries ) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2009. The Action Taken Replies on 
the Report were received on 17 March, 2010. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting 
held on 3 March, 2011. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Committee is given in 
Annexure. 
 
 
      
                    
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
7 March, 2011                                                                  Chairman, 
16 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)                          Committee on Agriculture. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(V) 

 
 
  
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Second Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2009 -10) on `Demands for Grants (2009 -
10)’  pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries) which was p resented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2009. 
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 32 observations / 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as under :- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government : 
 Recommendation Para Nos. 1.4, 3.30, 3.31, 3.33, 3.34, 3.35, 4.36, 
4.37, 4.38, 4.39, 4.40, 4.41, 4.42, 4.43, 4.44, 4.45, 4.46, 4.47, 4.48, 
5.8, 5.9, 6.17, 6.18, 6.19, 6.20 and 7.6 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply : 
  Recommendation Para Nos. 3.36 and 7.7  
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which action taken 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee : 
  Recommendation Para Nos. 2.8, 2.9, 3.32 and 6.16  
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited : 
 Recommendation Nos. NIL  
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations / Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter 
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. 

 
 
The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on the observations / 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final Action Taken Replies to the 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report be furnished to them 
at an early date. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
NEED FOR ENHANCED INVESTMENT 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.8) 
1.5 Having noted that the animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors, 
undoubtedly, provide greatest protection and resource to fall back to the farming 
community against natural cala mities and the uncertainties of agriculture, which is 
their primary vocation and acknowledging the undeniable potential of these Sectors 
as engines of growth, particularly in the context of the rural economy, the Committee, 
had recommended sector friendly schemes and substantially enhanced investments 
be made by the Government in these sectors at once in the larger interest of the 
Country. 
 
1.6 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries) in their Action Taken Note have stated that they included the following 
new schemes for implementation during the Eleventh Five Year Plan:- 
1. Poultry Development  
2. Integrated Development of Small Ruminants & Rabbits  
3. Establishment / Modernisation of Rural Slaughter Houses  
4. Utilisation of Fallen Animals 
5. Poultry Venture Capital Fund 
6. Piggery Development 
7. Salvaging and Rearing of Male Buffalo Calves 
8. National Animal Disease Reporting System (NADRS) 
9. National Control Programme of Peste des Petitis Ruminants (PPR) 
10. Strengthening of Existing Hospitals/Dispensaries 
11. National Control Programme of Brucellosis 
12. Food Safety and Traceability 
13. Livestock Extension & Delivery Services 
14. National Dairy Plan 

 
 
 It would be noted that the new schemes are innovative, sector -friendly and 
seek to address the felt needs on the ground. 
 It may also be submitted that the Department has been seeking higher 
budgetary allocations so as to make required level of investment for development of 
the animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors.  As would be noted from the 
position brought out below, the allocations actually received by the Department were 
of a much lower size:-  
  Amount in Rs. crore 
S.No. Year Allocation demanded Allocation received 
1 2007-08 1,435.10 910.00 
2 2008-09 1,891.25 1,000.00 
3 2009-10 1,889.07 1,100.00 
4 2010-11 1,829.38 1,300.00 
 TOTAL  7044.80 4310.00 
 
 
1.7 The Committee note that on their part the Department have done their 
bit by introducing innovative and sector friendly Schemes in the animal 
husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors.  Unfortunately, however, they have 
not been duly supported by the Government.  Out of the total allocation f or the 
Eleventh Plan of Rs. 8174.00 crore, as approved by the Planning Commission, 
the Department have actually been allocated Rs. 4310.00 crore during the first 
four years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  In perce ntage terms it amounts to 
about 53%, thereby leaving almost half of the funds for the terminal year of the 
Eleventh Plan.  They are highly perturbed to contemplate the cascading effect 
of this financial crunch on the implementation of various schemes of th e 
Department.  The Committee strongly deprecate this continued neglect of the 
Department by the planners and hope that justice is meted out and a major 
portion of the balance 47% of the approv ed allocation of Rs. 8174.00 crore is 
allocated to them during the year 2011-12. 
 
UNDERUTILISATION OF PLAN FUNDS    
(Recommendation Para No. 2.9) 
 
1.8 Noting the large scope for increasing the Annual Plan allocation by the 
Planning Commission in favour of the Department , the Committee had 
recommended hike in allocation s at the RE stage of 2009 -10 itself.  Further on 

 
 
observing that out of the total Plan Outlay of Rs. 1910.00 crore in the first two years 
of the Five Year Plan period expenditure of Rs. 1637.21 crore only has been 
incurred leaving Rs. 272.19 crore unutilise d, the Committee had asked the 
Department to analyse the reasons for this shortfall in the utilisation of funds and 
evolve suitable remedial strategies so that the Plan Funds allocated are fully utilised. 
 
1.9 The Department in their Action Taken Note have  stated that they have been 
pursuing with Planning Commission to provide adequate allocation for the 
Department. In this direction, the Department proposed Rs.1829.38 crore for Annual 
Plan 2010 -11, which was discussed in a meeting held on 14.01.2010 under the 
Chairmanship of Member (Agriculture), Planning Commission. The Department were 
advised to reduce revised projection up to an amount of Rs. 1400 crore. However, 
budget allocation of only Rs.1300 crore was received for 2010 -11, which is 18 
percent higher than the last year’s allocation.  T he scheme-wise utilisation of funds 
against allotment has been examined. The scheme -wise reasons for shortfall in 
expenditure in 2007-08 and 2008-09 have been presented in Annexure I. 
  
1.10 The Committee find an increas e of 18% from the previous Fiscal in the 
allocation of funds to the Department in 2010-11.  However, seen in the context 
of overall allocations to the Department for the entire Plan, this raise is merely 
a pittance.  As stated previously in this Report, th e Government’s inaction in 
ensuring well spread and prudent allocation has left about 47% of the total 
Five Year allocation for the last year of the Plan, thereby presenting the 
Department with the herculean task of absorbing huge amounts of funds in 
one single year.       
 
 On the aspect of Rs. 272.19 crore having remained unutilized during the 
first two years of the Plan, the Committee have gone through the reasons put 
forth by the Department in the context of their various Schemes.  They are, 
however, still not convinced by the reply of the Department, as they note that 
various new schemes continue to be in the pipeline for implementation even 
after a lapse of three years of the Eleventh Plan Period. They would also like 

 
 
the Department to inform them abou t the suitable remedial strategies that they 
had been asked to evolve by the m in their Second Report so that the Plan 
Funds allocated to the Department are fully utilized. 
ALLOCATIONS TO THE DEPARTMENT vis-à-vis CENTRAL PLAN OUTLAY 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.32)  
 
1.11 The Committee, in order to give animal husbandry, fisheries and dairying 
sectors their rightful place in view of their significant contribution to the economy and 
employment, had asked the Government to, amongst other measures, also consider 
having an exclusive Ministry mandated with the responsibilities of these sectors at 
the Union Government level, as is the case in some of the State Governments.  
1.12 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated the matter was taken 
up with the Pl anning Commission who have intimated that there is an increasing 
realization of importance being given to the animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries 
for securing the expected contribution of 6% growth rate during the 11 th Five Year 
Plan.  It has further informed that this intent is closely monitored while implementing 
various schemes.  
1.13 The Committee find no mention of the aspect referred to in their 
Recommendation in the reply of the Government.  Assuming it as an oversight 
and nothing else, the Comm ittee desire that they may be furnished the views 
of the Government in the matter of having an exclusive Ministry mandated with 
the responsibilities of animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries at the Union 
Government level immediately.  
SHORTAGE OF FEED AND FODDER 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.41) 
1.14 Finding that the Fodder Development Scheme had been allocated a meagre 
sum of Rs. 10.80 crore inspite of the fact that adequate availability of feed and 
fodder to livestock and poultry is very vital for increasing production of milk, poultry, 
meat and othe r animal products, the Committee had recommended that fund 
allocation for the Scheme be increased substantially, at once.  They had further, 
desired the Department to take initiatives with the help of ICAR to grow less water 
consuming feeder crops (viz. mi llets) for livestock as also to provide special 

 
 
incentives to the farmers who grow fodder crops and increase minimum support 
prices for millets, so that farmers could get motivated to cultivate these crops.  
 
1.15 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that they regularly 
consult ICAR from time to time in regard to its various initiatives. Fodder minikits of 
Bajra,  Guar and Jowar have been allocated to various States during Kharif and Rabi 
seasons 2009-10. The Department have also constitute d a Sub -group on feed and 
fodder with members also from the ICAR to deliberate on issues of mutual interest to 
the two organisations in the area of feed and fodder. 
 
1.16 The Committee are surprised to note that the Action Taken Note s of the 
Government is silent on the crucial question of efforts made for and results 
achieved ther e against with a view to ensure enhanced allocation for the 
Fodder Development Scheme.  They, therefore, desire to be informed about 
the concrete steps taken by them to get more funds allocated for this Scheme 
to increase the availability of feed and fodder to livestock and poultry resulting 
in a commensurate increase in the production of milk, poultry, meat and other 
animal products. 
 
 The Committee also note with surprise that the reply furnished does not 
mention the action taken in the context of growing of less water consuming 
fodder crops for livestock, minimum support price for millets to encourage 
their cultivation as well as the special incentives for fa rmers who grow fodder 
crops. The Committee therefore desire that they be apprised of the steps taken 
by the Department towards fructification of this Recommendation at the 
earliest and caution them to furnish full and complete replies to their 
recommendations in future.   
 
FOOD SAFETY AND TRACEABILITY SCHEME 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.44) 
1.17 Being aware of the fact that the exports of livestock produce, poultry, 
fisheries, etc. from India are mainly hindered because of qualitative deficiencies and 

 
 
finding that the new Scheme ‘Food Safety and Traceability’ which was meant to 
tackle the situation had not been initiated even in the third year of the Plan due to the 
fact that the Report submitted on the Scheme by NABCONS was not found 
implementable by t he Department and subsequent consultations with FAO had not 
reached any fruitful stage, the Committee had recommended the Department to stop 
further dithering in the matter and prepare a roadmap for implementation of the 
Scheme without any further delay.     
1.18 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that this is an entirely 
new area for the country for which neither requisite expertise  nor experience is 
available. Hence, it is necessary to proceed with due caution so that any steps taken 
do not have to be retraced and public money spent infructuously. After Department’s 
consultations within the country through NABARD / NABCONS did not provide an 
actionable blueprint, the FAO has been approached to provide the services of an 
international ex pert. As soon as such an expert becomes available, which is 
expected to happen soon, a road map for implementation of the traceability system 
for food safety would be prepared. 
 
1.19 The Committee are perturbed to note that an important area like export 
of livestock produce, poultry, fisheries etc. continues to be neglected.  Even 
after a lapse of more than three years of Eleventh Plan and consultations with 
NABARD / NABCONS / FAO, no road map for implementation of the Food 
Safety and Traceability Scheme  is in place .  The Department has singularly 
failed to appreciate the importance of bolstering the exports of these products 
and the consequent pressing need of having a regulatory scheme for the 
purpose.  They, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendati on that  the 
Department should work towards the implementation of the Food Safety and 
Traceability Scheme in right earnest  without further loss of time.   
ALLOCATION TO FISHERIES SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para No.6.16) 
1.20 Noting the gradual increase in the allocations for Fisheries Sector in the first 
three years of the Eleventh Plan, but still funding it insufficient for the inherent 
potential and the genuine requirements of the Sector, the Committee had 

 
 
recommended the De partment to endeavour to secure additional allocations for the 
Fisheries Sector on priority basis so that the Schemes pertaining to the Sector are 
planned and executed with a view to exploit their fullest potential.  
1.21 The Department in their Action Tak en Note have stated that they have taken 
up with the Planning Commission for enhanced allocation for the animal husbandry, 
dairying and fisheries sector. Funds proposed for the fisheries sector and allocations 
received during different years of the 11th Five Year Plan are as follows: 
   Amount in Rs. crore 
Year Funds proposed for 
Fisheries Sector 
Allocation Received for 
the Fisheries Sector 
2007-08 497.20 205.68 
2008-09 388.00 215.00 
2009-10 669.95 298.50 
2010-11 371.54 262.44 
 
1.22 The Committee are highly disturbed by  the results of the Department’s 
efforts to secure enhanced allocations from the Planning Commission for the 
Fisheries Sector.  From an allocation of Rs. 298.50 in 2009 -10 the allocation for 
Fisheries Sector has gone down by 12 % to Rs. 262.44 crore in 2010 -11.  
Apparently, the efforts of Department have not proved fruitful.   Keeping in 
view the immense untapped potential of the Fisheries Sector, the Committee 
desire the Department to continue striving for higher allocations, even if nee d 
be with the help of interventions at the highest levels with the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance.  
ASSISTANCE TO FISHERIES INSTITUTE SCHEME 
(Recommendation Para No. 6.17) 
1.23 The Committee, having noted the lesser spendings in the Scheme ‘Assistance 
to Fisheries Institute’ in the first two years of the Plan due to non -acquisition of 
vessels for the Central Institute for Fisheries and Nautical Engineering and Fishery 
Survey of India and also due to litigation in respect of construction of Office building 
of Fishery Survey of India at Mumbai, had asked the Department to take all 
necessary steps to acquire the vessels for these two Institutions without any further 
delay even if they are on lease basis, so that the research and other activitie s of 
these Institutions do not suffer in the absence of the vessels. 

 
 
1.24 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that the Technical 
Tender Committee constituted for purchase of vessels for Fishery Survey of India 
and Central Institute of Fis heries, Nautical and Engineering Training could not get 
valid quotations from suitable firms for construction of survey/training vessels and 
the Committee recommended the Ministry to take an appropriate decision in this 
regard.  The Institutes have been ad vised to initiate the process of acquisition of the 
vessels through Cochin Shipyard Limited, Kochi which is a public sector undertaking.  
Further, in the meanwhile, they have been directed to start the process for taking 
appropriate vessels on lease.  As r egards, construction of office building of FSI, 
Mumbai, there has been an escalation of the cost of the projects and the revised 
estimates are being examined in consultation with Integrated Finance Division. 
1.25 The Committee take note of the fact that th e Technical Tender 
Committee constituted for purchase of vessels for Fisheries Survey of India 
and Central Institute of Fisheries, Nautical and Engineering Training on not 
being able to get valid quotations from suitable firms for construction of 
survey/training vessels have recommended the Department to take 
appropriate decision in the matter.  They also note that the Department in turn 
have asked the Institutes to take two pronged action in the matter by initiating 
the process of acquisition of vessels th rough Cochin Shipyard Ltd., a Public 
Sector Undertaking and also initiate the process  for  taking  vessels  on  lease  
to  take  care of in the interregnum. While appreciating these initiatives of 
the Department, the Committee desire that action on both t he counts should 
be ensured without any further delay.  They also recommend that the 
construction of office building f or Fishery Survey of India, Mumbai which has 
remained in limbo for quite sometime be expedited so that they are able to 
carry out the mandated responsibilities without any further loss of time. 
NATIONAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
(Recommendation Para No. 6.18) 
 
1.26 Noting a trend of gross underspending in the financial performance of the 
National Fisheries Development Board during the last two Fiscals, the Committee 

 
 
had recommended the Board to manage its financial affairs in a more professional 
manner to ensure optimum utilisation of scarce resources for attainment of the 
objectives for which it was set-up.   
1.27 The Department in their Action Taken Note have submitted the following :- 
 
“Details indicating the release of funds to National Fisheries Development 
Board and utilization of these funds. 
 
1.  The details of the funds allocated (Budget Estimate) to NFDB and the funds 
actually made available (Revised Es timate) for the year 2007 -06 to 2009 -10 is as 
follows:   
Funds Allocated:                                                                                   
    Rs. in crore 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
BE RE BE RE BE RE 
100.50 50.00 75.00 46.90 135.00 100.00 
Expenditure incurred:                                  
     Rs. in crore 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Funds 
Received 
Funds 
Available 
Funds 
Sanctioned 
2006-07 0 30.00 30.00 3.66 
2007-08 26.85 50.00 76.85 27.09 
2008-09 50.81 46.90 97.71 71.28 
2009-10 26.46 85.00 111.46 98.00 
Total   211.90  200.03 
 
Constraints in the implementation: 
The response from the states and other user organizations has been slow  
resulting in  slow utilization of budget provided during the first two years of NFDB.  
Some of the reasons that could be attributed for slow absorption of resources are:   
(i) The NFDB does not have its own implementing machinery and by design it 
has to implement the schemes through the state fisheries departments and other 
institutions.  As the organization was new and the schemes and guidelines were also 
new the states and implementi ng agencies could not respond quickly to access 
funding and took time to abide by procedural formalities. 

 
 
(ii) Conditions of 10% contribution to NFDB by the states, and payment of 25% 
gross income from reservoir stocking schemes, harbors/landing centers et c. were 
not acceptable to certain states and it required a lot of convincing effort.  
(iii) Equity participation in certain schemes like Tuna Fisheries, wholesale markets 
and harbours development was found not feasible and hence expenditure on equity 
was not incurred. 
(iv) Other schemes such as RKVY, PM’s package etc. are flexible and hence offer 
higher rates of subsidy.  Some of the states are availing RKVY funds for such 
fisheries projects which require large investments. 
 
Efforts to speed up progress : 
Realizing the problems faced during the last three years, NFDB has recast the 
funding pattern and subsidy for the existing schemes and incorporated certain new 
schemes with a view to make the programmes acceptable and attractive to the user 
governments /government organizations/entrepreneurs/ farmers/ fishermen and fish 
merchants for realizing the NFDB objectives.  Government of India has also 
approved the revised guidelines and these revised guidelines were communicated to 
all implementing states and other organizations with a request to send the proposals 
accordingly during this year.   
Further, during this financial year, the following steps were taken to speed up 
implementation of the programmes by NFDB: 
(i) Organising regional meetings with the State Gov ernments /implementing 
agencies. 
(ii) Conducting seminars/ workshops to identify new projects with the 
stakeholders. 
 
(iii) Networking with R&D institutions  and  implementation of pilot projects for 
technology transfer. 
(iv) Organising Fish festivals and participation in the events and exhibitions to 
popularize the schemes. 
As a result many states and other implementing agencies have shown better 
response to implement the schemes during the year 2009 -10.  Therefore, NFDB 
could sanction schemes costing Rs. 98.00 crore as on 31.12.2009. Further, the 
Board has also received proposals valued at Rs. 111.00 crore which are at various 
stages of processing. From the statement given above, it could be seen that there is 
good progress in implementation of the schemes  in the last two years despite the 
constraints explained in the paragraphs 2 and 3 stated above. 
Major activities taken up by the Board:   
NFDB has been able to mobilize efforts in the following areas: 
 Reservoir Fisheries Development  
 Inland Aquaculture 
  Technology Up-gradation  
  Commercial Exploitation of Chaurs and Mauns 

 
 
  Cage Culture  Popularization 
  Open sea cage culture 
  Sea bass culture in ponds   
  Cryopreservation of fish milt 
  Popularization of Magur Culture  
 Establishment/modernization of hygienic markets 
  Modernization of Harbours 
  Aquatic Quarantine Facility  
  Individual Quick Freezer (IQF) Facility 
  Tuna: Sashimi grade processing unit 
 Ornamental fisheries 
   Human Resource Development” 
 
1.28 The Committee find that the trend of gross underspendi ng in the first 
two fiscals of the Eleventh Plan was primarily due to the slow response from 
the States  and other user organizations. They also note with satisfaction that 
the National Fisheries Development Board has recast the funding pattern and 
subsidy for the existing schemes and incorporated certain new schemes with 
a view to make the programmes acceptable and attractive to the user 
Governments / Government organizations / entrepreneurs / farmers / 
fishermen and fish merchants for realizing the National Fisheries Development 
Board objectives. The Department have as additional measures, also 
organized regional meetings with the State Governments / implementing 
agencies, conducting seminars / workshops to identify new projects with the 
stakeholders, netw orking with R&D institutions and implementation of pilot 
project for technology transfer and organized fish festivals and participation in 
the events and exhibitions to popularize the schemes to speed up 
implementation of the programmes by NFDB. The Commit tee while 
appreciating the number of measures taken at the levels of Department and 
the Board desire, that this tempo should be maintained to ensure that the 
underspending of the first two years does not recur.  

 
 
MARINE FISHERIES PRODUCTION 
(Recommendation Para No. 6.19) 
1.29 Having found that the development of inland fisheries is facing problems 
because of three reasons (i) the ownership of water bodies is not clearly defined in 
many States, (ii) there is no well laid down procedure for management of resou rce 
and (iii) since aquaculture is not considered to be a part of agriculture, it does not 
enjoy the facilities like non -levy of income tax, concessional tariff, water, access to 
credit, etc.  and feeling that until and unless remedial measures to tackle t hese three 
serious bottlenecks are initiated with due promptitude, the development of inland 
fisheries cannot be optimised, the Committee had  recommended  the Department to 
workout a well laid out plan to take care of these three impediments and get down to 
the task of removing them in consultation with other Ministries/Departments/State 
Governments/other agencies at the earliest. 
1.30 The Department in their Action Taken Note have submitted that they have 
consistently taken -up the issue of ownership of wa ter bodies with the State 
Governments and urged that this should be vested with the Fisheries Department.  
In addition, the issue of long-term leasing of water bodies has also been taken -up by 
them to facilitate greater investment in the inland fisheries s ector.  These issues are 
also being discussed and reiterated with the State Governments in various review 
meetings, conferences and workshops, whenever such events are organized. Since, 
fisheries is a state subject, the identification of bottlenecks and re medial action 
essentially lies with the State Governments.  However, there are two initiatives 
undertaken by the Department - first initiative relates to drafting of a Model Bill for 
Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture for adoption by the State Governments.   The Bill 
which was drafted by this Department was circulated among all the State 
Governments and comments were received.  These comments were appropriately 
incorporated in the draft Bill.  The draft Bill is being vetted by the Ministry of Law and 
Justice at the moment after which it would be recommended to the States for 
adoption.  Second initiative relates to reservoir fish productivity. Fish productivity 
from reservoirs in India is one of the lowest in the world.  The Department have 
circulated comprehen sive guidelines for culture -based Fisheries Management in 
Small Reservoirs in India among all the States, which contains the blue print for 
modern management practices for reservoir fisheries.  Guidelines for management 
of medium and large reservoirs are b eing published shortly which would also be 
circulated to States for adoption.  Reservoir Development Programme has been 
taken up as a flagship activity of the Board in about 12 lakh ha. with a view to 
enhance the fish production form the present level of 1 5-20 kg/ha. to at least 150 

 
 
kg/ha. This new initiative is expected to empower fishermen societies to produce 
quality seed at lower costs and thus leading to sustainable fish production.  In so far 
as the issue of aquaculture being at par with agriculture i s concerned, the actions lie 
both with the State Governments and the Central Government.  State Governments 
have been requested to actively consider concessions on power and water charges 
to aquaculture at par with agriculture.  In so far as Central Govern ment is concerned, 
this Department has already taken up the issue of income tax exemption for 
aquaculture and concessional credit at par with agriculture with the Ministry of 
Finance. 
1.31 The Committee note with satisfaction that pursuant to their 
recommendation the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries 
have taken up the issue of ownership of water bodies with the State 
Governments with the aim to ensure that these should b e vested with their 
respective Fisheries Departments. In addition, the issue of long term leasing of 
water bodies has also been taken up by the Department to facilitate greater 
investment in the Inland Fisheries Sector. They also highly appreciate two 
major initiatives of the Department viz. the draft Model Bill for Inland Fisheries 
and Aquaculture for adoption by the State Governments and the circulation of 
comprehensive guidelines for culture -based Fisheries Management in Small 
Reservoirs in India among a ll States.  The Committee are confident that 
coupled with the above measures, the decision to take up Reservoir 
Development Programme as a flagship activity of National Fisheries 
Development Board in about 12 lakh h ectares, asking State Governments to 
consider concessions on power and water charges to acquaculture at par with 
agriculture and taking up the issue of income tax exemption for aquaculture 
and concessional credit at par with agriculture with the Ministry of Finance are 
all laudable initiatives ta ken by the Department to usher buoyancy and 
dynamism in the acquaculture sector.  They, therefore, desire the Department 
to pursue all these initiatives to their logical conclusions earnestly and with 
due promptitude they deserve.    

 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF  ESTUARIES 
(Recommendation Para No. 6.20) 
1.32 Finding that in spite of the fact that most of the fish is produced in estuaries, 
the estuaries continue to be in the most neglected state the Committee had taken up 
the matter with the Department and based on their assurance given during the oral 
evidence that an appropriate scheme for the development of estuaries would be 
framed and implemented they had asked the Department to do so expeditiously.   
1.33 The Department in their Action Taken Note have submitted  that the matter 
regarding a new scheme for management of estuaries has been examined by them.  
It has been recognized that estuaries and other breeding grounds of fish are a highly 
critical eco-system for sustainable development of fisheries. 
 Accordingly, the Department have advised NFDB to prepare appropriate 
projects for sustainable management of estuaries and breeding habitats.  NFDB has 
accordingly prepared a scheme which is proposed to be implemented in 
collaboration with ICAR and State Governments. 
1.34 The Committee are happy to note that based on their recommendation 
the Department have got prepared a Scheme by National Fisheries 
Development Board for sustainable management of estuaries and breeding 
habitats which is proposed to be implemented in collab oration with ICAR and 
State Governments.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of 
the Scheme and the cost and timelines proposed for its implementation.  
Needless to mention they would also like the Department to implement it at the 
earliest.  

 
 
 
CHAPTER- II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.4) 
The Committee observe that Direction 73 A of Directions by Speaker entails 
the monitoring of the implementation of their recommendations and the concerned 
Minister need to make a statement in the House within a period of six months of the 
presentation of the original Report.  However, it is disturbing to further observe that 
in the instant case, the Minister made the Statement in the House on 4 August, 2009 
after lapse of more than 15 months after presentation of the Thirty Ninth Report.  The 
analysis of the  Statement also reveals that 50 % recommendations  have been 
implemented while 5 0% recommendations are either yet to be implemented or are 
under various stages of implementation and one recommendation has not been 
implemented. 
 The Committee take strong exception to the non -adherence by the Ministry to 
stipulations contained in Direction 73 A.  They, therefore, urge the Ministry to adhere 
to the stipulated time frame of six months for the making of Statement by the Minister 
in the House in future without fail. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Directions of the Committee have been noted for strict compliance in future. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
Zero Based Budgeting Exercise  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.30) 
 
The Committee find that a Zero Based Budgeting (ZBB) exercise is conducted 
by the Department in consultation with the Planning Commission at the formulation 
stage of the Five Year Plan. This is done in order to review the schemes being 
implemented in the p revious Plan for further continuation, assessment of new 
schemes for their inclusion, working out fund  requirements, inter -se prioritisation of 
allocated funds, etc. It is pertinent to note that the ZBB exercise of the Department in 
the context of the Ele venth Plan was held on 29 August, 2007 five months after the 

 
 
Eleventh Plan commenced. Several decisions were taken during the said ZBB 
exercise including merger of ongoing and new schemes in certain sectors, 
implementation of new schemes, modification/reca sting of ongoing schemes, etc. 
The examination by the Committee has, however, revealed that the element of 
conclusivity   was lacking in these decisions.  There has, therefore, been a severe 
cascading effect on the execution and implementation process. This is apparent from 
the fact that all the concerned Schemes viz. Poultry Development Scheme, 
Establishment/Modernisation of Rural Slaughter Houses, including Mobile Slaughter 
Plants, salvaging and Rearing of Male Buffalo Calves, Poultry Venture Capital Fund , 
Safety and Traceability, Utilisation of Fallen Animals, some Components of animal 
diseases, National Animal Disease Reporting System, National Dairy Plan, etc. are 
yet to take off, when we are already halfway through the Eleventh Plan. In the 
opinion of the Committee the extant Planning process is responsible to a great 
extent for poor performance and non achievement of the Department so far in the 
Eleventh Plan. Had the Plan proposals of the Department been worked out well in 
advance and the ZBB exercise  conducted sufficiently ahead of the commencement 
of the Eleventh Plan, things would have been totally different. The tenets of financial 
Planning as also financial prudence enjoin advance planning as a must, a basic fact 
that was evidently lacking while f ormulating the Eleventh Plan. The Committee to 
their dismay found that this state of affairs is prevailing in case of all the four 
Ministries/Departments whose Demands for Grants for the ongoing Fiscal were 
examined by them. They, therefore, desire that the entire system of planning process 
needs to be revisited by the Government at once, so that the delays of years 
together, in the formulation, appraisals and all approvals by SFC/EFC, Planning 
Commission etc. and implementation of schemes become a thing of  the past. The 
most likely roadmap for the purpose could be planning for the next Five Year Plan in 
the last year of previous Plan in such a manner that all approvals and sanctions are 
in the bag,  at least three months  before the commencement of the next Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Department has communicated Committee’s recommendations to the 
Planning Commission who have acknowledged the said advice as extremely useful 
for streamlining the process of sanctioning schemes of the Department. It has  
assured to make all efforts for implementing recommendations of Parliamentary 
Committee in letter and spirit. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 

 
 
ELEVENTH PLAN ALLOCATIONS 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.31) 
 
The Committee have also considered the aspect of Eleventh Plan Allocation 
to the Department and have found several shortcomings in the way the entire 
process has been dealt with. The Department had proposed an allocation of Rs. 
17695.17 crore for the Eleve nth Plan. This was in tune with the projections made by 
the concerned Working Group of the Planning Commission. This was, however, 
slashed by more than half by the Planning Commission, who have approved an 
Outlay of Rs. 8174.00 crore only. In the Tenth Plan the Department had been able to 
secure almost 77% of the allocation sought by them. To further compound the woes 
of the Department, even this substantially reduced allocation is not being given to 
them as per their projections and requirements. Against s ums of Rs. 1435.10 crore, 
Rs.1891.25 crore and Rs. 1889.07 crore respectively sought by the Department for 
the first three Fiscals of the Eleventh Plan, they have been allocated Rs. 910.00 
crore, Rs. 1000.00 crore and Rs. 1100 crore respectively by the Pla nning 
Commission. The allocations for the two Fiscals gone by were reduced further to Rs. 
810.00 crore and Rs. 940.00 crore respectively at the RE Stage by the Ministry of 
Finance. The Department have in turn, been able to spend Rs.784.08 crore and 
Rs.864.50 crore respectively out of these reduced RE allocations. Thus, against the 
Department’s request for allocation of about 64% of the total Outlay, the Planning 
Commission have allocated them hardly 37% of the total Outlay of the Eleventh Five 
Year Plan for the first three years of the Plan. With further cuts in funds at RE stage 
during the first two Fiscals and still lesser actual expenditure by the Department in 
these two Fiscals, the position that emerges now, when we are well beyond halfway 
mark of the E leventh Plan, is that the Department, even if they are able to use the 
entire  Rs.1100.00 crore meant for the ongoing Financial Year, would have hardly 
utilised one third of the total allocation. This leaves two -third outlay up for grabs in 
the last two ye ars of the Plan. Viewed in the context of the pace of approvals for 
Schemes etc., it can be safely concluded that the remaining two -third outlay of 
Eleventh Plan would largely remain unutilised. The Committee are not at all happy 
with the ad-hoc, unprofessional and non-serious manner in which the extant system 
of financial planning and management, release of funds, etc is being handled by all 
concerned. The lack of certainty and consistency in fund allocations and releases 
leaves little scope for the execut ing/implementing agencies for meticulous planning 
and execution of Schemes, which is a serious matter as it leads to delays and even 
scuttling of the developmental efforts. With this very apparent backloading of the 
Plan funds, the Department are left with  only two choices, either to rush up with 

 
 
execution/implementation of their schemes, without any concern for qualitative 
achievements, prudent planning and proper execution or to stagger these Schemes 
to the next Plan. In both the situations, regrettably, the casualty would be national 
interest and public good. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Government should, in consultation with all concerned, bring out well laid down 
norms with focussed timelines for the various stages of their bud geting procedures 
so as to improve financial planning and management of funds. Once such norms are 
in place, most of the present problems discussed above will be taken care of to a 
large extent.  The Committee desire that this may be attended to by the Gov ernment 
with utmost promptitude. They desire to be apprised of the action taken in this 
respect at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter was taken up with the Planning commission who have informed 
that the allocation of only Rs.8,174 crore could be made due to overall funds 
constraints and competing demands.   
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
 
 
NEW SCHEMES 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.33) 
 
In the context of new Schemes, the Committee’s scrutiny has revealed that 
new Schemes included in a particular Five Year Plan are identified on the basis of 
extensive consultation process involving the Department, Planning Commission, 
subject experts and s take holders. These are, thereafter, taken up for 
implementation in Annual Plans after obtaining the requisite approvals. The 
Committee note that as of now in case of 11 new schemes of the Department all of 
whom are of significant importance, implementation process has not even begun due 
to various reasons, though more than two and a half years of the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan have already elapsed. Six of these Schemes are pending for want of requisite 
approvals/evaluations while the remaining six are pending  for want of requisite 
funds. The Committee feel this is a very unsatisfactory state of affairs. If New 
Schemes, of crucial importance are treated with such disdain and allowed to 
languish for years together, it is a serious reflection on the entire system  of planning 
and finance management. Apart form the recommendation made previously in this 

 
 
Report about systemic improvement, the Committee desire that the Department 
should initiate prompt and conclusive action in the context of all these 11 New 
Schemes s o that their implementation begins in right earnest in the current fiscal 
itself without any further delay. With hardly two years and a quarter of Eleventh Plan 
period left, the Committee would also like to have a blue print of how the Department 
intend to go about with the implementation of those components of these Schemes, 
which were to be completed/achieved during the Eleventh Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department included the following new schemes for implementation 
during the 11th Five Year Plan:- 
1 Poultry Development  
2 Integrated Development of Small Ruminants & Rabbits  
3 Establishment/Modernisation of Rural Slaughter Houses  
4 Utilisation of Fallen Animals 
5 Poultry Venture Capital Fund 
6 Piggery Development 
7 Salvaging and Rearing of Male Buffalo Calves 
8 National Animal Disease Reporting System (NADRS) 
9 National Control Programme of Peste des Petitis Ruminants (PPR) 
10 Strengthening of Existing Hospitals/Dispensaries 
11 National Control Programme of Brucellosis 
12 Food Safety and Traceability 
13 Livestock Extension & Delivery Services 
14 National Dairy Plan 
The schemes mentioned at serial number 1 to 3 are under implementation 
after receiving requisite approvals.  The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) met 
on 26 th February, 2010 to consider the scheme mentioned at serial number 4. The 
scheme would be taken up for implementation as soon as competent approval is 
received.   
 The scheme ‘Poultry Venture Capital Fund’ (sr. no. 5) is in operation on old 
pattern and funds to the tune of Rs.10.00 crore have been released.  
The schemes ‘Piggery Development’ and ‘Salvaging & Rearing of Male Buffalo 
Calves’ awaits consideration of the EFC. It would be possible to take further action 
only thereafter. 

 
 
The EFC Memoranda for the schemes mentioned at Sl. Nos. 8, 9 & 10 were 
prepared and circulated to the appraisal agencies. However, the Planning 
Commission observed that the new schemes would require approval of the Full 
Planning Commission and suggested to explore the possibility o f merging these 
schemes with the on -going scheme. The matter was again discussed with the 
member, Planning Commission on 07.01.2010 when it was decided that these 
schemes may be merged with the existing scheme ‘Livestock Health and Disease 
Control’.  This has been done and the revised EFC Memorandum circulated to the 
appraisal agencies. 
 This Department had engaged NABARD Consultancy Services (NABCONS) 
to prepare approach papers for formulating the new initiative of Food Safety and 
Traceability. In order to  crystallize thinking on the subject, two stakeholder 
workshops were also held. In view of non -availability of adequate expertise in the 
area, the Department has requested technical help from the FAO who has tentatively 
agreed to provide services of an exp ert. A formal arrangement in this regard is 
expected to be put in place soon.  
 The Department had prepared SFC Memo for the scheme ‘Livestock 
Extension & Delivery Services’ and circulated to the appraisal agencies in May 2009. 
In order to provide further inputs, the Planning Commission set up a sub -group. 
Based on the inputs received from the subgroup, a revised EFC Memo has been 
prepared.  
 The NDDB is in discussion with the World Bank to finalize the Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) for the ‘National Dairy Plan’. The World Bank has conveyed that while 
National Dairy Plan spans a period of fifteen years, the World Bank usually funds 
projects for a period of five years. It has been proposed that the Project Concept 
Note (PCN) could cover the first phase of Nat ional Dairy Plan, spanning the period 
from 1st October 2010 to 31 st March 2017, co-terminus with the 12 th Five Year Plan. 
The World Bank is in the process of preparing their Project Concept Note. NDDB 
and the World Bank would work together to draw up the D etailed Project Document 
for obtaining approval of the Government of India. NDDB is working towards 
expediting the process.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 

 
 
RESTRICTIVE INSTRUCTIONS OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Recommendation Para No.3.34)  
 
For the Annual Plan 2009 -10, the Department had proposed a sum of Rs. 
1889.07 crore. They were, however, initially  allocated only Rs. 1000.00 crore by the 
Planning Commission, as it had been decided to stick to RE 2008 -09 levels owing to 
fund constraints  while fixing BE for 2009 -10.  An additional sum of Rs. 100.00 crore 
was allocated to the Department after they remonstrated with the Planning 
Commission. The reduced allocation has, admittedly affected the ongoing Schemes 
of the Department viz. National P roject for Cattle and Buffalo  Breeding, Livestock 
Health and Disease Control, expansion of Foot and Mouth Disease Control, etc. 
Furthermore, due to reduced availability of funds, implementation of several new 
schemes including Establishment and Modernisat ion of Veterinary Hospitals and 
Dispensaries, Unitisation of Fallen Animals, Control Programme of Brucellosis, Food 
Safety & Traceability etc. have been postponed. While paucity of funds, undoubtedly, 
led to the above situation, the Committee note that cer tain instructions regarding 
spending issued by the Ministry of Finance have also adversely affected the 
execution/implementation of Schemes owing to Vote on Account for the first four 
months of the current Fiscal. The Ministry of Finance, in this context i ssued 
instructions that in the first four months of the Financial Year (April to July) the 
expenditure on any ongoing Scheme should not exceed one third of the allocation 
and there should be no expenditure on any New Schemes. These restrictions have 
further retarded the momentum of implementation of the ongoing Schemes and the 
progression of new Schemes as they deprived the Department of whatever limited 
flexibility they enjoyed in the context of inter -se allocation of funds. The result is that 
in the most crucial middle year of the Plan, the Department’s performance will by 
their own admission take a hit. This, in all likelihood, would affect the implementation 
of Schemes in the remaining two years of the Plan as well. The Committee feel that 
the Ministry o f Finance ought not to have issued such restrictive instructions on 
spending. They should have, rather, permitted the Ministries/Departments to deal 
with the situation on their own and on a case to case basis. The Committee cannot 
but comment on the highly casual approach of the Ministry of Finance on this crucial 
issue. Having accepted these instructions as a fait accompli merely because these 
were applicable to all Ministries/Departments of the Government inspite of being fully 
aware of the negative impac t these restrictions would have on the implementation of 
their schemes, does not portray the Department in a positive light. The Department 
should have raised the matter with the Ministry of Finance or at other appropriate 
fora for withdrawal/relaxation of  these instructions so as to ensure the unhindered 

 
 
implementation of Schemes. They are of the firm view that had the Department 
taken this initiative, they would not have been alone, but many more 
Ministries/Departments would have supported their cause. Th e Committee expect 
that the Department will act more responsibly in similar situations in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
DECLINING GROWTH RATE  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.35) 
 
The Committee note that the Government have fixed a modest 6% growth 
rate target for the animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sector in the Eleventh 
Plan. The Committee are, however, highly concern ed to find that the growth rate in 
these sectors has shown a sharp decline. It has gone down from 5.6% in 2005 -06 to 
4.6% in 2006-07 and further down to 3.5% in 2007-08. The Committee are, however, 
not convinced by the argument of the Department that this ‘decline is apparently on 
account of overall disruption of economy’ for two simple reasons. One, there was 
nothing like overall disruption of economy during the years for which growth rate data 
has been furnished by the Department (upto 2007 -08) and two, most of the activities 
in animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries in India is in unorganised sector in rural 
areas which remained more or less untouched by the so called overall recession in 
economy. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to r evisit the whole 
matter with an open mind to establish the exact cause of this alarming decline in the 
growth rate in these sectors. More importantly, the Committee exhort the 
Government, that if the growth rate of 6% is to be achieved, these sectors need to be 
infused with requisite investments without any further delay. With little more than two 
years of the Eleventh Plan left, the Committee hope that the Government will ensure 
that the efforts of the Department in the direction of achieving the 6% growth  rate will 
not be hampered due to paucity of funds and be enabled in an all round manner to 
implement their Schemes in right earnest in the remaining period of the Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The growth rate in GDP is computed by the Central Statistica l Organization, 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. As per information 

 
 
communicated to this Department, following is the rate of growth in GDP in the last 
few years: 
Year Growth of GDP from 
Livestock and Fisheries 
2005-06 4.8 % 
2006-07 4.4 % 
2007-08 5.1 % 
2008-09 5.4 % 
 
The above information shows that the GDP has been increasing consistently except 
for the year 2006 -07. The growth rate of livestock and fisheries together reported 
earlier to the Committee was based on the base year 19 99-2000. Now the GDP for 
those years have been computed again by CSO with 2004 -05 as the base year. It 
has also been explained by the CSO that in departure from the earlier basis, the data 
of concentrates in feed of livestock is now estimated using ‘per an imal consumption’ 
figure as estimated from the Cost of Cultivation Studies conducted by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 
 
Further, in order to improve resource availability for animal husbandry, dairying and 
fisheries related activities, the Department is pursuing the states for making higher 
allocations for these sectors from the funds available to them under the Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY).   
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
 
ALLOCATIONS TO ANIMAL HUSBANDRY SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.36)  
 
The Animal Husbandry Sector being the thrust area of activity of the 
Department enjoys a ma jor chunk of financial allocation. In the ongoing Fiscal it has 
been allocated a sum of Rs. 619.40 crore out of the total allocation of Rs. 1100.00 
crore. In percentage terms this works out to more than 56% of the total allocation of 
the Department for the  year. In the previous two financial years, the Department’s 

 
 
performance has been mixed. While in the year 2007 -08 their actual expenditure at 
Rs 373.43 crore was more than the RE amount of RS. 357.46 crore, in 2008 -09 the 
Actuals at Rs. 442.70 crore lagged substantially behind the RE amount of Rs. 495.51 
crore. The Committee also observe that in both these years the BE amount had 
been substantially reduced at the RE stage. About the reasons behind this pruning 
down of allocations, the Department have state d that the reasons behind the cut 
effected by the Ministry of Finance at RE are not communicated to them. The 
Committee find the reply of the Department really shocking. The entire budgetary 
process, as it appears, is based on consultations between various players concerned 
with planning as well as execution/implementation. It is, therefore, inexplicable as to 
how the Ministry of Finance effects cuts at RE stage in an arbitrary manner, without 
conveying the reasons for the same. Ideally, the Ministry should  not only convey to 
the Department concerned, the specific reasons for reducing allocations at RE stage, 
they should also indicate clearly about future availability of funds in case the  
reductions at RE state are not attributable  to the non -performance o f the 
Ministry/Department in question, so that the relevant Schemes  are planned and 
implemented accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Finance, Deptt of Expenditure have informed that allocations 
at the RE stage take into account the position of utilisation of budgetary allocation by 
the Department and the revised resource availability with the Government. They 
have stated  that the exercise of fixing the revised allocation is undertaken on the 
basis of the information provided by the concerned Department and in consultation 
with its Financial Adviser.  
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010 
 
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.37 
 
Having analysed, indepth, the performance of the Department in 
implementation of some of the major Centrally Sponsored Schemes, the Committee 
find to their huge disappointment glaring shortcomings in the performance in this 
regard. The Establishment/Modern isation of rural slaughter houses for which a sum 
of Rs. 250.00 crore has been allocated has been a glaring example of tokenism, with 
Rs. 2.00 lakh and Rs. 1.00 lakh allocated in the first two years of the Plan. This year 

 
 
the sum has been raised to Rs. 5.0 0 crore. Going by the performance till date the 
Committee can very well imagine the fate of this Scheme, which will have a huge 
bearing on the animal husbandry sector, in the remaining period of the Plan. 
The carcasses of dead animals, are a substantial so urce of by products and 
earnings for their owners, the world over. In India, however, due to non -availability of 
the requisite infrastructure and facilities, the disposal of dead animals is usually a big 
hassle for the owners. The Department had, therefore , included a very ambitious 
‘Scheme on Utilisation of Fallen Animals’ in the Eleventh Plan. The Committee, 
however, regret to observe that as of now the Department has only been able to 
draft the Scheme and preparatory action is in hand to circulate it to the appraisal 
agencies. This Scheme has an allocation of Rs. 75.00 crore for the Eleventh Plan 
and no funds were, however, allocated for the Scheme in the first two years of the 
Plan. This year also only a token sum of Rs. 1.00 lakh has been assigned to th is 
Scheme.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The Centrally Sponsored Scheme ‘Establishment/Modernisation of Rural 
Slaughter Houses’ is being implementing in three States Andhra Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh and Meghalaya during  2009 -10 with an outlay of Rs.5 crore thr ough the 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). The scheme 
‘Utilization of Fallen Animals’ was considered and approved by the Expenditure 
Finance Committee. 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
   
  
ALLOCATION TO CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.38) 
 
The fate of Livestock Extension and Delivery Services Scheme for which a 
sum of Rs. 15.00 crore has been earmarked in the Plan, is still worse. The 
Department had prepared SFC Memo for this Sc heme and circulated it to the 
appraisal agencies and comments had been received form some of them. The 
Planning Commission has in the meantime set up a sub -group to examine the 
subject. The Department have submitted before the Committee that the SFC Memo 
will now be finalised on receipt of the report of the said sub -group. The result is that 

 
 
no funds were assigned to the Scheme during first two years of the Plan and a token 
amount of Rs. 1.00 lakh has been allocated in the ongoing Fiscal.  
Under the Poultry Development Scheme, for which a sum of   Rs. 150.00 crore has 
been earmarked for the Eleventh Plan, the Department have been able to spend 
only a sum of Rs. 28.17 crore in the first two Fiscals. This gross underutilisation is 
mainly due to non-receipt of necessary approvals for the two new components of the 
Scheme viz. ‘Rural Backyard Poultry Development’ and ‘Poultry Estates’. Even in the 
current year the allocation is Rs. 28.00 crore only. Even if this entire amount is 
utilised by the Department, almost two third funds meant for this Scheme would be 
left for being spent during the last two years of the Plan. As already commented 
elsewhere in this Report, the system of appraisals, approvals by SFC/EFC, Planning 
Commission etc. needs to revised urgently to obviate the fate the schemes of the 
Department are now undergoing resulting in non allocation of requisite amounts for 
Schemes, subsequent under utilisation and reductions at RE stage all leading to 
under performance of the Schemes. The Committee cannot bu t conclude that this 
leaves much to be desired in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department had prepared SFC Memo for the scheme ‘Livestock 
Extension & Delivery Services’ and circulated to the appraisal agencies in May 2009. 
In order to provid e further inputs, the Planning Commission set up a sub -group. 
Based on the inputs received from the subgroup, a revised EFC Memo has been 
prepared. 
 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme, ‘Poultry Development’ was approved in 
June 2009 at an total outlay of Rs.15 0 crore and is presently under implementation.  
Up to February 2010, amounts of Rs. 248.25 lakhs and Rs.541 lakh  have been 
released for ‘Poultry Estates’ and ‘Rural Backyard Poultry Development’ components 
respectively. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
  
 

 
 
 
LIVESTOCK HEALTH AND DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.39) 
 
The Committee note that the Livestock Health and Disease Control 
Programme has four ongoing components viz. Assistance to States for Control of 
Animal Diseases; National Project on Rinderpest Eradication; Professional Efficiency 
Development; Foot and Mouth  Disease Control Programme.  They also note that in 
the case of these four Programmes the actuals during the last two financial years 
have either matched the budget estimates or even surpassed them.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that in view of the goo d work being done by the Department 
towards control and eradication of animal diseases through this Scheme, all the 
existing components of the Scheme be provided sufficiently enhanced allocations in 
the remaining two years of the Eleventh Plan to increase the ambit of these 
components as also their effectiveness.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Against an allocation of Rs.128.39 crore for the ‘Livestock Health & Disease 
Control’ in 2009-10, an amount of Rs.373.90 crore has been provided for it in 2010 -
11. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
NEW COMPONENTS OF LIVESTOCK HEALTH AND DISEASE CONTROL 
PROGRAMME 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.40) 
  
As regards the four new components of the Scheme which the Department 
proposed for implementation in the ongoing financial year viz. Strengthening of 
existing hospitals/dispensaries; National Control Programme of Peste des petits 
ruminants (PPR); National Control Programme of Brucellosis; and National Animal 
Disease Reporting System, the Committee are distressed to note that nothing 
tangible has been achieved by the Department till date.  The Department could not 
take up the Components ‘Strengthening of Exi sting Hospitals/Dispensaries’ and 
‘National Control Programme of PPR’ for want of funds.  In case of National Animal 

 
 
Disease Reporting System, only a token provision was made because of non -
allocation of Rs. 53.24 crore earlier agreed to by the Planning Co mmission.  In case 
of the National Control Programme of PPR, the position is still worse.  Though 
Planning Commission allocated a sum of Rs. 39.00 crore for the Programme for the 
current financial year and the EFC Memo was circulated to appraisal agencies,  The 
Department was subsequently informed the Department that the approval of full 
Planning Commission is required in the matter. It was suggested by them to explore 
the possibility to accommodate the PPR Component under any existing scheme.  
Thus again, t he Department has to be content with a token amount for this 
component in the ongoing financial year.  Keeping this element of uncertainty in 
view, the Committee during their examination had suggested to the Department that 
in tune with the advice of the P lanning Commission they may think of 
accommodating the PPR Component, in the already existing Component of 
‘Assistance to State to Control Animal Diseases’ which is also meant for vaccination, 
control and eradication of certain diseases as is the case with PPR.  The Department 
had however, chosen to disagree on the plea that the National Control Programme 
on PPR is a mission mode activity to achieve eradication of the disease from the 
Country in a fixed time frame.  Hence, it requires focused attention of a  dedicated 
programme and it cannot be clubbed with other unconnected activities.  The 
Committee after considering all the aspects of the issue, desire that instead of 
endlessly delaying implementation of this important Component for control of animal 
diseases, the Department should seriously consider co -opting it in the existing 
scheme for ‘Assistance to Control of Animal Diseases’ so that the intended 
objectives are attained to some extent.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The following four new schemes relating  to the livestock health and disease 
control were, inter alia, identified for implementation in the 11th Plan: 
National Animal Disease Reporting System (NADRS)  
National Control Programme on Peste des Petits Rumianants (NCPPPR)  
Strengthening of existing Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries (SVHD) 
National Control Programme on Brucellosis (NCPB) 
Accordingly, in order to secure their approval, memoranda for the EFC for the first 
three schemes were prepared and circulated to the appraisal agencies in June to  
August ,2009.  The Planning Commission advised that instead of taking them as up 
as separate schemes, the same should be merged with the ongoing scheme of the 

 
 
‘Livestock Health & Disease Control’ and necessary approval obtained accordingly. 
The Agriculture Division of the Planning Commission also had reservations about the 
‘Establishment and strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries’ (SVHD). 
In order to reiterate the significance of this scheme, as also those of other new 
schemes, a presentati on was made to the Member (Agriculture), Planning 
Commission on 07/1/2010.  Based on the discussions held in the meeting, a new 
EFC Memoranda merging all the above mentioned schemes with the ongoing 
scheme of ‘Livestock Health & Disease Control’ has been c irculated to the appraisal 
agencies. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
SHORTAGE OF FEED AND FODDER 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.41) 
The Committee note that there is already a huge shortage of green fodder in 
the Country.  Scanty rainfall and drought this year have further worsened the 
problem.  The Committee note with concern that still Fodder Development Scheme 
has been allocated a meagre sum of Rs.10.80 crore. The Committee are of the view 
that adequate availability of feed and fodder to livestock and poultry is very vital for 
increasing production of milk, poultry, meat and other animal products.  They, 
therefore, recommend that fund allocation to the scheme be increased substantially, 
at once.  
The Committee, further, desire the Department to take initiatives with the help 
of ICAR to grow less water consuming feeder crops for livestock, like millets such as 
Jowar, bajara and ragi which are not only a good source of nutrition in food but their 
stalks are also a good source of fodder for livestock. Millet crops consume less water 
and can easily grow in scanty rain areas. Specific grasses should also be planted as 
per soil type and in Special incentives be given to the farmers who grow fodder crops 
and minimum support prices for m illets should be increased so that farmers could 
get motivated to cultivate these crops. These steps, they feel would certainly go 
alongway in easing out the situation on this front and increase the incomes of small 
and marginal farmers at the same time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

 
 
 In this regard, it is stated that this Department regularly consults ICAR from 
time to time in regard to its various initiatives. Fodder minikits of Bajra,  Guar and 
Jowar have been allocated to various States during Kharif and Rabi season 2009-10. 
The Department has also constituted a Sub -group on feed and fodder with members 
also from the ICAR to deliberate on issues of mutual interest to the two organisations 
in the area of feed and fodder.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16  of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
POULTRY VENTURE CAPITAL FUND SCHEME  
(Recommendation Para No. 4.42) 
 
The Committee note that a Poultry Venture Capital Fund has been 
established in view of huge demand and potential for employment generation. The 
Committee have been informed that earlier this was a part of the Dairy and Poultry 
Venture Capital Fund and it h as now been decided that poultry should have its own 
Venture Capital Fund. The Scheme is under evaluation.  
 The Committee, however, find that there is no clarity in two elements in the 
Demands for Grants of the Department of this year pertaining to this a spect.  A 
Scheme ‘Poultry Venture Capital Fund’ with an allocation of Rs.200.00 crore has 
been shown in the Demands separately while another Scheme ‘Dairy/Poultry 
Venture Capital Fund’ with an allocation of Rs.300.00 crore has also been shown 
separately in the demands.  During the oral evidence also the representatives of the 
Department could not properly explain how funds were being allocated from the old 
Scheme when the Scheme of Poultry Venture Capital Fund was still under 
evaluation.  They, therefore, d esire that the confusion created in the context of 
Poultry Venture Capital Fund may be removed by initiating appropriate necessary 
procedural correctives without any further delay.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

 
 
A scheme, ‘Dairy/ Poultry Venture Capital Fund’ is being implemented by the 
Department since 10 th Plan. To boost the Poultry Sector, it was decided to have a 
separate Scheme ‘Poultry Venture Capital Fund’. Accordingly a scheme was drawn 
up and EFC meeting for the scheme, ‘Poultry Venture Capital F und’ was held on 
12.01.2009. The Committee recommended that department should await the findings 
of the evaluation of erstwhile ‘Dairy/ Poultry Venture Capital Fund’. The evaluation 
has been carried out by the Centre for Management Development, 
Thiruvananthapuram. Meanwhile, in order to ensure a continuous support to various 
poultry activities, the funding of the scheme under the erstwhile pattern from the new 
head of ‘Poultry Venture Capital Fund’ has been continued.   Based on the 
evaluation report of the  erstwhile ‘Dairy/ Poultry Venture Capital Fund’, it has now 
been decided to propose the ‘Poultry Venture Capital Fund’ scheme under capital 
subsidy pattern. Scheme is being reviewed in consultation with NABARD for 
implementation during the next two years of 11th Five Year Plan. 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
SALVAGING AND REARING OF MALE BUFFALO CALVES 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.43) 
The Committee note with concern that the Scheme for Salvaging and Rearing 
of Male Buffalo Calves for which an amount of Rs.300.00 crore has been earmarked 
in the Eleventh Plan, is yet to see the light of the day.  The Scheme was dropped by 
the Planning Commission in favour of Private Sector during the ZBB meeting held on 
7 May, 2007.  On being persuaded by the Department, the Planning Commission 
approved the Scheme on 29 August, 2007.  
Further it is note clear as to why and what happened between May and 
August 2007 for the flip-flop witnessed on this front between the Department and the 
Planning Commission. The Committee desire an explanation for the delay of more 
than two years in this regard. The Committee wonder whether the Scheme would be 
implemented at all in the Eleventh Plan. Out of Rs.300.00 crore no funds have been 
spent during the first two years of the Plan and a sum of Rs.4.00 crore has been 
allocated as BE in the ongoing Fiscal.  The Committee, therefore, exhort the 
Department to attend to the fi nalisation of this Scheme in right earnest so that its 
implementation proper begins without any further delay.    
Reply of the Government 
 

 
 
 
This Department engaged NABCONS (NABARD) to prepare an approach 
papers for the scheme. On finalization of the approa ch paper and consulting the 
Department’s Internal Finance Division on the same, an EFC Memorandum seeking 
approval to the new scheme was circulated to the appraisal agencies on 9.6.08 for 
their comments. Since the scheme was not finalized, funds were reduc ed at RE 
stage and utilized for other ongoing schemes of the Department.   
 
The Department has fixed the meeting of the Expenditure Finance Committee 
on 25.03.10. 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
FOOD SAFETY AND TRACEABILITY SCHEME 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.44) 
The Committee note that a new scheme ‘Food Safety and Traceability’ has 
been launched with an outlay of Rs.50.00 crore for the Eleventh Plan. However for 
the third continuous year no funds have been spent on the scheme . Surprisingly, the 
modalities of implementation of the Scheme are yet to be decided.  NABCONS, the 
agency hired by the Department for drafting the Approach Paper for the Scheme 
have given their Report.  The Department have now appointed another Consultant , 
who is an expert in the area of livestock disease surveillance and management.  The 
Department are also toying with the idea of implementing the Scheme as a part of 
Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme.  It is a known fact that the export of 
livestock produce, poultry, fisheries, etc. from India are mainly hindered because of 
qualitative deficiencies. This point was time and again emphasised by the 
Department before the Committee during the examination of Demands for Grants 
(2009-10). The Committee fa il to understand as to why the Department is unable to 
make any progress in respect of this Scheme of utmost importance for increasing the 
exports of livestock produce, poultry, fisheries, etc. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Department should st op further dithering in the matter and prepare a 
roadmap for implementation of this Scheme without any further delay.  
Reply of the Government 
 

 
 
This is an entirely new area for the country for which neither requisite 
expertise  nor experience is available.  Hence, it is necessary to proceed with due 
caution so that any steps taken do not have to be retraced and public money spent 
infructuously. After Department’s consultations within the country through NABARD / 
NABCONS did not provide an actionable blueprint, the FAO has been approached to 
provide the services of an international expert. As soon as such an expert becomes 
available, which is expected to happen soon, a road map for implementation of the 
traceability system for food safety would be prepared. 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19  of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECT  ‘CONTROL AND CONTAINMENT OF AVIAN 
INFLUENZA’ 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.45) 
 
During the examination of the Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the 
Department, the Committee also dwelt upon the implementation of the Externally 
Aided Scheme ‘Control and Containment of Avian Influenza’. In the Basic Materia l 
submitted to the Committee, a sum of Rs. 40.00 crore has been indicated as BE for 
the year 2008-09. This was reduced to Rs. 34.20 crore at the RE stage. The Actual 
Expenditure was only Rs. 5.83 crore (Prov.).  When this gross -underutilisation was 
pointed out to the Department, they informed in the subsequent written reply that the 
actual expenditure incurred was Rs.  7.04 crore and not Rs. 5.83 core. In the 
Outcome Budget of the Department Submitted as a part of record to the Committee, 
the Actual Expendi ture for this Project has been shown as Rs. 6.43 crore. While 
desiring that the correct figures be conveyed to them immediately, the Committee 
take strong exception to the submission of contradictory figures in a casual and 
careless manner by the Department. They expect the Department to be more careful 
in future, while furnishing information to the Parliament and its various bodies. 
 
Reply of the Government 

 
 
 
A sum of Rs.7.04 crore was released during the financial year 2008 -09 under 
the Externally Aided Pr oject ‘Preparedness Control and Containment of Avian 
Influenza’ during 2008 -09. Out of this, Rs.5.83 crore was released through cheques 
and Rs.1.21 crore was released through Letter of Authority. Details are given as 
below: 
Amount in Rs. Crore 
Activity Cheques Issued 
Capacity Building: Veterinary Personnel (Vets. & Paravets.) 0.17 
Participatory Disease Intelligence: Training of community 3.00 
Animal Disease Surveillance Information System: Satellite 
Imagery/ GIS/GPS/Data Network 
0.05 
Surveillance of Poultry: Creation of Basic Facility for 
Sample/Specimen Collection 
0.50 
Strategic Reserves of Equipments, PPE, etc. 0.66 
Bird Flu Cell 0.12 
IEC: Development of Material and Dissemination 1.33 
Total 5.83 
Letter of Authority (LoA) issued for Information, Education 
and Communication: Development of Material and 
Dissemination 
1.21 
Grand Total  7.04 
 
Accordingly, the figure of Rs.7.04 crore was reported to the Committee. 
However, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting could spend an amoun t of 
Rs.0.60 crore only, out of an amount of Rs.1.21 crore released to it through the LoA. 
Hence, the actual expenditure incurred in 2008-09 was Rs.6.43 crore.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT OF SMALL RUMINANT AND RABBITS SCHEME 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.46) 
 

 
 
The Committee having examined the performance of the Integrated 
Development of Small Ruminant and Rabbits Scheme, note that an outlay of Rs. 
200.00 crore has been allocated in the Eleventh Plan fo r this Central Sector 
Scheme. However, it is distressing to note that  even though meagre sums of 
Rs.10.22 crore and Rs.15.00 crore were allocated for the Scheme during 2007 -08 
and 2008-09 respectively, the Actual Expenditure was Zero in both the years. Thi s 
happened due to the fact that the necessary approvals for the Scheme were 
accorded only in 2009. Notwithstanding the assertion of the Department that the 
Scheme will now be implemented in bimodal approach through NABARD and the 
State Implementing Agencie s, the Committee apprehend that if the present state of 
affairs continue, the Scheme would miss its cost as well as time lines thereby spilling 
over to the next Plan. They, therefore, recommend that the Department should come 
up with a specific and well la id down schedule for this scheme, at once, and 
implement the Scheme within that rigid framework to avoid cost and time over -runs. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government in 
this regard within a month of presentation of this Report to the Parliament. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Central Sector Scheme ‘Integrated Development of Small Ruminants and 
Rabbits’ was approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee on 16 th February 
2009 with an allocation of Rs.134.83 crore for the remaining period of 11 th Five Year 
Plan. Budget allocation for 2009 -10 is Rs. 18.33 crore. As the scheme is to be 
implemented through NABARD and the State Implementing Agencies in bimodal 
approach, there was some delay in implementing the scheme in the initial period of 
2009-10.  However, guidelines provide year -wise phasing of physical and financial 
activities for the remaining period of 11 th Five Year Plan to avoid cost and time over -
runs. The D epartment is in constant touch with NABARD and the State Govts. to 
implement the scheme successfully. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
PIGGERY DEVELOPMENT 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.47) 
 

 
 
The Central Sector Scheme ‘Piggery Development’ is again beset with the 
same problem of delay in requisite approvals/sanctions. The Scheme has a sum of 
Rs. 150.00 crore earmarked in the Eleventh Plan. However, spending during first two 
years has been ‘NIL’. This year also a miniscule amount  of Rs. 3.00 crore has been 
allocated for the Scheme. The Committee note with dismay that the Scheme was 
circulated to the appraisal agencies in 2008 -09 one year after commencement of 
Eleventh Plan. Further, after certain modifications, it has been again c irculated to the 
appraisal agencies in the current Financial Year and comments of one of them are 
still awaited. Thereafter, the Department will place the proposal before EFC and only 
after these approvals are received, the Scheme could be implemented. The  
Committee are of the firm view that with such an approach nothing tangible can be 
achieved. They would like the Department to take a proactive stand in the matter to 
expedite the response of the remaining appraisal agency and EFC approval on 
priority basi s. Unless this is done, they apprehend that the Scheme will merely 
remain on the drawing board in this Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
The Department has fixed the meeting of the expenditure finance committee 
on 25.03.10 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
DROPPING OF NEW SCHEMES 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.48) 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that two new Schemes of the 
Department viz. ‘Special Feeding Programme for Raising Heifers’ and 
‘Establishment of Livestock Food Corporation’ have been finally dropped at the 
behest of Planning Commission. Both these Schemes have been featuring in all 
three Demands For Grants of the Department in the Eleventh Plan. In fact, token 
allocations of Rs.  1.00 lakh each had also been made for the two Schemes in 2007 -
08, the first year of Eleventh Plan. The Committee feel that if decisions on inclusion 
or otherwise of the Schemes takes so long, it does not augur well. The Planning and 
conceptualising of Schemes do r equire certain commitments from the Department in 
terms of manpower, finances and time. They, therefore, desire the Department to 
invariably ensure that adequate ground work is done for their justification, before 
they are proposed so that they are not dropped at such late stages of consideration. 
In the similar vein, the Committee would also like to comment on the performance of 
the Department vis-à-vis two more Schemes viz. ‘Resource Mapping in 100 Potential 
districts and Promotion of entrepreneurial programme in small ruminants & pigs’ and 
‘setting up of retail poultry dressing units’. Both these schemes have been shown in 
the DFGs of the Department for 2007 -08 and 2008-09 with token/no allocation. They 
have also been included in the ongoing fiscal as well with ‘NIL’ allocations. The 
Committee find that EFC Memo for both these Schemes have been prepared. With a 
view to ensure that the implementation of these Schemes is not delayed any further, 
the Committee recommend that special initiatives are needed to get the EFC Memo 
of these Schemes considere d on priority for a favourable decision. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the efforts of the Department in this regard at the 
earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
At the advice of the Planning Commission, the scheme ‘Resource Mapping in 
100 Poten tial Districts and Promotion of Entrepreneurial Programme in Small 
Ruminants and Pigs’ has been dropped and a new Central Sector Scheme 

 
 
‘Integrated Development of Small Ruminants and Rabbits’ has been initiated in the 
11th Five Year Plan with an allocation of Rs.134.83 crore.  
 
Further, the Working Group on Animal Husbandry and Dairying for 11 th Plan 
had recommended taking up a scheme for Piggery Development in the country. 
Accordingly, NABARD Consultancy Services was engaged by the Department to 
prepare an Approach Paper on the subject.  Based on this Approach Paper, a new 
Central Sector Scheme for Piggery Development has been formulated.  
Memorandum for Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) for the new scheme with an 
outlay of Rs.150 crore was circulated on 02.09.2008 and again on 06.08.2009 with 
supplementary information.  However, the EFC meetin g under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (Expenditure) could not be held on 10.03.2010.   
Now, in view of the limited time available during the 11 th Plan, the Department 
has decided to scale down the outlay to Rs.73.58 crore and the EFC meeting under 
the Chai rmanship of Secretary (ADF) is scheduled on 25.03.2010.  It has a 
component on Resource Mapping with an outlay of Rs.0.39 crore. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
ALLOCATIONS TO DAIRY SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.8) 
 
The C ommittee are extremely happy to note that with the estimated 
production of 110 million tonnes of milk during 2008 -09, India has become the 
largest producer of milk in the world. The Committee are however, saddened to note 
that inspite of the well known emp loyment generation and export potentials of milk 
and dairy products, the Government has not paid sufficient attention to the Dairy 
Sector. This is amply reflected by meagre allocation of Rs. 580.00 crore for this 
Sector for the entire Eleventh Five Year Pl an. At a time when the consolidation and 
investment are the bye -words for all industries, the allocation to this Sector only 
reflects the indifference of the Government to a prospective sunshine area. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Government sh ould enhance the allocations to 
the Dairy Sector in a substantial way in the Eleventh Plan itself so that the full 
potential of the Sector both in terms of employment generation and export earnings 
is achieved to the maximum of the known potential. 
 
Reply of the Government 

 
 
 
 An amount of Rs.2,170.79 crore has been allocated for development of dairy 
sector during the 11 th Five Year Plan period against Rs.1,161.00 crore allocated 
during 10th Five Year Plan period under the scheme implemented by the Department 
for this purpose.  There has been increase in allocation of funds during the 11 th Five 
Year Plan as compared to 10 th Five Year Plan by 86.97%.  Details of scheme -wise 
allocation during the 10th & 11th Plan is given below: 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the scheme 10th Plan 
outlay 
11th Plan 
outlay 
 A. Centrally Sponsored Schemes   
1. National Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding 375.00 554.00 
2. Assistance to States for Fodder Development 25.00 141.40 
3. Assistance to States for Control of Animal 
Diseases 
255.00 550.00 
S. 
No. 
Name of the scheme 10th Plan 
outlay 
11th Plan 
outlay 
4. National Project on Rinderpest Eradication 40.00 25.00 
5. Livestock Insurance 0.00 149.40 
6. Intensive Dairy Development Programme 175.00 124.99 
7. Strengthening Infrastructure for Quality and Clean 
Milk Production 
30.00 100.00 
8. Delhi Milk Scheme 1.00 5.00 
 Total-A 901.00 1,649.79 
 B. Central Sector Schemes   
1. Central Cattle Breeding Farm 49.00 75.00 
2. Assistance to Cooperatives 130.00 50.00 
3. Dairy/Poultry Venture Capital Fund 25.00 0.00 
4. Dairy Venture Capital Fund 0.00 300.00 
5. Central Herd Registration Scheme 11.00 16.00 

 
 
6. Central Fodder Development Organization 45.00 80.00 
 Total-B 260.00 521.00 
 Total A+B 1,161.00 2,170.79 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
 
NATIONAL DAIRY PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.9) 
 
The Committee note that a National Dairy Plan (NDP) with an estimated 
Outlay of Rs.17371.00 crore has been proposed by the Department. NDP contains 
strategies to increase the milk production of the Country to meet the projected 
demand of about 180 million tonnes by 2021 -22 and also enhance the share of 
organised sector to about 65% from the present 30%. The Plan has three major 
components viz. Enhancing Milk Production through better productivity; 
Strengthening/expanding infrastructure in procurement, proce ssing, marketing; and 
Quality Assurance and Human Resource Development.  
 The Committee also note that the Planning Commission has accorded in -
principle approval for the Scheme subject to certain conditions.  The financial 
requirements for the Scheme, as p er the Project Report of National Dairy 
Development Board, would be met mainly through external assistance (Rs.15994 
crore) in the form of soft loans and grants.  The remaining funds would be 
contributed by the implementing agency as margin money (Rs.1377 crore).  Any 
shortfalls in the external assistance would be met through grants in the Schemes of 
Central Government and/or other agencies.   The Preliminary Project Report of 
NDDB has been forwarded by the Government to the World Bank in March, 2009. 
The timeframe for various activities would be drawn once the Detailed Project Report 
is finalised and approval of various Departments and the Cabinet is obtained.  The 
Committee are happy that at last the Government has made a beginning towards 
achieving holistic development of the Dairying Sector in the Country.  The NDP has 
come not a day too soon.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department 
should work in tandem with other Ministries/Departments/Agencies with a single 
minded zeal to fructify this Sc heme of immense national interest and ensure that its 
implementation does not suffer like many other Schemes of the Department that 
have been commented upon elsewhere in this Report.  The Committee would like to 

 
 
be apprised of the positive outcome of the e ndeavours of the Department in the 
matter at the earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 National Dairy Plan (NDP) is a strategic plan with an outlay of Rs.17,371 crore 
to achieve a target of 180 million tonnes of milk production annually by 2021 -22.   
Milk production is expected to grow at 4% with an annual incremental output of 5 
million tonnes in the next 15 years.  Districts will be categorised into 324 high 
potential districts for intensive development and remaining 282 low potential districts 
for further expansion of the sector. 
 The Government is exploring World Bank assistance to bring down the cost to 
the Government and also to provide loans at a concessional rate.  Approach 
paper/Preliminary Project Report (PPR) has been forwarded to the World Bank 
through the Ministry of Finance.  NDDB is preparing State specific plans in 
consultation with State Governments/Milk Federations to increase milk production. 
 NDDB is having discussion with World Bank officials to finalise Detailed 
Project Report (DPR).  The  World Bank team indicated that they would need to first 
prepare a Project Concept Note (PCN) for their internal approval after which they 
would be about to finalise the nature of participation of the World Bank in jointly 
preparing the Detailed Project Re port on the NDP.  The World Bank team explained 
some of the options that could be pursued for possible funding of the NDP by the 
World Bank. 
 The World Bank team conveyed that while NDP spans a period of 15 years, 
the World Bank usually funds projects for a period of around five years.  It was felt 
that the PCN would cover the first phase of NDP spanning 6 ½ years – 1st October, 
2010 to 31st March, 2017, co-terminous with the 12th Five Year Plan. 
 It is also mentioned that after the PCN is approved, it usua lly takes about 18 
months to complete activities to the preparation of the Detailed Project Report, 
obtaining the approval by the Government of India and the appraisal of the project by 
the World Bank.  Considering the urgency, these processes could be exp edited so 
as to launch the project by 1st October, 2010 or latest by 1st April, 2011. 
 
ASSISTANCE TO FISHERIES INSTITUTE SCHEME 
(Recommendation Para No. 6.17) 
The Committee note that there have been substantially less spendings in the 
Scheme ‘Assistance to  Fisheries Institute’ in the first two years of the Plan.  This 

 
 
happened due to non-acquisition of vessels for the Central Institute for Fisheries and 
Nautical Engineering and Fishery Survey of India and also due to litigation in respect 
of construction of  Office building of Fishery Survey of India at Mumbai.  The 
Committee hope that the Department will take all necessary steps to acquire the 
vessels for these two Institutions without any further delay even if they are on lease 
basis, so that the research a nd other activities of these Institutions do not suffer in 
the absence of the vessels.    
Reply of the Government 
 
The Technical Tender Committee constituted for purchase of vessels for 
Fishery Survey of India (FSI) and Central Institute of Fisheries, Nautical and 
Engineering Training (CIFNET) could not get valid quotations from suitable firms for 
construction of surve y/training vessels and the Committee recommended the 
Ministry to take an appropriate decision in this regard.  The Institutes have been 
advised to initiate the process of acquisition of the vessels through Cochin Shipyard 
Limited (CSL), Kochi which is a pu blic sector undertaking.  Further, in the 
meanwhile, they have been directed to start the process for taking appropriate 
vessels on lease.   
As regards, construction of office building of FSI, Mumbai, there has been an 
escalation of the cost of the project s and the revised estimates are being examined 
in consultation with Integrated Finance Division (IFD).  
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25  of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
NATIONAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
(Recommendation Para No. 6.18) 
The Committee have noted a trend of gross underspending in the financial 
performance of the National Fisheries Development Board during the last two 
Fiscals.  The BE in both the years had to be slashed down from Rs.100.50 crore and 
Rs.75.00 crore respectiv ely to Rs.50.00 crore and Rs.46.90 crore respectively.  
However, as submitted by the Department, these being the formative years of the 
Board, it was in the process of settling.  Now that this phase is over, the Committee 
expect the Board to manage its fin ancial affairs in a more professional manner to 
ensure optimum utilisation of scarce resources for attainment of the objectives for 
which it was setup.   

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A.  Details indicating the release of funds to National Fisheries Development  Board 
(NFDB) and utilization of these funds. 
1.  The details of the funds allocated (Budget Estimate) to NFDB and the funds 
actually made available (Revised Estimate) for the year2007 -06 to 2009 -10 is as 
follows:   
Funds Allocated:                                                                                  Rs. in crore 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
BE RE BE RE BE RE 
100.50 50.00 75.00 46.90 135.00 100.00 
 
Expenditure incurred:                                 Rs. in crore 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Funds 
Received 
Funds Available Funds 
Sanctioned 
2006-07 0 30.00 30.00 3.66 
2007-08 26.85 50.00 76.85 27.09 
2008-09 50.81 46.90 97.71 71.28 
2009-10 26.46 85.00 111.46 98.00 
Total   211.90  200.03 
 
B.  Formative years and institution building: 
The Board was established on July 10 th 2006 and it was inaugurated on 9 th 
September 2006.  During 2006 -07 and 2007-08, the NFDB was still in the formative 
stage and the Board initiated recruitment process for appointing  suitable officers.  It 
was only by January 2008 t hat a majority of the officers and technical staff were 
inducted into the Board.  The guidelines for various activities were prepared and 
approved in the 3 rd Governing Body meeting held on 05.01.2008.  These guidelines 
relating to various schemes were communicated to all states and other implementing 
organizations. Hence it took some time to set up the process of creating the required 

 
 
infrastructure and manpower and a working framework for implementation of the 
various schemes.   
C.  Constraints in the implementation: 
The response from the states and other user organizations has been slow  
resulting in  slow utilization of budget provided during the first two years of NFDB.  
Some of the reasons that could be attributed for slow absorption of resources are:   
i) The NFDB does not have its own implementing machinery and by design it 
has to implement the schemes through the state fisheries departments and other 
institutions.  As the organization was new and the schemes and guidelines were also 
new the states and im plementing agencies could not respond quickly to access 
funding and took time to abide by procedural formalities. 
ii) Conditions of 10% contribution to NFDB by the states, and payment of 25% 
gross income from reservoir stocking schemes, harbors/landing centers  etc. were 
not acceptable to certain states and it required a lot of convincing effort.  
iii) Equity participation in certain schemes like Tuna Fisheries, whole sale 
markets and harbours development was found not feasible and hence expenditure 
on equity was not incurred. 
iv) Other schemes such as RKVY, PM’s package etc. are flexible and hence offer 
higher rates of subsidy.  Some of the states are availing RKVY funds for such 
fisheries projects which require large investments. 
 
 
 
D.  Efforts to speed up progress : 
Realizing the problems faced during the last three years, NFDB has recast the 
funding pattern and subsidy for the existing schemes and incorporated certain new 
schemes with a view to make the programmes acceptable and attractive to the user 
governments /government organizations/entrepreneurs/ farmers/ fishermen and fish 
merchants for realizing the NFDB objectives.  Government of India has also 
approved the revised guidelines and these revised guidelines were communicated to 
all implementing states and other o rganizations with a request to send the proposals 
accordingly during this year.   

 
 
5.  Further, during this financial year, the following steps were taken to speed up 
implementation of the programmes by NFDB: 
i. Organising regional meetings with the State Gove rnments /implementing 
agencies. 
ii. Conducting seminars/ workshops to identify new projects with the 
stakeholders. 
iii. Networking with R&D institutions  and  implementation of pilot projects for 
technology transfer. 
iv. Organising Fish festivals and participation in the events and exhibitions to 
popularize the schemes. 
As a result many states and other implementing agencies have shown better 
response to implement the schemes during the year 2009 -10.  Therefore, NFDB 
could sanction schemes costing Rs. 98.00 crore as on  31.12.2009. Further, the 
Board has also received proposals valued at Rs. 111.00 crore which are at various 
stages of processing. From the statement given above, it could be seen that there is 
good progress in implementation of the schemes in the last two years despite the 
constraints explained in the paragraphs 2 and 3 stated above. 
 
E.  Major activities taken up by the Board:   
NFDB has been able to mobilize efforts in the following areas: 
 Reservoir Fisheries Development  
 Inland Aquaculture 
  Technology Up-gradation  
  Commercial Exploitation of Chaurs and Mauns 
  Cage Culture  Popularization 
  Open sea cage culture 
  Sea bass culture in ponds   
  Cryopreservation of fish milt 
  Popularization of Magur Culture  
 Establishment/modernization of hygienic markets 
  Modernization of Harbours 
  Aquatic Quarantine Facility  
  Individual Quick Freezer (IQF) Facility 

 
 
  Tuna: Sashimi grade processing unit 
 Ornamental fisheries 
   Human Resource Development: 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28  of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
MARINE FISHERIES PRODUCTION 
(Recommendation Para No. 6.19) 
The Committee observe that with the marine fisheries production having 
reached a plateau, the Department is rightly focusing on development of inland 
fisheries. The Committee, however, find that the development of inland fisheries is 
facing problems becaus e of three reasons (i) the ownership of water bodies is not 
clearly defined in many States, (ii) There is no well laid down procedure for 
management of resource and (iii) since aquaculture is not considered to be a part of 
agriculture, it does not enjoy th e facilities like non -levy of income tax, concessional 
tariff, water, access to credit, etc..  The Committee are of the firm view that until and 
unless remedial measures to tackle these three serious bottlenecks are initiated with 
due promptitude, the deve lopment of inland fisheries cannot be optimised.  They, 
therefore, recommend  the Department to workout a well laid out plan to take care of 
these three impediments and get down to the the task of removing them in 
consultation with other Ministries/Departm ents/State Governments/other agencies at 
the earliest.   
Reply of the Government 
 
 This Department has consistently taken -up the issue of ownership of water 
bodies with the State Governments and urged that this should be vested with the 
Fisheries Department.  In addition, the issue of long-term leasing of water bodies has 
also been taken -up by this Department to facilitate greater investment in the inland 
fisheries sector.  These issues are also being discussed and reiterated with the State 
Governments in various review meetings, conferences and workshops whenever 
such events are organized. However, since, fisheries is a state subject, the 
identification of bottlenecks and remedial action essentially lies with the State 
Governments. 

 
 
However, there are two initiatives undertaken by this Department which would 
go a long way to tackle the first two bottlenecks mentioned in the Report, namely the 
issue of diversified ownership of water bodies and efficient management of 
resources.  The first initiative relates to drafting of a Model Bill for Inland Fisheries 
and Aquaculture for adoption by the State Governments.   The Bill which was drafted 
by this Department was circulated among all the State Governments and comments 
were received.  These comments were appropriately incorporated in the draft Bill.  
The draft Bill is being vetted by the Ministry of Law and Justice at the moment after 
which it would be recommended to the States for adoption.  Many a bottlenecks of 
the fisheries sector would be adequately a ddressed alongwith ownership issues if 
the provisions of the Bill are adopted by the State Governments. 
Second initiative relates to reservoir fish productivity. Fish productivity from 
reservoirs in India is one of the lowest in the world.  This Department  has circulated 
comprehensive guidelines for culture -based Fisheries Management in Small 
Reservoirs in India among all the States, which contains the blue print for modern 
management practices for reservoir fisheries.  Guidelines for management of 
medium a nd large reservoirs are being published shortly which would also be 
circulated to States for adoption.  As mentioned in the action taken on para 6.18 on 
NFDB, Reservoir Development Programme has been taken up as a flagship activity 
of the Board in about 12 lakh ha. with a view to enhance the fish production form the 
present level of 15 -20 kg/ha. to at least 150 kg/ha. Apart from stocking seed from 
external sources, seed rearing within and in the vicinity of the reservoirs under both 
pond/cage/pen rearing sy stems is promoted by NFDB to internalize the seed 
production capacity of the concerned states. This new initiative is expected to 
empower fishermen societies to produce quality seed at lower costs and thus leading 
to sustainable fish production. 
In so far as the issue of aquaculture being at par with agriculture is 
concerned, the actions lie both with the State Governments and the Central 
Government.  State Governments have been requested to actively consider 
concessions on power and water charges to aquacu lture at par with agriculture.  In 
so far as Central Government is concerned, this Department has already taken up 
the issue of income tax exemption for aquaculture and concessional credit at par 
with agriculture with the Ministry of Finance. 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.31  of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
DEVELOPMENT OF  ESTUARIES 
(Recommendation Para No. 6.20) 
The Committee find that in spite of the fact that most of the fish is produced in 
estuaries, the estuaries continue to be in the most neglected state.  Admittedly, the 
Department realised the importance of this aspect hitherto neglected by them only 
when the matter was taken up by the Committee.  The Committee expect that the 
assurance given to them by the Department during evidence that an appropriate 
scheme for the development of estuaries would be framed and implemented by them 
at the earliest would be honoured.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The matter regarding a new scheme for management of estuaries has been 
examined by this Department.  It has been recognized that estuaries and other 
breeding grounds of fish are a highly critical eco-system for sustainable development 
of fisheries.     
Accordingly, this Department had advised NFDB to prepare appropriate 
projects for sustainable management of estuaries and breeding habitats.  NFDB has 
accordingly prepared a scheme which is proposed to be implemented in 
collaboration with ICAR and State Governments. 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.34  of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
 
 

 
 
SPECIAL PACKAGE FOR SUICIDE PRONE DISTRICTS  
(Recommendation Para No. 7.6) 
 
The Committee note that the actual expenditure under the Scheme ‘Special 
Package for Suicide Prone Districts’ has been significantly less than the allocated 
funds.  It was Rs.131.61 crore in 2007 -08 against an RE of Rs. 170.00 crore.  
Similarly, it was Rs. 132.91 crore during 2008 -09 against an RE of Rs. 160.00 crore.  
The Department contended that the drawal of funds by the beneficiary States 
remained below the allocations made by the Department for the purpose in these 
years. The Committee would however like to comment on the total projection made 
by the Department for the Scheme for the entire Eleventh Plan which is Rs. 340.00 
crore.  Assuming the entire RE funds of last two years had been availed by the 
States, the Department would be left with only Rs.10.00 crore for the remaining three 
years.  Presently, a sum of Rs.264.52 crore has already been spent in the first two 
years of the Plan and if the entire amount of Rs.75.00 crore which is the BE for 
2009-10 is spent this year, the Departmen t would be virtually left with no funds for 
the remaining two years. The Committee hope that the Department will anticipate the 
fund requirement for such important scheme in a more careful manner in future. 
They further desire that a mid -term review of the  attainment of the objectives vis -à-
vis the expenditure already incurred on the Scheme be made on an urgent basis 
before the projections for BE 2010 -2011 are made by the Department. They also 
desire to be apprised of the outcome of the review at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Special Package was approved in August 2007 with a total budgetary 
outlay of Rs. 510.79 crore covering a period of three years i.e. up to March 2009. 
Accordingly, the Department made pro -rata allocations for 2006 -07, 2007 -08 and 
2008-09. The actual off-take of funds by the beneficiary states was much lower than 
the funds provided for as would be seen from the table below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Amount in Rs. Crore 
Year Funds provided Funds drawn by 
beneficiary states 
2006-07 169.37 90.33 
2007-08 153.00 131.62 
2008-09 160.00 132.91 
 
The Department did not receive any additional allocation for implementing the 
Special package. The funds for the purpose were mobilised by cutting back the 
requirements of other schemes. The above situation of lower offtake by the 
beneficiary states create d a situation where the funds provided for the Special 
Package were not utilised to extent provided and these were also not permitted to be 
reappropriated for other schemes, which were suffering for want of adequate 
allocations. The Govt. of India also dec ided to extend the term of the package up to 
September 2011. In order to avoid the situation that is seen from the above table, the 
Department provided an amount of Rs. 75 crore only for implementation of the 
Special Package in 2009-10.  The actual drawal so far is only Rs.61.02 crore.   
In the meanwhile, the Govt. of India decided to implement ‘ Development of Kuttanad 
Wetland Eco -system’ (August 2008) and ‘Mitigation of Agrarian Distress in Idukki 
District’ (December 2008) as part of the Special Package. T he total outlay of 
‘Mitigation of Agrarian Distress in Idukki District’ is Rs.91.15 crore and that of 
‘Development of Kuttanad Wetland Eco -system’ is Rs.9.50 crore. An amount of 
Rs.9.14 crore has already been incurred on these two new components, taking th e 
total expenditure under the Special Package to Rs.415.88 crore.  
Keeping in view these additional requirements, the Department proposed a 
requirement of Rs.135 crore for the Special Package for 2010 -11. However, keeping 
in view the reduced allocation of Rs. 1300 actually made to the Department for the 
year 2010-11, the revised allocation for the Special Package for the year stands at 
Rs.95.85 crore. 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S ACTION TAKEN 
REPLY 
 
MID-TERM APPRAISAL  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.36) 
 
The Committee find that the Department have completed their mid -term 
appraisal exercise and presented the results, thereof, to the Planning Commission 
and the experts committee constituted by the Planning Commission. The Committee 
have gone through the outcome of mid term appraisal submitted to them by the 
Department. The Committee are, however, not satisfied with the manner in which the 
outcome of mid -term appraisal ha s been projected by the Department. While citing 
achievements of the Eleventh Plan, the Department have needlessly and 
inexplicably made comparisons with data as old as that of year 1997. In other cases, 
achievements have been couched in a vague language   thereby making their exact 
assessment difficult to understand. The constraints cited are also the ones which are 
generally known and not specific to the Schemes included in the Eleventh Plan. Like-
wise, the way ahead also doesn’t present any cogent roadma p for achievement of 
goals enumerated. Such type of inputs, in the opinion of the Committee, are neither 
going to make the mid -term appraisal a professional and purposeful exercise nor 
help the Department in taking appropriate mid course corrections. Since  the mid 
term appraisal would continue beyond the Committee’s examination of the Demands 
for Grants 2009-10, they desire that the final outcome of this appraisal along with the 
specific follow up measures initiated by the Department may be furnished to the m 
alongwith the Action Taken Replies of the Government within three months of 
presentation of this Report to the Parliament.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Planning Commission has not yet intimated the outcome of the Mid -term 
Review of the Department’s 11th Five Year Plan undertaken by it. 

 
 
EXPORT OF ANIMAL, DAIRYING AND FISHERIES PRODUCTS 
(Recommendation Para No. 7.7) 
 
The Committee’s perusal of the figures furnished by the Department for export 
of animal, dairying and fisheries products during the last t hree years reveals a 
disturbing trend.  They are concerned to note that while the export of animal 
products is increasing in quantitative terms, they are not yielding higher value in 
monetary terms.  In the case of fisheries product also, while the quantit y of exports 
has increased during the last three years, the value of exports has decreased.  Since 
the exports of these products are important for the country’s economic growth and 
that they also provide employment to a substantial segment of the populatio n, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should look into the reasons for these 
alarming trends and take remedial measures urgently so that the exports of animal, 
dairying and fisheries products get remunerative returns in the remaining period of 
the Eleventh Plan.      
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Following is the information relating to the export of animal and marine 
products in the last three years: 
Qty. in MT 
Values Rs. in crores 
Items 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
 
 Qty Value Qty Value Qty Value 
Buffalo 
Meat 
4,94,506.30 3,213.70 4,83,478.29 3,549.80 4,62,749.62 4,839.70 
Sheep 
and Goat 
Meat 
5,777.52 65.87 8,908.72 134.09 37,790.64 493.36 
Poultry 
Products 
7,11,245.67 318.17 13,55,246.31 441.08 10,57,016.46 422.05 
Dairy 
Products 
45,371.84 434.57 69,415.44 866.56 70,146.77 980.86 
Animal 
Casings 
436.98 9.50 619.68 684.14 1823.72 884.32 
Processed 
Meat 
860.69 7.12 1,245.47 12.96 857.63 10.14 
Items 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 

 
 
 
 Qty Value Qty Value Qty Value 
Natural 
Honey 
8,135.60 60.91 12,231.19 93.29 15,587.53 148.96 
Swine 
Meat 
1,523.47 8.65 1,710.89 24.63 817.82 9.17 
Total 
Animal 
Products 
12,67,857.07 4,118.56 19,32,855.99 5,129.26 16,46,790.19 6,913.12 
Total 
Marine 
Products 
6,126,41.5 8,363.5 5,41,700.8 7,620.90 6,02,834.0 8,608.0 
Total 18,80,498.57 12,482.06 24,74,556.79 12,750.16 22,49,625.19 15,521.12 
 
       Source APEDA and MPEDA 
 
     It would be seen from the above that there has been an increase in value of 
exports in case of all the products, except for marginal decrease in the case of swine 
meat, processed meat and poultry products. The main reason for this decline is the 
outbreak o f Avian Influenza and resulting bans imposed by various countries on 
these imports.  
These years have seen a significant increase in the value of exports from 
Rs.12,750.16 crores in 2007 -08 to Rs.15,521.12 crores in 2008 -09, i.e. an increase 
of about 21.7%. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH ACTION 
TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
 
NEED FOR ENHANCED INVESTMENT 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.8) 
  
The Committee note the acclaimed position of  India as a huge reservoir of 
livestock and poultry and the vital role these abundant resources have played and 
continue to play in providing the much needed sustenance to the rural populace of 
the Country. The Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sect ors, undoubtedly, 
also provide greatest protection and resource to fall back to the farming community 
against natural calamities and the uncertainties of agriculture, which is their primary 
vocation. The Committee further note that these sectors have also contributed a 
significant 5.21% in total GDP of the Country in the year 2007 -08 when the 
Budgetary Allocation to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries) was a paltry 0.28% of the Central Plan Outlay. These sectors 
also provide total employment to more than 9% of the work force in the Country. The 
Committee’s examination, as borne out by the succeeding narrative, has revealed 
the undeniable potential of these Sectors as engines of growth, particularly in the 
context of the rural economy. They, therefore, are of the firm view that sector friendly 
schemes and substantially enhanced investments be made by the Government in 
these sectors at once which is the need of the hour as also in the larger interest of 
the Country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department included the following new schemes for implementation 
during the 11th Five Year Plan:- 
 
1 Poultry Development  
2 Integrated Development of Small Ruminants & Rabbits  

 
 
3 Establishment/Modernisation of Rural Slaughter Houses  
4 Utilisation of Fallen Animals 
5 Poultry Venture Capital Fund 
6 Piggery Development 
7 Salvaging and Rearing of Male Buffalo Calves 
8 National Animal Disease Reporting System (NADRS) 
9 National Control Programme of Peste des Petitis Ruminants (PPR) 
10 Strengthening of Existing Hospitals/Dispensaries 
11 National Control Programme of Brucellosis 
12 Food Safety and Traceability 
13 Livestock Extension & Delivery Services 
14 National Dairy Plan 
It would be noted that the new schemes are innovative, sector -friendly and seek to 
address the felt needs on the ground. 
It may also be submitted that the Department has been seeking higher 
budgetary allocations so as to make required level of investment f or development of 
the animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors.  As would be noted from the 
position brought out below, the allocations actually received by the Department were 
of a much lower size:-  
Amount in Rs. crore 
S.No. Year Allocation demanded Allocation received 
1 2007-08 1,435.10 910.00 
2 2008-09 1,891.25 1,000.00 
3 2009-10 1,889.07 1,100.00 
4 2010-11 1,829.38 1,300.00 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7  of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
 UNDER-UTILISATION OF PLAN FUNDS 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.9) 
 
The Committee note that Demand No. 3 pertaining to Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries provides fo r Rs. 1583.50 crore in BE 2009 -2010. 
This consists of Rs. 1564.95 crore in the Revenue Section and Rs. 18.55 crore in the 
Capital Section. While the entire amount in the Capital Section is in the Plan side, in 
the Revenue Section a sum of Rs. 1081.45 crore  is on Plan side and the remaining 
Rs. 483.50 crore is on the Non -Plan side. Compared to corresponding Revised 
Estimates figures of previous Fiscal, there is an increase of 16.5% in the Revenue 
Section (Plan Side) and an increase of 33% in Revenue Section (Non-Plan side). In 
the Capital Section there is an increase in allocation by about 62% over the previous 
year. The Committee have also noted that the Department implements their agenda 
through a number of Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes.  
The Committee find that the approved Eleventh Plan outlay for the 
Department is Rs. 8174.00 crores, and the plan outlays in the first three years of the 
plan period from 2007 -08 to 2009 -10 works out to Rs. 3010.00 crores, leaving a 
huge balance of Rs. 5164. 00 crores for the last two years of the Plan period. The 
committee feel that there is a large scope for increasing the Annual Plan allocation 
by the Planning Commission in favour of the Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries and they desire that the allocation for 2009-10 should suitably 
be revised upwards at the Revised Estimates this year itself by the Planning 
Commission. 
The Committee also finds that out of the total Plan outlay of Rs. 1910.00 
crores in the first two years of the Five Ye ar Plan period, and expenditure of Rs. 
1637.21 crores only has been incurred leaving Rs. 272.19 crore unutilised.  The 
Committee feel that the Department should analyse the reasons for this shortfall in 
the utilisation of funds and evolve suitable remedial strategies so that the Plan Funds 
allocated to the Department are fully utilised. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The department has been pursuing with planning commission to provide 
adequate allocation for the department of animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries. 
in this direction, the department proposed rs.1829.38 crore for annual plan 2010 -11, 
which was discussed  in a meeting held on 14.01.2010 under the chairmanship of 
member (agri.), planning commission. the department was advised to reduce revised 
projection up to an amount of rs. 1400 crore. however, budget allocation of only 
rs.1,300 crore was received for 20 10-11, which is 18 percent higher than the last 
year’s allocation.   
 
The scheme -wise utilisation of funds against allotment has been examined. 
The scheme-wise reasons for shortfall in expenditure in 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 have 
been presented in Annexure I. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10  of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
ALLOCATIONS TO THE DEPARTMENT VIS-A-VIS CENTRAL PLAN OUTLAY 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.32 ) 
  
The Committee observe that though the Central Plan Outlay is a mammoth 
Rs. 4,47,921 crore, the share of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries is a measly  Rs. 1,100.00 crore, which is about 0.25% of th e Central Plan 
Outlay in the fiscal. This disparity is more prominent in the inter -se allocation of 
funds, within the three Departments of the Ministry of Agriculture. While Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation and Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education have been allocated Rs. 7200.00  crore and Rs. 1760.00  crore 
respectively, the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have to 
remain content with Rs. 1100.00 crore only. In percentage terms, while the 
Department have been all ocated 11% of the overall funds, DAC and DARE have 
been provided 89% of the total funds allocated to the Ministry of Agriculture. This is 
despite the fact that livestock and fisheries sectors contribute to 31.6% of the value 
of output from agriculture and allied sectors. The Committee find it incomprehensible 

 
 
as to why the Department is being given such a step motherly treatment in the 
allocation of funds. One obvious reason that comes to their mind in the context of the 
continued neglect of these sectors i s the agriculture/crop centric planning of the 
Government which has over the years relegated this sector to the periphery as mere 
subsidiary activities.  
The Animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors have a very wide but sadly 
unexplored canvas, Giv en proper impetus, these sectors can change the face of 
rural India, more specifically, the lives of the small and marginal farmers and the 
underprivileged sections. Even otherwise, as contributors of more then 5% to our 
GDP (in 2007 -08) and providers of t otal employment to 9% of our work force, it is 
incumbent on the part of Government to enhance infusion of more funds in these 
sectors to not only sustain their present level of contribution to our economy but also 
to exploit further their vast untapped pot ential in furtherance of national interest. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that not only the Government get rid of their 
agriculture centric mindset without any further delay but also workout in right earnest, 
the exact potential of animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors and 
accordingly enhance investment in these sectors for their proper and prompt 
development. To give these sectors, their rightful place in view of their significant 
contribution to the economy and employment, the Government should, amongst 
other measures, also consider having an exclusive Ministry mandated with the 
responsibilities of these sectors at the Union Government level, as is the case in 
some of the State Governments.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The matter was taken up with the Planning Commission who have intimated 
that there is an increasing realisation of importance being given to the animal 
husbandry, dairying and fisheries for securing the expected contribution of 6% 
growth rate during the 11 th Five Year Plan. It  has further informed that this intent is 
closely monitored while implementing various schemes. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(8)/2009 – AHD (Coord) dated 17th March 2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13  of Chapter I of 
this Report. 

 
 
ALLOCATION TO FISHERIES SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para No. 6.16) 
The Fisheries Sector has been allocated Rs.298.00 crore as BE for 2009 -10.  
Though this is substantially higher than the RE allocations of last two years 
(Rs.168.14 crore and Rs.180.39 crore respectively), the Committee find that the 
allocations are not in consonance with the requirements and the potential of a 
Sector, which is a source of livelihood to 14.49 million people and provides 
employment to a large segment o f population engaged in ancillary activities. The 
Committee had, therefore, recommended enhancement of allocation to the Fishery 
Sector, even in their 39th Report on DFG (2008-09) of the Department.  At the cost of 
sounding repetitive, the Committee desire  that the Department should endeavour to 
get additional allocations for the Fisheries Sector on priority basis so that the 
Schemes pertaining to the Sector are planned and executed with a view to exploit 
their fullest potential.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The Department has taken up with the Planning Commission for enhanced 
allocation for the animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sector. Funds proposed 
for the fisheries sector and allocations received during different years of the 11 th Five 
Year Plan are as follows: 
Amount in Rs. Crore 
Year Funds proposed for 
Fisheries Sector 
Allocation Received for 
the Fisheries Sector 
2007-08 497.20 205.68 
2008-09 388.00 215.00 
2009-10 669.95 298.50 
2010-11 371.54 262.44 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22  of Chapter I of 
this Report. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI        BASUDEB ACHARIA 
3 March, 2011        Chairman 
12 Phalguna, 1932, (Saka)        Committee on Agriculture 
 
 

 
 
APPENDIX 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3 rd March, 2011 from 1500 hours to 
1515 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite  
4. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
9. Shri Prabodh Panda 
10. Shri Premdas 
11. Shri Uday Singh  
12. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
15. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. V. L. N. Murthy - Director 
2. Shri P. C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  They Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for 
consideration:  
 
(i)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
(ii) Action Taken Report on Observations/Recommendations contained i n 
the  Second  Report  of  the  Committee  (2009 -10)  on  Demands  for 
Grants (2009-2010) relating to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department 
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries). 
 
(iii)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
(iv)   XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports.  They 
also authorized the Chairman to finalise the above Draft Reports in the light of the 
factual verifications made by the concerned Ministry/Department and present the 
same to the Houses. 
 
4. XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XXXX  Matter not related to this Report. 

 
 
ANNEXURE 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE SECOND REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10) PERTAINING TO MINISTRY OF 
AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND 
FISHERIES) 
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations      32 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 1.4, 3.30, 3.31, 3.33, 3.34, 3.35, 4.36, 4.37, 4.38, 4.39, 
4.40, 4.41, 4.42, 4.43, 4.44, 4.45, 4.46, 4.47, 4.48, 5.8, 5.9, 
6.17, 6.18, 6.19, 6.20 and 7.6   
Total           26 
Percentage                        81.25%
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Para Nos. 3.36 and 7.7 
Total                      2 
Percentage                           6.25% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos.  2.8, 2.9, 3.32 and 6.16 
 Total           4 
Percentage                  12.5% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para No.  NIL 
 