  
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-2010) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & CO-OPERATION) 
              
 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009 
 
 
         
        
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2010/Bhadrapada, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 

  
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-2010) 
          
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION) 
         
         
         
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009 
  
         
 
  Presented to Lok Sabha on    30.08.2010 
      
  Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on  30.08.2010      
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
August, 2010/ Bhadrapada,1932 (Saka)  
 

  
 
COA No. 235 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
© 2010 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  

  
<CONTENTS> 
                   PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
          
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
  
REPORT 
 
PART I Background of the Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh 
  Amendment) Bill, 2009          
PART II  Analysis of the Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh 
  Amendment) Bill, 2009       
       
APPENDICES    
I. Statement showing Recommendations of Committee  
(14th Lok Sabha -32 Report) and views of Department  
of Agriculture and Co-operation on The Constitution  
(106th Amendment) Bill, 2006.        
II.  The Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) 
Bill, 2009.         
        
III.  Executive Summary of the High Powered Committee Report 
 on Co-operatives.        
 < 
IV.  Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 12 January, 2010.       
       
V.  Minutes of the Thirty First Sitting of the Committee 
held on 17 May, 2010.        
    
VI.  Minutes of the Thirty Second Sitting of the Committee 
held on 1 June, 2010.       
  
VII.  Minutes of the Thirty Fourth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 18 June, 2010.        
 
VIII.  Minutes of the Thirty Seventh Sitting of the Committee 
held on 28 July, 2010.       
    
IX.  Minutes of the Thirty Eighth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 5 August, 2010.         
X.    Minutes of the Thirty Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 26 August, 2010.        
                            
 
(i)

  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2009-2010) 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhry  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
^22. 
23. 
Vacant 
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24. 
$25.            
Shri A. Elavarasan 
Vacant 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
        *31.          Smt. B. Jayashree            
^ Vice Shri Narendra Budania who ceased to be the Member of the  
Committee on his  retirement from Rajya Sabha on 4 July, 2010. 
$ Vice Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi who ceased to be the Mem ber of the 
Committee on his  retirement from Rajya Sabha on 4 July, 2010. 
*    Nominated on 2 July, 2010.  
 
(iii) 

  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

  
INTRODUCTION 
           
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the report on their behalf, present this Twelfth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‗The Constitu tion (One Hundred and Eleventh 
Amendment) Bill 2009‘.  
 
2. The Constitution (One Hundred Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009 was 
introduced in Lok sabha on 30 November, 2009. The Speaker under Rule 
331E(1)(b) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in  Lok Sabha 
referred the Bill to the Committee. 
 
 3. The Committee were briefed by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Co -operation) on the Bill on 12 
January, 2010 and they also decided to invite suggestions/vi ews of various 
stakeholders  on the Bill through an advertisement in the media.   
4.   In response to publicity in the media written suggestions/memoranda were 
received from 37 individuals/Organisations.  The Committee at their sittings held 
on 17 May, 1 a nd 18 June, 2010 took evidence of the following 
individuals/organisations:- 
 
(i) National Co-operative Union of India; 
(ii) National Agricultural Co -operative Marketing Federation of India 
Limited; 
(iii) Natinal Co -operative Consumer‘s Federation of India Limited and 
Krishak Bharati Co-operative; 
(iv) National Federation of Urban Co -operative Banks and Credit 
Societies Limited; 
(v) Indian Farmers Fertilizer Co -operative Limited and National  
Co-operative Development Corporation; 
(vi) National Co -operative Agriculture and Rural Developm ent Banks 
Federation Limited; and 
(vii) National Federation of State Co -operative Banks Limited and 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development.   
5. The Committee also sought the views of State Governments/Union 
Territory Administrations on various clauses of the Bill.  The six States of  Andhra 
Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Tripura, West Bengal and four Union 
Territory Administrations of Andaman and Nicobar, Daman and Diu, Delhi and 
Lakshadweep have forwarded their views to the Committee. 
 
6. The Committee at their sitting held on 28 July, 2010 discussed in detail the 
suggestions/proposals received from experts/organisations/stakeholders/ State 
Governments/Union Territory Administration on various clauses of the Bill. The 
Committee took oral evide nce of the representatives of Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Co -operation) and Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department) on 5 August, 2010. 
 
(v) 

  
7. The Committee at their sitting held on 26 August 2010 considered and 
adopted the Report.  
 
8.  The Committee also benefitted from the views/suggestions of 
Individuals/Experts/Organisations and expressed their thanks to all of them who 
furnished Memoranda and tendered evidence before the Committee as referred 
to in Para 4.  
 
 
9. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Co -operation) and Ministry of Law 
and Justice (Legislative Department) for placing before them the material and 
information in connect ion with examination of the Bill.  They also express their 
thanks to the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations who gave their 
suggestions/views on various clauses of the Bill.  
 
10. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
       
                    
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
27 August, 2010                                                                           Chairman, 
5  Bhadrapada,1932 (Saka)                          Committee on Agriculture. 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(vi)  

  
REPORT 
 
PART-I 
 
 
BACKGROUND OF THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED 
AND ELEVENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009 
 
   
The Constitution (106 th Amendment) Bill, 2006 was introduced in Lok 
Sabha on 22 May, 2006.  The Standin g Committee on Agriculture (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) considered the Bill and submitted their Report to Lok Sabha on       
20 August, 2007.  This Report was considered by the Cabinet in its meeting held 
on 8th August, 2008 and the requisite notices for conside ration of the Bill as per 
requirements of Rules of Procedures and Conduct of Business of Lok Sabha 
were given by the Agriculture Minister.  However, the Bill could not be discussed 
in the Lok Sabha for passing.  The Bill lapsed upon dissolution of the Four teenth 
Lok Sabha on 18 May, 2009. 
 
1.2 A comparative statement showing the recommendations of the Committee 
on Agriculture (14th Lok Sabha) on the Constitution (106 th Amendment) Bill, 2006 
as contained in their 32 nd Report vis -à-vis the view of the Departm ent of 
Agriculture and Co-operation thereon and the provision made after amendments 
i.e., as reflected in The Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) 
Bill, 2009 are at Appendix-I.  
 
1.3 The Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009 has 
been introduced in the Lok Sabha on 30 November, 2009 and was referred by 
Hon‘ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to the Committee on Agriculture on 24 December, 
2009 for detailed examination and Report.  The text of the Bill is at Appendix-II.   
 
  
 
 

  
The major additions in the said Bill relate to:- 
 
(i) To insert Article 43B in Part IV of the Constitution as Directive 
Principle of State Policy for voluntary formation of co -operative 
societies. 
(ii) To make provision for giving representation to women and 
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, by provision for the 
reservation of two seats for women and one seat for the Scheduled 
Caste/Scheduled Tribes on the board of every co-operative society, 
which have individuals as members from such categories (Article 
243 ZJ(1) second proviso). 
  
1.4 The Bill aims to address the following issues through the proposed 
amendment: 
(a) Inclusion of co-operative principles;  
(b) Insertion of Article 43B in Part -IV of the Constitution as 
Directive Principle of State Policy for volunta ry formation of 
co-operative societies; 
(c) Timely conduct of elections; 
(d) Maximum time limit for supersession  or suspension  of a 
managing committee; 
(e) Independent and professional audit; 
(f) Uniform tenure of managing committee; 
(g) Regular and timely conduct of general body meetings; 
(h) Right of a member for access to information; 
(i) Compulsory system of filing returns;  
(j) providing for the reservation of one seat for the Scheduled 
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and two seats for women on 
the boar d of every co -operative society, which have 
individuals as members from such categories; and  
(k) Provisions for offences and penalties. 
 

  
The proposed amendment to the Constitution, for the purpose, would 
ensure the democratic, autonomous and professional functioning of the co -
operatives ensuring timely conduct of elections and proper audit of their 
accounts.  The co -operatives, however, would still continue to remain  as a State 
Subject under  entry 32 of  the State List of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution.   
 
1.5 The statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill states that 
considering the need for reforms in the Co -operative Societies Acts of States, 
consultations with State Governments were held on several occasions and that a 
strong need wa s felt for amending the Constitution in the Conference of State 
Co-operative Ministers held in December, 2004.  The issue of amendments to  
Constitution was discussed in the above stated conference and a resolution to 
this effect that the Constitution be am ended was adopted.  Thereupon, the 
Constitution (106th Amendment) Bill, 2006 was introduced in the 14 th Lok Sabha 
in May, 2006.   
 
1.6 In the interregnum between the adoption of the Resolution in the State Co-
operative Ministers Conference held in December , 2004 and introduction of The 
Constitution (106 th Amendment) Bill in May, 2006, the Government by a 
resolution published in the Gazette on 10 May, 2005 constituted a High Powered 
Committee to review the achievements made in the co -operative sector during 
last 100 years, identify challenges faced by the sector and suggest appropriate 
policy and legislative framework and changes required in co -operative legislation 
in the country.  The High Powered Committee was required to submit its Report 
within a period of six months.  
 
1.7  In view of the reference of The Constitution (106 th Amendment) Bill, 2006 
to Committee on Agriculture in May,  2006, the High Powered Committee 
presented an Interim Report to Ministry of Agriculture in June, 20 07.  The High 
Powered Committee submitted their final Report in May, 2009. The Committee 
on Agriculture also examined the High Powered Committee in June, 2007 to elicit 
their view on the Bill then.   An Executive Summary of the Report of the High 
Powered Committee on co-operatives is at Appendix-III.  After receipt of the final 

  
Report of the High Powered Committee in May, 2009, the Government 
introduced The Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009 
in the Fifteenth Lok Sabha in November, 2009. 
 
1.8 In spite of need felt for amendments in the State Acts, the pace of reforms 
in Co-operative Legislation by the States is not encouraging.  Some of the States 
such as Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Karnataka, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand and Utt arakhand, have enacted parallel self -
reliant co-operatives Acts which are exclusively for the co -operatives without any 
share ho lding or financial assistance f rom the Government.  Other States are 
also considering enacting similar legislations.  However, m ost of the co-
operatives,  particularly those bearing significance on agriculture and allied 
sectors and implementation of public policies  in the areas of agricultural credit, 
agricultural marketing and supply of inputs, agro -processing, handloom and 
handicrafts, labour, consumers etc. are still governed under the provisions of Co -
operative Societies Acts which do not facilitate growth of these co -operatives by 
providing a conducive environment and autonomous and professional 
functioning. Therefore, it has become necessary to bring in amendment in the 
Constitution to provide a conducive environment, strong legal framework and 
protection to co -operatives, for their growth and to insulate them from 
unnecessary political and bureaucratic interference. 
 
Existing Constitutional Provisions 
 
1.9 ―Co-operative Societies‖ is a State subject under Entry 32 of the State List 
of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India.  Under this entry, the State 
Governments have enacted their respective State Co -operative Soc ieties Acts.  
However, the functioning of Co -operative Societies with objectives not confined 
to one State, and serving the interests of members in more than one State, 
comes under the purview of entry 44 of the Union List of the Seventh Schedule of 
the Constitution of India.  The Parliament has, therefore, enacted Multi -State Co-
operative Societies Act, 2002 (No. 39 of 2002).  

  
 
1.10 Though institutions of local self -governance viz  municipalities and 
Panchayat Raj Institutions are State subjects (u nder Entr y 5 of the State List ), 
provisions for these institutions in respect of their composition, audit, election, 
etc. have been made in the Constitution  through the Seventy Third and Seventy 
Fourth am endments. Similarly, such provisions are proposed to be made in 
respect of co-operative societies through the proposed amendments.  
 
1.11 To address the issues  enumerated in para 1.4 ibid,  provisions have been 
incorporated in the pr oposed Constitution  Amendment Bill.  It is proposed to 
insert Article 43B in Part -IV of the Constitution as a Directive Principle of State 
Policy whereby the State shall endeavour to promote for voluntary formation of 
co-operative societies.  It is also proposed that the election s should be entirely 
the responsibility of an independent aut hority as may be provided by law  by the 
State. This has been proposed in order to protect the autonomy of co -operatives 
and to ensure member control of co -operatives by ensuring free and fair 
elections.  Similarly, in order to protect the autonomy and memb er control of co -
operatives, the power of State to supersede the elected management have been 
defined.  In order to give representation  to women and Scheduled 
Castes/Scheduled Tribes, a provision has been proposed for reservation of two 
seats for women and one seat for the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes on the 
board of every co -operative society, which have individuals as members from 
such categories.  The State is to provide broad parameters for conduct of audit. 
The co-operative societies should be free  to get their accounts to be audited by 
the auditors, appointed by the general body, who fulfil the requirements laid down 
by the State Legislature.  It is also proposed to include provisions for convening 
annual general meeting in time, right of member to  get information, returns to be 
filed by every co -operative society in respect of annual reports, statement of 
audited accounts etc and provisions for offences and penalties. These provisions 
are proposed to make the management of a co -operative society accountable to 
members, to prevent misuse of powers by the management and transparency in 
the functioning of co-operative societies. 
 

  
1.12 An expert on the subject suggested that co -operative societies be 
incorporated in the Chapter -III of the Constitution u nder Fundamental Rights in 
the following way as it would ensure enforceability: 
(i) The word ‗co-operative societies‘ should be inserted after the word 
‗associations‘ in sub-clause (c) of Clause (1) of Article 19. 
(ii) A new sub -clause (h) should be added after sub -clause (g) of 
clause (1) of Article 19. 
 (h) to form and run co -operatives based on principles of voluntary, 
democratic member control, member economic participation and 
autonomous functioning.‖ 
1.13 On the above suggestion, the Department of Agr iculture and Co-operation 
responded by saying that the objective of the Constitutional Amendment Bill is to 
ensure that the cooperative societies in the country function in a democratic, 
professional, autonomous and economically sound manner. The Departmen t is 
of the view that these objectives can be achieved by inserting a new ar ticle in 
Part IV of the Constitution (Directive Principles of State Policy) and other 
amendments as suggested in Part IXB of the Constitution.  
 
1.14 Ministry of Law & Justice is o f the view that the word ‗associations and 
unions‘ as occurring in Art 19(1) (c) also includes the word ‗Cooperatives 
Societies‘ and there appears to be no need for specifically incorporating the 
words ‗cooperative societies‘ after the words ‗associations and unions‘.  Hence, 
right to form associations includes right to form cooperative societies.  
 
1.15 The Government of West Bengal have given their final views on the issue 
of insertion of the word ‗co-operatives‘ in Article 19(1)(c) as under:- 
“The State Government has carefully gone through the proposed 
Amendment Bill and would like to suggest that the word „co -operatives‟ 
may be inserted after the word associations or unions in article 19(1)(c) of 
the Constitution.  This would enable the people to form c o-operatives as a 
matter of fundamental right.  This amendment itself would provide 
constitutional recognition to co-operatives in the country.” 
 

  
1.16 The Committee in their 32nd Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on the Constitution 
(106th Amendment) Bill, 2006 desi red the Government to examine, if the words             
‗co-operative societies‘ could be inserted after the word ‗associations‘ in Article 
19(1)(c), as the Law Ministry then opined that the word ‗associations‘ includes 
the words  ‗co-operative societies‘ also, as a contrary view was  expressed in the 
Committee then . The Department of Agriculture and Co -operation, however, 
stated that the matter was examined in consultation with Ministry of Law & 
Justice and that the amendment to Article 19(1)(c) is not required. 
 
1.17 When asked  the reasons for change of opinion of the Ministry of Law 
subsequent to the opinion tendered by them before the Committee then i.e. at 
the time of examination of The Constitution  (106th Amendment) Bill, 2006, the 
Department of Agricul ture and Co -operation now in a written reply stated that 
Ministry of Law & Justice was of the opinion that Article 19  (1) (c) confers a 
fundamental right on all citizens to form association or union. An association may 
take diverse forms according to the p urpose for which it is formed. Freedom of 
association includes the rights to form an association for any lawful purpose e.g., 
companies, partnership society, trade union etc. Referring to this constitutional 
provision, the legal definition of association a nd Supreme Court Judgments, 
Ministry of Law & Justice was of the view that the word ‗associations‘ as 
occurring in Art 19(1) (c) includes the word ‗Cooperatives Societies‘ and there 
appears to be no need for specifically incorporating the words ‗cooperativ e 
societies‘ after the words ‗associations and unions‘.   
  
1.18 During evidence, when enquired if the word ‗association‘ includes  the 
word  ‗co-operation‘, then why the same cannot be added in Article 19(1)(c), the 
Secretary responded as under: 
 
“When we obtained that advice from the Law Department, we again 
went in 2008.  I will read out what they have said.  We can share this with 
the Committee.  They have discussed certain judgment of the court and 
finally they have said: “In view of the above observations of the apex Court 
and the High Court, we are of the view that the word „association‟ and 
„unions‟ as occurring in Article 19(1)(c) includes words „co -operative 
societies‟ and there appears to be no need for specifically incorporating 

  
the words „co-operative societies‟ after the words „association‟ and „union‟.  
We reiterate our earlier views which they have given.”  This is what the 
judgment is from where they have quoted.  I can give a copy of that to the 
Committee.  We have in the Department gone by t his advice of the 
Ministry”. 
   
1.19 The representative of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) 
further stated as under:  
  
“I am from the Legislative Department; I am here to translate 
policies of the Government into legal provisions.  Tha t is the job that I do.  
The Department of Legal Affairs gives legal advice on these matters.  As a 
person involved in this, there are two basic principles which I would do – if, 
according to the Department of Legal Affairs, the word association is 
capable of encompassing co-operatives, then there is no need of telling it 
separately.  But taking the word as incapable of taking the co -operatives 
within its four walls of associations, as a matter of elucidation or 
clarification, if we provide additional word co-operatives, I will not find any 
justification to say no to it.  I do not find any difficulty in doing it because it 
will make the decision more clear only.  When somebody says that the 
word association includes co -operatives, then we are only making it more 
crystal clear.  I do not find the logic in saying that it cannot be provided 
there; I do not find any difficulty; it is a matter of policy that the 
Government will have to consider; ............................... I do not find any 
difficulty in incor porating that word co -operatives in addition to the words 
associations or unions or co -operatives.  The word co -operative is distinct 
from corporations............................  If adding that word would give some 
boost to the co -operative movement, and  it will go into the minds of the 
people that it is our right, I do not think, we should have any disinclination 
to acceding to that.........................”.  
 
 
1.20 Considering the fact that at present co -operative societies is a State 
subject under Entry 32 of the State List of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, 
the Committee on Agriculture (14 th Lok Sabha) in their 32nd Report had 
recommended that a comprehensive amendment to the Constitution on co -
operatives was not necessary and had, therefore, re commended that ‗The 
Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Bill, 2006 should be 
converted into a Comprehensive Central Model Law for voluntary formation, 
autonomous functioning, democratic control and professional management of the 
co-operatives wi th certain incentives and disincentives to the State s that 
implement or not implement the model law.  The States can enact their own laws 

  
on the subject, however, State Laws should be compatible with the Central 
Model Law: 
1.21 Asked why the Government ha ve not accepted the above  
recommendation of the  Committee and would not this step create an 
apprehension amongst the States that the Central Government is trying to 
encroach on their territory, the Department in a detailed reply stated as under: 
“In 1990, the Government appointed an Expert Committee under 
the chairmanship of Choudhary Brahm Perkash to review the status of the 
cooperative movement, suggest future directions and finalise a Model 
Cooperative Act. This Committee submitted its report in 1991.  S ince 
cooperation is a State subject and each State has its own cooperative 
legislation covering cooperatives whose membership is confined to the 
State, the report of the Committee, along with a draft Model Cooperative 
Law, was circulated to all State Gover nments for their consideration and 
adoption at State level. However, there was lukewarm response from the 
State Government. So far only 9 States have enacted parallel Cooperative 
Acts reflecting the essence of Model Cooperative Law.  This department is 
of the view that since such model laws are in the nature of advisory to the 
States, they are not bound to incorporate the provisions of such model law 
in their legislations. The intent of this Bill is to incorporate certain minimum 
fundamental provisions in t he Constitution which will be binding on the 
States and will ensure that every State enacts such cooperative legislation 
conforming to the provisions as laid down in the Constitutional 
Amendment Bill to facilitate the democratic and autonomous functioning of 
the cooperatives in a uniform manner. Such a provision would facilitate 
orderly growth of cooperative institutions based on cooperative principles. 
The High Powered Committee on Cooperatives appointed by Government 
has recommended Constitution Amendment  after consulting the States 
and other stakeholders on this issue.” 
    
1.22 Asked further , if there was  no other way of ensuring that the States act 
upon the recommendations of the ‗Model Co-operatives Act‘ as recommended by 
Chaudhary Brahm Pr akash Commit tee, the Department stated that as the 
cooperative societies are a state subject the Central Government has no 
legislative jurisdiction to ensure that the state enacts their legislation conforming 
to the recommendations made by the Chaudhary Brahm  Perkash Committee. 
Hence, the G overnment has decided to bring the proposed Constitutional 
Amendment Bill. The High Powered Committee constituted by the Government 

  
which held wide ranging consultation with various stakeholders including the 
State Governments, has also recommended Constitution Amendment. 
1.23 When asked as to h ow many State s have acted  upon the 
recommendations of the Chaudhary Brahm P rakash Committee so fa r, the 
Department stated that the so far nine  States namely Andhra Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Orissa, Karnataka, Jharkhand, Chhatisgar h 
and Uttaranchal have enacted p arallel Cooperative Acts which are largely based 
on the recommendations of Choudhary Brahm Prakash Committee.  
 
1.24 When enquired if the proposed Amendment to the Constitution would lead 
to encroachment of the rights of the State Government s by the Centre as 
currently co-operative societies is a State subject under Entry 32 of the State List 
of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, the Secretary, Department of 
Agriculture and Co-operation clarified as under: 
“............I would like to state that the intention is not  at all to control 
the State by some Central Legislation.  What I have understood is, the 
Constitution is being amended. 
It is not a Central law but it is the Constitution of the country.  We 
also have a lot of experience of the co -operative bodies in the States.  In 
the Centre, everyday we see this.  All that is being attempted through this 
amendment in the Constitution is that there should be certain ba sic 
factors.  Very basic points have been raised.  The law will be made by the 
State.  When they make the law, they have to take care of a few things 
that is there in the Constitution.  Centre will not at all interfere in making 
the law.  State will be gui ded by the principles as set out in the 
Constitution through this amendment.  To my mind, the principles that 
have been laid down in Part IXB are of a very basic nature to ensure that 
the co -operatives function in a proper manner and that it helps the co -
operative movement. It is our experience in many of the State 
Governments because of week laws, sometimes the co -operative 
movement is hampered because of the Government interference or 
certain other factors. This will ensure that they function more 
democratically and in a better manner.  Again, I would humbly submit that 
this will not give the Centre any handle to interfere with the States.  It will 
be in the Constitution of India”. 
 
1.25 The Ministry also informed the Committee that the Union Government 
does not intend to encroach on the powers of the State Governments.  No 
provision under the proposed Bill gives any power to the Central Government to 

  
encroach upon the powers of the State Government.  The intention of the Bill is 
to ensure a conducive and f acilitating legal environment for growth of vibrant, 
professionally efficient and democratically managed institutions in the country.  
 
 
1.26    The Committee note that Constitution (One Hundred Sixth 
Amendment) Bill, 2006 was examined and reported upon by the Committee 
on Agriculture (14th Lok Sabha – 32nd Report of Committee on Agriculture). 
They further note that some of the recommendations/observations have 
been accepted by the Government  and  incorporated in the Constitution 
(One Hundred Eleventh Amen dment) Bill, 2009 which was introduced in 
Lok Sabha in December, 2009.  They, however, are constrained to observe 
that some of their most important recommendations have not been 
accepted by the Government on which their observations and further 
recommendations are enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
1.27   The examination of the proposed Amendment Bill reveals that the  
Department of Agriculture and C o-operation have not ac cepted their 
recommendation on a mendment to Article 19(1)( c) on the plea that  t he 
word „association‟ and „unions‟ as occurring in Article 19(1)( c) includes 
„co-operative societies‟ and there appears to be no need for specifically 
incorporating the same after t he word „association‟ in Article 19(1)( c) of 
the Constitution.  The Committ ee are rather flummoxed with this stand of 
the Ministry.  On the one hand, they say that co -operative societies are 
already included under „association‟ and „unions‟ , while on the other hand 
they have proposed to bring co -operatives und er the ambit of Dire ctive 

  
Principles of State P olicy which are not enforceable.  The logic for the 
Government to bring a Fundamental Right under the ambit of the Directive 
Principles of State Policy is incomprehensible  viewed in the context of  
their admission that it is imp licit and all encompassing under the meaning 
of the words „ associations‟ and „union‟ as existing under Article 19(1)( c) 
of the Constitution.  Not only are the Directive Principles of State Policy 
not enforceable, the proposed amendment seems to take away the 
autonomy of co -operative societies and tries to bring them under the 
control of the Government in an indirect manner.  According primacy to 
the concept of autonomy for co -operative societies, the Committee 
recommend that the right to form co -operative societies be made a 
Fundamental Right and be inserted after the word  „associations‟ in sub -
clause (c ) of Clause (1) of Article 19  which in their considered  view 
should be made explicit so that it could give some boost to the 
cooperative movement and when  done, it would enthuse the people to 
actively participate in the cooperatives as a matter of right.  They are of the 
firm belief that after it becomes a part of their fundamental rights, ,the 
responsiveness of members would increase manifold and the coope rative 
movement would be cured of the ills plaguing it to a great extent.  They 
further recommend that a new sub --clause (h) be added after sub -clause 
(g) of Clause (1) of Article 19.  This should  read as follows: „(h)‟ to form 
and run co -operatives based  on the principles of voluntary formation, 
democratic member control, member economic participation and 
autonomous functioning.  The Committee are of the unanimous opinion 

  
that by doing so, the co -operative movement in the country would be truly 
strengthened. 
 
1.28 The Committee observe that the Government appointed an Expert 
Committee under the chairmanship of Choudhary Brahm Prakash in 1990 
to review the status of the cooperative movement, suggest future 
directions and finalize a Model Cooperative Act.  The Committee submitted 
its Report in 1991 and a Draft Model Cooperative Law was circulated to all 
State Governments for their consideration and adoption at the state level.  
So far, only nine States have enacted parallel cooperative acts reflecting 
the ess ence of Model Cooperative Law.   The Committee in their Thirty 
Second Report (14 th Lok Sabha ) on the Constitution (One Hundred and 
Sixth Amendment)  Bill 2006 recommended that based on the provisions 
of the aforesaid Bill, a Model Law for voluntary format ion, autonomous 
functioning, democratic control and professional management of 
cooperatives with certain incentives and disincentives be framed for 
States to implement the model law.  They, however, are constrained to find 
that this recommendation was not accepted on the ground that model laws 
are  in  the nature of advisory to the States and they are not bound to 
incorporate the provisions of such Model Law in their legislations as also 
the fact that the Union Government has no legislative jurisdiction to 
ensure that States conform to the Model Law.   The  Committee  find it 
interesting to note that finding no other way to persuade the States to act 
upon the Model Cooperative Law as recommended by Choudhary Brahm 
Prakash Committee, the Government decided to  bring the proposed 

  
Constitutional Amendment Bill after the High Powered Committee 
constituted by the Government submitted its Report after wide ranging 
consultations with various stake holders including the State Governments.   
 
1.29 All said and done,  t he Committee still are of the unanimous view 
that to promote and strengthen the cooperative movement in the country 
all that is required to be done is to amend the Constitution by inserting the 
word „Cooperatives Societies‟ after the word „associations‟ in  Article 
19(1)(c) of the Constitution and all the proposed provisions included as 
Article 43 B and Part IX B of the amendment Bill need to be inserted as a 
separate Schedule under Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution since they feel 
that the Constitution o f India is a sacred document and no analogy on the 
lines of Part IX and Part IX A can be drawn as Panchayats and 
Municipalities  are institutions of local self governance whereas 
cooperatives do not involve participation of all citizens.  They, therefore, 
desire the Government to reconsider and have a re-look at the whole issue 
of galvanizing the cooperative movement with a fresh approach including 
their above recommendation before the amendment Bill continues its 
further legislative journey and the Constit ution stands amended and 
ratified by States as required under relevant Constitutional provisions. 
 
1.30 Notwithstanding the Comments/Observations on certain vital 
clauses of the proposed amendment Bill as enumerated in Part II of  this 
Report, the Committee desire the Government to reconsider the proposed 

  
amendment Bill in its entirety as they feel the Constitution is a sacrosanct  
document. 
 
 
 

  
PART-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND 
ELEVENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009 
 
 
  
Clause  2 
 
       In Part IV of the Constitution, after article 43A, the following article shall 
be inserted, namely:- 
 
      ―43B. The State shall endeavour to promote voluntary formation, 
autonomous functioning, democratic control and professional management of co -
operative societies‖. 
 
2.2 The Department have informed the Committee that the objective of the 
Constitutional Amendment Bill is to ensure that the cooperative societies in the 
country function in a democratic, professional, autonomous and economically 
sound manner. T he Department is of the view that these objectives can be 
achieved by inserting a new article in Part IV of the Constitution (Directive 
Principles of State Policy) and other amendments as suggested in Part IXB of the 
Constitution.  
  
2.3 When enquired as t o why the provision of co -operative societies  was 
included in Directive Principles of State Policy, though they are not enforceable, 
the Ministry in their written reply responded that though the Directive Principles 
are not enforceable, but the same are fu ndamental in governance of directives to 
the States to apply these principles in making laws. These principles reflect the 
hopes and aspirations of the people.  Although the provisions of this part are not 
enforceable by any court, the principles laid down  therein are nevertheless 
fundamental in the governance of the country and the State is under an 
obligation to apply them in making laws.  The principles laid down therein, 
therefore, define the objectives and goals, which the State must endeavour to 
achieve over a period of time.  Therefore, whenever the State is required to make 

  
laws it must do so in conformity with these principles with a view to securing 
social and economic goals considered essential for the establishment of an 
egalitarian society. 
 
2.4 Asked if the Constitution is the right place for inclusion of the provision 
relating to co-operatives as in the globalised scenario of economic activities, new 
forms of organisations might come up in future calling for similar steps, the  
Secretary of the  Department responded by saying that this is a matter on which 
we would request the Committee to give us the benefit of their wisdom.  As co -
operative societies entrenched themselves in the Indian society & economy they 
have become organizations working fo r the benefit particularly of weaker 
sections, it was felt that constitutional protection in the form of an enabling 
provision would give greater strength, enable their professional management and 
provide certain level of autonomy. 
 
2.5 On the proposed inc lusion of provisions for co -operatives under the 
Directive Principles of State Policy, the Government of West Bengal in a written 
communication stated as under: 
 
“Currently cooperative is included under entry 32 in the State List.  
By including highly pres criptive clauses under the Directive Principles of 
State Policy, the proposed constitutional amendment takes away the 
authority of the State Government  to legislate in matters of cooperatives.  
Nevertheless, the State Government has recently made comprehen sive 
amendments to its Cooperative Laws.  The West Bengal Cooperative 
Societies Act, 2006 that was assented to by the President of India on 25 
May, 2010 and published in the official gazette on the same day lays down 
the structure and pattern of governance  of cooperative societies in the 
State of West Bengal.  This is broadly in line with the recommendation of 
the Chowdhury Brahma Prakash Committee.  Thus, there is no need for 
amendment of the Constitution as far as insertion of specific clause under 
the Article 43 under Directive Principles of State Policy.” 
 
  
 
 
2.6 When asked to give their considered view on the suggestion that the 
proposed Part IXB be inserted as a separate schedule under Article 43 B rather 

  
than as Part IXB, the Secretary, Department of  Agriculture and Co -operation 
stated as under:  
 
“I am not a legal expert.  But I will express my intention as the 
Secretary of the Department.  My intention is that there should be a 
provision in the Constitution such that the State Governments are guided  
by it.  While making their law, they should be within certain boundaries.  If 
that does not get disturbed by the suggestion of the Chairman, then I as a 
Secretary will not have any issue.  We will go by the advice of the Law 
Ministry‟s suggestion as to wh ich will serve better.  The intention is very 
clear.  So, we will go by your advice and take the Law Ministry‟s advice on 
that specific issue.” 
 
2.7 The representative of the Ministry of Law further supplemented as under: 
“I will be guided by my superiors and the Government.  My first 
reaction would  be like this.  Regarding organization, for Village 
Panchayats there is an article 40 of the Constitution and on that basis we 
have created two parts for municipalities and Panchayats.  Similarly, we 
are going to have a Directive Principle in respect of co -operative societies 
as a new article, the proposed Article 43B vide Clause 2 of the Bill under 
consideration of the hon. Committee .  So, the suggestion is to have parts 
A and B to co -operative societies.  In my personal view, this is in 
accordance with the scheme of things in the Constitution.  There would be 
no problem in that.  But the schedules are carved out to elaborate the 
things.  The main thing which is provided in the Constitution for want of 
elaboration and no t losing the continuance of the provisions of the 
Constitution, if we want to put it in the elaboration, we use the schedule as 
the method.  But I think, what we have done as putting parts A and B is in 
consonance with the provisions of the Constitution.  Now we will be guided 
by the Committee.” 
   
 
2.8 The Committee in their examination of the Bill had the benefit of 
views and suggestions expressed by various individuals/experts 
/organizations who have opined that the matter of including the provisi on  
relating to cooperatives in the Constitution of India is a matter on which 
they need to deliberate as to its rightful place as in the globalised scenario 
of economic activities new forms of organizations might crop up in future 
calling for similar acti on on part of the Government.  The Government on 

  
their part felt that Constitutional protection in the form of an enabling 
provision would give greater strength to the cooperatives, enable their 
professional management and provide certain level of autonomy .  The 
Committee also observe that a view was expressed that Article 43 B and 
the provisions in the proposed Part IX B could be inserted as a separate 
schedule in the Constitution.  The Committee therefore, desire the 
Government to consider their recommend ation on this aspect and 
reconsider inclusion of Article 43B as commented in para 1.29  of Part I of 
this Report.  

  
Clause 243ZH(C) - Definitions 
 
2.9 The Clause read as under 
 
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
 
**     **      ** 
 
  ―Co-operative society‖ means a society registered or deemed to be 
registered under any law relating to co -operative societies for the time being in 
force in any State.‖ 
 
**     **      ** 
 
2.10 The Committee received suggestions from various non -official expe rts 
regarding inclusion of some important terms like ‗autonomous association of 
persons‘, having ‗common needs‘,  ‗jointly owned‘ and democratically controlled‘ 
enterprise and adhering to the ‗co -operative principles‘ and ‗values‘, which have 
not been included in the above-mentioned clause. 
 
2.11 When asked t o be apprised of the reasons for non-inclusion of the above 
terms, the Department stated that the terms like ‗autonomous association of 
persons‘, having ‗common needs‘, ‗jointly owned‘ and ‗democratical ly controlled‘ 
enterprise and adhering to the ‗co -operative principles‘ and ‗values‘ form the 
fundamental building block on which the edifice of cooperative institutions rests. 
These values are the essence which distinguishes a co -operative society from 
other forms of associations. However, definition clause will not be an appropriate 
place for elaborating these vital elements of functioning of cooperative societies.  
A new Article 43B is proposed to be inserted after Article 43A providing for these 
important elements forming the very essence of the functioning of cooperative 
societies. These have also been included in Article 243ZI. 
 
2.12 The Committee also noted that under Clause 243ZH the definition of an 
‗active member‘ has been left out.  Written memora nda received from non-official 

  
experts stressed that it was important that the definition of active member is 
incorporated under the definition clause to ensure that members participate in the 
affairs of the co-operative and use its services. 
 
2.13 In response to the Committee‘s query regarding non -inclusion of the term 
‗active member‘ in Clause 243ZH and the definition of the said term , the 
Department stated that active member means any member who attends a 
minimum number of meetings and avails such minimu m level services or 
products of the society as may be specified in the bye -laws of the society.  This 
has been included in Article 243 ZO(2).  If required, the definition may be 
included in the State Laws. 
 
2.14 Clause 243ZH(c) lays down the definition of a co-operative society as 
“co-operative society” means a society registered or deemed to be 
registered under any law relating to co -operative societies for the time 
being in force in any State.  The Committee note that this definition has left 
out importan t terms like „autonomous association of persons‟, having 
„common needs‟, „jointly owned‟ and „democratically controlled‟ enterprise 
and adhering to the „co -operative principles‟ and „values‟.  These terms are 
the core essentials of co -operatives.  Even the  Ministry have stated that 
these terms form the fundamental building block on which the edifice of 
co-operative institutions rest and these values are the essence which 
distinguish a co -operative society from other forms of associations.  The 
Committee are  not able to comprehend this dichotomous stand of the 
Government.  On the one hand, they say that these are fundamental core 
terms of the co-operatives, while on the other hand they have left out these 
in the definition of co-operative society in the Bill.  They strongly feel that it 

  
is very essential to clearly define that the co -operative societies are 
promoted, owned, controlled and managed only by their user members.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Clause 243ZH(C) should read 
as:      „A co -operative society is an autonomous association of persons 
united voluntarily to meet their common needs and aspirations through a 
jointly-owned and democratically controlled enterprise and adhering to the 
co-operative principles and values, as recognized by the Indian 
Cooperative Law registered or deemed to be registered under any law 
relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force in any State. 
 
2.15 Further taking note of the fact that co -operative societies are 
Member driven societies, the C ommittee desire that the definition of „an 
active member‟ be suitably inserted under Clause 243ZH in the following 
way: „Active Member is one who participates in the affairs of the co -
operative society using its services as prescribed in the bye-laws of the co-
operative society.‟ The Committee are of the opinion that this would ensure 
that members participate in the affairs of their co -operative society and 
avail its services. 

  
Clause 243ZK(2) – Elections to Board 
 
2.16 The Clause read as under: 
 
**     **      ** 
  
The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral 
rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to a co -operative society shall vest in 
such an authority or body, as may be provided by the Legislature of a State, by 
law:  
 
 Provided that the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the 
procedure and guidelines for the conduct of such elections. 
 
2.17 The power to conduct elections Clause 243ZK(2) for co -operative 
societies is proposed to be vested in an authority or body as may be provided by 
the Legislature of a State by Law and not with the Board of a co -operative 
society.   
 
2.18 One of the experts who deposed before the Committee opined that the 
power to conduct elections to the co -operative societies should vest with the 
Board of the Society as vesting their authority with others authorities would 
undermine the autonomy of the Board.  This gave the im pression the 
Government wants to curtail their autonomy and gain some sort of  control over 
them which is against the spirit of functioning of co-operatives. 
 
2.19 When asked to comment, the Department stated  in a written reply  that 
timely conduct of election in a free and fair manner is vital for ensuring 
democratic governance character of a cooperative society. The ob jective of this 
provision is not to curtail the autonomy of the society but to ensure prevalence of 
democratic character of the society by conducting timely election in a free and 
fair manner by an independent and professionally competent authority as woul d 
be legislated by the State Governments. Such a provision would instill a greater 
degree of confidence among the members and other stake holders and would 

  
facilitate better growth of the cooperative institutions in the country. There have 
been instances w here doubts have been raised on the independence of 
Returning Officer appointed by Board to conduct elections in a free and fair 
manner. 
 
 
2.20 During evidence, the representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice 
stated on the subject as under: 
“In addition to what the Department has stated, this provision of the 
superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls 
for, and the conduct of, all elections to a co-operative society shall vest – it 
is mandatory „shall vest‟ – in such a n authority or body, as may be 
provided by the Legislature of a State, by law.  So, whether a body or a 
particular officer or authority, that we have left to the wisdom and the 
financial capability of the State Government.  This is totally in  consonance 
with Article 243K relating to elections to panchayats.  You can make a 
parallel study of Article 324 relating to the Election Commission of India, 
Article 243 K is in  consonance with the provisions in respect of those 
bodies.  Of course, we have given the fl exibility, but mandatory.  Flexibility 
in relation to whether a body or an authority because the financial position, 
the area covered, the requirement, all these things are within the wisdom 
of the concerned State Governments”. 
 
 
 
2.21 The Committee are in  agreement with the Government on the aspect 
of entrusting the task of superintendence, direction and control of the 
election process of a co -operative society in such an authority or body as 
may be provided by the Legislature of a State by Law.  Although,  the 
Committee are aware that co -operative societies are not agencies of the 
Government, due to the fact that the election process is the achilles heel of 
the co-operative societies they concur with the provisions of the Bill with 
regard to the election pr ocess of co-operatives.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that a specialised agency on the lines of the Election 
Commission be set -up and entrusted the task of conducting elections in 

  
co-operatives in a timely, fre e and impartial manner.  In their consi dered 
view this step would go a long way in ensuri ng full democratization of the 
co-operative sector.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
Clause 243ZL(1) – Suspension & Supercession of Board 
 
2.22 The Clause reads as under 
 
**     **      ** 
 
       Provided further that the board of any such co -operative society shall not be 
superseded or kept under suspension where there is no Government 
shareholding or loan or financial assistance or any guarantee by the 
Government: 
 
 
**     **      ** 
 
2.23 The Committee observe  the provision of this clause empowers the 
Government to supersede or suspend the Board of co -operative societies even 
when there is no Government shareholding or loan or financial assistance or any 
guarantee by the Government. 
 
2.24 This provision, it app arently appears that Government is trying to wrest 
control over co -operatives.  A sked to explain  for such a clause in the Bill,  the 
Department in their written reply submitted that under the existing State Laws, 
the State Governments have unlimited power t o supersede any cooperative 
society irrespective of Government‘s share holding. The present provision is a 
progressive step in the sense that the Government proposes to have provision of 
supersession and suspension of the board of only such societies where  there is 
any Government shareholding or loan or financial assistance or any guarantee 
by the Government. This provision has been made not with the objective to wrest 
control over co -operatives but to safeguard the economic interest of the 
government and public exchequer and to ensure necessary financial discipline in 
such cooperative societies.  However, the State would be free to put further 
restrictions on this, if they consider it necessary in the context of States.   

  
 
2.25 When asked why the recommenda tion of the Committee (14 th Lok Sabha) 
was not accepted, the Secretary during evidence stated as under: 
“The reason is that there were several cases. From my own 
personal experience, in Bihar and also all over the country, I have seen 
the co-operatives, the apex bodies.  The co -operatives are not only given 
shareholding but also they are given loan by the Government.  They are 
given guarantee by the Government.  For instance, I will give you one 
example.  In NAFED, we do not have a shareholding but we have given a 
huge guarantee running into more than a thousand crores of rupees. 
Suppose the NAFED starts functioning in a manner which is totally 
detrimental to the co -operative spirit or even the basic public spirit.  The 
Government has no control to stop that .  There is no instrument to stop 
that.  So, these are extreme cases where the Government will use its 
power.  That is why, the whole section is there. There are a lot of 
limitations on Government.  They cannot supersede for more than six 
months.  Then, in  that, the very same clause says when and for what 
reason exactly you can keep it superseded.  We have tried to put control 
on the Government as well.  If you leave the co -operatives completely out 
of control, I have seen for myself what it can lead to.  I  had been in my 
State.  Now, I am working here as Secretary”.  
  
 
2.26  Asked why no provision for giving a reasonable opportunity to the Board 
or Governing Council of the co -operative society to explain its conduct has been 
kept in the amendment before th e supersession or suspension of the Board is 
done by Government or its agencies, the Department in reply stated that t hese 
details would be provided in the respective State Laws.  However, there may be 
a situation of emergent nature, where Board may have t o be suspended with 
immediate effect.  However, in normal course, the society will be given an 
opportunity to explain their conduct before invoking the provision for 
supersession or suspension of the board.  
 
2.27 Clause 243ZL(1) stipulates that the board of any co-operative society 
shall not be superseded or kept under suspension where there is no 
Government shareholding or loan or financial assistance or any guarantee 
by the Government.  The Committee do not buy the argument put forth by 
the Government that the present provision is a progressive step made with 

  
the objective to safeguard the economic interest of the Government and 
the public exchequer and to ensure necessary financial discipline and it 
has not been incorporated with the objective to wrest c ontrol over co -
operatives.  The Committee are of the opinion that as co -operatives are not 
Government agencies and are only  autonomous bodies that are promoted, 
owned, controlled and managed only by their user members, the 
Government should not have such unfettered power over the  
co-operatives.  They also want that the Government funding/share in co -
operatives should be minimal and ultimately nil.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should supersede or place under 
suspension the Board  of a co -operative society where it possesses more 
than 51% shares or loan or financial assistance or given guarantees 
amounting to more than 51% of net worth of the cooperative.  Further, they 
desire that  the Government should resort to this draconian me asure only 
in cases of extreme and gross financial irregularities for which also they 
feel that there are enough provisions in the Indian Penal Code to take care 
of misdemeanors of such nature on the part of the cooperatives. The 
Committee further desire t hat the period of supersession/ suspension 
should be restricted to only 3 months. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;              BASUDEB ACHARIA 
27 August, 2010                                                       Chairman, 
5 Bhadrapada,1932 (Saka)                          Committee on Agriculture.  
 
 
 

  
                                     APPENDIX-I 
  
The Constitution (106th Amendment) Bill, 2006 
   
Recommendations of the Standing Committee and the views of the 
Department of Agriculture and Co-operation. 
 
S. 
No
. 
Provisions of 
the Bill 
Recommenda-
tions of the 
Committee 
Views of the DAC Provision 
after 
amendments 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1. Be it enacted by 
Parliament in 
the Fifth-seventh 
Year of the 
Republic of India 
as follows: 
No 
recommendation 
This amendment is 
of drafting nature. 
For ―Fifty -
seventh‖, 
substitute 
―Sixtieth‖. 
 
2. 1(1) This Act 
may be called 
the Constitution 
(One Hundred 
and Sixth 
Amendment) 
Act, 2006. 
No 
recommendation 
This amendment is 
of drafting nature. 
For ―2006‖ 
substitute 
―2009‖. 
 
  
 
3. No Provision. Article 19(1)(c) 
of the 
Constitution 
says that ‗all 
citizens shall 
have the right to 
form 
associations or 
unions‘.  The 
Committee have 
been informed 
that the 
Department of 
Legal Affairs of 
the Ministry of 
Law and Justice, 
Government of 
India is of the 
opinion th at the 
word 
‗associations‘ in 
The issue has been 
examined in 
consultation with 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice.  The 
Department is of the 
view that 
amendment to 
Article 19(1)(c) is 
not required as the 
word ‗association‘ 
includes cooperative 
societies. Further, a 
new clause 43B is 
proposed to include 
the provision of 
cooperative 
societies in Directive 
Principles of State 
Policy. Therefore, 
this 
No Provision. 

  
Article 19(1)(c) 
of the 
Constitution 
includes the 
words 
‗cooperative 
societies‘ also. A 
view has been 
expressed in the 
Committee that 
the word 
‗associations‘ 
does not include 
‗cooperatives‘. 
The Committee, 
therefore, 
recommends 
that the 
Government 
should examine 
whether the 
words 
‗cooperative 
societies‘ can be 
inserted after 
the word 
‗associations‘ in 
the aforesaid 
Article. 
recommendation 
of the Committee 
could not be 
accepted. 
4. No Provision. The Committee 
further 
recommended 
that a new 
Article 43B on 
Empowerment 
of Cooperatives 
may be added in 
Part – IV of the 
Constitution that 
contains 
Directive 
Principles of 
State Policy, 
which may read 
as under: 
 ―43B 
Empowerment 
of 
Accepting the 
recommendation of 
the Committee, it is 
proposed to add the 
following provision: 
 
 ―43B 
Promotion of 
Cooperative 
Societies: The state 
shall endeavour to 
promote voluntary 
formation, 
autonomous 
functioning, 
democratic control 
and professional 
management of 
cooperative 
New article 
proposed to be 
added as 
follows: 
 
 ―43B 
Promotion of 
Cooperative 
Societies: 
The state shall 
endeavour to 
promote 
voluntary 
formation, 
autonomous 
functioning, 
democratic 
control and 
professional 

  
Cooperatives: 
The state shall 
endeavour to 
promote 
voluntary 
formation, 
autonomous 
functioning, 
democratic 
control and 
professional 
management of 
the 
cooperatives‖. 
societies‖. management 
of cooperative 
societies‖. 
5. No Provision. Cooperative 
Societies is a 
State subject 
under Entry 32 
of the State List 
of Seventh 
Schedule of the 
Constitution.  
The Committee 
is of the firm 
view that the 
Central 
Government 
should not 
interfere in the 
day-to-day 
affairs of the 
cooperative 
societies. 
 
Regarding the 
recommendation 
that the Central 
Government should 
not interfere in the 
day-to-day affairs of 
the cooperatives, it 
is the policy of the 
Central Government 
not to interfere in the 
day-to-day affairs of 
the cooperative 
societies.  Nor there 
is any provision in 
the Constitution 
(106th Amendment) 
Bill, 2006 providing 
any power to the 
Central Government 
even for any action 
or directive for the 
governance of 
cooperative 
societies, leaving 
aside the 
interference in day -
to-day working of 
the cooperatives. 
This 
recommendation is 
accepted. 
No provision. 

  
 
6. No Provision. The Committee 
is of the 
unanimous 
opinion that a 
comprehensive 
amendment to 
the Constitution 
on cooperatives 
is not 
necessary.  
They, therefore, 
recommend that 
‗The 
Constitution 
(One Hundred 
and Sixth 
Amendment)Bill 
2006‘ should be 
converted into a 
comprehensive 
central model 
law for voluntary 
formation, 
autonomous 
functioning, 
democratic 
control and 
professional 
management of 
the cooperatives 
with certain 
incentives and  
disincentives to 
the State that 
implement or not 
implement the 
model law.  The 
States can enact 
their own laws 
on the subject, 
however, State 
Laws should be 
compatible with 
the Central 
Model Law. 
 
 
The Committee‘s 
view is that a 
comprehensive 
amendment to  the 
Constitution is not 
necessary and has 
recommended to 
convert the Bill into 
a comprehensive 
Central model law.  
During the 
discussion in the 
meetings of the 
Committee as well 
while replying to the 
Points for 
Discussion, the 
Department has 
made it clear  that 
the said model law 
will not serve the 
purpose.  This is 
mainly on following  
grounds:- 
(a) Any such 
model law would 
be only advisory in 
nature and it is for 
the State 
Governments to 
follow the suit or 
not.  In fact, it can 
not be termed as 
‗Central model  
law‘.  The 
recommendations 
of the ‗Model 
Cooperatives Act‘ 
as recommended 
by Choudhury 
Brahm Perkash 
Committee are 
already there but 
the states are not 
adopting them in 
their State Acts. 
 
No Provision. 
 

  
(b) The basic 
aim to bring this 
Constitution 
Amendment Bill is 
to provi de for 
certain provisions 
in the Constitution 
regarding the 
conduct of 
elections, audit, 
tenure and size of 
the board etc. 
which are 
considered basic 
to the democratic 
and professional 
management of 
cooperatives and 
being the 
constitutional 
provision, thes e 
will be mandatory 
to be conformed in 
the State 
Legislations. 
 
(c) As the 
Cooperative 
Societies is a 
State Subject, 
Central 
Government has 
no legislative 
jurisdiction to 
enact such a 
model law.  If such 
a model law is 
prepared by the 
Central 
Government as 
advisory to the  
States, the 
recommendation 
of the Committee 
that the state law 
should be 
compatible with 
the Central model 

  
law will not be 
implementable. 
 
           Due to 
aforementioned 
reasons, this 
recommendation 
of the Committee 
could not be 
accepted.   
7. No Provision.  The Committee 
recommended 
that no person 
should be 
allowed to 
become the 
office bearer of 
the c ooperative 
society for more 
than two 
consecutive 
terms.  
However, he will 
again be eligible 
to contest the 
elections after a 
gap of full one 
term. 
 
Regarding 
restriction on 
holding office for 
more than two 
consecutive terms 
the         Multi -State 
Co-operative 
Societies Act has a 
similar provision 
prohibiting 
Chairman or 
President of Multi -
State Cooperative 
Society to hold such 
office for more than 
two consecutive 
terms.  However, 
the High Power 
Committee while 
giving its interim 
report on 
amendments to 
MSCS Act has 
recommended that 
this restriction 
should be removed.  
There are both pros 
and cons on this 
issue.   While 
viewing the  concept 
of democratic 
member control over 
the cooperatives, it 
can be said that it is 
for the members to 
decide that for how 
long a member 
holds a certain 
No provision. 

  
office.  On the other, 
when this provision 
was introduced, it 
was with the basic 
intention to preven t 
the vested interests 
from holding an 
office of cooperative 
society for a longer 
period. However, it 
would be advisable 
that this issue may 
be left to the State 
Legislature and 
need not to 
provide in the Bill.  
Otherwise also no 
provision has been 
provided in the Bill 
regarding 
disqualifications or 
any prohibitory 
provision for being 
chosen as a 
member of the 
board or its office 
bearer. Therefore, 
this recommenda -
tion of the 
Committee could 
not be accepted.   
 
8. 243ZI. Subject 
to the provis ions 
of this Part, the 
Legislature of a 
State may, by 
law, make 
provisions with 
respect to the 
incorporation, 
regulation and 
winding up of 
co-operative 
societies based 
on the pr inciples 
of voluntary,  
democratic 
No 
recommendation
. 
The word 
―formation‖ may be 
added after the word 
―voluntary‖ in this 
clause. 
 
This amendment is 
of drafting nature. 
 
243 ZI Subject 
to the 
provisions of 
this Part, the 
Legislature of 
a State may, 
by law, mak e 
provisions with 
respect to the 
incorporation, 
regulation and 
winding up of 
cooperative 
societies 
based on the 
principles of 

  
member-control, 
member-
economic 
participation and 
autonomous 
functioning. 
 
voluntary 
formation, 
democratic 
member – 
control, 
member – 
economic 
participation 
and 
autonomous 
functioning. 
 
9. 243ZJ. (1)   Th e 
board shall 
consist of such 
number of 
directors as may 
be provided by 
the Legislature 
of a State, by 
law: 
Provided 
that the 
maximum 
number of 
directors of a co-
operative 
society shall not 
exceed twenty -
one, except in 
the case of a 
State level co -
operative 
society‖.  
The Committee 
noted that this 
Clause specifies 
that the 
maximum 
number of 
Directors shall 
not exceed 
twenty-one 
except in the 
case of a State 
level 
cooperative 
society.  It has 
been observed 
that in many 
cases there are 
very large 
boards and i t is 
very difficult to 
arrive at 
reasonable 
decision.  The 
Committee, 
therefore, 
recommended 
that the 
maximum 
number of 
directors 
including 
functional 
directors should 
be restricted to 
twenty-one for 
all cooperatives 
This 
recommendation of 
the Committee has 
been accepted to 
keep the maximum 
number of directors 
as twenty-one for all 
the cooperative 
societies. However, 
the functional 
Directors would be 
in addition to this 
limit, to ensure that 
adequate number of 
elected Directors 
are there on the 
Board.  
243 ZJ(1) The 
board shall 
consist of such 
number of 
directors as 
may be 
provided by 
the Legislature 
of a  State, by 
law: 
 
Provided that 
the maximum 
number of 
directors of a 
cooperative 
society shall 
not exceed 
twenty-one ‖. 
 

  
irrespective of 
their sizes.  
Hence, th e 
words ‗except in 
case of a State 
Level 
cooperative 
society‘ should 
be deleted from 
the proviso to 
Clause 
243ZJ(1). 
10. 243ZJ (3)   The 
Legislature of a 
State shall, by 
law, make 
provisions for 
co-option of 
persons to be 
members of the 
board having 
experience in 
the field of 
banking, 
management, 
finance or 
specialization in 
any other field 
relating to the 
objects and 
activities 
undertaken by 
the co -operative 
society as 
members of the 
board of such 
society: 
 
Provided 
that the number 
of such co-opted 
members shall 
not exceed two 
in addition to 
twenty-one 
directors 
specified in the 
proviso to 
The Committee 
recommend that 
in the second 
proviso to the 
Clause 243ZJ(3) 
for the words 
‗Vice-Chairman 
or                    
Vice-President, 
Chairman or 
President of the 
board‘, the 
words ‗office 
bearer of the 
board‘ may be 
substituted. 
 
Clause 243ZJ(3) 
provide that the co -
opted members 
shall not cast vote in 
the election of the 
Chairman or 
President, Vice -
Chairman or Vice -
President.   Clause 
243 ZH(e) defin es 
the words ‗office 
bearers‘ means a 
President, Vice -
President, 
Chairperson, Vice -
Chairperson,  
Secretary or 
Treasurer of a 
cooperative society 
and includes any 
other person to be 
elected by the 
cooperative society.  
 
This 
recommendation 
of the Committee 
is accepted. 
 
243 ZJ(3) The 
Legislature of 
a State shall, 
by law, make 
provisions for 
co-option of 
persons to be 
members of 
the board 
having 
experience in 
the field of 
banking, 
management, 
finance or 
specialization 
in any other 
field relating to 
the object s 
and activities 
undertaken by 
the 
cooperative 
society as 
members of 
the board of 
such society: 
 
Provided that 
the number of 
such co -opted 
members shall 
not exceed 
two in addition 
to twenty -one 
directors 

  
clause (1): 
   Provided that 
such co -opted 
members shall 
not have the 
right to vote in 
any election of 
the cooperative 
society in their 
capacity as such 
member or to be 
eligible to be 
elected as Vice -
Chairman or 
Vice-President, 
Chairman and 
President of the 
board‖. 
 
specified in the 
proviso to 
clause (1).   
 
Provided that 
such co -opted 
members shall 
not have the 
right to vote in 
any election of 
the 
cooperative 
society in their 
capacity as 
such member 
or to be 
eligible to be 
elected as 
office bearers  
of the board: 
 
   Provided 
also that the 
functional 
directors of  a          
co-operative 
society shall 
also be the 
members of 
the board and 
such members 
shall be 
excluded for 
the purpose of 
counting the 
total number of 
directors 
specified in 
first proviso of 
clause (1) of 
this article.‖ 
 
11. 243ZK (1)   
Notwithstanding 
anything 
contained in any 
law made by the 
Legislature of a 
The Committee 
feel that though 
the cooperative 
societies are not 
part of local 
governance like 
 Under the 
Multi-State Co -
operative Societies 
Act, the 
responsibility to 
conduct the election 
243 ZK (1) 
Notwithstand-
ing anything 
contained in 
any law made 
by the 

  
State, the 
election of a 
board shall be 
conducted 
before the expiry 
of the term of 
the board so as 
to ensure that 
the newly 
elected board 
assumes office 
immediately on 
the expiry of the 
term of the  
outgoing board: 
   Provided that 
in case the co -
operative 
society has 
failed to conduct 
such elections in 
time the 
Registrar or an 
authority or 
officer 
authorized by 
the Registrar 
shall cause the 
elections to be 
conducted within 
a period of six 
months after the 
expiry of the 
term of the 
outgoing board 
at the cost of the 
co-operative 
society. 
 (2) The 
superintendence
, direction and 
control of the 
preparation of 
electoral rolls 
for, and the 
conduct of, all 
elections to a  
co-operative 
panchyati raj 
institutions and 
municipalities 
and should be 
allowed to 
conduct their 
own elections, 
however, they 
are of the 
opinion that 
major ill of 
cooperative 
sector is their 
election 
process.  They, 
therefore, 
recommend that 
the matter 
should be 
further 
examined so as 
to have free, 
fair, impartial 
and timely 
elections of the 
cooperative 
societies 
conducted by 
the S tate 
Election 
Commission or 
any other 
appropriate 
independent 
body. 
 
 
is that of the board 
of directors.  To 
make the 
cooperatives 
member driven 
organizations the  
concept of conduct 
of election by a 
cooperative itself 
conforming to 
principle of 
democratic 
management.  
However, in 
practice, as 
observed by the 
Committee the 
election process is a 
major ill of the 
cooperative sector.  
The elections are 
not held regular ly or 
the election process 
is vitiated for one 
reason or another.  
Moreover, the 
magnitude of the 
problem has to be 
examined in view of 
the large spread of 
primary cooperative 
societies in the 
states.  Most of 
these societies are 
financially weak and 
many of them even 
may not bear the 
expenses if the 
elections are held by 
the State Election 
Commission on 
pattern of the 
panchayat raj 
institution. It is, 
therefore, 
proposed that 
accepting the 
recommendation 
Legislature of 
a State, the 
election of a 
board shall be 
conducted 
before the 
expiry of the 
term of the 
board so as to 
ensure that the 
newly elected 
board 
assumes office 
immediately 
on the expiry 
of the term of 
the outgoing 
board: 
 
 
(2) The 
superintend-
ence, direction 
and control of 
the 
preparation of 
electoral rolls 
for, and the 
conduct of, all 
elections to a 
cooperative 
society sha ll 
vest in such 
an authority 
or body as 
may be 
provided by 
the 
Legislature of 
a State, by 
law. 
 

  
society shall 
vest in the  
general body of 
the co -operative 
society:   
of the Committee 
elections may be 
held by an 
authority as may 
be provided by the 
State Legislature 
in law. 
 
12. 243ZL(1)      
Notwithstanding 
anything 
contained in any 
law for the time 
being in force, 
no board shall 
be superseded 
or kept under 
suspension for a 
period 
exceeding six 
months: 
 
The Committee 
note that in the 
Bill it is stated 
that ‗the board 
of cooperative 
societies shall 
not be 
superseded 
where there is 
no government 
shareholding or 
loan or financial 
assistance or 
any guarantee 
by the 
Government‘.  
The Co mmittee 
note that the 
shareholding by 
the Government 
has not been 
qualified and 
even if the 
Government 
have one rupee 
as shareholding, 
it will have the 
right to 
supersede the 
board of the 
cooperative 
society.  These 
unfettered 
powers to 
Government as 
proposed in the 
Bill will affect the 
autonomy of the 
Cooperatives 
adversely.  The 
The Multi -State Co -
operative S ocieties 
Act, 2002 provide 
for supersession of 
a multi state society 
only in the case 
where Government 
equity is not less 
than 51%.  The 
existing provision in 
clause 243 ZL was 
proposed keeping in 
view the overall 
spread of 
cooperative 
societies in the 
country, the stake of 
the State 
Governments by 
way of share 
holding, loans, 
government 
guarantee, etc.  In 
case of Multi -State 
Cooperative 
Societies Act, there 
are very few multi -
state cooperative 
societies where the 
Government equity 
is there.  Otherwise 
also safeguards 
have been provided 
in this clause to 
prevent misuse of 
the provision by the 
Government such 
as; maximum period 
of supersession not 
exceeding six 
243 ZL(1) 
Notwithstand-
ing anything 
contained in 
any law for 
the time 
being in 
force, no 
board shall 
be 
superseded 
for a period 
exceeding six 
months: 

  
Committee are 
of the opinion 
that the board of 
cooperative 
society should 
not be 
superseded 
where 
government 
shareholding is 
less than 51 per 
cent. 
 
months (one year in 
case of cooperative 
banks), 
responsibility of the 
administrator to 
arrange for  the 
elections of the 
board within this 
period and 
supersession of 
board only on 
tangible grounds.    
 
Therefore, this 
recommendation 
of the Committee 
could not be 
accepted.   
 
13. No Provision. The Committee 
are of the 
opinion that 
there is a need 
to set up 
‗Cooperative 
Members 
Grievances 
Redressal 
Forum‘ to decide 
all types of 
disputes arising 
in respect of  
constitution, 
business, 
management, or 
any other 
activity of the 
cooperative 
society.  This 
may deliver 
cheap and quick 
justice to the 
members of the 
cooperatives. 
 
After careful 
examination of the 
recommendation of 
the Committee, this 
Department is of th e 
view that there are 
already provisions in 
the State 
Cooperative Laws 
providing for 
mechanism for 
settlement of 
disputes etc. 
Further, it will also 
add to the multi -
layer mechanism 
already provided in 
the State Acts for 
the settlement of 
disputes, 
inspection/inquiry 
etc. Moreover, if 
these provisions are 
added in the Bill, it 
would be touching 
the governance of 
cooperatives, which 
is not the intention 
of the Bill and 
No provision. 
 

  
therefore, should be 
left to the wisdom of 
the State 
Legislature.   
 
Therefore, this 
recommendation 
of the Committee 
could not be 
accepted.   
 
14. No Provision. The Committee 
are of the 
opinion that 
there is a need 
to set up a 
‗Cooperative 
Regulatory 
Commission‘ to 
reduce the 
interference of 
the Government 
as well as the 
Registrar and to 
inspect / enquire 
about the 
conduct of the 
Management 
Committee / 
Board of 
Directors of the 
cooperatives in 
each State to 
ensure 
transparency, 
neutrality in 
quick disposal of 
the cases which 
will also regulate 
the statutory 
aspect of 
functioning of 
cooperatives. 
 
 No provision. 
  
15. 243ZM.  (1)   
The Legislature 
of a State may, 
by law, make 
The Committee 
observed that 
the spirit of an 
independent 
   The Committee 
has recommended 
that in order to 
ensure independent 
243 ZM (1) 
The 
Legislature of 
a State may, 

  
provisions with 
respect to the 
maintenance of 
accounts by the 
co-operative 
societies and the 
auditing of such 
accounts at least 
once in each 
financial year. 
 
(2)  The 
Legislature of a 
State shall, by 
law, lay down the 
minimum 
qualifications 
and experience 
of auditors and 
auditing firms 
that shall be 
eligible for 
auditing the co -
operative 
societies. 
 
 
(3)  Every co -
operative society 
shall cause to be 
audited b y an 
auditor referred 
to in clause (2) 
appointed by the 
general body of 
the co -operative 
society. 
 
(4) The accounts 
of every 
cooperative 
society shall be 
audited before 
the expiry of a 
period of six 
months of the 
financial year to 
which such 
audit may be 
diluted if the 
cooperative 
society being 
audited has a 
hand in the 
choice and 
appointment of 
its auditors.  
There may be 
chances that 
although 
officially the 
general body 
will appo int the 
auditors, it is the 
Board of 
Directors of the 
concerned 
cooperative 
society, whose 
choice will 
actually prevail 
to the detriment 
of auditing 
ethics, given the 
reality that most 
of the members 
of the 
cooperative 
society are 
neither deeply 
involved n or 
have the time 
and information 
required to 
make the best 
choice.  The 
independent 
audit can be 
ensured only if 
audit is carried 
out by the 
auditor from the 
government 
approved panel 
of auditors / 
audit firms or 
and impartial audit, 
the auditor should 
be appointed from 
the Government 
approved panel or 
through a separate 
Government 
organization say 
Directorate of Audit.   
 
Accepting the  
recommendation 
of the Committee, 
it is proposed to 
provide a provision 
in clause 243 ZM to 
the effect  that the 
auditor shall be 
appointed out of a 
panel approved by 
the 
Government/Regist
-rar. 
 
by law, make 
provisions with 
respect to the 
maintenance 
of accounts by 
the 
cooperative 
societies and 
the auditing of 
such accounts 
at least once 
in each 
financial year. 
 
(2) The 
Legislature of 
a State shall, 
by law, lay 
down the 
minimum 
qualifications 
and 
experience of 
auditors and 
auditing firms 
that shall be 
eligible for 
auditing 
accounts of  
the 
cooperative 
societies. 
 
(3) Every 
cooperative 
society shall 
cause to be 
audited by an 
auditor or 
auditing firms 
referred to in 
clause (2) 
appointed by 
the general 
body of the 
cooperative 
society. 
 

  
accounts relate. 
 
 
 
through a 
separate 
government 
organization say 
for example 
Directorate of 
Audit.  The 
Committee are 
of the opinion 
that the Director 
of Cooperative 
Audit should be 
made 
answerable to 
the State 
Legislature.  
 
Provided that 
such auditors 
or auditing 
firms shall be 
appointed 
from a panel 
approved by 
a State 
Government 
or an 
authority 
authorized by 
the State 
Government 
in this behalf.  
 
(4) The 
accounts of 
every 
cooperative 
society shall 
be audited 
within six 
months of the 
close of the 
financial year 
to which such 
accounts 
relate. 
 
(5) Audit 
report of the 
accounts of 
an apex 
cooperative 
society, as 
may be 
defined by 
law,  shall be 
laid before 
the state 
legislature in 
the manner 
as may be 
provided by 
the State 
legislature, 
by law. 

  
16. 243ZP. Every 
co-operative 
society shall file 
returns, within 
six months of the 
close of every 
financial year, to 
the authority 
designated b y 
the State 
Government 
amongst others,  
the following, 
namely:- 
 
No 
recommenda-
tion. 
This amendment is 
of drafting nature. 
243 ZP  Every 
cooperative 
society shall 
file returns, 
within six 
months of the 
close of every 
financial year, 
to the authority 
designated by 
the State 
Government 
including, the 
following, 
namely:- 
 
17. 243 ZQ(1)  The 
Legislature of a 
State may, by 
law, make 
provisions for 
defining the 
offences relating 
to cooperati ve 
societies and 
penalties for 
such offences.  
No 
recommenda-
tion. 
This amendment is 
of drafting nature. 
243 ZQ(1) The 
Legislature of 
a State may, 
by law, make 
provisions for 
the offences 
relating to 
cooperative 
societies and 
penalties for 
such offences. 
 
18. 243ZQ(2)(a) a 
co-operative 
society or an 
officer or 
member thereof  
willfully making a 
false return or 
furnishing false 
information, or 
willfully not 
furnishing any 
information 
required from 
him by a person 
authorized in this 
behalf;  
No 
recommenda-
tion. 
This amendment is 
of drafting nature. 
 
  
243 ZQ (2)(a)  
a cooperative 
society or an 
officer or 
member 
thereof willfully 
making a false 
return or 
furnishing 
false 
information, or 
any person 
wilfully not 
furnishing any 
information 
required from 
him by a 
person 
authorized in 
this behalf 

  
under the 
provisions of 
the State Act; 
 
19. No Provision. The Committee 
have considered 
each clause of 
the Bill 
thoroughly and 
are of the 
opinion that the 
clauses, other 
than those 
discussed in 
Part – II of the 
Report, shou ld 
be made 
consistent with 
the provisions 
on which 
amendments / 
suggestions 
have been 
made in the 
Report. 
 
The provisions of 
the Bill have been 
made consistent 
with the 
recommendations of 
the Committee 
otherwise where the 
recommendations 
are not accepted. 
No provision. 
 
              

  
 APPENDIX-II 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
  Date: 30 Nov 2009 
Bill No. 107 of 2009 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—        
 1. (I) This Act may be called the 
Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh 
Amendment) Act, 2009. 
 
   (2)  It shall come into force on such 
date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint. 
 
Short title and 
commencement 
 
 
 
 2. In Part IV of the Constitution, after 
article 43A, the following article shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
Insertion of new 
article 43 B 
      ―43B. The State shall endeavour to 
promote voluntary formation, 
autonomous functioning, democratic 
control and professional management 
of co-operative societies‖. 
 
Promotion of co -
operative 
societies. 
Insertion of 
new Part IXB 
3. After Part IXA of the Constitution, the 
following Part shall inserted, namely:- 
 
 

  
   
  „PART IXB‟ 
THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
 
Definitions. 243ZH.  In this Part, unless the context 
otherwise requires,- 
  
         (a) ―authorized person‖ means a 
person referred to as such in article 
243ZQ; 
 
 
 (b)   ―board‖ means the board of directors 
or the governing body of a co -operative 
society, by whatever name called, to 
which the direction and control of the 
management of the affairs of a society is 
entrusted to; 
 
 
 (c)    ―co -operative society‖ means a 
society registered or d eemed to be 
registered under any law relating to co -
operative societies for the time being in 
force in any State; 
 
 
 (d)  ―multi -State co -operative society‖ 
means a society with objects not 
confined to one State and registered or 
deemed to be registered u nder any law 
for the time being in force relating to such 
co-operatives:  
 
 
 (e)    ―office bearer‖ means a President, 
Vice-President, Chairperson, Vice -
Chairperson, Secretary or Treasurer of a 
co-operative society and includes any 
other person to be elec ted by the board 
of any co-operative society; 
 

  
 
 (f)  ―Registrar‖ means the Central 
Registrar appointed by the Central 
Government in relation to the multi -State 
co-operative societies and the Registrar 
for co -operative societies appointed by 
the State Gov ernment under the law 
made by the Legislature of a State in 
relation to co-operative societies;  
 
 
 (g)  ―State Act‖ means any law made by 
the Legislature of a State; 
 
 
 (h)  ―State level co -operative society‖ 
means a co -operative society having its 
area of operation extending to the whole 
of a State and defined as such in any law 
made by the Legislature of a State. 
 
 
Incorporation of 
co-operative 
societies. 
243ZI. Subject to the provisions of this 
Part, the Legislature of a State may, by 
law, make provi sions with respect to the 
incorporation, regulation and winding up 
of co -operative societies based on the 
principles of voluntary formation, 
democratic member -control, member -
economic participation and autonomous 
functioning. 
 
 
Number and 
term of 
members of 
board and its 
office bearers. 
243ZJ. (1)   The board shall consist of 
such number of directors as may be 
provided by the Legislature of a State, by 
law: 
 
 

  
Provided that the maximum 
number of directors of a co -operative 
society shall not exceed twenty-one: 
 
Provided further that the 
Legislature of a State shall, by law, 
provide for the reservation of one seat for 
the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes and two seats for women on 
board of every co -operative society 
consisting of individuals as members and 
having members from such class or 
category of persons.  
 
 (2)  The term of office of elected 
members of the board and its office 
bearers shall be five years from the date 
of election and the term of office bearers 
shall be co -terminus with the term o f the 
board: 
 
    Provided that the board may fill a 
casual vacancy on the board by 
nomination out of the same class of 
members in respect of which the casual 
vacancy has arisen, if the term of office 
of the board is less than half of its 
original term. 
 
 
 (3)   The Legislature of a State shall, by 
law, make provisions for co -option of 
persons to be members of the board 
having experience in the field of banking, 
 

  
management, finance or specialization in 
any other field relating to the objects and 
activities undertaken by the co -operative 
society as members of the board of such 
society: 
 
Provided that the number of such co -
opted members shall not exceed two in 
addition to twenty-one directors specified 
in the proviso to clause (1): 
 
Provided further that such  co-opted 
members shall not have the right to vote 
in any election of the co-operative society 
in their capacity as such member or to be 
eligible to be elected as office bearers of 
the board: 
 
Provided also that the functional 
directors of a co -operative s ociety shall 
also be the members of the board and 
such members shall be excluded for the 
purpose of counting the total number of 
directors specified in first proviso of 
clause (1) of this article. 
 
Provided further that such co -opted 
members shall not have  the right to vote 
in any election of the co-operative society 
in their capacity as such member or to be 
eligible to be elected as office bearers of 
the board: 
 
 

  
Provided also that the functional 
directors of a co -operative society shall 
also be the member s of the board and 
such members shall be excluded for the 
purpose of counting the total number of 
directors specified in first proviso of 
clause (1) of this article. 
 
 243ZK. (1)   Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law made by the 
Legislature of  a State, the election of a 
board shall be conducted before the 
expiry of the term of the board so as to 
ensure that the newly elected members 
of the board assumes office immediately 
on the expiry of the term of the office of 
members of the outgoing board. 
 
Election of 
members of 
board. 
 (2)     The superintendence, direction and 
control of the preparation of electoral 
rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections 
to a  co -operative society shall vest in 
such an authority or body, as may be 
provided by the Legislature of a State, by 
law: 
 
Provided that the Legislature of a State 
may, by law, provide for the procedure 
and guidelines for the conduct of such 
elections. 
 
 
 243ZL. (1)      Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law for the time being in 
Supersession 
and suspension 
of board and 
interim 

  
force, no board shall be superseded or 
kept under suspension for a period 
exceeding six months. 
Provided that the board may be 
superseded or kept under suspension in  
case- 
(i) of its persistent default; or 
(ii) of negligence in the 
performance of its duties; or 
(iii) the boa rd has committed any 
act prejudicial to the interests 
of the co -operative society or 
its members; or 
(iv) there is a stalemate in the 
Constitution or functions of the 
board; or 
(v) the authority or body as 
provided by the Legislature of 
the State, by law, under cla use 
(2) of article 243ZK, has failed 
to conduct elections in 
accordance with the provisions 
of the State Act: 
 
       Provided further that the board of 
any such co -operative society shall not 
be superseded or kept under suspension 
where there is no Govern ment 
shareholding or loan or financial 
assistance  or any guarantee by the 
Government: 
 
      Provided also that in case of a co -
operative society carrying on the 
business of banking, the provisions of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 shall also 
apply: 
  
 
management. 

  
         Provided also that in case of a co -
operative society, other than a multi -
State co -operative society, carrying on 
the business of banking, the provisions of 
this clause shall have the effect as if for 
the words ―six months‖, the words ―one 
year‖ had been substituted. 
 
 (2)     In case of supersession of a board, 
the administrator appointed to manage 
the affairs of such co -operative society 
shall arrange for conduct of elections 
within the  period specified in clause (1) 
and handover the management to the 
elected board. 
 
 
 (3)     The Legislature of a State may, by 
law, make provisions for the conditions of 
service of the administrator. 
 
 
Audit of 
accounts of co -
operative 
societies. 
243ZM.  (1)   The Legislature of a State 
may, by law, make provisions with 
respect to the maintenance of accounts 
by the co -operative societies and the 
auditing of such accounts at least once in 
each financial year. 
 
 
 (2)     The Legislature of a State shall, by 
law, lay down the minimum qualifications 
and experience of auditors and auditing 
firms that shall be eligible for auditing 
accounts the co-operative societies. 
 
 
   

  
(3)  Every co -operative society shall 
cause to be audited by an auditor or 
auditing firm s referred to in clause (2) 
appointed by the general body of the co -
operative society. 
 
      Provided that such auditors or 
auditing firms shall be appointed from a 
panel approved by a State Government 
or an authority authorized by the State 
Government in this behalf. 
 
 (4)     The accounts of every co-operative 
society shall be audited within six months 
of the close of the financial year to which 
such accounts relate. 
 
 
 (5)     The audit report of the accounts of 
an apex co -operative society, as may b e 
defined by the State Act, shall be laid 
before the State Legislature in the 
manner, as may be provided by the State 
Legislature, by law. 
 
 
Convening of 
general body 
meetings. 
243ZN. The Legislature of a State may, 
by law, make provisions that the annua l 
general body meeting of every co -
operative society shall be convened 
within a period of six months of close of 
the financial year to transact the 
business as may be provided in such 
law. 
 
 
   

  
Right of a 
member to get 
information 
243ZO. (1)     The Legisl ature of a State 
may, by law, provide for access to every 
member of a co -operative society to the 
books, information and accounts of the 
co-operative society kept in regular 
transaction of its business with such 
member. 
 
 (2)   The Legislature of a State  may, by 
law, make provisions to ensure the 
participation of members in the 
management of the co -operative society 
providing minimum requirement of 
attending meetings by the members and 
utilizing the minimum level of services as 
may be provided in such law. 
  
 
 (3)   The Legislature of a State may, by 
law, provide for co -operative education 
and training for its members. 
 
 
Returns 243ZP. Every co -operative society shall 
file returns, within six months of the close 
of every financial year, to the authority 
designated by the State Government 
including the following, namely:- 
 
(a) annual report of its activities; 
(b) its audited statement of accounts; 
(c) plan for surplus disposal as 
approved by the general body of 
the co-operative society; 
(d) list of amendments to the bye -
laws of the co -operative society; if 
any; 
(e) declaration regarding date of 
holding of its general body 
 

  
meeting and conduct of elections 
when due; and 
     (f)  any other information required by   
the Registrar in pursuance of any 
of the provisions of the State Act. 
  
Offences and 
penalties. 
243ZQ. (1)    The Legislature of a State 
may, by law, make provisions for the  
offences relating to co -operative 
societies and penalties for such offences. 
 
 
 (2)   A law made by the Legislature of a 
State under clause (1 ) shall include the 
commission of the following act or 
omission as offences, namely:- 
(a) a co-operative society or an officer 
or member thereof  willfully 
makes a false return or furnishes 
false information, or any person 
willfully not furnishes any 
information required from him by 
a person authorized in this behalf 
under the provisions of the State 
Act; 
(b) any person willfully or without any 
reasonable excuse disobeys any 
summons, requisition or lawful 
written order issued under the 
provisions of the State Act; 
(c) any employer who, without 
sufficient cause, fails to pay to a 
co-operative society amount 
deducted by him from its 
employee within a period of 
fourteen days from the date on 
which such deduction is made; 
(d) any officer or custodian who 
willfully fails to hand over custody 
of books, accounts, documents 
records, cash, security and other 
property belonging to a co -
operative society of which he is an 
officer or custodian, to an 
authorized person; and 
 

  
  (e)  whoever, before, during or after 
the election of memb ers of the 
board or office bearers, adopts 
any corrupt practice.  
 
  
243ZR. The provisions of this Part shall 
apply to the multi -State co -operative 
societies subject to the modification that 
any reference to ―Legislature of a State‖, 
―State Act‖ or ―Stat e Government‖ shall 
be construed as a reference to 
―Parliament‖, ―Central Act‖ or ―the Central 
Government‖ respectively. 
 
 
Application to 
multi-State co -
operative 
societies. 
 243ZS. The provisions of this Part shall 
apply to the Union Territories and shal l, 
in their application to a Union territory, 
having no Legislative Assembly as if the 
references to the Legislature of a State 
were a reference to the administrator 
thereof appointed under article 239 and, 
in relation to a Union territory having a 
Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative 
Assembly: 
 
Provided that the President may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that the provisions of this Part shall 
not apply to any Union territory or part 
thereof as he may specify in the 
notification. 
 
Application to 
Union Territories. 
  
 
 
 
 

  
243ZT.  Notwithstanding anything in this 
Part, any provision of any law relating to 
co-operative societies in force in a State 
immediately before the commencement 
of the Constitution (One Hundred and 
Eleventh Amendment ) Act, 2009, which 
is inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Part, shall continue to be in force until 
amended  or repealed by a competent 
Legislature or other competent authority 
or until the expiration of one year from 
such commencement, whichever is less. 
Continuance of 
existing laws. 

  
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The co-operative sector, over the years, has made significant contribution 
to various sectors of national economy and has achieved voluminous growth. 
However, it has shown weaknesses in safeguarding the interests of the members 
and fulfilment of objects for which these institutions were organised. There have 
been instances where elections have been postponed indefinitely and nominated 
office bearers or administrators remaining in -charge of these institutions for a 
long time. This reduces the accountability of the management of co -operative 
societies to their members. Inadequate professionalism in management in many 
of the co-operative institutions has led to poor services and low produ ctivity. Co-
operatives need to run on well established democratic principles and elections 
held on time and in a free and fair manner. Therefore, there is a need to initiate 
fundamental reforms to revitalize these institutions in order to ensure their 
contribution in the economic development of the country and to serve the 
interests of members and public at large and also to ensure their autonomy, 
democratic functioning and professional management. 
 
2.  The "co -operative societies" is a subject enumerated i n Entry 32 of the 
State List of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and the State Legislatures 
have accordingly enacted legislations on co -operative societies. Within the 
framework of State Acts, growth of co -operatives on large scale was envisaged 
as part of the efforts for securing social and economic justice and equitable 
distribution of the fruits of development. It has, however, been experienced that 
in spite of considerable expansion of co -operatives, their performance in 
qualitative terms has no t been up to the desired level. Considering the need for 
reforms in the Co -operative Societies Acts of the States, consultations with the 
State Governments have been held at several occasions and in the conferences 
of State Co -operative Ministers. A strong  need has been felt for amending the 
Constitution so as to keep the co -operatives free from unnecessary outside 
interferences and also to ensure their autonomous organisational set up and their 
democratic functioning. 

  
 
3.  The Central Government is committ ed to ensure that the co -operative 
societies in the country function in a democratic, professional, autonomous and 
economically sound manner. With a view to bring the necessary reforms, it is 
proposed to incorporate a new Part in the Constitution so as to provide for certain 
provisions covering the vital aspects of working of co -operative societies like 
democratic, autonomous and professional functioning. A new article is also 
proposed to be inserted in Part IV of the Constitution (Directive Principles of 
State Policy) for the States to endeavour to promote voluntary formation, 
autonomous functioning, democratic control and professional management of 
cooperative societies. The proposed new Part in the Constitution, inter alia , 
seeks to empower the Parliament  in respect of multi-State co-operative societies 
and the State Legislatures in case of other co -operative societies to make 
appropriate law, laying down the following matters, namely:— 
 
(a) provisions for incorporation, regulation and winding up of co-operative 
societies based on the principles of democratic member -control, member-
economic participation and autonomous functioning; 
 
(b) specifying the maximum number of directors of a co -operative society 
to be not exceeding twenty-one members; 
 
(c) providin g for a fixed term of five years from the date of election in 
respect of the elected members of the board and its office bearers; 
 
(d) providing for a maximum time limit of six months during which a board 
of directors of co -operative society could be kept under supersession or 
suspension; 
 
(e) providing for independent professional audit; 
 
(f) providing for right of information to the members of the co -operative 
societies; 
 

  
(g) empowering the State Governments to obtain periodic reports of 
activities and accounts of co-operative societies; 
 
(h) providing for the reservation of one seat for the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes and two seats for women on the board of every co -
operative society, which have individuals as members from such 
categories; 
 
(i) providing for offences relating to co-operative societies and penalties in 
respect of such offences. 
 
4.  It is expected that these provisions will not only ensure the autonomous 
and democratic functioning of co-operatives, but also ensure the accountability of 
management to the members and other stakeholders and shall provide for 
deterrence for violation of the provisions of the law. 
 
5.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        SHARAD PAWAR 
 
The 11th November, 2009. 
 
 
 
 

  
APPENDIX-III 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF THE HIGH POWERED COMMITTEE REPORT ON 
CO-OPERATIVES 
  
 Two centuries ago when the Co -operative movement emerged, markets 
were dominant and unmindful of the well being of consumers.  The Rochdale 
Pioneers demonstrated the co -operative ability not only to help survival of the 
people but also of indirectly forcing the market to behave.  Today, although our 
knowledge, technology, global governance systems, availability of alternatives 
and a globalized production system are very d ifferent, the basic issues remain 
the same – markets that serve only sectarian interest, large masses remaining 
impoverished, capital gaining advantage over labour and a State which, seems to 
be increasingly supportive of a free market.  In the Indian cont ext, it is pertinent 
to mention that a large segment of the population (65%) continues to depend on 
agriculture and agriculture related sectors of the economy.  As such co -
operatives are today all the more relevant in the current contexts. 
 
 Co-operatives in India came into being as a result of the Government 
taking cognizance of the agricultural conditions that prevailed during the latter 
part of the nineteenth century and the absence of institutional arrangements for 
finance to agriculturists, which had r esulted in mounting distress and discontent.  
Small, local, locally worked institutions, co -operative in form, which would satisfy 
the postulates to proximity, security and facility for providing credit, were seen as 
the answer to this situation.  However,  subsequent events during both pre and 
post Independence period have led to a vast growth of co -operatives covering 
various sectors of the Indian economy. 
 
 The preoccupation of the Government with the co -operative sector and its 
potential for bringing abo ut development, right up to the nineties, resulted in an 
increase in the number of co -operatives and their contribution, making the Indian 
co-operative movement one of the largest movements of its kind in the world.  
Though we can claim to have the World‘s  largest and most diverse co -operative 

  
movement, barring some exceptions our co-operatives in general are fraught with 
a number of problems and challenges.  Apart from certain inherent weaknesses, 
they are constrained by the overwhelming role of the Govern ment as well as 
prescriptive and restrictive legislation and have been unable to retain an 
autonomous and democratic character. 
 
 Some of the problems and challenges that co-operatives face today are: 
 Inability to ensure active membership, speedy exit of n on-user 
members, lack of member communication and awareness building 
measures. 
 Serious inadequacies in governance including that related to Board‘s 
roles and responsibilities. 
 A general lack of recognition of co -operatives as economic institutions 
both amongst the policy makers and public at large. 
 Inability to attract and retain competent professionals. 
 Lack of efforts for capital formation particularly that concerning 
enhancing member equity and thus member stake. 
 Lack of cost competitiveness arising out of issues such as overstaffing, 
a general top -down approach in forming co -operatives including the 
tiered structures. 
 Politicization and excessive role of the Government chiefly arising out 
of the loop holes and restrictive provisions in the Co-operative Acts. 
 
In addition to the above, there is also a serious problem of a large number 
of co-operatives that are sick/non viable.  As regards the problems specific to the 
credit co-operatives, the same have been dealt with in detail in the Vaidyanathan 
Committee Report. 
 
Summary Recommendations 
 
 The Committee has envisioned co -operatives as primarily, autonomous, 
economic institutions of user members.  It sees them as self -reliant and self -

  
sustaining institutions functioning in a free, fair and transparent mann er in 
keeping with the principles and values of the co -operative movement.  Summary 
Recommendations of the Committee are given below: 
 Considering the importance of a progressive and enabling legislation, 
which provides a level playing field for co -operatives with other 
corporate entities, the law enacted in each State should be amended 
to truly reflect the letter and spirit of the Model Co -operatives Act 
proposed by the Choudhary Brahm Perkash Committee Report.  Even 
in States where a Parallel law has been enacted, considering its poor 
utility and problems faced, a single enabling law be enacted, which is 
member centric and based on co -operative principles, replacing the 
existing State Acts. 
The laws enacted with the Model Co -operatives Act as the basis 
should also consider the following: 
 With a view to enhance member participation in co -operatives and 
enable them to do away with non -user members the Acts must provide 
for a definition of ‗active member‘, right to vote and contest only to 
active members and an  enabling provision for speedy exit of non -user 
members. 
 In order to improve the effectiveness of Boards particularly their 
trusteeship role and fiduciary responsibilities, ensure accountability 
and professionalization of the organization, the laws should provide for 
clearly defined roles and responsibilities of the co -operative‘s board 
vis-à-vis that of paid executives/managers and a fair, but enforceable 
provision for fiduciary responsibility as provided in the Companies Act. 
 With a view to build in profe ssionalism, the Acts should provide for 
cooption of experts/subject matter specialists, mandate that any 
person elected as a Director on the Board should undergo a set of 
prescribed training programmes within six months of being elected. 
 Considering the ne ed to remove all such loopholes in the law, which 
have contributed to the politicization of co -operatives, it is necessary 

  
that the laws also provide for rotational retirement of Board members 
and restriction on contribution to political and religious organization.* 
 Keeping in view the need to enable co -operatives, which have already 
received equity contribution from the Government, the laws should also 
provide for repatriation of Government equity and where co -operatives 
are unable to return the Government  equity, they may enter into an 
MoU with the co -operative agreeing to such conditions that the 
Government may stipulate. 
 In order to enhance competitiveness, the laws should enable co -
operatives to decide their Organizational structure and staffing 
including recruitment policies, service conditions and remuneration, 
undertake measures such as formation of join ventures, partnerships, 
subsidiaries and strategic alliances with co -operatives and other 
corporate and operate without any imposed area restrictions  and have 
flexibility in business decisions, mobilizing funds and allocation of 
surplus. 
 State Governments should put in place a policy framework for 
facilitation the functioning of co -operatives with free and fair means, in 
no less equal terms with any ot her organization engaged in economic 
activities. 
 States should refrain from deputing officers to occupy key positions in 
co-operative except on an explicit request from a co -operative and 
ensure that the officers if deputed to hold key positions are given a 
minimum tenure of three years. 
 The utility of various tiers of the co -operative structure be examined in 
each case and actions be taken for de-layering wherever the structures 
are not found to be cost effective. 
__________________________________________________________ 
*Dr. Amrita Patel has suggested inclusion of restriction on MLAs/MPs to be office 
bearers 

  
 
 Co-operatives should undertake member awareness and education 
programmes on a continuing basis in order to sensitize members 
regarding their rights , responsibilities/obligations in respect of the 
organization to which they belong and make special efforts to facilitate 
women and youth participation in co-operatives. 
 A scheme of Central Government and State Government budgetary 
provision for soft loans to farmers for share capital participation should 
be considering seriously. 
 Retained earnings in co -operatives are the most important form of 
collective capital.  However if a substantial portion of retained earnings 
is taken away in the form of income ta x, the rate of accretion to the 
reserve becomes that much slower affecting the health of the co -
operative societies.  Full income tax exemption is therefore 
recommend for all co -operative societies.  This will be a major 
incentive for the co-operatives to strengthen their capital base. 
 The share of Co -operative Banks in rural credit has been steadily 
declining and is around 18%.  Co -operative Banks presently depend 
for their activities on their own funds which are very limited and 
refinance from NABARD.  Si nce adequate refinance through NABARD 
cannot be relief upon and many of the Co -operative Banks are weak 
and unable to raise funds from the markets, there is a strong need for 
an alternative organizational set up to mobilize funds and to bridge the 
systematic gap in the co-operative credit and banking structure. 
 Co-operatives in various countries have adopted different strategies to 
augment their equity.  The system of tapping share capital from non -
members through different classes of shares or special purp ose 
vehicles is also found.  Depending upon the business of the co -
operative, financial instruments need to be developed for raising 
capital. 
 
 

  
Amendment to the Constitution 
 
 The Committee endorses the view that only through certain amendments 
in the Cons titution it will be possible to ensure that the State co -operative laws 
provide for enabling the autonomous functioning of the co -operatives.  The 
Committee reviewed the Constitution Amendment Bill (106 th Amendment Bill, 
2006) and recommends that some more  changes as given below be effected in 
order to be responsive to the needs of the co-operatives. 
 
1. Apprehending that introducing new Part IXB after Part IXA of the 
Constitution as the Bill proposes, along with Panchayati Raj 
Institution (PRI) and Municip alities, would imply that co -operatives 
are a part of governance, the insertion of this part may be 
considered at any other appropriate place in the Constitution to 
ensure that this construal is dispelled.  
 
2. Insertion of ―the word ―co -operative societie s‖ after the word 
―associations‖ in sub -clause (c) of clause (1) of Article 19 and a 
definition of co-operatives {new sub-clause(h)} ―to form and run Co-
operatives based on principles of voluntary, democratic member 
control, member economic participation a nd autonomous 
functioning.‖ 
 
3. 243. ZJ. Number and term of members of Board of Directors 
and its office bearers (Following additions are recommended 
under this Head)  
 
 Only elected members of the Board of Directors shall be eligible to 
vote in election and to be elected as Chairman or Vice Chairman or 
President or Vice President of the Board. 
  
Candidates who have lost in elections to the Board shall not be co -
opted on the Board either on casual vacancy or otherwise. 

  
 
 4. 243. ZK. Election of members of Board 
 
The Bill recommends that functions relating to, and the conduct of 
all elections to the co -operative societies, shall vest in the General 
Body of a co -operative society.  As it may not be possible to hold 
meetings of General Body frequently, the Comm ittee recommends 
that these functions shall vest in the Board of a co -operative 
society. 
 
 5. 243.ZL. Supersession of Board of Directors 
 
The Bill provides that no Board of a co -operative society shall be 
superseded, where there is no Government shareholdi ng of loan or 
financial assistance or any guarantee by the Government. 
 
Since this would imply that the Boards of co -operatives even where 
there is a minor Government shareholding of financial assistance or 
any guarantee by the Government can be superseded , the 
Committee has suggested that no supercession of the Board of 
Directors should be allowed in any case where Government share 
holding is less than 51%. 
 
Amendment to the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002 
  
 The Committee took note of the fac t that while the MSCS Act, 2002 has 
been in operation for the last six years there is a need to make the Act more 
comprehensive to mitigate practical problems being faced by the Multi -State Co-
operatives Societies due to certain provisions of the Act.  Som e important 
recommendations of the Committee are: 
1. The internationally accepted definition of Co -operative Society 
reflecting its voluntary, autonomous and democratic nature may be 
introduced in the Act. 

  
 
2. To ensure that the co -operatives are user owne d and user 
controlled, a concept of ―active member‖ may be introduced in the 
Act and accordingly, a definition of active member be included.  
The Act should provide that only active members shall have the 
right to vote/contest elections. 
 
3. A fair, but en forceable provision for fiduciary responsibility as 
provided in the Companies Act should be introduced.  It should be 
mandatory for the directors on co -operative boards also to disclose 
certain information in order to avoid conflict of interests.  A 
provision be also made for cooption of experts on the Board. 
 
4. Provisions may be introduced putting restriction on contribution to 
political and religious organizations.* 
 
5. Provisions for raising of capital through issue of non voting shares 
and IPO may be included. 
 
6. Deletion of Rule making powers. 
  
_______________________________________________________________ 
*Dr. Amrita Patel has suggested the retention of a clause at this juncture restricting 
Ministers/MLAs/MPs to be office bearers, which was dropped by the Committee. 

  
APPENDIX-IV 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
     
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 12 January, 2010 from 1500 hours to 
1630 hours in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Premdas 
8. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
9. Shri Uday Singh 
10. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
11. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Narendra Budania 
13. Shri A. Elavarasan 
14. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
15. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
16. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 

  
SECRETARIAT 
          
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
  
 
  
WITNESSES 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND     
CO-OPERATION) 
 
1.     Shri N.K. Das   Special Secretary 
2.     Shri A.S. Lamba   Additional Secretary & FA 
3.     Shri G.C. Pati       Additional Secretary 
4.     Shri R.K. Tiwari           Joint Secretary 
5.     Shri S.D. Indoria           Chief Director  
(Co-operation) 
2. At the outset the Hon‘ble Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting 
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee had a brief discussion on 
procedural matters including the format of Reports of the Committee. 
 
(Around 1520 hours) 
  
3. The Chairman asked the representatives of the Department of Agriculture 
& Co -operation to be usher ed in.  The Chairman then welcomed them to the 
Sitting of the Committee.  After introducing themselves to the Committee, the 
representatives of the Department briefed the Committee on the salient features 
of the ‗The Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009‘.  
This was followed by an audio -visual presentation on the various aspects of the 
Bill. The members sought several clarifications on various aspects of the 
subject. The representatives of the Department responded to the same. 
  
4. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the 
Committee on the subject. He also directed them to send at the earliest 
information on points which had remained unclarif ied during the Sitting or on 
which information was not readily available, to the Secretariat of the Committee.  
(The witnesses then withdrew). 

  
5. Before the Committee adjourned, it was also decided to seek 
suggestions/views of the various stakeholders on t he Bill through an 
advertisement in the media. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
/---------------------/ 

  
APPENDIX-V 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 17 May, 2010 from 1500 hours to 
1655 hours in Committee Room ‗C‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite  
4. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Premdas 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
11. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Narendra Budania 
13. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
14. Shri A. Elavarasan 
15. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
17. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 

  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
   
   
WITNESSES 
 
 
1.      Dr. Chandra Pal Singh Yadav       - President, 
    (Ex-M.P.) National 
Cooperative Union 
of India and 
Chairman, Krishak 
Bharati Cooperative 
(KRIBHCO) 
 
2.      Dr. Bijender Singh, MLA             -  Chairman,  
National Agricultural 
Cooperative 
Marketing 
Federation of India 
Limited (NAFED) 
 
3.      Shri Virendra Singh       - Chairman, 
National  
Cooperative 
Consumers‘ 
Federation of India 
Limited   (NCCF) 
 
4. Mrs. Anita Manchanda       - Chief Executive, 
National 
Cooperative Union 
of India (NCUI)     
5. Shri C.T. Adhikari         - Principal Advisor, 
National 
Cooperative 
Consumers‘ 
Federation of India 
Limited (NCCF) 
 
   6. Shri D.K. Gulati          - General Manager,  
National Agricultural 
Cooperative 
Marketing 
Federation of India 
Limited (NAFED) 

  
*2. xxxx                   xxxx             xxxx             xxxx  
 
3. The Chairman, thereafter directed that the representatives of NCUI, 
KRIBHCO, NAFED & NCCF be ushered in. 
 
(At about 1520 Hours representatives of NCUI, KRIBHCO, NAFED & NCCF 
took their seats in the Committee Room). 
 
4. After introducing themselves the witnesses briefed the Committee on 
clauses of ―The Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009‖ 
as well as the functioning of cooperative societies system in the country. 
 
 5. The members so ught several clarifications on various aspects of the Bill.  
The witnesses responded to the same. 
 
6. Before the sitting concluded, the Chairman thanked the witnesses for 
appearing before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information 
desired by the Committee on the Bill. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 The Committee then adjourned.  
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________ 
*Matter not related to this Report. 

  
APPENDIX-VI 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 1 June, 2010 from 1100 hours to 
1300 hours in Committee Room ‗C‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi     - Acting Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite  
4. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
6. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
9. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
10. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
11. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
13. Shri Prabodh Panda 
14. Shri Premdas 
15. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
16. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
17. Shri Uday Singh 
18. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
19. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
20. Shri Narendra Budania 
21. Shri A. Elavarasan 
22. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
23. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
24. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
 

  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 
NATIONAL  FEDERATION OF URBAN COOPERATIVE BANKS 
AND CREDIT SOCIETIES  LIMITED (NAFCUB) 
 
1.        Shri H.K. Patil    President 
2. Shri Subhash Gupta  Executive Director  
3. Smt. Veena Nabar   Consultant 
 
 INDIAN FARMERS FERTILISER COOPERATIVE  LTD. (IFFCO) 
 
1. Shri Surinder Kumar Jakhar Chairman 
2. Dr. G.N. Saxena   Director 
 
 National Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC) 
 
1. Shri G. Panmei   Deputy Managing Director 
    
2. Shri Prabhat Saxena  Executive Director 
 
3. Shri P.K. Chaudhuri   Chief Director 
 
4. Shri W.M. Rizvi   Chief Director 
  
 
At the outset the Joint Secretary, Lok Sabha Secretariat informed the 
Members that due to indisposition the Chairman would not be able to attend the 
Sitting. The Committee, therefore, chose Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi M.P. (Rajya 
Sabha) to act as Chairman for the Sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
2. The Acting Chairman, thereafter directed that the representatives of 
National Federation of Urban Cooperative Banks and Credit Societies Limited 
(NAFCUB) be ushered in. 
 
 

  
 
(At about 1120 hours representatives of NAFCUB 
took their seats in the Committee Room) 
  
3. After introducing themselves the witnesses briefed the Committee on the 
various clauses of ―The Constitution  (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) 
Bill, 2009‖ as well as the functioning of cooperative societies system in the 
country. 
 
4. The members sought several clarifications on various aspects of the Bill.  
They also sought clarifications on the Memorandum of  National Federation of 
Urban Cooperative Bank and Credit Societies Ltd. circulated during the Sitting. 
The witnesses responded to the same. 
(At about 1220 hours representatives of NAFCUB  
withdrew and the representatives of IFFCO and NCDC were ushered in) 
 
5. Once the introductions were over, the representative of NCDC briefed the 
Committee about the various changes/modifications suggested by NCDC in their 
Memorandum submitted to the Committee.  The members sought several 
clarifications from the witnesses, which were duly responded to. 
 
6. The Acting Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and furnishing their valuable views on the subject.  The witnesses 
then withdrew.  
7. Before the Sitting concluded, the Committee also deci ded to undertake a 
Study Tour to the North Eastern Region of the country in the last week of June, 
2010. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned.  
***** 

  
APPENDIX-VII 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRY FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the Eighteenth June, 2010 from 1505 hours 
to 1740 hours in Committee Room ‗B‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam  
7. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
8. Shri Premdas 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
 10.     Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri A. Elavarasan 
12. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan  
14. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
15. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar      -      Additional Secretary  
2. Shri P.C. Koul -      Additional Director 
 
    
 

  
WITNESSES 
 
NATIONAL COOPERATIVE AGRICULTURE & RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
BANKS FEDERATION LTD. (NAFCARD) 
 
 1. Shri K. Sivadasan Nair - Chairman 
  
NATIONAL FEDERATION OF STATE COOPERATIVE BANKS LTD. 
(NAFSCOB) 
 
1.     Shri B. Subrahmanyam -       Managing Director  
 
NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(NABARD) 
 
1. Shri U.C. Sarangi -       Chairman 
 
 
*2. xxxx                   xxxx             xxxx             xxxx   
 
3. The Chairman thereafter directed that the representative of N ational 
Cooperative Agriculture & Rural Development Banks‘ Federation Ltd. be ushered 
in. 
 
(At around 1520 hours the representative of NAFCARD was ushered in) 
 
4. The Committee, thereafter, took the Oral Evidence of the representative of 
National Cooperative Agriculture & Rural Development Banks Federation Ltd. in 
connection with the examination of ―The Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh 
Amendment) Bill, 2009.  The members sought several clarifications on the 
various clauses of the Bill.  The witness responded to them.  
 
(At around 1615 hours the representative of NAFCARD withdrew and the 
representative of NAFSCOB was ushered in) 
 
 

  
5. The Committee took the Oral Evidence of representative of National 
Federation of State Cooperative Banks Ltd. on ―The Con stitution (One Hundred 
and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009‖.  The members sought clarifications on the 
various suggestions contained in the Memorandum submitted by the 
Organisation. The witness responded to them.  
 
(At around 1645 hours the representative of NAFSCOB withdrew and the 
representatives of NABARD were ushered in) 
 
6. On the direction of the Chairman, the representative of National Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development made a presentation on Cooperative Sector 
in general and on the various cl auses of ―The Constitution (One Hundred and 
Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009‖.   He also responded to the queries of the 
members in the matter.  
 
7. The Chairman thanked the witnesses individually for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the 
Committee on the subject. He also directed them to send at the earliest 
information on points on which information could not be provided by them during 
the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat.  
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
  
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________ 
*Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 

  
   APPENDIX-VIII  
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 28 th July, 2010 from 1500 hours to 
1535 hours in Committee Room ‗B‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
  
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3.     Shri Thangso Baite 
4.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
5.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6.  Shri Prabodha Panda 
7.      Shri Premdas 
8.      Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
   
Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
10. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
11. Smt. B. Jayashree 
   
SECRETARIAT 
        1.    Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Director 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Under Secretary  

  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee deliberated on the various sugges tions/comments 
received from State Governments/Union Territory Administrations/Experts/ 
Stakeholders on ―The Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 
2009.‖ 
3. The Committee then decided to take Oral Evidence of the representatives 
of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) and Law 
and Justice (Legislative Department) on ―The Constitution (One Hundred and 
Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009‖ at their next Sitting. 
 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

  
APPENDIX-IX  
  
 COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 5 th August, 2010 from 1500 
hours to 1615 hours in Committee Room ‗B‘, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh ‗Baba‘ 
4. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
7. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda 
9. Shri Premdas 
10. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
11. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
   Rajya Sabha 
 
12.    Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Under Secretary 
 

  
WITNESSES 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND     
CO-OPERATION) 
1.     Shri P.K. Basu   Secretary  
2.     Shri G.C. Pati       Additional Secretary 
3.     Shri A.S. Lamba   Additional Secretary & FA 
4.     Shri R.K. Tiwari           Joint Secretary 
5.     Shri P. Sampath           Director   
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
  
  1.    Shri N.K. Nampoothiry         Additional Secretary    
2.    Dr. S. D. Singh                Joint Secretary & Legislative                                                        
Counsel 
  3.     Dr. Reeta Vasishta             Additional Legislative     
                                                                       Counsel 
4.     Dr. Battu Narayan Rao       Additional Legislative 
                                                                       Counsel    
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) and Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) to the 
Sitting. After introduction of the witnesses, the Committee took evidence of 
the representatives of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) and Ministry of Law and Justice(Legislative Department) on 
―The Constitution (One Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009‖.  
 
 
3. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised queries on various 
clauses of the Bill and sought clarifications from the witnesses, which were 
duly responded to. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
/---------------------/ 

  
APPENDIX-X  
   
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 26 August, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 
1710 hrs. in Committee Room ‗C‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4.     Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6. Shri Premdas 
7. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
8. Shri Uday Singh 
9. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
11. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
          
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 

  
 
2. At the outset the Hon‘ble Chairm an welcomed the members to the Sitting. 
The Committee, thereafter took up the draft Report on “The Constitution (One 
Hundred and Eleventh Amendment) Bill, 2009”  for consideration and after a 
brief discussion adopted the same without any modification. The C ommittee then 
authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report and present the same to both 
Houses of Parliament.  
 
*3. ****   ****    ****   **** 
 
*4. ****   ****    ****   **** 
 
*5. ****   ****    ****   **** 
 
*6. ****    ****    ****   **** 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Matter not related to this Report. 

  
 
 
 

  
  
 
 
 