 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-2014) 
                  
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
                                         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014)  
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-seventh Report 
of the Committee on Agriculture (2012-2013)} 
 
               
FIFTY FIRST REPORT 
  
 
         
               
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December 2013/Agrahayana,1935 (Saka) 
51 

 
 
FIFTY FIRST REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-2014) 
          
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
                
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)          
                 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2013-2014) 
           
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-seventh Report of the 
Committee on Agriculture (2012-2013) 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                            09.12.2013 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                          09.12.2013 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
December 2013/Agrahayana,1935 (Saka)  


 
 
 
COA No. 274 
 
 
         
         
            
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
            
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
<CONTENTS> 
 
                   PAGE 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….    (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………    (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1   
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have   
   been accepted by the Government ……………  18    
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..  48   
  
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….  49  
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….  51  
 
 
                                    ANNEXURE 
 
 
I.  Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee      
held on 29 October, 2013.      52 
    
            APPENDIX 
 
   
I.  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the    
  Recommendations contained in the Forty-seventh Report              
   (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture  
(2012-2013).        54 
        
 
 
(i)  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2013-14) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas  Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Kachhadia Naranbhai  
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri N. Balaganga 
23.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
30.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 
 (iii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Director 
3. Shri R.S. Negi   - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
  INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture , having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the R eport on their behalf, present this Fifty-first Report on action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-seventh Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (201 3-2014) pertaining 
to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education). 
 
2. The Forty-seventh Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha  on  23 
April, 2013 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25 April, 2013.  The Action Taken 
Notes on the Report were received on 18 July, 2013. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 29 October, 2013. 
 
4. An analysis of the action t aken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-seventh Report of the 
Committee is given in Appendix.  
  
 
 
             
                                                                                          
NEW DELHI;                   BASUDEB ACHARIA 
26 November, 2013                                 Chairman, 
05 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                     Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
 
  
 
  
(v) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
 R E P O R T 
 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations contained in the Forty -seventh Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2012 -2013) on “Demands for Grants – 
2013-14 pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 23 April, 2013 and laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 25 April, 2013.  
 
1.2  The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Re search & Education) 
have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the                                                
27 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as under:  
 
 . Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:  
Recommendation Para Nos. 1.4, 2.18, 2.19, 2.20, 2.21, 3.31, 3.32, 3.33, 3.34,  
         3.36, 4.57, 4.59, 4.60, 4.61, 4.62, 4.63, 4.64, 4.65,  
        4.66, 4.67, 4.68, 4.69, 4.70, 4.71 and 4.72. 
         
        Total  =  25 
             Chapter  =   II  
 
. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply:  
 
Recommendation Para No. NIL  
        Total  =  NIL 
             Chapter  =   III  
 
. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  
Recommendations Para No. 3.35  
        Total  =  01 
             Chapter  =   IV  
 
. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited :  
 
Recommendation Para No.  4.58 
        Total  =  01 
             Chapter  =   V  

 
 
1.3  The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the observations/recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Committee’s comments contained 
in Chapter -I and Final Action Taken Reply in respect of Recommendation for 
which only interim reply has been furnished as brought out in Chap ter-V of this 
Report, be furnished to them at an early date.  
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
SOIL MAPPING 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.19) 
 
1.5  Inventory of soil resources including soil map is one of the basic tool as it guides 
suitability of various crops.  Keeping the farmers constantly updated of soil health 
profile, mapping and geo -reference database of micro and micro -nutrients play a major 
role in improving the agriculture production in the Country.  The Committee are 
concerned to find that geo -referenced soil fertility maps for only 152 districts have been 
prepared out of 171 selected districts and remaining 19 districts are likely to be 
completed by September, 2013.  The Department has been assigned a target of 62 
districts in the current fiscal and 300 Districts in the XII Five Plan.  The Department is 
working with other organizations like Indian Space Research Organisation, National 
Remote Sensing Agency etc. in close tandem.  Since the geo -reference database help 
in working out the exact nutrient requirement especially micro -nutrients of a crop in the 
field, the Committee, therefore, desire that the Department to review their targets and 
complete geo-reference of all the 600 odd Districts in the Twelfth Five Year Plan itself.  
They further desire the Department to work out the additional financial requirement 
needed for completion of major and micro nutrients geo-reference map and prevail upon 

 
 
the Planning Commission and the Government to liberally fund the project during the 
current Five Year Plan period.   
1.6 Developing geo-referenced soil fertility maps for different districts of the country 
was undertaken by the Council for 171 districts in ﬁrst phase funded by DAC, Ministry of 
Agriculture under National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility. The DAC 
is likely to take up rest of the districts in subsequent phases through respective state 
Governments involving state soil tes ting laboratories. However, the Council may accept 
the same if offered by DAC. 
1.7 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had desired the DARE to 
review the targets and complete geo-reference for the 600 odd districts in the 12 th 
Five Year Plan itself.  The Committee also desired the Department to work out the 
additional fund requirement needed for completion of major and micro nutrients, 
geo-reference maps and prevail upon the Planning Commission/Government to 
liberally fund the project during the c urrent Five Year Plan period.  The reply of 
DARE is silent as to whether the matter regarding additional fund requirement 
was taken up with the Planning Commission and if so, when and with what result.  
The Committee would await further information in this regard.   
SMALL AND MARGINAL FARMERS 
(Recommendation Para  No. 2.20) 
 
1.8 In a country, where a large section of the farmers are small and marginal with low 
land holdings, inadequate purchasing power and lack of access to credit and extension 
services, it is but desirable that appropriate farm technologies to cater to their spec ific 
needs, be evolved.  It was a matter of great relief that the Council has initiated an 
AICRP on Integrated Farming System for small and marginal farmers of different agro -
ecological zones to increase productivity and profitability.  The multi -enterprise system 
involves crops, horticulture, agro forestry, livestock, fisheries, poultry, piggery, 
mushroom cultivation and bee -keeping with the potential to increase productivity.  The 
Committee noted that the cluster farming system has been undertaken in some  states 
and Integrated farming system units set up in 50 KVKs to demonstrate the suitability of 
integrated farming system models.  Keeping in view of the interest of small and marginal 
farmers, the Committee, desired the Department to increase the number o f KVKs for 

 
 
demonstration of integrated farming system models expeditiously.   The rise in input 
costs, dearth of labour etc. contribute significantly to the end cost of agriculture produce.  
Farm mechanisation is one of key to growth, for so called progres sive farmers and can 
afford cost of such implements and machineries.  Economy of scale may not 
appropriately suit farm machineries and implements, to be used in small land holdings.  
The unique characteristic of small and marginal farmers, thus calls for i ntroduction and 
development of low cost, light weight, multi -purpose farm equipments and tools for their 
benefit.  The Committee desired that appropriate steps including technological 
innovation and support be extended to small and marginal farmers.  Actio n taken by the 
Government may be apprised to the Committee.   
1.9 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that Horticulture is best 
option for diversification and system productivity for small holdings.    Horticulture crops 
such as flowers, medicinal and aromatic plants, and vegetable crops under protected 
cultivation, mushrooms, bee farming and post harvest processing and preparation of 
value-added products can fetch more prices in the market. Further, considering 
adoption of Integrated Farm ing System (IFS) as the most appropriate approach in 
meeting the challenges of small -farm-agriculture, the Council has strengthened the 
ongoing AICRP on Integrated Farming System (IFS) during current Plan with an 
allocation of Rs. 149.5 crores. The project  is presently operational in 32 centres. Once 
the models are developed, the same will be popularized through different KVKs.  
1.10 Development of low cost and light weight farm tools and implements is a 
continuing endeavor of the AICRPs on Farm Implements and Machinery, Utilisation of 
Animal Energy and Ergonomics and Safety in Agriculture.  Several farm implements 
and machines have been developed for various power sources. Simple and low cost 
tools and implements can be owned by the farmers and the larger, expensive machines 
are available on custom -hiring basis which are quite popular in various states of the 
country. Small farmers are getting benefits of high capacity machines through custom 
hiring services.  
1.11 Fisheries Research Institutes have develope d technologies for small scale aqua 
farming in pond, seed production, coastal aquaculture, marine and inland aquaculture, 
mussel farming, oyster farming, poly -lined pond culture systems and ornamental fish 

 
 
culture for the benefit of small & marginal farmer s. Open sea cage farming is another 
opportunity where field demonstrations have been conducted with active participation of 
fishermen including tribals in different regions of east and west coast of India. Hygienic 
ﬁsh drying/ smoking technologies and valu e addition to low value fishes developed will 
also help poor farmers to fetch more price for their commodity.  
1.12 They further stated that as suggested by the committee, 424 more number of 
integrated farming system units have been proposed in the EFC for  establishment in 
KVKs during XII Plan. 
1.13 The Committee note that the DARE has strengthened the All India 
Coordinated Research Project on Integrated Farming System (IFS) with an 
allocation of Rs. 149.50 crore  during the current Plan.  DARE has submitted that 
the IFS project, which is considered to be the most appropriate approach in 
meeting the challenges of small -farm agriculture is operational in 32 centres and 
that once the models are developed, 424 more in tegrated farming system units in 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras are proposed to be established during the current plan.  
The Committee hope that the models will be developed expeditiously and the task 
of establishing 424 more IFS units taken up without delay.   
 
OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.31) 
 
1.14 The Committee noted that as per Demand No. 2 pertaining to Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education a sum of Rs. 5729.17 crore  was allocated to the 
Department at BE for the current Fiscal.   Out of this Rs. 3415.00 crore was a part of 
Plan side which is 26.20 % higher than the RE of previous financial year and 26.97 % 
lower than the proposal of the Department i.e. 4676.32 crore.    On the Non Plan side 
the Department had allocated a sum of Rs. 2314.17 crore as BE 2013 -14 which was 
9.25 % more than RE of Rs. 2100.00 crore for the previous Fiscal.    The Annual Plan 
Outlay of the Department which was Rs. 5729.17 crore also to be seen i n the context of 
total Outlay of Rs. 25,553 crore communicated by the Planner to the DARE for the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan.   The Committee noted that as in the past the Department had 
again failed to change the mindset of the Planner and the Government in th e matter of 
allocation of funds to DARE during the current Fiscal also.   This was a undoubted fact 

 
 
that Indian Agriculture has been facing a large number of challenges as narrated in 
previous chapter which will require capital intensive solutions, seems to  have been 
given a go by the Planners and the Government.   Both of them have, again in this 
Second year of the Twelfth Five Year Plan, too failed to understand the urgency of 
timely infusion of capital in the system so as to give an impetus for developing 
technologies for the emerging challenges.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
allocations to the Department in the ongoing Fiscal be reconsidered and enhanced 
accordingly at the RE stage by when, hopefully EFC/SFC approval of the schemes will 
be cleared.   
1.15 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in their Action Taken 
Reply has stated that the EFC/SFC processes of the plan scheme are at various stages 
of formulation/approval. As advised by the committee the department will be 
approaching the Planning commission/ Ministry of Finance for enhanced allocation at 
RE stage. 
1.16 The Committee are glad to note that as recommended by the Committee, 
the DARE will be approaching the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for 
enhanced allocatio n at RE stage.  The DARE has, however, not mentioned the 
projection made for enhanced allocation. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the same and also the actual realisation of the enhanced allocation.   
FUNDS UTILISATION  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.33) 
 
1.17 The Committee noted that the figures for the Financial Year 2008 -09 and 2009 -
10 submitted in the Committee last year, had changed in the documents submitted to 
them this year.   The Department had  communicated  the final figure for expenditure o f 
2011-12   as Rs. 2765.27 against the expenditure of Rs. 1654.58 crore till January, 
2012 communicated previous year.   The Committee found that Rs. 1195.47 crore (Rs. 
2765.27 – 1654.58) had added in two months expenditure of the Department.   Out of 
the al located amount, the Department was unable to utilized Rs. 524.98 crore   
(10325.75 – 9800.77) during Eleventh Five Year Plan period.  The trend of expenditure 
clearly reveals that the Department had failed to observe the instructions/guidelines of 
Ministry of Finance regarding monthly expenditure plan.   From the quarterly 

 
 
expenditure, the Committee found that for 2011-12 the expenditure was 28 % in the last 
quarter and for 2012 -13 is 11 %.   There was NIL expenditure in the Second Quarter in 
ICAR Plan and Non  Plan side during the year 2012 -13.   The Committee noted with a 
great sense of disappointment that despite several assurance given by the Department 
on the previous recommendations regarding utilization of funds by them had 
again failed to utilized 100 % of their allocation.   They therefore, strongly felt that the 
Department to review the functioning of their funds utilization mechanism  to check 
recurrence of such trend in future and apprise of the outcome.  
1.18 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that they have noted 
the observation of the Committee regarding the fund utilization mechanism for strict 
future compliance. 
1.19 The Committee in their previous Reports have on a number of occasions 
commented on the fund utilisation  mechanism of the Department.  The reply of 
the Department has not indicated whether any review of the mechanism was 
undertaken as desired by the Committee.  The Committee would like the 
Department to undertake a review in this regard, if not already undertaken and the 
Committee be informed of the outcome.   
TWELFTH PLAN OUTLAY 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.35) 
 
1.20 The Twelfth Plan Document though approved by NDC in December 2012 had 
delayed considerably and was yet to see the light of day, despite several efforts made 
by the Committee during the previous years, the Department had proposed Rs. 
57,887.21 crore for the  XII Plan.  The Working Group appointed by the Planning 
Commission had also recommended Rs. 55,000 as Twelfth Plan outlay for DARE/ICAR.  
The Department had communicated the Gross Budgetary support of Rs. 25,553.00 
crore for the XII Plan by the Planning Co mmission on September, 2012.  The 
Committee did not appreciate the downsizing of allocation, if the communicated figure 
was taken on its face value which was less than 1% of Agriculture GDP.  The Eleventh 
Plan document had unequivocally emphasized agriculture spending on NARS, to be 1% 
of Agriculture GDP. The Committee would also urge upon the Government to allocate 
1% of Agriculture GDP for Agriculture Research and also rework on financial and other 

 
 
requirements of 1% investment of Agriculture GDP on Resea rch.  The Committee noted 
with a great sense of disappointment that the exercise undertaken by the Working 
Group set up by the Planning Commission to suggest plan size, had  proved to be futile, 
as Planning Commission failed to honour the recommendations m ade by one of its 
authority.  They therefore, desired the Government to make such examination/scrutiny 
of planning process, more realistic in future 
1.21 The Department in their Action Taken Reply have stated that the report of 
Working Group on Research an d Education constituted for the 12 th Five Year Plan was 
duly considered by deciding the Gross Budgetary Support to the Department of 
Agriculture and Education. The 12 th Five Year Plan document has kept the target for 
expenditure on agricultural research and education at 1% of the agricultural GDP.  Such 
expenditure includes the expenditure incurred by the National Agricultural Research 
System (NARS) which comprises both the Central and State Governments on plan and 
non-plan side. One of the targets of 11 th Five Year Plan was raising the expenditure on 
agricultural research and education to the level of 1% of the agriculture and allied 
sectors’ GDP.  The 12th Five Year Plan has noted that as it turns out, research spending 
at 2006 -07 prices, although reaching  nearly 0.9% in 2010 -11, averaged 0.7% during 
Eleventh plan. Part of the reason was a shortfall of about 20% in the Centre’s Plan 
expenditure from that originally targeted, but the main reason was inadequate spending 
by States. While Centre’s expenditure ( non-Plan & Plan, including RKVY) increased 
68% in real terms between Tenth and Eleventh Plan periods, corresponding States 
expenditures increased only 22%. In particular, non -Plan spending on SAUs increased 
less than 17%. 
 
1.22 The Committee are disappointed with reply of the Department that 1% of 
the Agricultural GDP expenditure targeted during the 12 th Five Year Plan includes 
the expenditure incurred both by the National Agricultural Central Research 
System comprising of the Central and State Go vernments on plan and non plan 
side.  The Committee have been emphasizing time and again that allocation of 1% 
of Agricultural GDP on Agriculture Research should be exclusively for the Centre.  
The Committee hope that the DARE has taken note of the Committ ee’s view in 

 
 
this regard and expect the Department to take all necessary steps to ensure 
allocation accordingly.  
Recommendation Para No. 3.36 
 
1.23 The Committee noted that 44% of proposed outlay of the Department was 
reduced by the Planner for Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The pace of progress of important 
research programmes like genomics work in horticultural plants, markets for desirable 
traits stem cell research would  slackened due to the cut.  The strengthening of existing 
KVKs including new initiatives viz. Consortia Research Platform (CRP) on Agri -
biodiversity Management Genomics and Molecular Breeding etc. would too be affected 
due to reduced allo cation during the XII Plan.  In addition to that new initiatives like 
National Agricultural Education Project, Farmers First, Student Ready, ARYA etc will be 
slackened.  It was a matter of deep concern that High end Research Projects such as 
Agro-biodiversity, Genomics, Nanotechnology, Conservation Agriculture, Health Foods,  
Farm Mechanisation etc. which were component of  CRP, may either had to be shelved 
or postponed indefinitely.  The Committee appreciating the constraints of ICAR for 
slackening these i mportant programmes would like to advise the Department to again 
draw attention of the Planner and the Government on the gravity thereof and ask 
enlarge funds to complete these activities as to overcome the challenges faced by 
Indian Agriculture.   
1.24 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply has stated that ICAR's proposal for XII 
plan envisions this scenario of judiciously integrating conventional plant breeding, 
molecular biology, bioinformatics, genetic engineering, human resource and 
infrastructural d evelopment, Farm Mechanization, Energy in Agriculture, Secondary 
Agriculture, Health Foods and Natural Fibres through the Consortia Research Platform 
(CRP).  These CRPs have been conceived keeping in mind the evolving scenario of 
agriculture in the country and to address them with appropriate research and 
development interventions. 
  

 
 
1.25 DARE/ICAR would be seeking highe r allocation of funds for completion of these 
activities to overcome the challenges faced by Indian Agriculture. 
1.26 The Committee are not satisfied with the perfunctory reply of the 
Department that it would be seeking higher allocation of funds.  The Dep artment 
does not seem to be pro -active in enlisting its demands for additional allocation 
for specific projects and proposals.  The Committee desire the Department to 
make vigorous efforts in this regard and ensure desired results.   
CROP SCIENCE 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.58) 
 
 
1.27 The Committee also noticed that only 52.13 % of the funds were utilized by the 
Division upto January, 2013 and the factors responsible for such slow phase were time 
taken in completion of processing of official procedures to procure spill over 
equipments.  To utilize the RE, the Division had made re -appropriation amongst sub -
heads for Grant for Capital/Salary/General through Divisional meetings.  The Committee 
strongly recommended the Department to strengthen the monitoring mechanism of 
expenditure of the Crop Science Division to ensure   that the Budget Estimates 
allocation of the Division was fully utilized in a time bound manner. 
1.28 The Department in their Action Taken Reply have stated that suitable monitoring 
mechanism of expenditure of all the Schemes under Crop Science Division for 
utilization of funds would be put into place in addition to existing mechanism. 
1.29 The Committee note that the Department has proposed to put in place 
additional monitoring mechanism to monitor the expenditure of all the schemes 
under Crop Science Division.  No details have, however, been given as to what 
additional mechanism is envisaged in this regard.  The Committee would await 
these details and expect the Department to ensure positive results.  
  

 
 
HORTICULTURE 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.59) 
 
1.30 Genetic resource management and development of improved varieties of 
horticulture crop, biotic and abiotic resistance, export -value, as also standardization of 
technique for rapid propagation and horticulture based cropping pattern were some of 
the issues connected with Horticulture Division.     
1.31 The Committee noted that the Department had not made any changes in the 
proposals of the Horticulture Division for 2013 -14.  The Division had able to utilized 
73.86 % of their RE grant (upto January 2013).   S ome of the institutes like Central 
Institute of Sub Topical Hortiulture, Lucknow, Central Institute of Arid Horticulture, 
Bikaner, Central Plantatio Crops Research Institute, Kasargod and Director of 
Floriculture, New Delhi unable to utilized more than 26 % of their allocation upto 
January, 2013 which improved belatedly in the month of February, 2013.  Under 
utilization of funds was a cause of concern to the Committee.  For the purpose of 
finalization or reallocations, prioritization and also EFC’s clearanc es, discussions were 
held in March, 2013.  The Committee, desired the Department to complete the 
finalization of EFC / SFC and other formalities of various schemes of the Division.  
Further, there was an imperative need to strengthen the implementation mec hanism of 
the Horticulture Division so that the targets assigned for of the Twelfth Five Year Plan 
are realised.  At the same time, corrective actions need to be taken to ensure utilization 
of funds prudently.     
1.32     The Department in their Action Ta ken Reply have stated that the focused areas 
envisaged are being addressed through Consortia Research Platform and Challenge 
Programme such as Agro -biodiversity, hybrids, molecular breeding, diagnostics, seeds 
and secondary agriculture. Efforts are being m ade to complete formalities for the 
finalization of EFC/SFC of various schemes of the Division so that the targets assigned 
for the Twelfth Five Year Plan could be realised. 
1.33 The Committee note that the Department has proposed to address focused 
areas like agro bio -diversity, hybrids molecular breeding, diagnostics, seed and 
secondary Agriculture through Consortia Research Platform.  The reply is, 
however, silent about the progress made in final isation of EFC/SFC clearances of 

 
 
various schemes and the time required for completion of the task.  The 
Committee would like to be intimated of the position.  
AGRICULTURE EXTENSION 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.60) 
 
1.34 Agriculture Extension has a major sche me of disseminating knowledge and 
information to the farmers.  The Krishi Vigyan Kendras during 2012 -13, assessed  
refined and demonstrated technologies through 29,428 on -farm trials, 1.31 lakh front -
line demonstrations in different farming system.  Under NICRA project 100 KVKs also 
demonstrated climate resilient technologies through 23441 demonstrations in the 
country.  The Committee further found that out of 632 KVKs in the country, the 
Department had provided Administrative buildings to 554 KVKs, trainee s hostel to 490 
KVKs, staff quarters to 442 KVKs, demonstration units to 394 KVKs and soil and water 
testing facilities to 389 KVKs.   The Committee found major deficiencies in the operation 
of KVKs.  At places they were non -operational for want of project  coordinator/specialist 
and other administrative staff, lack of infrastructure etc.  Some of KVKs have failed to 
extend professional advise expected from them.  Bridging the yawning gap recorded at 
demonstration and farmers field, is another area of the co ncern.  The Committee 
desired that the functioning of KVKs be relooked into and the specific pitfalls brought so 
in the Report be made good.  At the same time, the infrastructure such as 
Administrative buildings, trainees hostel, staff quarters, demonstration units and soil and 
water testing facilities, be provided in a time bound manner in the remaining KVKs.  The 
bottlenecks in achieving demonstration level yields at farm levels by identified and 
appropriate actions taken to narrow the productivity gap fu rther.  The Committee found 
that private participation in agriculture extension through the institutions of Krishi Vigyan 
Kendra (KVK) has not yielded the desired results, since the private players allegedly, 
pursue limited agenda of promoting their produc ts driven by profit motives under the 
guise of agriculture extension.  Such deficiencies were admitted by Secretary, DARE 
during his deposition before the Committee.  Under such a scenario, the private 
participated KVK do not attend to major components of extension services, leaving 
farmers in a lurch.  The holistic approach of dissemination of information and farm 
knowledge to farmers, through KVK, which is a guiding philosophy, is given a decent 
burial by the private participated KVK.  The Committee view this with all the 

 
 
seriousness, it deserves and liked the Department to appraised the quality and reach of 
extension services rendered by private players.  The Committee                                   
desired that Government should ensure that KVK includ ing private KVKs provide all the 
mandated activities to the farmers, without any exception.  At the same time the 
allocations for KVKs be stepped up, so as to ensure that only State supported KVKs 
function, in the country.   
1.35 As regards inadequate infr astructures in KVKs, it is stated that as per availability 
of funds the required and need based infrastructure in the remaining KVKs will be 
provided during XII Plan. With regard to bottlenecks in achieving demonstration level 
yields at farm level, it is p ertinent to mention that other factors like non -availability of 
adequate agro - inputs like seed, fertilizers, plant protection chemicals etc. credit, 
irrigation facilities in time to farmers also work as constraining factors in achieving 
higher yields by f armers. The KVKs have no control over such factors. Moreover, the 
main extension system, which is responsible for reducing the yield gaps between 
demonstrated technologies and yields obtained by farmers is operated by the State 
Governments. However, after demonstrating the production potential of agricultural 
technologies in farmers field through front -line demonstrations on different crops, the 
KVKs conduct a number of follow up activities like field days, kisan gosthis, technology 
week and other awareness  creating programmes with the participation of farmers and 
extension personnel. As far as the issue of private participation in Agriculture Extension 
through KVKs is concerned, it is stated that all the KVKs are provided 100% financial 
support by ICAR. Few  KVKs have also taken up selected extension activities on the 
public private partnership (PPP) mode on technologies which are tested and 
recommended by Agricultural Universities and Research Institutions. These activities 
are taken up within the scope of w ork of KVKs without diluting the mandated activities. 
However, as per the observation of the Committee the KVKs have been advised to be 
careful while working in PPP mode not to allow the private partners to pursue their 
agenda of promoting their products u sing KVK platform. Regarding stepping up of 
allocations to KVKs it is stated that funds allocation to KVKs was increased from              
Rs. 435.40 crore in 2012-13 to Rs. 496.88 crore in 2013-14. 
 

 
 
1.36 The Committee had desired among other things that there should be a 
relook at the functioning of KVKs and suitable remedial action taken on the basis 
of its outcome.  The Government’s reply has not dealt with this aspect.  The 
Committee desire that action be taken on this recommendation and the 
Committee be informed of the outcome.  The Committee would also like that a 
copy of the advice given to KVKs regarding working in PPP mode be furnished to 
them for information. 
 
Recommendation Para No. 4.61 
 
1.37 The Committee noted that the entire expenditure of the KVKs was booked under 
Plan Head and was reported to be the main cause for delay in making provision for 
infrastructure developments.  They therefore, desired the Department to take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance so as to fund Krishi Vigyan Kendras from Non -Plan 
allocation.   
1.38 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in their Action Taken 
Reply have stated that t he proposal for funding of KVKs from Non -Plan budget has 
already been mooted for consideration by Planning Commission and Ministry of 
Finance. 
1.39 The Committee note with satisfaction that the proposal for funding KVKs 
from Non -Plan Budget has been mooted for consideration by the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry o f Finance.   The Committee desire the Department 
to pursue the matter with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance 
and report the final outcome to the Committee. 
AGRICULTURE EDUCATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.65) 
 
1.40 The Committee have taken serious note of lack of enthusiasm amongst youth of 
the country, to take agriculture, as a career and profession, probably on the grounds of 
limited employment opportunities, unfavourable returns as compared to service sector 
etc.  This calls for in trospection of whole gamut of agriculture education system in the 

 
 
country and employability.  The Committee feel that being agrarian economy, expansion 
of agriculture education should not halt.  The avenues of employment be raised 
exponentially.  At the sa me time, policy on Central Agriculture University as 
recommended by the Committee each be expedited.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of action taken in the matter. 
1.41 In order to promote reach and visibility of agricultural education in the coun try, 
policy on higher agricultural education has been developed after a critical analysis of 
current agricultural education system in the country.  Similarly, a proposal has been 
moved to constitute a committee to develop detailed guidelines for establishm ent of 
Central Agricultural Universities in the country. 
1.42 The Committee feel that the policy on higher agricultural education to 
promote the reach and coverage regarding agricultural education should be 
combined with creation of adequate employment opp ortunities with reasonable 
salary.  The reply has not mentioned anything about steps proposed in this 
regard.  They are curious to know about specific steps proposed/being taken.  
The Committee also desire that the proposed Committee to develop guidelines 
for establishment of the Central Agricultural Universities be constituted 
expeditiously with definite time frame for submission of its report.   
ANIMAL SCIENCE 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.71) 
 
1.43 Management and improvement of livestock was one of thrust area of Agriculture 
in the Country.   To improve productivity, production and reproductive efficiency in 
livestock and poultry were major areas which were addressed by 18 animal science 
institutes   comprising of 2 Deemed Universities, 5 Central Research Institutes, 01 
National Bureau, 4 Project Directorates and 6 National Research Centres. The Division 
also coordinates 7 All India Coordinated Research Projects and 7 Network Research 
Programmes.  In addition, 2 Outreach programmes and 4 mega seed projects (poultry, 
sheep, goat and pig) were also being operated in different parts of the country at 
different ICAR institutes, State Agricultural / Veterinary Universities and Non -
Governmental Organizations .  Against the proposal of Rs. 280 crore an outlay of Rs. 
225.00 crore BE which was 19.64 % lower was approved.   The Committee noted that 

 
 
programmers of Network Project on Animal Genetic Resources, Karnal, National Dairy 
Research Institute, Karnal includi ng Network on Research & Development, Central 
Sheep and Wool Research Institute, Avikanagar, Central Institute for Research on 
Goats, Makhdoom, Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes, Hissar, Network on 
Buffaloes Hissar, National Institute on Animal N utrition and Physiolgy, Bengaluru, NRC 
on Camel, Bikaner, NRC on Equine, Hissar, Veterinary Type Culture, AICRP on Cattle 
Research, Meerut, Central Avian Research Institute Izatnagar, Project Directorate on 
Poultry, Hyderabad, Network on Gastro Intestinal Parasitism, Izatnager and NRC on 
Mithuu, Jharnapani Nagaland Animal Science Institutes, were affected due to the lower 
allocation to the tune of 76.47%, 31.35%, 41.66, 50.76, 47.5%, 53.75%, 51.14%, 
34.78%, 45.71%, 33.33%, 37%, 56.75%, 50%, 66.25%, funds, r espectively.  The 
projects of Animal Science Division assumes special significance, as they directly 
impact small and marginal farmers.  The Committee, therefore, recommended the 
Department to review the proposals of these Centres and consider re appropria tion of 
funds with the Divisions so that the priority research of these Centres did not suffer in 
the current Fiscal. 
1.44 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that they have agreed 
with the recommendation  that the research activities of priority concerns in Animal 
Sciences are likely to be affected due to lower allocation of funds. However, the 
proposed research activities to be undertaken in the XII Five Year Plan are as follows; 
1. “Embryo bio -technology including cloning, transgenics, mod ern bio -
technologicaltools including stem cell technology.  
 
2. Enhancing livestock productivity viz. broiler and egg production, milk,meatand 
woolproduction including by products through fertilityenhancement and elite 
germplasm production.  
3. Enhancing nutritional value of milk, meat and poultry products through 
incorporation of nutraceuticals and value addition.  
4. Conservation of Animal Genetic Resources and whole genome analysis for 
marker assisted selection.  
 
5. Sero-surveillance and monitoring  of livestock and poultry diseases, bio - 

 
 
containment of zoonotic diseases and highly pathogenic diseases for their 
effective handling and control.  
6. Development of accurate diagnostic kits and novel vaccines for disease 
diagnosis and their control.” 
 
These activities will be the priority concern for allocation of funds in the current 
plan period. 
 
1.45 The Committee are not satisfied with the Reply of the Government. Though 
the Department has stated that it agrees with the recommendation of the 
Committee, no thing has been mentioned as to what action has been taken or 
proposed to be taken to implement the recommendation.   The Committee would 
like the Department to ensure that research activities of priority concerns in 
Animal Sciences do not suffer in the current financial year for want of funds.   
  
  

 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation Para No. 1.4 
 
The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the action taken by 
the Government on  the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Thirty -
Second Report of the Committee were furnished by the  Government within the 
stipulated three months and the Statement of the Minister under Director 73 -A was 
made within the stipulated six months period.  An analysis of the action taken by the 
Government reveals that 57% Recommendations have been accepted, 29% 
Recommendations have not been accepted and 11% of Recommendations are in the 
various stages of implementation.  While the Committee hope and  trust that the 
Department will continue to adhere to the stipulations laid down under Direction 73 -A in 
future, in letter and spirit.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Noted for compliance. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation Para No. 2.18 
 
 Sustainable development, climate change, bio -security, bio -safety are some of 
the upfront areas requiring detailed research.  The development of appropriate 
technology for conservation management and sustainable utilisation of natural 
resources, to ensure food, nutritional and environmental security; deteriorating 
productivity of resources, profitability of small land holdings, dry -land agriculture, farm 

 
 
mechanisation etc. are some of the challenges confronting Indian agriculture.  Many of 
the challenges have there been in the past and some owe their genesis to fast changes 
contemporary scenario. Some of the challenges have been tamed and very long 
distance ought to be travelled before the new and novel manifestations are win over.  
The technology -driven agr iculture with farmers’ centric approach calls for anticipatory 
research of various agro -ecological conditions instead of adaptive research.  Recent 
empirical studies have revealed that investment in Agriculture Research and 
Development is one of the factor s contributing to substantially reduction in rural poverty 
by stimulating agriculture growth and reducing food prices, globally.  In the Indian 
context, results have shown that about 13.5 rupees are returned for every rupee 
invested in Agriculture Research  and Development.  Another study to quantify outcome 
of research, found that around ¼ growth in output of wheat and cotton, 1/5 th   in case of 
bajra and 13% in paddy and maize, were due to toil and labour put by research and 
development works.  The primacy  of agriculture R&D in the development process is 
second to none.  The Committee desire that investment in Agriculture R&D be stepped 
up, so as to obtain high returns, further the Committee trust and hope that  the Indian 
scientists and technocrats will co ntinue to strive hard, as before and overcome the 
challenges besetting Indian agriculture, on war footing, by developing appropriate 
mitigating strategies & technology, for the benefit of  farmers.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Government agrees with the recommendation that the investment in R&D be 
stepped up to obtain high returns by developing mitigating strategies & technology for 
the benefit of farmers. In this context, the crop improvement programmes of ICAR will 
give more emphasis on crop yield, quality and tolerance/ resistance to biotic and abiotic 
stresses and making crops able to withstand the weather extremities. The recent 
achievements in the field of sequencing of genomes of important plants and microbes 
may be ga infully utilized in this regard. Targeted integration of economically important 
genes for crop improvement through structural and functional genomics/ molecular 
breeding in major field crops will be strengthened. ICAR's proposal for XII plan 
envisions the scenario of judiciously integrating conventional plant breeding, molecular 

 
 
biology, bioinformatics, genetic engineering, human resource and infrastructural 
development. For this, inter -disciplinary and inter -departmental research platform in 
consortium mode on hybrids, agro -biodiversity management, genomics, bio -fortification 
and seeds are proposed through Consortia Research Platforms. 
Further ICAR is developing location specific eco friendly low cost farm 
technologies in farmers’ participatory mode with due consideration of farmers’ resource 
availabilities to overcome the challenges and to resolve problems of farming community. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
SOIL MAPPING 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.19) 
 
Inventory of soil resources including soil map is one of the basic tool as it guides 
suitability of various crops.  Keeping the farmers constantly updated of soil health 
profile, mapping and geo -reference database of micro and micro -nutrients play a major 
role in improving the agriculture production in the Country.  The Committee are 
concerned to find that geo -referenced soil fertility maps for only 152 districts have been 
prepared out of 171 selected districts and remaining 19 districts are likely to be 
completed by September, 2013.  The Department has been assigned a target of 62 
districts in the current fiscal and 300 Districts in the XII Five Plan.  The Department is 
working with other organizations like Indian Space Research Organisation, National 
Remote Sensing Agency etc. in close tandem.  Since the geo -reference database help 
in working out the exact nutrient requirement especially micro -nutrients of a crop in the 
field, the Committee, therefore, desire that the Department to review their targets and 
complete geo-reference of all the 600 odd Districts in the Twelfth Five Year Plan itself.  
They further desire the Department to work out the additional financial requirement 
needed for completion of major and micro nutrients geo-reference map and prevail upon 
the Planning Commission and the Government to liberally fund the project during the 
current Five Year Plan period. 

 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Developing geo-referenced soil fertility maps for different districts of the country 
was undertaken by the Council for 171 districts in ﬁrst phase funded by DAC, Ministry of 
Agriculture under National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility. The DAC 
is likely to take up rest of the districts in subsequent phases through respective state 
Governments involving state soil testing laboratories. However, the Council may accept 
the same if offered by DAC.  
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
SMALL AND MARGINAL FARMERS 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.20) 
 
 In a country, where a large section of the farmers are small and marginal with low 
land holdings, inadequate purchasing power and lack of access to credit and extension 
services, it is but desirable that appropriate farm technologies to cater to their spec ific 
needs, be evolved.  It is a matter of great relief that the Council has initiated an AICRP 
on Integrated Farming System for small and marginal farmers of different agro -
ecological zones to increase productivity and profitability.  The multi -enterprise system 
involves crops, horticulture, agro forestry, livestock, fisheries, poultry, piggery, 
mushroom cultivation and bee -keeping with the potential to increase productivity.  The 
Committee note that the cluster farming system has been undertaken in some s tates 
and Integrated farming system units set up in 50 KVKs to demonstrate the suitability of 
integrated farming system models.  Keeping in view of the interest of small and marginal 

 
 
farmers, the Committee, desire the Department to increase the number of K VKs for 
demonstration of integrated farming system models expeditiously.   The rise in input 
costs, dearth of labour etc. contribute significantly to the end cost of agriculture produce.  
Farm mechanisation is one of key to growth, for so called progressiv e farmers and can 
afford cost of such implements and machineries.  Economy of scale may not 
appropriately suit farm machineries and implements, to be used in small land holdings.  
The unique characteristic of small and marginal farmers, thus calls for intr oduction and 
development of low cost, light weight, multi -purpose farm equipments and tools for their 
benefit.  The Committee desire that appropriate steps including technological innovation 
and support be extended to small and marginal farmers.  Action ta ken by the 
Government may be apprised to the Committee.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Horticulture is best option for diversification and system productivity for small 
holdings.   Horticulture crops such as flowers, medicinal and aromatic plants, and 
vegetable crops under protected cultivation, mushrooms, bee farming and post harvest 
processing and preparation of value -added products can fetch more prices in the 
market. Further, considering adoption of Integrated Farming System (IFS) as the most 
appropriate approach in meeting the challenges of small -farm-agriculture, the Council 
has strengt hened the ongoing AICRP on Integrated Farming System (IFS) during 
current Plan with an allocation of Rs. 149.5 crores. The project is presently operational 
in 32 centres. Once the models are developed, the same will be popularized through 
different KVKs.  
 Development of low cost and light weight farm tools and implements is a 
continuing endeavor of the AICRPs on Farm Implements and Machinery, Utilisation of 
Animal Energy and Ergonomics and Safety in Agriculture.  Several farm implements 
and machines have b een developed for various power sources. Simple and low cost 
tools and implements can be owned by the farmers and the larger, expensive machines 
are available on custom -hiring basis which are quite popular in various states of the 
country. Small farmers ar e getting benefits of high capacity machines through custom 
hiring services.  

 
 
 Fisheries Research Institutes have developed technologies for small scale aqua 
farming in pond, seed production, coastal aquaculture, marine and inland aquaculture, 
mussel farmi ng, oyster farming, poly -lined pond culture systems and ornamental fish 
culture for the benefit of small & marginal farmers. Open sea cage farming is another 
opportunity where field demonstrations have been conducted with active participation of 
fishermen including tribals in different regions of east and west coast of India. Hygienic 
ﬁsh drying/ smoking technologies and value addition to low value fishes developed will 
also help poor farmers to fetch more price for their commodity.  
 As suggested by the co mmittee, 424 more number of integrated farming system 
units have been proposed in the EFC for establishment in KVKs during XII Plan. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
Recommendation Para No. 2.21 
 
 The subsequent narratives deals with details examination of the working of the 
Department in terms of implementation of its Schemes and financial performance during 
the Fiscal, 2012-13 and projections for the year 2013-14.  The Committee desire that the 
Demand No.2 of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education) be approved. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Complied with. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 

 
 
OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.31) 
 
The Committee note that as per Demand No. 2 pertaining to Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education a sum of Rs. 5729.17 crore has been allocated to 
the Department at BE for the current Fiscal.   Out of this Rs. 3415.00 crore has been a 
part of Plan  side which is 26.20 % higher than the RE of previous financial year and 
26.97 % lower than the proposal of the Department i.e. 4676.32 crore.    On the Non 
Plan side the Department has allocated a sum of Rs. 2314.17 crore as BE 2013 -14 
which is 9.25 % more  than RE of Rs. 2100.00 crore for the previous Fiscal.    The 
Annual Plan Outlay of the Department which is Rs. 5729.17 crore is also to be seen in 
the context of total Outlay of Rs. 25,553 crore communicated by the Planner to the 
DARE for the Twelfth Five Year Plan.   The Committee note that as in the past the 
Department has again failed to change the mindset of the Planner and the Government 
in the matter of allocation of funds to DARE during the current Fiscal also.   This is a 
undoubted fact that Indian Ag riculture has been facing a large number of challenges as 
narrated in previous chapter which will require capital intensive solutions, seems to 
have been given a go by the Planners and the Government.   Both of them have, again 
in this Second year of the Tw elfth Five Year Plan, too failed to understand the urgency 
of timely  infusion of capital in the system so as to give an impetus for developing 
technologies for the emerging challenges.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
allocations to the Departmen t in the ongoing Fiscal be reconsidered and enhanced 
accordingly at the RE stage by when, hopefully   EFC/SFC approval of the schemes will 
be cleared.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The EFC/SFC processes of the plan scheme are at various stages of 
formulation/approval. As advised by the committee the department will be approaching 
the Planning commission/ Ministry of Finance for enhanced allocation at RE stage. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
  

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
OUTCOME BUDGET 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.32) 
 
  Outcome Budget broadly indicates the physical dimensions of financial budget as 
also the actual physical programmes of the Department.   It also records performance of 
first Nine months of the a Fiscal year and targeted performance for the year ahead.  The 
Ministry of Finance issues instructions to various Ministries and Department for 
presentation of Outcome Budget Document in a uniform format in the Parliament.   The 
scrutiny by the Committee has revealed that DARE has not observed the guidelines of 
the Ministry of Finance in preparation of the document in letter and spirit.   For instance, 
minute details as required under the instant guidelines, have not been reflected in 
Chapter II to V, religiously and in clear terms.  Further, as admitted by the Departmen t, 
the information contained in Chapters V & VI, were inter -changed, though inadvertently.    
The Committee take strong note of the failure to adhere to the stipulations and other 
minute details, contained in the instant instructions, and also the so calle d “inadvertent 
mistakes” in the Outcome Budget.  The Committee is of the view that due care and 
caution has not been exercised in the process of compilation and presentation of the 
Document to Parliament and its authorities.  Appropriate action to correct the mistakes, 
be taken and the Parliament apprised thereof.  The Committee also desire that DARE 
should meticulously follow the instructions of Ministry of Finance and present their error 
free Outcome Budget, in the ensuing year. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Department has furnished the requisite information in annexure I of the 
outcome budget as already indicated in the tabular form, but assures for compliance of 
the instructions of Ministry of Finance outlined in chapter II. This could be done with a 
thoughtful consideration to make things easy and clear. Précised forms of achievements 
have been given for concerned sectors in Chapters IV, as scheme wise outcomes have 

 
 
already been furnished in chapter II. Inadvertent mistake as noticed will not be allowed  
to recur. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
FUNDS UTILISATION  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.33) 
 
The Committee note that the figures for the Financial Year 2008 -09 and 2009-10 
submitted in the Committee last year, have been changed in the documents submitted 
to them this year.   The Department has   communicated  the final figure for expenditure 
of 2011-12   Rs. 2765.27 against the expenditure of Rs. 1654.58 crore till January, 2012 
communicated previous year.  The Committee find that Rs. 1195.47 crore (Rs. 2765.27 
– 1654.58) has added in two months expenditure of the Department.   Out of the 
allocated amount, the Departme nt has been unable to utilize Rs. 524.98 crore    
(10325.75 – 9800.77) during Eleventh Five Year Plan period.  The trend of expenditure 
clearly reveals that the Department has failed to observe the instructions/guidelines of 
Ministry of Finance regarding mo nthly expenditure plan.   From the quarterly 
expenditure, the Committee found that for 2011 -12 the expenditure is 28 % in the last 
quarter and for 2012 -13 is 11 %.   There was NIL expenditure in the Second Quarter in 
ICAR Plan and Non Plan side during the ye ar 2012 -13.   The Committee note with a 
great sense of disappointment that despite several assurance given by the Department 
on the previous recommendations regarding utilization of funds by them have 
again failed to utilized 100 % of their allocation.   They therefore, strongly feel that the 
Department to review the functioning of their funds utilization mechanism  to check 
recurrence of such trend in future and apprise the outcome.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  The Department has noted the observation of the C ommittee regarding 
the fund utilization mechanism for strict future compliance. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
UNSPENT BALANCES 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.34) 
 
  The Committee note that the Department has again surrendered unspent 
balances to the tune of Rs. 201.58 crore  for Financial Year 2010 -11 and Rs. 108.89 
crore for F.Y. 2011 -12 to the Government.   The reasons regarding EFC/SFC 
documents, delay in release of funds and operation of institutes from different locations 
etc.  tendered by the Department before the Commit tee are not convincing.  The 
Committee note that while the Department argue forcefully to step its allocation and at 
the same time return the past years unspent balance, do reflect poorly on the 
performance and planning process monitoring mechanism of the Department.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to revisit their existing funds 
utilization mechanism and over the whole system so as to ensure that the funds once 
allocated are fully utilized by various Divisions in the remaining period of  the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Department has taken note of this Recommendation. The Regular 
monitoring of utilization of funds is being done in the monthly expenditure review 
meetings. The requisition based release is undertaken  to meet the expenditure 
demands in order to ensure optimum utilisation of allocated funds. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation Para No. 3.36 
 
 The Committee note that 44% of proposed outlay of the Department has been 
reduced by the Planner for Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The pace of progress of important 

 
 
research programmes like genomics work in horticultural plants, markets for desirable 
traits stem cell research will be slackened due to the cut.  The strengthening of existing 
KVKs including new initiatives viz. Consortia Research Platform (CRP) on Agri -
biodiversity Management Genomics and Molecular Breeding etc. will too be affected 
due to reduced allocation during the XII Plan.  In addition to that new initiatives like 
National Agricultural Education Project, Farmers First, Student Ready, ARYA etc will be 
slackened.  It is a matter of deep concern that High end Research Projects such as 
Agro-biodiversity, Genomics, Nanotechnology, Conservation Agriculture, Health Foods,  
Farm Mechanisation etc. which are component of  CRP, may either had to be shelved 
or postponed indefinitely.  The Committee appreciating the constraints of ICAR for 
slackening these important programmes would like to advise the Department to again 
draw attention of the Planner and the Government on the gravity thereof and ask 
enlarge funds to complete these activities as to overcome the challenges faced by 
Indian Agriculture.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 ICAR's proposal for XII plan envisions this scenario of judiciously integrating 
conventional plant breeding, molecular biology, bioinformatics, genetic engineering, 
human resource and infrastructural development, Farm Mechanization, Energy in 
Agriculture, Secondary Agriculture, Health Foods and Natural Fibres through the 
Consortia Research Platform (CRP).  These CRPs have been conceived keeping in 
mind the evolving scenario of agriculture in the country and to addr ess them with 
appropriate research and development interventions. 
 DARE/ICAR would be seeking higher allocation of funds for completion of these 
activities to overcome the challenges faced by Indian Agriculture. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
 

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.26 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
CROP SCIENCE 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.57) 
 
 Development of new crop varieties, with improved yield and nutritional quality 
alongwith technical support are some of the mandate assigned to ICAR.   The 
Committee note that for Crop Science Division an Outlay of Rs. 468.00 crore was 
approved against the proposal of Rs. 628.01 crore.  The financial proposals of the 
National Institute of Biotic Stress Management, Indian Institute of Agricultural 
Biotechnology,  Central Institute of Cotton Research, Nagpur and Indian Grassland and 
Fodder Research Institute, Jhansi have been drastically down-sized by almost 93.33 %,  
92.5 %, 77.56 % and 64.78 % respectively.  On the other hand some of the 
programmes and projects have received enhanced allocations at BE stage.  The 
Department has lamented that the reduction wou ld influence the procurement of 
research materials and cost of the laboratory/field work force. Further, upon 
reassessment of the operational cost upward revision effected in some of the projects.  
Such unprofessional and casual approach at planning stage itself points towards 
mismanagement in the Crop Science Division which resulted in either drastically 
reducing the allocation or revising the cost upwards.  They therefore, recommend the 
Department to reapprove the projects so that need based provision mad e for the 
purpose. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The proposal for higher allocation was initially made for some of the institutions 
of Crop Science division tentatively taking into account certain newer initiatives in 
respect of infrastructure development. However, these were downsized subsequently 
due t o envisaged delay in EFC finalization and to optimize the expenditure of the 

 
 
budgetary allocation. It is ensured that these programmes and the projects will not 
suffer any budgetary constraints.  
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
HORTICULTURE 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.59) 
 
 Genetic resource management and development of improved varieties of 
horticulture crop, biotic and abiotic  resistance, export-value, as also standardization of 
technique for rapid propagation and horticulture based cropping pattern are some of the 
issues connected with Horticulture Division.     
 The Committee note  that the Department have not made any changes in the 
proposals of the Horticulture Division for 2013 -14.  The Division has been able to utilize 
73.86 % of their RE grant (upto January 2013).   Some of the institutes like Central 
Institute of Sub Topical H ortiulture, Lucknow, Central Institute of Arid Horticulture, 
Bikaner, Central Plantatio Crops Research Institute, Kasargod and Director of 
Floriculture, New Delhi unable to utilize more than 26 % of their allocation upto January, 
2013 which improved belate dly in the month of February, 2013.  Under utilization of 
funds is a cause of concern to the Committee.  For the purpose of finalization or 
reallocations, prioritization and also EFC’s clearances, discussions were held in March, 
2013.  The Committee, desire the Department to complete the finalization of EFC / SFC 
and other formalities of various schemes of the Division.  Further, there is an imperative 
need to strengthen the implementation mechanism of the Horticulture Division so that 
the targets assigned for of the Twelfth Five Year Plan are realised.  At the same time, 
corrective actions need to be taken to ensure utilization of funds prudently.     
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
          The focused areas envisaged are being addressed through Consortia Researc h 
Platform and Challenge Programme such as Agro -biodiversity, hybrids, molecular 
breeding, diagnostics, seeds and secondary agriculture. Efforts are being made to 

 
 
complete formalities for the finalization of EFC/SFC of various schemes of the Division 
so that the targets assigned for the Twelfth Five Year Plan could be realised. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.33 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
AGRICULTURE EXTENSION 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.60) 
 
 Agriculture Extension has a major scheme of disseminating knowledge and 
information to the farmers.  The Krishi Vigyan Kendras  during 2012 -13, assessed  
refined and demonstrated technologies through 29,428 on -farm trials, 1.31 lakh front -
line demonstrations in different farming system.  Under NICRA project 100 KVKs also 
demonstrated climate resilient technologies through 23441 de monstrations in the 
country.  The Committee further find that out of 632 KVKs in the country, the 
Department has been able to provide Administrative buildings to 554 KVKs, trainees 
hostel to 490 KVKs, staff quarters to 442 KVKs, demonstration units to 394 KVKs and 
soil and water testing facilities to 389 KVKs.   The Committee find major deficiencies in 
the operation of KVKs.  At places they are non -operational for want of project 
coordinator/specialist and other administrative staff, lack of infrastructure etc.  Some of 
KVKs have failed to extend professional advise expected from them.  Bridging the 
yawning gap recorded at demonstration and farmers field, is another area of the 
concern.  The Committee desire that the functioning of KVKs be relooked into and the 
specific pitfalls brought so in the Report be made good.  At the same time, the 
infrastructure such as Administrative buildings, trainees hostel, staff quarters, 
demonstration units and soil and water testing facilities, be provided in a time bound 
manner in the remaining KVKs.  The bottlenecks in achieving demonstration level yields 
at farm levels by identified and appropriate actions taken to narrow the productivity gap 

 
 
further.  The Committee find that private participation in agriculture extension t hrough 
the institutions of Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) has not yielded the desired results, since 
the private players allegedly, pursue limited agenda of promoting their products driven 
by profit motives under the guise of agriculture extension.  Such defic iencies were 
admitted by Secretary, DARE during his deposition before the Committee.  Under such 
a scenario, the private participated KVK do not attend to major components of extension 
services, leaving farmers in a lurch.  The holistic approach of dissemi nation of 
information and farm knowledge to farmers, through KVK, which is a guiding 
philosophy, is given a decent burial by the private participated KVK.  The Committee 
view this with all the seriousness, it deserves and would like the Department to appra ise 
the quality and reach of extension services rendered by private players.  The Committee 
desire that Government should ensure that KVK including private KVKs provide all the 
mandated activities to the farmers, without any exception.  At the same time th e 
allocations for KVKs be stepped up, so as to ensure that only State supported KVKs 
function, in the country.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 As regards inadequate infrastructures in KVKs, it is stated that as per availability 
of funds the required and need b ased infrastructure in the remaining KVKs will be 
provided during XII Plan. With regard to bottlenecks in achieving demonstration level 
yields at farm level, it is pertinent to mention that other factors like non -availability of 
adequate agro - inputs like seed, fertilizers, plant protection chemicals etc. credit, 
irrigation facilities in time to farmers also work as constraining factors in achieving 
higher yields by farmers. The KVKs have no control over such factors. Moreover, the 
main extension system, wh ich is responsible for reducing the yield gaps between 
demonstrated technologies and yields obtained by farmers is operated by the State 
Governments. However, after demonstrating the production potential of agricultural 
technologies in farmers field throug h front -line demonstrations on different crops, the 
KVKs conduct a number of follow up activities like field days, kisan gosthis, technology 
week and other awareness creating programmes with the participation of farmers and 
extension personnel. As far as t he issue of private participation in Agriculture Extension 

 
 
through KVKs is concerned, it is stated that all the KVKs are provided 100% financial 
support by ICAR. Few KVKs have also taken up selected extension activities on the 
public private partnership (P PP) mode on technologies which are tested and 
recommended by Agricultural Universities and Research Institutions. These activities 
are taken up within the scope of work of KVKs without diluting the mandated activities. 
However, as per the observation of th e Committee the KVKs have been advised to be 
careful while working in PPP mode not to allow the private partners to pursue their 
agenda of promoting their products using KVK platform. Regarding stepping up of 
allocations to KVKs it is stated that funds all ocation to KVKs was increased from Rs. 
435.40 crore in 2012-13 to Rs. 496.88 crore in 2013-14. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.36 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
Recommendation Para No. 4.61 
 
 The Committee note  that the entire expenditure of the KVKs is booked under 
Plan Head and is reported to be the main cause for delay in making provision for 
infrastructure developments.  They therefore, desire the Department to take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance  so as to fund Krishi Vigyan Kendras from Non -Plan 
allocation.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The proposal for funding of KVKs from Non -Plan budget has already been 
mooted for consideration by Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 

 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.39 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
Recommendation Para No. 4.62 
 
 During 2012-13 out of Rs. 450.00 crore RE the Division has been able to utilize 
only Rs. 291.26 crore upto January, 2013.  This shows  the tardy trend in the 
expenditure in the Division.  The Committee desire the Department to revisit the funds 
utilization and monitoring mechanism of that Division so as to utilize the funds prudently 
so as to meet the targets of Twelfth Five Year Plan. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 As suggested by the Committee, the funds utilization will be monitored on 
quarterly basis to ensure its prudent utilization so as to meet the targets of Twelfth Five 
Year Plan. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation Para No. 4.63 
 
 The Committee have observed that in the context of drought prevailing in various 
parts of the country, ICAR has developed a number of technologies, for drought 
proofing.  Similarly, demonstration and training organised by CAZRI, Jodhpur and 
CRIDA, Hyderabad in drought affec ted districts of Maharashtra, Karnataka, Gujarat and 
Rajasthan, as part of NICRA.  District level contingency plan to meet aberrant weather 
contingency like delay in monsoon, mid -seasonal break in monsoon, unseasonal rain, 
heavy floods, cyclone, cold waves , heat waves prepared for 400 districts.  While 
appreciating the work of ICAR in mitigating sufferings of farmers, the Committee desire 

 
 
that KVKs should disseminate information / knowledge in the districts under their 
jurisdiction, so as to contain the ill effects of drought. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 In order to contain the ill effects of drought and other adverse climatic conditions, 
the KVKs prepare and implement contingency plan of their activities based on the 
technologies developed by ICAR Institutes  and Agricultural Universities. Besides, 100 
KVKs are also involved in demonstrating climate resilient technologies under NICRA 
project.   
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
AGRICULTURE EDUCATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.64) 
 
 The Agriculture Education is being imparted in the country by 55 Agriculture 
Universities, 5 Deemed to be Universities and 4 Central Universities having Agricultural 
faculties.  To promote the talent, an All India Entrance Examination for Admission to UG 
level course for 15 % seats and to PG level courses for 25 % seats are held annually.  
The ICAR supports strengthening and development of agricultural education to develop 
student amenities like Educational Museum, Sports complex, Smart Class Rooms, 
Examination Hall, Boys and Girls Hostel etc. supports to promote niche area of 
excellence, hands on training, Library for education quality and reforms.  Due to 
reduced allocation no new works, purchase of equipment has been undertaken by the 
universities for str engthening and development of Higher Agriculture Education during 
the current Fiscal.  The Committee appreciate the assistance being provided by the 
DARE/ICAR.  They further desire the Department to utilize funds expeditiously and raise 
additional funds under the Head at RE stage.   
 

 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The programmes initiated in XI Plan will be continuing in the XII Plan also and 
the objectives of the project are aligned with the mainstream thrust areas, as enunciated 
in the XII Plan document of the Planning Commission.Ensuring Access, Equity, and 
Quality assurance i n higher agricultural education shall be emphasized. Promoting 
holistic higher agricultural education by blending knowledge, skill and attitude shall be 
the priority for : 
 Engendering and social inclusiveness in education 
 Performance linked support 
 Institution Development and reforms in governance. 
 Faculty development by enlarging faculty resources and supporting research 
programme of teachers associated with Agriculture Universities. 
 Attracting talent to higher agricultural education 
 The Universities will be encouraged to utilize the funds expeditiously & effectively 
and additional demand at RE stage shall be raised. Effective approval of E.F.C. will be 
taken up and equipment procured as per provisions. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation Para No. 4.65 
 
 The Committee have taken serious note of lack of enthusiasm amongst youth of 
the country, to take agriculture, as a career and profession, probably on the grounds of 
limited employment opportunities, unfavourable returns as compared to service sector 
etc.  This calls for in trospection of whole gamut of agriculture education system in the 
country and employability.  The Committee feel that being agrarian economy, expansion 
of agriculture education should not halt.  The avenues of employment be raised 
exponentially.  At the sa me time, policy on Central Agriculture University as 
recommended by the Committee each be expedited.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of action taken in the matter. 
 

 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In order to promote reach and visibility of agricultural education in the country, 
policy on higher agricultural education has been developed after a critical analysis of 
current agricultural education system in the country.  Similarly, a proposal has been 
moved to constitute a committee to develop detailed guid elines for establishment of 
Central Agricultural Universities in the country. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.42 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.66) 
 
 Development of Human Resources,  is key to ushering Agriculture growth.  To 
meet the challenge and future requirement of agriculture scientist the Department has 
set up CAU at Imphal and four Deemed to be Universities i.e. IARI, New Delhi IVRI, 
Izatnagar, NDRI, Karnal and CIFE, Mumbai.  The Committee have taken note of intake 
and manpower of some of the Agricultural Institutes.  It has been noted that there exists 
an annual intake capacity of 545 in CAU Imphal and 115 UG & 128 PG, 140 UG & 97 
PG, 22 UG & 132 PG, and 166 at IARI, IVRI, NDR I and CIFE respectively.  Against this 
intake, the actual enrolment in CAU Imphal is 331 which are supervision of 218 
teachers/faculties.  Similarly in IARI, against 241 students there are 542 
teachers/faculties.  In IVRI against 222 students, there are 23 2 teachers/faculties, NDRI 
against 227 there are 146 teachers/faculties and CIFE against 129 students there are 
52 teachers/faculties.  The Committee have a growing feeling that number of 
teachers/faculties engaged in all these needs to be reviewed by the Department and the 
Committee be apprised of the outcome thereof. 

 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The total number of students enrolled in the CAU, Imphal is 922 in UG and 200 in 
PG including 1 st to 5 th year and therefore, the strength of teachers/faculty may be 
viewed accordingly.   
As regards ICAR Deemed Universities viz. IARI, New Delhi, IVRI, Izatnagar, 
NDRI, Karnal and CIFE, Mumbai are premier research institutes established with the 
mandate to conduct research, post graduate education and transfer of technolo gies in 
the areas of agriculture, animal health and production, dairy sciences and fisheries 
respectively. The faculty of these institutes is involved in all the activities performing 
tripartite role for which most of the scientists are often working beyon d the normal office 
hours. For example, there are 542 scientists inducted as faculty for teaching post 
graduate students in 24 disciplines of M.Sc., M.Tech. and Ph.D. Programs at IARI, New 
Delhi.   Of these 366 faculty is from IARI and the remaining is fro m its sister institutes 
located in IARI campus viz. IASRI/NBPGR/NRCPB/DMR/DFR/NCIPM/NCAP where 
post graduate programmes in Agricultural Statistics, Bioinformatics, Computer 
Application and Plant Genetic Resources are being offered. The Institute has 108 in -
house projects, 170 externally funded projects, 5 challenge programs and 12 outreach 
programs, which are being executed by scientists of IARI who are involved in teaching 
activity as faculty also in order to carry out research. Further, it may be pertinen t to 
mention here that annual intake of the students in IARI is 242 only but on roll students 
are 645. 
IVRI, Izatnagar offers Master’s and Ph.D. programme  in 22 and 20 disciplines 
respectively and National Diploma courses in 9 disciplines besides several short -term 
specialized training courses to the professionals and vocational trainings to the farmers. 
Beside the IVRI faculty is handling number of interna tional, multi -institutional, multi -
divisional and other projects like All India Coordinated Research Projects (2); All India 
Networking Programmes (9); DBT Projects (17); ICAR Funded Projects (3); National 
Fund for Basic and Strategic Frontier Area Researc h in Agriculture (7); National 
Agricultural Innovation Project (15); Outside funded Projects (21); International 
Collaborative Research Projects (4) and Institute Projects (111).  In the year 2011 -12, 

 
 
Scientists of the institute have published a total of 4 05 research papers (Indian journals 
-213; Foreign journals -192) in journals of repute. The institute have filed 12 new 
patents, 3 copy rights & 4 design registration applications and commercialized 4 
technologies during the year. It may also be mentioned t hat the present total strength of 
students of 2 year’s duration of MVSc. & 3 year’s duration of Ph.D. is about 600, which 
is being taught & guided by the faculty of IVRI. 
Similarly, NDRI, Karnal - a premier institute in Research & Development of Dairy 
Sector is mandated for research in Dairy process, production and marketing and Human 
Resource Management to meet requirements of Dairy Industry and dissemination of 
innovative technologies for socio-economic transformation.  Therefore, all the Scientists 
are en gaged not only in teaching but also in research, extension, consultancy and 
technology transfer as per mandate of the institute. Considering that B.Tech is of four 
years duration; Master’s degree of two years duration and Ph. D. of minimum three 
years dura tion, the present students on roll in B.Tech., M.Sc./M.V.Sc./M.Tech, Ph.D. 
are 140, 257, 398 respectively, which comes out to be a total of 795 students. In 
addition, a new programme viz. National Diploma (Dairy Technology) with annual intake 
of 25 student s of 3 years duration is to be initiated from this academic session. 
Therefore, the present physical strength of 146 is required to be increased so as to 
make it  to the sanctioned strength of 227 to achieve the targets as per the mandate. 
At CIFE, Mumbai the faculty is also actively engaged in research of both institute 
based projects and externally funded research programmes, besides teaching, training 
and extension programmes. Currently, CIFE, Mumbai has 58 teachers for about 260 
students of Masters and Doctoral programmes.  The academic programmes and 
requirements of students & staff are continuously reviewed by the institute’s Academic 
Council and QRT and their recommendations have been implemented from time to time 
to offer academic programmes effectively and to utilize the services of faculty efficiently. 
Therefore, in view of the above it is evident that there is only an optimum number 
of faculty in these deemed universities, to undertake these multifarious huge tripartite 
activities and responsibilities. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 

 
 
SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER  
(Recommendation Para No. 4.67) 
 
 From the latest information furnished by the Department regarding the vacant 
position the Committee note that there are 1895 vacancies in the Scientific Cadre 
against the sanctioned 6472 posts.  In the Technical cadre  the situation is not very 
good it has 891 vacancies out of 6635 sanctioned posts.  On Administrative side out of 
total 4891 posts 580 are vacant.  The Divisions like  Crops Science, Animal Science, 
NRM, Fisheries, Engineering and Education are the worst suffer of the shortage of 
Scientists.   The Committee have been greatly concerned about the vacancies in 
scientific, technical and administrative cadres in ICAR and had urged upon Government 
to take appropriate administrative measures.  However, result oriented action, has not 
been taken so far .  29% vacancy in scientific cadre is a great cause of concern since it 
directly impact the pace and quality of R&D work in Agriculture Sector.  As an interim 
measures, ICAR should consider extension of services of scientists of proven merit, 
with national / international track record of research.  At the same time, the Department 
should strengthen the existing recruitment procedure and prepare an action plan to fill 
the vacant posts in a time bound manner. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Regarding scientists final result of the ARS Examination 2012 for filling up 431 
positions of Entry level Scientists is expected by September – October, 2013.  Another 
75 selectees of ARS Examination 2011, who had been granted extension of joining time 
to complete their Ph.D thesis are likely to join in next two -three months.  Further, about 
400 entry level positions are expected to be filled up annually in the coming years.   
As clarified in replies submitted earlier, recruitment in other senior scientific 
positions is a cont inuous process.  Recruitment action is at different stages in the 
Agricultural Scientists’ Recruitment Board (ASRB) for filling up about 500 positions on 
lateral entry basis.   

 
 
To address the situation of applicants not being found suitable, the essential 
qualifications have recently been fine -tuned and made broad -based so as to attract 
larger number of applicants to fill up scientific positions on lateral entry basis.  
In order to retain and utilize services of Scientists of proven merit, the ICAR has 
following three schemes :- 
(i) National Professor    : 10 slots 
(ii) National Fellow        :  25 slots 
(iii) Emeritus Scientists  :  50 slots 
It is also proposed to increase the existing number of slots in the above 
schemes, and also to engage Post Doctoral Fellows (PDFs) in the XII Plan to address 
shortage of scientific manpower. 
Recruitment in the Administrative and Technical categories is decentralized.  
Instructions have already been issued to all units for filling up vacancies expeditiously.  
Efforts being made in this regard are monitored closely.  
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
FARM MECHANIZATION / AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.68) 
 
 Farm mechanization and availability of adequate farm power are crucial for timely 
farm operations, handling the crop produce, increasing production and productivity and 
reducing post harvest losses.  With the increase in intensity of copping, the turnaroun d 
time is drastically reduced, which demands availability of adequate power for time farm 
operations so that land is made available for subsequent crop.   Similarly, for precision 
farming, increasing area under irrigation, conservation tillage, straw manag ement and 
diversification of agriculture, more power is required for water lifting and precision 
placement / application of agricultural inputs such as seed, fertilizer, irrigation water, 
plant protection chemicals etc.   The Committee desire that farm mec hanization should 
be accorded a higher degree of priority so as to address the issue of scarcity of farm 
labour during peak agricultural season. 

 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Research and development activities on farm mechanization including precision 
farming technologies, conservation agriculture, and straw management are being 
carried out at Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal with the cooperating 
centres o f AICRP on Farm Implements and Machinery.  The need for increasing the 
farm power availability on Indian farms has been given adequate attention in the XII 
Plan. A Consortia Research Platform on Farm Mechanization has been proposed with 
farm machinery manu facturing centres at different locations.  These farm machinery 
manufacturing centres would manufacture and supply location -specific farm implements 
and would also serve as training centres for local entrepreneurs.   
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Recommendation Para No. 4.69 
 A sum of Rs. 75.00 crore  has been allocated under Major Head Agricultural 
Engineering for the current Fiscal against the proposal of Rs. 99.30 crore.  The demand 
of funds for approximately Rs. 92.00 crore was received from various units/schemes of 
the Division.  These demands was  made while the financial year 2012 -13 has 
completed only six to eight months and therefore, the demand was on the higher side 
for the year 2013 -14.  The Committee was shocked to know that the Division has 
prepared their proposals on the higher side and no t in realistic manner.  They therefore, 
recommend the Department to review the Budget estimation system of Agriculture 
Engineering Division.  The Committee noted that the Division has utilized Rs. 34.32 
crore upto January, 2013 out of RE allocation of Rs. 52.00 crore while submitting 
clarification regarding non -utilization of funds upto 31 January, 2013 was due to less 
expenditure reported by certain units under establishment charges.  The Committee 
took serious view and recommend the Department to rework o n the priorities of the 
Division and strengthen the funds utilization mechanism so that the targets of XII Five 
Year Plan in respect of the Divisions are achieved in remaining period of plan.   
 

 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Efforts were made to expedite fund u tilization by different units of Agricultural 
Engineering and it is seen that 99.83% (Rs 5191.39 lakhs) of the total allocation of Rs 
5200 lakh was utilized by the end of financial year (2012 -13).  The proposals for the 
funds were made based on the demands  received from different institutes/units. The 
allocation was reduced based on the actual funds received. The Department would 
rework on the priorities of the Division and strengthen the funds utilization mechanism 
so that the targets of XII Five Year Plan  in respect of the Division are achieved in 
remaining period of plan.   
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.70) 
 
 Institutes under Natural Resource Management Division have made significant 
achievements in improving soil health, promoting organic farming and agroforestry.  
There has been the reduction of 11 % funds at RE stage.  Against the proposal of 
351.40 crore an  outlay of Rs. 310.00 crore has allocated.  The Committee noted that 
National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning, Nagpur, Central Soil and Water 
Conservation Research & Training Institute, Dehradun, AICRP on Integrated Farming 
System + Organic Far ming, Modipuram, NRC Agroforestry, ICAR Research Complex, 
Goa, NIASM, Malegaon and NICRA has registered a reduction of 34.16%, 60%, 
23.52%, 20%, 33.33%, 22.5%, 21.97 and 18.18% respectively.  The Committee have a 
growing feeling that the such a huge reduct ion of allocation of certain Institutes on the 
plea of reduction in over all allocation indicates a degree of ad -hocism in the financial 
management.  The Committee, therefore, desire that rather than waiting till the RE 
stage, DARE/ICAR should reconsider t he proposals of these institutes at the earliest 
and apprise the outcome.   The Division has been able to utilize only 66.47 % of their 
RE allocation upto the end of January, 2013 several approved items of works / 
equipments could not be completed because of the codal formalities involved.  They 

 
 
strongly recommend the Department to review their internal funds utilization mechanism 
at the earliest so that the funds allocated to the Division are utilized fully. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The reduction of 11% in allocation of NRM Division in the RE 2012-13 (Plan) was 
due to reduction of allocation by the Ministry of Finance in the overall allocation of 
DARE/ICAR in the RE 2012 -13 (Plan). Even though the utilization was 66.5% up to 
January 2013, it improved to 89% by the end of March 2013. 
 As regards internal mechanism for utilisation of funds allocated to the Institutes 
is being regularly monitored/reviewed through various forums such as SOC meetings, 
Divisional meetings, Expenditure Review meetings etc. However, all efforts will be made 
to ensure full utilisation of allocation by the institutes in future.  
An allocation of Rs. 310.00 crores has been accorded to the NRM Division under 
BE 2013 -14 (Plan) out of the the overall allocation of ICAR in BE 2013 -14 (Plan) . 
However, as a sequel to the recommendation of the Committee for enhancing the 
allocation of National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning, Nagpur, Central 
Soil and Water Conservation Research & Training Institute, Dehradun, AICRP on 
Integrated Far ming System + Organic Farming, Modipuram, NRC Agroforestry, ICAR 
Research Complex, Goa, NIASM, Malegaon and NICRA, necessary steps are being 
taken separately to augment the allocation of these institutes/ AlCRP; at the BE 2013 -
14 stage itself without waiting for the RE 2013-14 stage. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
ANIMAL SCIENCE 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.71) 
 
 Management and improvement of livestock is one of thrust area of Agriculture in 
the Country.   To improve productivity, production and reproductive efficiency in 
livestock and poultry are major areas which are addressed by 18 animal science 
institutes   co mprising of 2 Deemed Universities, 5 Central Research Institutes, 01 
National Bureau, 4 Project Directorates and 6 National Research Centres. The Division 

 
 
also coordinates 7 All India Coordinated Research Projects and 7 Network Research 
Programmes.  In add ition, 2 Outreach programmes and 4 mega seed projects (poultry, 
sheep, goat and pig) are also being operated in different parts of the country at different 
ICAR institutes, State Agricultural / Veterinary Universities and Non -Governmental 
Organizations.  Against the proposal of Rs. 280 crore an outlay of Rs. 225.00 crore BE 
which is 19.64 % lower has been approved.   The Committee noted that programmers 
of Network Project on Animal Genetic Resources, Karnal, National Dairy Research 
Institute, Karnal includi ng Network on Research & Development, Central Sheep and 
Wool Research Institute, Avikanagar, Central Institute for Research on Goats, 
Makhdoom, Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes, Hissar, Network on Buffaloes 
Hissar, National Institute on Animal Nutrition and Physiolgy, Bengaluru, NRC on Camel, 
Bikaner, NRC on Equine, Hissar, Veterinary Type Culture, AICRP on Cattle Research, 
Meerut, Central Avian Research Institute Izatnagar, Project Directorate on Poultry, 
Hyderabad, Network on Gastro Intestinal Parasitism, Izatnager and NRC on Mithuu, 
Jharnapani Nagaland Animal Science Institutes, are likely to be affected due to the 
lower allocation to the tune of 76.47%, 31.35%, 41.66, 50.76, 47.5%, 53.75%, 51.14%, 
34.78%, 45.71%, 33.33%, 37%, 56.75%, 50%, 66.2 5%, funds, respectively.  The 
projects of Animal Science Division assumes special significance, as they directly 
impact small and marginal farmers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to review the proposals of these Centres and consider re  appropriation of 
funds with the Divisions so that the priority research of these Centres do not suffer in 
the current Fiscal. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Agreed with the recommendation  that the research activities of priority concerns 
in Animal Sciences are likely to be affected due to lower allocation of funds. However, 
the proposed research activities to be undertaken in the XII Five Year Plan are as 
follows; 
1. “Embryo bio -technology including cloning, transgenics, modern bio -
technologicaltools including stem cell technology.   

 
 
2. Enhancing livestock productivity viz. broiler and egg production, milk,meatand 
woolproduction including by products through fertility  enhancement and elite 
germplasm production.  
3. Enhancing nutritional value of milk, meat and poultry products through 
incorporation of nutraceuticals and value addition.  
4. Conservation of Animal Genetic Resources and whole genome analysis for 
marker assisted selection.   
5. Sero-surveillance and monitoring of livestock and poultry diseases, bio - 
containment of zoonotic diseases and highly pathogenic diseases for their 
effective handling and control.  
6. Development of accurate diagnostic kits and novel vaccines for disease 
diagnosis and their control.” 
 
These activities will be the priority concern for allocation of funds in the current 
plan period. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para Nos. 1.45 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
FISHERIES 
Recommendation Para No. 4.72 
 
 Against the proposal of Rs. 104.80 crore an outlay of Rs. 85.00 crore  BE has 
approved.  The Committee note that the allocation of Fisheries Division has reduced to 
18.89 % at BE stage and there has an impact of 34.03%, reduction on the funds of 
Central Marine Fisheries Institutes, Kochi, 28.57% funds Central Institute Brack ishwater 
Aquaculture, Chennai, 20.61% Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, Kochi and 
20.83% National Bureau of Fish Genetic Resources, Lucknow.  The shortage of funds 

 
 
will have impact on various important programmes like Networking Programs on 
Mariculture and Aquatic Animal Health Management, Species & System diversification 
and intensification of culture practices in freshwater and brackishwater.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Department to revisit the funds requirements of these 
Centres and I nstitutes and consider their proposals before RE stage.  The Committee 
also noted that out of allocation of Rs. 69 crore the Fisheries Division has been able to 
utilize only Rs. 50.14 crore upto the end of January, 2013 and to monitor the funds 
utilization the Division initiated action on 15 March, 2013.  The Committee desire the 
Department to strengthen the funds utilization mechanism of Fisheries Division so that 
the funds allocated are fully utilized. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Lower allocation of fund may  have some impact on some of the programs like 
Networking Programs on Mariculture and Aquatic Animal Health Management, species 
& system diversification and intensification of culture practices in freshwater and 
brackishwater. Increase in plan funds alloca tion to the Fisheries Division will be 
considered at the time of submission of Revised Estimates depending upon the 
availability of plan funds.  
 Monthly monitoring of utilization of funds are being done at the Division and 
discussions with Directors of th e institutes were held for full utilization of funds. 
Divisional meeting of Directors and Heads of Division of the Fisheries Research 
Institutes was convened by Secretary DARE & DG, ICAR on 15 th March 2013 and after 
discussions during meeting, action was taken for full utilization of Plan funds. Though an 
amount of Rs. 50.14 crore was utilized out of allocation of Rs. 69 crore up to the end of 
January 2013 and by the end of March, 2013 it was Rs. 67.59 crore which was 98% of 
RE. However, steps will be taken  to further strengthen the funds utilization mechanism 
of Fisheries Division so that the funds allocated are fully utilized. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
   - NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
TWELFTH PLAN OUTLAY 
(Recommendation Para No.3.35) 
 
 The Twelfth Plan Document though approved by NDC in December 2012 has 
been delayed considerably and is yet to see the light of day, despite several efforts 
made by the Committee during the previous years, the Department has proposed Rs. 
57,887.21 crore for  the XII Plan.  The Working Group appointed by the Planning 
Commission has also recommended Rs. 55,000 as Twelfth Plan outlay for DARE/ICAR.  
The Department has been communicated the Gross Budgetary support of Rs. 
25,553.00 crore for the XII Plan by the Pl anning Commission on September, 2012.  The 
Committee do not appreciate the downsizing of allocation, if the communicated figure is 
taken on its face value which is less than 1% of Agriculture GDP.  The Eleventh Plan 
document had unequivocally emphasized ag riculture spending on NARS, to be 1% of 
Agriculture GDP. The Committee would also urge upon the Government to allocate 1% 
of Agriculture GDP for Agriculture Research and also rework on financial and other 
requirements of 1% investment of Agriculture GDP on  Research.  The Committee note 
with a great sense of disappointment that the exercise undertaken by the Working 
Group set up by the Planning Commission to suggest plan size, has been proved to be 
futile, as Planning Commission failed to honour the recommen dations made by one of 
its authority.  They therefore, desire the Government to make such examination/scrutiny 
of planning process, more realistic in future. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The report of Working Group on Research and Education constituted for th e 12th 
Five Year Plan was duly considered by deciding the Gross Budgetary Support to the 
Department of Agriculture and Education. The 12 th Five Year Plan document has kept 
the target for expenditure on agricultural research and education at 1% of the 
agricultural GDP.  Such expenditure includes the expenditure incurred by the National 

 
 
Agricultural Research System (NARS) which comprises both the Central and State 
Governments on plan and non -plan side. One of the targets of 11 th Five Year Plan was 
raising the expenditure on agricultural research and education to the level of 1% of the 
agriculture and allied sectors’ GDP.   The 12th Five Year Plan has noted that as  it turns 
out, research spending at 2006 -07 prices, although reaching nearly 0.9% in 2010 -11, 
averaged 0.7% during Eleventh plan. Part of the reason was a shortfall of about 20% in 
the Centre’s Plan expenditure from that originally targeted, but the main reason was 
inadequate spending by States. While Centre’s expenditure (non -Plan & Plan, including 
RKVY) increased 68% in real terms between Tenth and Eleventh Plan periods, 
corresponding States expenditures increased only 22%. In particular, non -Plan 
spending on SAUs increased less than 17%. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
TO THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
CROP SCIENCE 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.58) 
 
 The Committee also notice that only 52.13 % of the funds were utilized by the 
Division upto January, 2013 and the factors responsible for such slow phase were time 
taken in completion of processing of official procedures to procure spill over 
equipments.  To utilize the RE, the Division has made re -appropriation amongst sub -
heads for Grant for Capital/Salary/General through Divisional meetings.  The Committee 
strongly recommend the Department to strengthen the monitoring mechanism of 
expenditure of the Crop Science Division to ensure   that the Budget Estimates 
allocation of the Division are fully utilized in a time bound manner. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Suitable monitoring mechanism of expenditure of all the Schemes under Crop 
Science Division for utilization of funds would be put into place in addition to existing 
mechanism. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
O.M No.7(6)/2013, dated 18th July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.29 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
NEW DELHI;                   BASUDEB ACHARIA 
26 November, 2013                                 Chairman, 
05 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                      Committee on Agriculture 

 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 October, 2013 from 1100 hours to            
1325 hours in Committee Room ‘C’ (G/F), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOKSABHA 
 
2.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
3.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
4.  Smt. Paramjit  Kaur Gulshan 
5.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
6.  Shri P. Kumar 
7.  Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
10.  Shri Kachhadia Naranbhai  
11.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
12.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
               RAJYA SABHA 
13.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
14.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
15.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
16  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
17.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
18.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
19.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri  A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yadhuvanshi - Director 
3. Shri  T.H. Rao   - Additional Director 
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  Then, the Committee took up for consideration the following; 
(i) Memorandum No. 02 pertaining to the draft Report on the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommen dations contained in the 
Forty-Seventh Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2012 -13)  on 
Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education);  
*(ii) xxx   xxx   xxx    xxx  xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
 xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
*(iii) xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
 xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx       xxx  xxx  xxx. 
3. After some del iberations, the Committee approved the categorization of action 
taken replies as shown in the Memoranda and adopted the draft Reports without any 
modification.  They authorized the Chairman to present these Reports to Parliament 
after getting them factually verified from the concerned Departments. 
*4. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
 xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx       xxx  xxx  xxx. 
xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx       xxx  xxx  xxx. 
*5. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx       xxx  xxx  xxx. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
*Matter not related to this Report.  

 
 
APPENDIX  
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2013-14 OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations               27 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Para Nos. 1.4, 2.18, 2.19, 2.20, 2.21, 3.31, 3.32, 3.33,  3.34,  3.36,  
 4.57, 4.59, 4.60, 4.61, 4.62, 4.63, 4.64, 4.65, 4.66, 4.67,  
 4.68, 4.69, 4.70, 4.71 and 4.72. 
 
Total          25 
Percentage                          92.59%  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Total                   NIL 
Percentage                               0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para No.  3.35  
Total            01  
Percentage              03.70% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para No.   4.58           01 
Total            01   
Percentage                   03.70% 
 
 
 