 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
                  
          
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & CO-OPERATION) 
              
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013)  
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2011-2012)} 
 
         
        
 
THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August 2012/Bhadrapada,1934 (Saka) 
 
 
38 

 
 
THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
          
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
                  
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION) 
                  
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2012-2013) 
          
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report of the Committee on 
Agriculture (2011-2012) 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                             30.08.2012 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                           30.08.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
August, 2012/Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)  
 
 


 
 
 
COA No. 261 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
<CONTENTS> 
 
 
                   PAGE 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….    (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………    (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     01 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have   
   been accepted by the Government ……………     16 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government‟s replies …………………..     41 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….     42 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….     50 
 
 
 
                                    ANNEXURES 
 
 
I.  Minutes of the Forty-fourth Sitting of the Committee   52    
held on 28 August, 2012. 
       
II.  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the   54 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report              
 (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture  
(2011-2012).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
        
(i)

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-12) 
  
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
11.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12.  Shri Premdas  
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
15.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
16.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
17.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
18.  Shri Laxman Tudu 
19  Shri D. Venugopal 
20.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
21.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
*23.  Shri Narendra Budania 
*24.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
*26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
*Nominated to the Committee on 04.05.2012. 
(iii) 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri K. Vijayakrishnan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul   - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

 
 
  INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (2011 -2012), having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty -eighth Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Thirty -fourth Repor t of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012 -2013) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation). 
 
2. The Thirty -fourth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2011 -2012) on 
Demands for Grants (2012 -2013) pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 30 April, 2012.  The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received 
on 30 July, 2012. 
 
3. The Report was conside red and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 28 August, 2012. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty -fourth Report of the Committee 
is given in Annexure-II.  
  
 
 
             
                                                                                          
NEW DELHI;                   BASUDEB ACHARIA 
28 August, 2012                            Chairman, 
06 Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)                                     Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
(v) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER I 
Report 
 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of the 
Committee  on Demands for Grants – 2012-13 pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) which was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 April, 2012.   
 
1.2 The Department have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all t he 1 7 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorised as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Recommendation Nos. 2.33, 2.35, 3.44, 3.45, 3.48, 3.49, 3.50, 3.51, 3.52, 
3.53 and 3.54 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:  
Recommendation Nos. Nil  
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
Recommendation Nos. 2.32, 2.34, 3.46, 3.47 and 3.55. 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited.   
Recommendation No. 2.36. 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 

 
 
Government.  In cases  where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation.  The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and Chapter -V of this Report be furnished to them a t an 
early date.  
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.32)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
 
 
1.5 The Committee had repeatedly observed that in  spite of the Department‟s  
utilization of funds being in the range  of 95% of the amount made available to them at  
the revised estimates stage, the Department‟s approved outlay of Rs. 66577.00 crore by 
the Planning Commission during the Eleventh Plan period was not evenly spread.  Th is 
hampered the implementation of schemes of the Department. Keeping the interest of 
Indian Agriculture in mind, the Committee had once more impressed upon all agencies 
concerned with the planning p rocess to adopt a holistic approach and ensure that 
allocation of funds to the Department be evenly spread across all fiscals to avoid 
backloading of Plan funds. This, in the opinion of the Committee , would not only ensure 
that the Department are allocated maximum share of its approved Outlay, thereby 
ensuring optimum utilization of allocated resources, but also  bring the figures of 
approved Outlay and actual allocation on an even keel during the Twelfth Plan period. 
 

 
 
1.6 The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, in their Action Taken N ote, have 
stated that against an approved allocation of Rs.66,577 crore for XI Plan, Planning 
Commission/Finance Ministry provided Rs.61,527.90 crore at RE stage s after taking 
into consideration resource availability and demands from other competing national 
priorities.  Out of  this, an amount of Rs.60,866.232 crore has been utilized by the 
Department for the development of agriculture sector through various schemes 
implemented during the Eleventh Plan period , which works  out to 98.92% of allocated 
resources.  
1.7  The Committee strongly deprecate the reply of the Government which has 
flowed monotonously during the course of the Eleventh Five Year Plan and that 
too bereft of a proper understanding of the Committee ‟s repeated 
recommendations regarding allocation of Plan funds.  What irks the Committee is 
the procedure followed by the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Expenditure) which has resulted not only in variance between 
approved Outlay and actual allocation, but also in lopsided allocati ons.  These 
factors have consequently led to a high performing Department , viz. Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation , not being able to get their full complement of 
earmarked funds, which  proved detrimental to the growth of the agriculture 
sector which is the major constituent of the Indian economy , during the Eleventh 
Plan.  Due to delays in planning and approvals, the first two years of the Plan saw 
very little on implementation front.  This resulted in a cascading effect on the last 
three fiscals wi th funds going abegging as hardly anytime was left for 
implementing the new Schemes .  The reply of the Department is indicative of the 

 
 
fact that they too have reconciled to the existing situation.  What further agitates 
the Committee is the fact that it ap pears as though agriculture is no longer a 
national priority in terms of budgetary allocation.  Taking into consideration the 
precarious condition of Indian agriculture, the Committee recommend that all 
concerned agencies should introspect on the performan ce of this lifeline sector 
during the Eleventh Plan and devise a mechanism which ensures parity between 
earmarked funds and actual allocation for Agriculture Sector during the course of 
the Twelfth Plan.  
 
INVESTMENT IN AGRICULTURE 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.34) 
 
1.8 The Committee while taking into account the increase in public sector investment 
in agriculture being in the range of 17.6% to 22.5% and the Gross Capital formation 
(GCF) in Agriculture &  Allied sectors at 2004 -05 prices for the fiscal 2010 -11 being 
20.1%, were of the strong opinion that this is a meagre amount considering the fact that 
agriculture is the principal source of livelihood for 58% of the populace. The candid 
acceptance of the Department that the present level of public investment is inadequate 
and funds ‟ crunch is retarding the progress of a number of vital schemes further 
buttressed their opinion. Keeping in view the stark reality that almost 60% of the 
population is living on  15% of the GDP, the Committee exhort ed the Planning 
Commission to go for a quantum enhancement of pu blic investment in Agriculture 
Sector during the Twelfth Plan Period. The y also urged the Government to break free 
from the shackles of their extant piece -meal approach towards the agriculture sector 
and go for a holistic approach to ensure a turnaround in this vital sector.   

 
 
1.9 The Department , in the ir Action Taken N ote, have stated that allocation of 
Central Plan Outlay for various sectors is done by the  Planning Commission based on 
the overall resources available at the disposal of the Government, priorities assigned for 
competing sectors/objectives and after wide ranging consultations wi th various 
stakeholders. Due to the low growth rate in the Agriculture Sector during the Tenth Five 
Year Plan, the Government had made conscious efforts in stepping up the allocation to 
Agriculture & Allied sectors during Eleventh Five Year Plan by way of higher allocations 
and also incentivizing the State Governments to enhance public investment in these 
sectors to sustain and maintain capital formation and agriculture infrastructure. This had 
resulted in the  Plan Outlay on various schemes of this Department increasing 
substantially from Rs. 9530.33 crore in 2008 -09 to Rs. 16515.05 crore in 2011-12 (RE). 
For the first year of the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Budget Estimate is Rs. 20208.00  
crore, an increase of 22.36% over the previous year‟s RE. 
 
1.10 Notwithstanding the fact that Plan Outlay of the Department has increased 
from Rs. 9530.33 crore in 2008 -09 to Rs. 16515.05 crore in 2011 -12 and further to 
Rs. 20208 crore in the ongoing Fiscal , the Committee are of the firm opinion that 
the budgetary allocations are meager in view of the fact that the Indian economy 
is still a predominantly agrarian economy and the Agriculture Sector continues to 
be the principal source of livelihood for 58% of the population.  The Committee 
also wonder as to how the Government propose to achieve their objective of food 
security for all in the absence of even minimal  funding for the agriculture sector.  
They, therefore, impress upon the Planning Commission and the Government to 

 
 
at least now realize that starving the Agriculture Sector of funds would have a 
debilitating effect on our eco nomy, which is already reeling under severe 
recession.  The Committee, therefore, recommend substantially enhanced 
allocation for the Agriculture Sector during the Twelfth Plan. This would, in the 
present bleak scenario, work in a two -pronged manner by not only improving the 
lot of those presently engaged in the vocation, but would also ensure that the 
youth are also drawn towards the profession of agriculture.  The Committee are 
pretty sanguine that if the Government pays he ed to their recommendation, a 
turn-around in the fortunes of the agriculture sector would not be far off  and it 
would in its wake also expedite a turn around in the Country‟s economy.   
 
MAJOR INITIATIVES FOR TWELFTH PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.35) 
 
1.11 Noting with appreciation  that the Department had finally acted upon the 
recommendation contained in their Twen ty-second Report about pruning the number of 
Schemes for the Twelfth Plan  and the 53 Schemes  of fiscal 2011 -12 had been 
converged into  7 National Missions , viz. National Mission on Seeds and Planting 
Material; National Food Security Mission; Mission on Oilseeds and Oil -Palm; National 
Horticulture Mission; National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture;  National Mission on 
Farm Mechanisation and Energy; and National Mission o n Agriculture Extension a nd 
Technology, t he Committee  had, therefore, impressed upon the planners to accord 
clearance to these revolutionary propos als at the earliest and ensure their  
implementation in quick time.   
 

 
 
1.12   The Department, in their Action Taken Note , have stated that approval of any 
new scheme is through an established procedure, which entails appraisal of the 
proposed scheme through comments of the relevant Departments/Ministries of the 
Government and the Planning Commissi on.  The concern of the Committee was 
conveyed by DAC to the Planning Commission.  „In principle approval of Planning 
Commission has been received in respect of National Food Security Mission, National 
Horticulture Mission, National Mission on Agricultural  Extension & Technology, National 
Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm, National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture and 
Farmers Income Security Scheme‟.  The proposals have to be evaluated through EFC 
before obtaining approval of CCEA.  Efforts of DAC are to co mplete the process in the 
shortest possible time through constant monitoring of various stages of appraisal. 
 
1.13 The Committee are highly perturbed over the turn of events beyond the 
pruning down of the number of Schemes and apprehend a repeat of the Eleventh 
Plan.  We are half -way through the first year of the Twelfth Plan and the Plan 
Document is yet to be finalised.  The EFC appraisals, etc. are all subsequent 
exercises.  Apparently, things are not moving in the right direction and at the 
desired pace.  The Committee while keeping their fingers crossed, exhort the 
Planners and the Government to work over time to clear the uncertainty over the 
Twelfth Plan so that not only DAC but all ministries/departments have their task 
cut out and are able to work in right earnest towards implementation of their 
Schemes without any further loss of time. 
  

 
 
MAJOR INITIATIVES FOR TWELFTH PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.36) 
 
1.14. Having observed the  cascading effect of delay in finalisation of Eleventh Plan 
Document in terms of staggering of timelines and backloading of funds, the Committee , 
in their Twenty -Second Report , had recommended to the Planning Commission and 
other concerned agencies to streamline the plannin g process and ensure timely 
finalization of the Twelfth Plan D ocument and convey the same to all line 
ministries/department by 31  December, 2011 so that they are able to complete all 
necessary formalities at their end in the last quarter of the fiscal 2011 -12 and be in all 
readiness to implement the Twelfth Plan Schemes from day one , i.e. 1 April, 2012.  On 
being apprised that the Twelfth Plan Document is yet to be finalized and would take 
another three to four months before it is placed before the National  Development 
Council, the Committee  recommended that all concerned should keep in view the 
detrimental effect of this time consuming process on the development of all sectors and 
undertake concrete steps to get the Twelfth Plan Document finalized within th e next 
three months. 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Note , the Ministry  have stated that the Planning 
Commission is in process of finalizing the Twelfth Plan.  Approach Paper for  the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan has been approved by the Full Planning Commission.  Effort is being 
made to complete the process at an early date. 
 
1.16 As already, stated in the previous Recommendation , the Committee are 
deeply concerned at the malaise afflicting the planning process in vogue . The 

 
 
Committee not wanting the Twelfth Plan Document to suffer the fate of the 
Eleventh Plan had in the ir Thirty-fourth Report recommended that all concerned 
agencies should get the Twelfth Plan Document finalized within the next three 
months.  However, much to  their dismay the reply of the D epartment reveals that 
nothing tangible has been achieved during the said period .  The fact that the 
Planning Commission is still in the process of finalizing the Twelfth Plan when we 
are almost at the RE stage of the First Year of the Plan does not augur well.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation for speedy finalization and 
implementation of the Twelfth Plan.   They would also like to be apprised of the 
extant position in the matter. 
 
MARKETING RESEARCH AND INFORMATION NETWORK (MRIN) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.46) 
 
1.17 Noting the reluctance of the States to avail central funds for establishing a 
nationwide information network under a standalone Marketing Research and 
Information Network, the Committee had while whole-heartedly supporting the stand of 
the Department for merging this Scheme under RKVY, as  States have some amount of 
freedom under RKVY, asked the Department to pursue the fructification of merger of the 
Scheme with RKVY. 
 
1.18 The Department , in their A ction Taken N ote, have stated that for the Eleventh 
Plan, a total of Rs. 20.00 crore was available for implementation of the MRIN Scheme, 
with a Plan Outlay of Rs. 15.00 crore and Rs. 5.00 crore already available with NIC from 
savings of the Ninth  and Tenth Plan period. 590 new computers were sanctioned 

 
 
against the target of 360 computers and 574 old computers (provided during 2000 -02) 
were sanctioned for replacement. However, the budget provided for new computers and 
replacement of old compu ters was not utilized due to availability of funds of with NIC 
from savings from Ninth and Tenth Plan due to reduction of computer costs.  An amount 
of Rs.14.10 crore was, therefore, utilized during the Eleventh Plan against the available 
funds of Rs. 15 cr ore that included funds  of Rs.5.56 crore released to the States for 
undertaking market -led extension activities, i.e. Training of farmers and Training of 
Trainers, etc. as per the proposals received from the States. The under -utilization of 
funds was due to availability of funds with NIC. 
It was further stated that efforts have been made to intensify activities under the 
Scheme. The AGMARKNET portal has been harmonized with State portals. The 
database developed is also serving various Commodity Directorates of the Department 
of Agriculture & Co -operation by providing customized hyperlinks to data pertaining to 
specific comm odities. The dissemination of market information is being made in 
association with other mobile service providers like REUTERS, I FFCO Kisan Sanchar 
Ltd., NOKIA, BSNL, etc. through SMS to the farmers and other beneficiaries.  
 
1.19 The reply of the Government while giving a detailed explanation on the 
reasons responsible for under -utilization of funds during the course of the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan under the Scheme of Marketing Research and 
Information Network (MRIN) is completely silent on t he aspect of merger of this 
Scheme with the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY).  The Committee find this 
inexplicable as in the first place, this idea was mooted by the Department 

 
 
themselves.  Deprecating the incomplete reply of the Department, the Commi ttee 
reiterate their recommendation of merger of MRIN with RKVY at the earliest and 
also desire to be apprised about the progress achieved , within three months of 
the presentation of this Report to Parliament.  They also expect the Department to 
be careful  while furnishing any information to the Committee and ensure that 
such cases are not repeated.   
 
GRAMEEN BHANDARAN YOJANA 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.47) 
 
1.20 Concerned to note that the data furnished by the Department on  physical 
achievement of the Grameen Bhandaran Yojana only mentioned the number of 
completed godowns and total capacity while remaining silent on the capacity utilization 
of these godowns  as also k eeping in view that the increased production of  foodgrains 
witnessed during the last two  fiscals was creating storage problems for Central and 
State Governments, the Committee had asked the D epartment to collect the capacity 
utilisation data at the earliest and furnish to them so that a proper and accurate 
assessment of this Scheme could be done. 
 
1.21 The Department , in their Action Taken N ote, have stated that „Grameen 
Bhandaran Yojana‟ was launched w.e.f. 01.04.2001 and since its inception up to 31 st 
May, 2012, 28374 godowns having a capacity of 324.31 lakh tonnes  with subsidy of 
Rs. 878.26 crore have been sanctioned all over the country. During the Eleventh Plan 
period from April, 2007 to March, 2012, 13719 rural godown projects having a capacity 
of 135.01 lakh tonnes have been sanctioned under the scheme against the target of 90 

 
 
lakh tones.   Since this S cheme is construction linked and capital investment linked 
subsidy is provided under the S cheme, data regarding capacity utilization of rural 
godown is not maintained. However, report of the Evaluation  of the Cent ral Sector 
Scheme of construction of Rural Godown carri ed out in 2005 mentions that 95 % of 
godowns are used to store agriculture output and only 5 % store both input and output. 
 
1.22  The Committee are pained at the reply of the Government which , in their 
opinion, is indicative of their lackadaisical attitude towards the Committee‟s 
instant recommendation.  Further, they do not at all buy the argument that as the 
Gramen Bhandaran Yojana is construction linked and capital investment linked 
subsidy is provided under the Scheme, data regarding capacity utilization of rural 
godowns is not maintained.   Unless and until capacity utilisation is known how 
are Government planning capacity augmentation under this Scheme, year after 
year, defies logic. T he Committee recommend that the Government get this data 
collected immediately and furnish the same to the Committee post haste  so as to 
facilitate a q uantitative and qualitative analysis of development of storage 
infrastructure.   
  
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.50) 
 
 
1.23 In order to motivate the States/UTs to increase their participation in the Scheme 
and avail more central funds a s dynamic and reliable partners , the Committee had 
recommended the Department to take into con sideration their views on this S cheme 
and to incorporate the same to the extent possible. They further desired that the reach 

 
 
of this Scheme be expanded  from the present 604 ATMA s in 28 States and 3 UTs,  so 
as to ensure all States/UTs are covered by this S cheme before the culmination of the 
Twelfth Plan. 
 
1.24 The Government, in their Action taken Note, have stated that feedback and views 
of the States/UTs are obtained regularly in Review Meetings, Zonal input conferences 
and National Conferences held annually before Rabi and Kharif seasons and by 
telephonic conversations.  Their suggestions for further improvement in implementation 
of the Scheme  are being incorporated in the Twelfth Plan  EFC. All the rural districts 
across the country are to be covered under ATMA Scheme. The number of ATMAs has 
been increased from 604 to 614 during 2012 -13 in 28 States and 3UTs. However, three 
UTs, namely Lakshadweep, Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli have not been 
responding to ATMA Scheme since inception, i.e. 2005-06.  
 
1.25 The Committee appreciate that the Government have initiated action upon 
their recommendation for increasing the coverage of the ATMA Scheme from the 
present 604 in 28 States and 3 UTs to 614 during 2012 -13 and also deciding to 
bring all rural districts under the ATMA umbrella. The Committee, however, find it 
inexplicable as to why the UTs of Lakshadweep, Daman & D iu and Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli have been unresponsive to the ATMA Scheme since its inception, i.e. 2005-
06.  They would, therefore, like the Department to apprise them at the earliest of 
the reasons due to which these thr ee UTs have chosen not to benefit from this 
Scheme. 

 
 
DEVELOPMENT AND STRENGTHENING OF SEED INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES 
FOR PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF QUALITY SEEDS 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.55) 
 
 
1.26 Having been informed about the inadequacy of the present infrastructure of seed 
testing, i.e. Seed Testing Laboratories, the Committee had desired the Department to 
work on strengthening this infrastructure at the earliest and get cleared the Scheme of 
National Mission on Seeds  in quick time. To enable t he farmers in being able to get 
firsthand knowledge about the quality of a particular seed before investing in it, the 
Committee had also desired  the Department to establishing Seed Testing Laboratories 
at more than one location in a district depending upo n the geographical size of the 
district and apprise them of the steps taken in this regard.  
 
 
1.27  In their Action Taken Note , the Department have stated that in order to ensure 
availability of quality seeds it has been providing financial assistance for  
strengthening/establishing of Seed Testing Laboratories under the component “Quality 
control arrangements on seeds‟ of the Central Sector Scheme “Development and 
Strengthening of Infrastructure Facilities for Production and Distribution of Quality 
Seeds”.  The proposed sub -mission on “Seeds and Planting Material” of the new 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme “National Mission on Agricultural Extension and 
Technology”, whose approval process is being expedited will have a more focused 
approach to whole gamut of activities pertaining to Seed Sector. 
 
 

 
 
1.28 Taking cue from the admission of the Department that the present 
infrastructure of Seed Testing is Seed Testing Laboratories is inadequate, the 
Committee desire that the Scheme of National Mission on Seeds be cleared in 
quick time and the Department establish Seed Testing Laboratories at more than 
one location in a district, depending on the geographical size of the district.  In 
their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department have sta ted 
that they propose to have more focused approach to the whole gamut of activities 
pertaining to the seed sector in the proposed sub  mission on “Seeds and 
Planting Material” of the new Centrally Sponsored Scheme „ National Mission on 
Agricultural Extension and Technology‟ for which the processes/approvals are 
being expedited.  However, the reply is silent on the aspect of strengthening of 
Seed Testing Laboratories.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to  
pursue speedy implementation of the above -mentioned Scheme and also inform 
the Committee on how they propose to strength en the extant system of Seed 
Testing mechanisms in the country.  
 
  
  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS) 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.33) 
 
The Committee also observe that the Department have not been able to entirely 
utilize even this reduced allocation during the last five fiscals.  Being well aware of t he 
reasons for this, they exhort the Department to take steps to utilize even the reduced 
allocations to the hilt as in the entire Eleventh Plan period, the Department consistently 
failed to utilize the reduced allocations completely, by motivating the Sta tes/UTs to end 
their proposals as well as utilization certificates timely, thereby ensuring uniform pace of 
utilization of funds in each fiscal year.  They also desire the Department to incorporate 
the views of States/UTs while drawing up the modalities of  a Scheme.  This in their 
considered opinion would ensure active participation of States/UTs in all Central 
Schemes as well as ensure optimum utilization of scarce resources.  They would like to 
be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
  
Reply of the  Government  
 
 Out of the total Plan allocation of Rs.61,527.90 crore for the XIth Plan, an amount 
of Rs.60,866.23 crore was utilized by the Department, which works out to 98.92% of the 
allocated resources. 
 
 As regards incorporating views of the States whi le drawing up the modalities of a 
scheme, the same is followed and the guidelines issued accordingly.  To illustrate, 
RKVY is a State Plan Scheme which provides complete flexibility to States to plan and 
execute projects and intervention as per their local priorities and needs, keeping in view 
their agro-climatic/ technological capabilities. 
  
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 

 
 
 
(MAJOR INITIATIVES FOR TWELFTH PLAN) 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.35) 
 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the Department had finally acted upon 
their recommendation contained in their Twenty -Second Report of reducing the number 
of Schemes for the Twelfth Plan.  This was based on the admission of the Department 
that due to good response it had elicited from States/UTs from Rashtriya Krishi Vigyan 
Yojana (RKVY) which under its umbrella had a plethora of Schemes and allowed 
States/UTs a certain degree of flexibility and a sense of participation and partnership as 
well.  From 53 Schemes in the fiscal 2011 -12, the Department have pruned it down to 
Seven National Missions to address issues pertaining to Agriculture.  These are (i) 
National Mission on Seeds and Planting Material; (ii) National Food Security Mission; 
(iii) Mission on Oilseeds and Oil -Palm; (iv) National Horticulture Mission; (v) National 
Mission on Sustainable Agriculture; (vi) National Mission on Farm Mechanisation and 
Energy; and (vii) National Mission o n Agriculture Extension and Technology.  The 
Department‟s contention is that by reducing the number of Schemes being implemented 
by them they would be able to avoid overlapping as well as duplication of Schemes.  
They therefore, desire upon the planners to  accord clearance to these revolutionary 
proposals at the earliest and ensure its implementation in quick time.  They desire to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 Approval of any new scheme is through  an established procedure, which entails 
appraisal of the proposed scheme through comments of the relevant 
Departments/Ministries of the Government and Planning Commission.  The concern of 
the Committee was conveyed by DAC to Planning Commission.  „In prin ciple approval 
of Planning Commission has been received in respect of National Food Security 
Mission, National Horticulture Mission, National Mission on Agricultural Extension & 
Technology, National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm, National Mission for Sust ainable 

 
 
Agriculture and Farmers Income Security Scheme‟.  The proposals have to be 
evaluated through EFC before obtaining approval of CCEA.  Efforts of DAC are to 
complete the process in the shortest possible time through constant monitoring of 
various stages of appraisal. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
(NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY MISSION) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.44) 
 
The National Food Security Mission (NFSM) is under implementation w.e.f. Rabi 
2007-08 in pursuance o f a resolution accepted by the National Development Council 
(NDC) to enhance the production of Rice by 10 million tonnes, of Wheat by 8 million 
tonnes and Pulses by 2 million tonnes by the end of the Eleventh Plan. The mission has 
three components namely – NFSM Rice, NFSM Wheat and NFSM Pulses and is being 
implemented in 482 identified districts of 19 States of the Country. The Committee 
observe that during the last five fiscals BE amount was curtailed at RE stage and the 
actual utilization was lower in com parison to the RE amounts. The Department have  
attributed the underutilization of funds to  the fact that 10% of the allocated funds are 
allocated to the North Eastern Region  (NER) with coverage restricted to just two States 
i.e. Assam and Tripura and th eir  inability to absorb the allocated funds in view of the 
unique geographical location of the North Eastern Region. The Committee desire the 
Department to rework the guidelines of the said Scheme for the NER so as to enhance 
its coverage in the region. B y doing so, the 10% allocation for NER could be optimally 
utilized, thereby ensuring the entire allocation is utilized at least in the next Five Year 
Plan. 

 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As desired by the Committee, all the Northern Eastern States have been covered 
under NFSM during 2012-13. 
 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
 
(NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY MISSION) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.45) 
 
The Committee laud the Department on the success of the Scheme in the fiscal 
2011-12 whereby the production of food grains reached a record level of 250.4 million 
tonnes which is 6.4 million tonnes higher than the Planning  Commission‟s projected 
demand of 24 4.0 million tonnes. The silver lining being the record increase of about 
20% in rice production in the Eastern Region in comparison to the production of 2010 -
11. Keeping in view the potential of this Scheme in changing production/ productivity 
and performa nce in agriculture sector, the Committee desire the Government to 
increase the coverage of this Scheme from the present 482 identified districts in 19 
States to cover the entire Country. They are pretty sanguine that by enhancing its 
coverage the Country would be closer to attaining, if not complete food security, at least 
in the Twelfth Plan Period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As desired by the Committee, 27 States of the Country have been covered under 
NFSM during 2012-13. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 

 
 
 
STRENGTHENING AND MODERNIZATION OF PEST MANAGEMENT IN INDIA 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.48) 
 
The major thrust area of plant protection is promotion of Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM), ensuring availability of safe and quality pesticides for sustaining 
crop production from the ravages of pests and diseases, streamlining quarantine 
measures for preventing entry of exotic pests and human resource development in plant 
protection skills.  The Committee, however, are concerned to note that during the last 
five fiscals out of the RE amount of Rs.112.57 crore the actual expenditure stands at 
only Rs.80.01 crore which is 71.08% of the R E.  The reasons attributed for this are 
delay in acquisition of land for new Central Integrated Pest Management Centres/ 
Locust Control Offices etc.  These procedural delays have made our agriculturists 
vulnerable to the threat of pest attacks which could be calamitous for our agricultural 
production that really causes the Committee deep anguish.  They, therefore, urge the 
Department to accord top priority to this Scheme and ensure all procedural aspects are 
taken care off in real quick time and ensure smoo th implementation of the Scheme in 
the Twelfth Plan period, which could then reflect positively on the optimum utilization of 
sanctioned funds as also reflect in reducing the crop losses as a result thereof.  They 
would await the details of the promised ne w initiatives/activities being proposed in the 
Twelfth Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
PROMOTION OF INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT 
The following activities are proposed to be undertaken to utilize  maximum funds during 
the 12th five year plan. An allocation of  Rs.35 crore has been made in  BE 2012 -13 for 
implementation of the scheme.  
 
S. No.                  ACTIVITIES 
1. Continuation of CIPMCs and existing activities 
2. e-pest surveillance 
3. Recruitment of Pest Scouts through service provider 

 
 
4. Construction of CIPMC Buildings 
7. Opening of  Four New CIPMCs 
6. Establishment of Pest Diagnostic Unit at five regional CIPMCs 
7. Pest surveillance Unit of Invasive Pest Species 
8. Procurement of Laboratory Equipments- 
9. Procurement of New Vehicles-(17 vehicle) 
10. Additional Posts- 252 Posts 
11. Rodent Management 
12. Capacity Building Programme in IPM 
13. Farmer to Farmer IPM Field School 
14. Coordination with Research & Extension Agencies and Other 
stakeholders 
15. Crop Pest surveillance and Farmers Field School activities in Scheduled 
Dessert Area (SDA) through Locust Warning Organization (LWO) staff. 
16. Outsources of Services/ Services to be outsourced. 
17. Data Management cum Pest Forecasting Unit 
18. Creation of Emergency Mitigation and preparedness cell for ensuing 
pests 
  
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
 
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.49) 
 
The Committee note that despite the BE for the fiscal 2011 -12 getting doubled to 
Rs.500.00 Crore for BE of Rs.250.00 Crore for the preceding fiscal, the same old story 
of BE being pruned at RE stage and ac tual expenditure being still lower in comparison 
to the actual allocation. This is in spite of the fact that the scheme was fully operational 
on 19 th March, 2010. These repetitive irritants retarding the progress of this vital 
Scheme which aims at making e xtension system farmer driven and farmer accountable 
by way of new institutional arrangements for technology dissemination in the form of 
ATMA truly enrages the Committee, as lower utilization of funds year after year directly 
lowers dissemination of technology to farmers.  
 
 They further note that had the new five year plan started from 1 st April, 2012, the 
Department could have broken free of the jinxed past and taken up the cudgels on 
behalf of the toiling farming community, removal all obstacles hinderi ng the smooth 

 
 
implementation of this scheme and ensure optimum utilization of funds thereby directly 
impacting the farming community in a positive manner. They, therefore, desire the 
Department to take a proactive approach in the matter and do justice to t he farming 
community at large.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The financial progress under Extension Reforms Scheme is given hereunder: -  
         
(Rs. in Crore) 
 Year B.E. R.E. Release Percentage 
2005-06  45.00 45.00 43.90 97.55% 
2006-07 75.00 50.00 48.27 64.36% 
2007-08 230.00 150.00 155.81 67.7 % 
2008-09 298.00 198.00 193.01 64.77% 
2009-10 298.00 188.98 178.59 59.93% 
2010-11 250.00 220.00 240.28 96.11% 
2011-12 500.00 458.60 434.01 86.81% 
2012-13 600.00    
 
The above table reveals that there has generally been a consistently increasing 
trend in expenditure. During the year 2011-12, 94.63% expenditure (as against RE) was 
incurred despite Assembly Elections in 5 States, which impeded deployment of 
manpower during the period under report.  
It is also submitted that regular follow -up has been done with States for smooth 
implementation of Modified ATMA Scheme through review meetings; conferences; 
workshops; and written, telephonic &  electronic communication.  Consequently, State 
Extension Work Plans (SEWPs) from 27 States & 2 UTs were got approved by State 
Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC)/ Technical Committee (TC) during 2011 -12.   25 
States have so far reported deployment of nearly 12000 personnel at different levels.  
 The Government has been trying its utmost to strengthen Extension Reforms. A  
National Mission on Agricultural Extension Technology has been proposed during 12 th 
Plan. The Mission will focus on disseminating timely information and appropriate 

 
 
technology among farmers through the structure of ATMA and Block Technology Teams 
(BTT).  EFC for the proposed mission is under preparation.  
Expenditure on extension activities has risen by 9 times over a period of 5 years 
since 2006 -07.  With the deployment of manpower and commensurate increase in 
extension activities, percentage of expenditure as against BE & RE has increased 
considerably. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
 
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.50) 
 
 Having recognized the pressing need to motivate the States/UTs to increase 
their participation in the Scheme and avail more central funds, the Committee 
recommends the Department to also take into consideration the views of the 
implementing agencies i.e. t he States/UTs and try to incorporate their views on this 
scheme to the possible extent. This in their opinion would ensure that States/UTs 
become dynamic participants and then attain the status of being reliable partners in 
implementing this Scheme. They f urther desire that the reach of this pivotal Scheme be 
widened from the present 604 ATMAs in 28 States and 3 UTs, so as to ensure that all 
States/UTs are covered by this Scheme before the culmination of the Twelfth Plan.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Feedback & views of the States/UTs are obtained regularly in Review Meetings, 
Zonal input conferences and National Conferences held annually before Rabi and Kharif 
seasons and also by talking to the officers concerned in the States/ UTs on phone.  
Their suggestions for further improvement in  implementation of the  Scheme are being 
incorporated in the 12th Plan EFC.  
 

 
 
The Government has already decided to cover all the rural districts across the 
country under ATMA Scheme. Number of ATMAs has been increased from 604 to 614 
during 2012 -13 in 28 States & 3UTs. However, three UTs namely Lakshadweep, 
Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli have not been responding to ATMA Scheme 
since inception i.e. 2005-06.  
 
                    
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of Chapter I of this 
Report.   
 
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.51) 
 
 They also note that only half of the States/UTs i.e. 14 out of the 28 States/UTs 
having furnished their study reports on the Scheme to the Department, the Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation made in their Twenty -second Report that the 
remaining 14 recalcitrant States/UTs be politely but firmly requested to get the needful 
done at the earliest and forward the same to the Department as monitoring and 
evaluation of a Scheme helps to iron out its inherent weaknesses and increase its 
viability. Las t, but not least, the Committee would also like to be apprised about the 
action initiated by the Department on the recommendations contained in the report on 
Impact Assessment of Establishment of Agri -Clinic and Agri-Business Centres Scheme 
done by M/s Spe ctrum India, Planning, Faridabad during 2011 -12; and Evaluation of 
Kisan Call Centres by Administrative Staff college of India, Hyderabad. They also desire 
to be apprised of the recommendations of three separate Committees which evaluated 
the function of MANAGE, Hyderabad, along with the action taken thereon.  
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
ATMA Scheme 
 
Eighteen States/UTs have reported that they have completed 3 rd Party M&E so 
far. Apart from above, four States/ UTs namely Meghalaya, Jharkhand, Bihar and 
Puducherry have reported that 3 rd Party Evaluation is under progress in their States. 
Rest of the States are being pursued and reminded regularly.   
 
ACABC Scheme 
 
The impact assessment of the ACABC Scheme was conducted by M/s. Global Agri 
Systems Private Ltd. New Delhi during 2007 -08. Based upon the findings and 
recommendations of the Study Report, the following actions have been initiated:-  
 Eligibility under the scheme is  now open to Biological Science graduates with 
post graduation in agriculture & allied subjects from SAUs/ Central Agricultural 
Universities/ Universities recognized by ICAR/ UGC, diploma / post graduate 
diploma holders in agriculture and allied subjects f rom State Agricultural 
Universities and also Intermediate (i.e. plus two) level with agriculture courses 
(subject to 55% marks). 
 Subsidy pattern has been simplified from existing “capital and interest subsidy” to  
“composite subsidy”, which is 44% of proje ct cost for women, SC/ST & all 
categories of candidates from NE and Hill states and 36% of project cost for all 
others. 
 Training cost has been enhanced to Rs.35000/ - per trainee for two month 
duration programme. 
 Cost ceiling of projects has been revised to Rs.20 lakh for individual‟s project and 
to Rs.100 lakh for a group project (minimum of five individuals). 

 
 
 Additional amount of 10% on food, accommodation, honorarium, training 
expenditure and handholding cost in NE and Hill States has been included under 
the Scheme. 
 Awareness programme for the Banks & other stakeholders and Refresher 
Training Courses for the successful agri-preneurs have been initiated. 
 Greater involvement of State functionaries, ICAR Institutes, SAUs PRIs etc has 
been provided in the Sche me for monitoring and certification of the agri -ventures 
set up under the Scheme to ensure greater ownership by the State.   
KISAN CALL CENTRES: 
Based upon the findings and recommendations of the Impact Assessment Study 
conducted by Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad, following actions 
have been initiated:- 
 The old toll free number 1551 has been switched over to the new toll free number 
1800-181-1551 which is configured for wider accessibility to callers of all telecom 
service providers  including mobile phones and the same has been publicized 
through important national dailies and Audio/Video Spots through Doordarshan.  
All India Radio as well as private Channels. 
 KCC locations have been set up in appropriate room size and have improved 
infrastructure and related facilities now for effective handling of calls.  In all the 
KCC locations, KCC agents from the same States who are proficient in 
communication in local dialects have been positioned.  
 The service condition of KCC agents have been  improved by increasing their 
salary  from Rs 10,000/- to Rs. 15,000/- and Rs.18000/- to supervisors along with 
PF and ESIC contribution. A provision of annual increase of 7.5% is also 
provided for better performing KCC agents who are continuing in service for more 
than one year.     
 The web based software developed for backend support has provision for 
creating a unique caller ID to the farmers calling the KCC to retrieve the frequent 

 
 
callers to reduce time of conversation. Also there are provisions to cap ture the 
UID number.  
 In addition to above, following state of the art technological features are being 
incorporated  under Kisan Call Centres  through new service provider, i.e. IFFCO 
Kisan Sanchar Ltd (IKSL):  
o Voice/Media Gateways (IPPBX based decentralized system).  
o Dedicated MPLS leased line network with dedicated bandwidth.  
o Call barging. 
o 100% call recording and call reply  
o SMS to caller farmers providing a gist of advisories given to them on phone.  
o Voice mail system for recording farmer‟s q ueries during idle time of KCC or 
during call lines busy, with provision for call back to the caller.  
o Soft phones in every personal computer with caller ID facility.  
o Continuous up scaling the knowledge of CCAs.  
o Facility of video conferencing.   
o Modified Call Escalation Matrix 
o Centralized monitoring of KCCs at different locations.  
MANAGE: 
Recommendations  of the three separate Committees which evaluated the function of 
MANAGE, Hyderabad along with the action taken thereon is given below:   
 
I. Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI) Report on evaluation of 
training activities of MANAGE 1985-86 to 1994-95:   
 
  
 
 

 
 
 
Recommendations Action Taken 
1.1 At each level there 
should be a training 
coordinator for 
agricultural and 
extension departments. 
All training is processed 
through State Training 
Coordinator 
 
During the last one decade, state level training 
 institutions termed as SAMETIs have been 
established 
 in many of the states. As such, the training 
coordination  
for each of these states is assigned to SAMETIs and 
the  
Directors of SAMETI act as the National Training  
Coordinator and facilitator for MANAGE training 
programmes. This system has been established and is 
functioning effectively. 
1.2. MANAGE facilitator s 
could be designated as 
training coordinators 
1.3 MANAGE should 
prepare a write up for 
each programme to be 
sent to State 
Departments and other 
organizations in advance 
This is being done. The details are communicated 
through  
write ups well in advance to the sponsors / Head of  
Departments to identify appropriate participants 
for the programmes, so that they in turn can depute 
 appropriate persons. 
1.4 Technical component in 
management training be 
increased and both 
meshed together 
Technical and managerial components for the 
 training programmes are well planned to meet the 
 objectives of the training programmes based on the  
 feed back of the participants and review of the course 
1.5 More workshops / 
seminars for top level  
functionaries as this 
would help in transfer of 
learning to the field staff. 
Workshops and seminars for top level functionaries are 
 an integral part of MANAGE training programmes with  
specific reference to bigger projects like National  
Agricultural Technology Project, Extension 
 Reforms, Participatory Adaptive Research,  
 Agri. Entrepreneurship Development, National 
 Horticulture Mission etc.  
 
1.6 Provide additional 
reading material on ASA, 
PRA, FSBE. 
The concepts like ASA, PRA, FSBE and others are 
 the core training areas of MANAGE and advanced 
 reading / study material and training material 
 have been developed internally and supplied to the  
 participants.  
1.7 More case studies be 
prepared 
Case studies have been developed. However, there is 
 need to increase the number of cases in each 
functional 
 area.  
1.8 Selection of task for 
group work during 
training should be job 
oriented 
Normally in all the courses the group tasks assigned 
relate 
to the job situations of the majority of the participants.  
  

 
 
1.9 Develop training 
modules for village level 
extension workers 
MANAGE is able to reach out to develop the training  
modules for village level functionaries through capacity 
building of the state level trainers and master trainers  
from SAMETIs, SAUs, KVKs etc. 
1.10 Joint training 
programmes for officers 
from service agencies 
like seeds, irrigation, 
legal and finance. 
Progressive farmers 
should be invited to such 
programmes. 
This is being done 
1.11 Programmes for 
improving coordination 
between a gricultural 
departments and 
agricultural universities 
This is being done, more so under extension reforms 
which focuses on integrated delivery of technical 
advise 
 based on SREPs. 
1.12 Follow up workshops 
after six months to one 
year of training 
This is being done with reference to specific projects.  
In future, it will be increased further.  
1.13 Prepare case studies 
and reading material 
based on the faculty 
experience dealing with 
officials of various 
agencies all over India 
This is being done as already indicated under Item 
No.1.7. Research proposals are being prepared by 
MANAGE faculty and are being submitted to the  
Academic Committee for approval. After approval, 
these are submitted to EC for funds.  
1.14 A separate research fund 
be created. Research 
proposals should be duly 
approved by a specially 
constituted research 
committee within 
MANAGE.  
1.15 Standardized format for 
participants feedback 
should be 
institutionalized.  
MANAGE has been using standardized format for 
feedback  
from the participants.  
 
II. RAU Committee Report on evaluation of training activities of MANAGE  - 1995 
to 1998: 
 
Recommendations Action Taken 
2.1 Training can be strengthened by 
ascertaining needs of the 
farmers, their research priorities 
Being done. Participatory approaches are 
being used to ascertain the training  
needs of participants and other stake holders  

 
 
and general trend in the 
management of extension 
systems.  
in the system to plan and implement the  
extension programmes at the district level 
and below. 
2.2 Secretaries and Directors of 
agriculture can be brought 
together for short -term brain 
storming sessions. 
Head of Departments of Agriculture and 
allied departments are being invited to brain 
storm in the project specific areas at MANAGE 
and regional level. 
2.3 Action research should be an 
integral part of the MANAGE 
Action research has been an integral part 
of MANAGE to monitor projects. Guidelines 
on Watershed Development, PAR, SREP 
and institutionalization of ATMAs have been  
some of the major outcomes of action  
research in MANAGE.  
2.4 Regular contact with all the 
participants who have been 
trained by them. 
Regular contact is being maintained with the  
project specific participants. Directors are  
being contacted during the follow up 
workshops  
2.5 Develop training programme in 
management of new farming 
system, post harvest 
technologies, value adding 
processes and the like 
Subjects like farming systems, post  
harvest technology, value addition 
processes, supply chain management, 
market led extension are some of the 
contemporary subjects which are currently  
dealt in MANAGE training  
programmes.  MANAGE has taken up 
consultancy with experts in the concerned 
 subject areas and other faculty in the state. 
2.6 The faculty in the existing 
institutions in States should 
receive special attention 
Capacity building of the state level 
institutions including SAMETIs, SAUs and 
KVKs is taken up. State level facilitators are  
being trained through exclusive programmes 
on Training of Trainers  / Facilitators  
Development. 
2.7 The system of training of trainers 
should be revived and vitalized  
2.8 MANAGE should study 
organizations and management 
structures of different 
organizations  
O&M studies were taken up by MANAGE 
faculty as a result of which, the concept of 
ATMA and SAMETIs were conceived 
and currently SAMETIs and ATMAs 
are established in most of the states.  
2.9 MANAGE should undertake 
studies of the ways in which the 
farmers are managing with 
indigenous technologies with 
varied success 
MANAGE has been able to reach out to the  
farmers level through various  
interventions including preparation of  
SREPs wherein ITKs also were  
collected, documented and disseminated.  

 
 
2.10 A certain period within a year 
needs to be allocated where the 
staff members can pursue their 
subjects in -depth and produce 
papers on the a rea of their 
interest 
Professional development is a continuous 
process and hence specific time frame needs 
to be allotted to the entire faculty to take 
up self development through in depth  
studies in their areas of interest. A balance is  
to be struck for research and training for 
MANAGE faculty. As of now, the  
training workload is very heavy.  
2.11 MANAGE work should be limited 
and not over-extended 
2.12 MANAGE should work with 
private organizations, voluntary 
agencies whose work 
synchronizes with that of 
MANAGE 
MANAGE is helping certain private 
institutions  such as CALPI , Indo-Swiss,  
MSSF and seed companies to build the  
capacities of their personnel. 
2.13 The Academic Committee 
should be activated 
Academic Committee has been activated 
by involving reputed organizations such as  
IIM, IRMA, Planning Commission,  NAARM, 
SAUs etc.  
 
 
 III. IIM Report on Evaluation of Training activities during October 1998 to March 
2001 
Recommendations Action Taken 
3.1 On the whole 67 % of the 
programmes planned could be 
conducted  
Over 95 % of the planned programmes have  
been conducted during the last two  
years. Further, there is an increase in  
sponsored  and paid training programmes  
both at national and internation al level 
during  
the recent years.  MANAGE programme  
content has improved in qualitative terms 
 by involvement of client managers /  
academic experts, personnel from  
development sector and private industries  
in deciding the content.  
3.2 30 % planned but not conducted 
fully under the category of 
Agriculture Technology 
Management, International 
Training Programmes sponsored 
programmes 
3.3 There was a phenomenal growth 
appreciated though not 
improvement in the quality 
3.4 Only 6 % of women participants 
participated in the training 
programme which was observed  
to be minimal.  
The participation of the women participants  
has improved substantially with  
specific programmes on Gender 
Sensitization. MANAGE has also developed 
Master  
Trainers Module  for other institutions in  
the country and trained master trainers  
for conducting one day and three day  
training programmes on gender 
sensitization. 
  

 
 
3.5. Over the years senior level 
officers trained slightly declined 
and lower level functionaries 
were increasing.  
Since the focus of training programmes over  
the years has increased for field  
level functionaries, since MANAGE is  
involved in the field level projects such  
as ATMA operationalization in various 
states.  
As a result, the participation of district level  
and below has gone up significantly. Though 
 the participation of senior functionaries  
remains the same, their percentage has  
come down in comparison to participants  
and training programmes for field  
level functionaries    
3.6 Reports on training pedagogy 
training contents etc. available 
from the coordinators were 
missing which is valuable for the 
designing and planning of the  
programmes  
MANAGE has a standard format for  
course reports, covering training  
objectives, methodology, content cover,  
details of the resource persons, feed back  
and summary course report by the  
Course Director. The Course Report is  
being submitted for each programme to  
DG with copy to Programme Division.  
3.7 Practice for the maintaining 
course report and course items 
needs to be strengthened. 
Standard format is needed to be 
developed. 
3.8 There is a need to cut down the 
duration to  one hour instead of 
half-a-day on inaugural and 
valedictory function 
Largely MANAGE has done away with  
the inauguration and valedictory functions  
and wherever this is thought appropriate,  
limited time frame is being allotted.  
Valedictory and Inaugural functions are kept  
to the bare  minimum. 
3.9 There is missing link in group 
exercises and individual 
presentations which was actually 
observed 
This may be an isolated case. More often  
than not, the training group exercises and  
the individual presentations are linked with  
the objective of the session.  However, this 
 is consciously taken care by the  
MANAGE faculty. 
3.10 Though the record keeping is 
improved to some extent, in 
recent years, it was not 
satisfactory 
Point Nos.3.6  and 3.7 may please be 
referred. 
3.11 The off -campus programmes 
were found satisfactory though 
the academic input but boarding 
and lodging facilities were found 
unsatisfactory. In order to 
maintain high image of MANAGE 
The class room input of the off campus  
training programmes are highly appreciated  
by the participants. However, boarding  
and lodging facilities particularly in the  
off-campus programmes need  
some improvement. The nodal / link  

 
 
facilities need not be 
compromised. 
institutions where the off-campus  
training programmes are conducted need 
 to provide improved services, as most of  
the states have got SAMETIs now. This 
issue 
has already been taken care of by the 
SAMETIs.  
3.12 No case studies are used in the 
training programmes. The 
committee feel the number of 
cases dealt needs a up 
gradation. 
Case studies are used in the  
training programmes. However, to increase  
its usage, specific time allocation for the  
faculty along with capacity building to  
junior faculty would be taken up.  
3.13 Titling of the programmes need 
to be registered at Programme 
Division, if needed could be 
computerized. 
This is already being done. Academic 
calendar  
is approved by Academic Committee well  
in advance and also printed for circulation to 
the states along with the dates of  
the programmes, content and design.  This  
is recorded and monitored in the training  
division of MANAGE.   
3.14 Inviting local leaders, senior 
bureaucrats and prominent 
personalities is appreciated but 
recommended only to workshops 
and conferences but not for 
training programmes.  
This is being done.  
3.15 All the course reports needs to 
be presented and discussed in 
the faculty meeting. Unless the 
report is submitted Director 
General may not permit to 
initiate new programme. 
This is already in practice. The reports are  
being discussed with MANAGE  
faculty, however, it will be taken up at  
the institutional level also.  Earlier a pattern  
of Faculty / Facilitator workshops  
were conducted once in six months for 
sharing  
of learning and lessons among the faculty.  
This will be revived in future.  
3.16 Though there is lot of learning 
generated by different training 
programmes, which is not 
shared among the faculty 
members.  
 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012]  
 
 
 

 
 
NATIONAL HORTICULTURE MISSION (NHM) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.52) 
 
 The Committee are happy to be apprised that post implementation of various 
horticulture development programmes including NHM, the availability of fruits has 
increased from 138 gms/pers/day in 2004-05 to 172gms/pers/day in 2010-11 and that of 
vegetables from 279gms/pers/day to 337gms/pers/day in the same period.  They 
applaud the National Horticulture Mission for a task well done and are of the firm belief 
that they would continue to strive for further increasing the availability levels of fruits & 
vegetables in the years to come.  They are, however, constrained to note that allocated 
funds have been under -utilized during the Eleventh Plan period due to vari es reasons.  
Not inclined to dwell upon these reasons as they would not help in finding a solution 
herein, they urge the Department to play a more pro -active role and motivate 
States/UTs to be active partners. One positive aspect being the removal of credi t 
linkage from some of the Post Harvest Management Components. Keeping in view the 
vast, yet untapped potential of Horticulture especially in the NER and other 
Mountainous regions of the Country, they desire the Department to lay more emphasis 
on this Scheme in the Twelfth Plan to ensure that horticulture produce increases and be 
in a position to tap export markets after having satisfied domestic consumption. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
National Horticulture Mission Scheme (NHM): -  
                                                               (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Release 
2007-08 1100.00 900.00 917.33 
2008-09 1100.00 1000.00 1010.50 
2009-10 1100.00 830.00 800.00 
2010-11 1061.98 986.00 970.86 
2011-12 1200.00 1150.00 1049.99 
  

 
 
            In 2007 -08 and 2008 -09, release exceeded RE, whereas in the next two years 
(2009-10 & 2010 -2011), there was minor shortfall.  However, in 2011 -12, there was 
shortfall to the tune of Rs. 100.00 crore. This was due to less demand from the state 
implementing agencies as sufficient funds were available with them which includes  bank 
interest on central grants -in-aid, unspent balance of previous year and release of state 
share in time.   
National Mission on Micro Irrigation Scheme (NMMI): -  
                                                                           (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Release 
2007-08 550.00 430.00 411.26 
2008-09 500.00 470.00 470.00 
2009-10 430.00 480.00 480.00 
2010-11 1000.00 982.00 997.25 
2011-12 1150.00 1150.00 1227.00 
Under NMMI, RE level was achieved except during 2007-08. 
Action taken to ensure uniform pace of utilization of funds: -  
 
(i)  Meetings were held with state implementing agencies in the month of March 2012 for 
finalizing their Annual Action Plans for 2012-13. 
 
(ii) Meeting of Executive Committee (EC) of NHM was convened  in the first week of April 
to approve the outlay for 2012-13. 
 
(iii)States have been sensitized to submit proposals for release and submit provisional UC 
for the previous year and Audited UC for 2010-11 well in time. 
 
(iv) Frequency of meeting of the Empowered Committee of NHM has been increased to 
clear project based proposals. 
 
(v)State Horticulture Missions are being impressed upon to pre-position inputs in advance 
for season based activities.  

 
 
(vi)State Horticulture Missions have been advised to get State Share released during first 
quarter of the financial year.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
 
NATIONAL HORTICULTURE MISSION (NHM) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.53) 
 
 Keeping in view the huge potential of the horticulture sector and the shortage of 
public investment in agriculture, the Committee desire the Government to take all 
possible steps to ensure greater participation of private sector in horticulture sector both 
in terms of production and post-production areas, especially the export markets for fruits 
and flowers.  Guidelines should be made flexible with adequate checks and balances to 
ensure that the farmer is not taken for a ride and his interest is always taken care of as 
he is the toiler who ensures food for all. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of Agriculture is implementing National Horticulture Mission (NHM), 
National Horticulture Board (NHB) and Horticulture Mission in North East and 
Himalayan States (HMNEH) schemes, which provide assistance for a number of 
components related to horti culture development including private sector investment 
through creation of post harvest infrastructure like cold storages, controlled 
atmosphere/modified atmosphere (CA/MA) storages and refrigerated transport in the 
country.  
 
A few Government initiatives taken during 11th Plan    
i. Enhanced Pattern of Assistance: 
Subsidy enhanced from 25% to 40% in General Area and from 33.33% to 55% in 
Hilly and scheduled area, to attract more entrepreneurs and private investment in 
Cold Chain Infrastructure Sector.   

 
 
ii. Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) for warehousing  
Finance Minister in his budget speech for 2012 -13 has proposed to earmark Rs. 
5,000 crore for creating warehousing facilities (including cold storages) from the 
allocation under RIDF. 
  During 2011-12, there was provision of Rs. 2,000 crore under RIDF VII for the 
first time. 
 
iii. Reduction of Excise Duty on Import of Cold Storage Equipments 
During 2011 -12 full exemption from excise duty has been extended to air -
conditioning equipment and refrigerati on panels for cold chain infrastructure; 
including conveyor belts. 
iv. External Commercial Borrowing (ECB) 
External Commercial Borrowing (ECB) can be raised for investments in new 
projects, modernization/expansion of existing production units in real sector – 
industrial sector including infrastructure sector for creating cold storages or cold 
room facility, including farm level pre -cooling, for preservation or storage of 
agricultural/horticultural and allied produce.   
 
v. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
100% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is allowed under automatic route in storage 
and warehousing including warehousing of agriculture products with refrigeration i. 
e. cold storages. 
 
vi. National Mission on Food Processing 
In order to have a better outreach and to pro vide more flexibility to suit local needs 
of fruits and vegetables, it has been decided that a new centrally sponsored 
scheme titled “National Mission on Food Processing” would be started, in 
cooperation with the State Governments in 2012 -13 under which co ld storage for 
processing purposes will also be developed. This mission will be implemented by 
MoFPI as a centrally sponsored scheme. 
 

 
 
vii. Introduction of Horti Train 
Introduction of dedicated train and reefer van is also expected to bridge the gap 
between the  producers and consumers thereby ensuring remunerative prices to 
the farmers. A trial run in this regard has been made successfully between 
Bhusawal (Maharashtra) to Azadpur Mandi (New Delhi). 
  
viii. Technical Standards Notification 
Following Technical Standard s for storing fresh fruits & vegetables had been 
notified for implementation w.e.f.1.4.2010. 
 
a. Fresh Horticulture produce Not requiring pre -cooling before storage  
(Technical standards number NHB-CS-Type 01-2010) 
 
b.  Fresh Horticulture produce requiring pre-cooling before storage 
(Technical standards number NHB-CS-Type 02-2010) 
 
c. Control Atmosphere (CA) Cold Storage  
(Technical Standards    Number NHB-CS-Type 03-2010)  
 
d. Fruit Ripening Units  
(Technical standards number NHB-CS-Type 04-2010) 
 
ix. National Centre for Cold Chain Development (NCCD) 
 
NCCD has been constituted as an autonomous body and has been registered as a 
Society under the Societies Registration Act 1860. 
 
The aims and objectives of the Society are: 
 
a. To recommend standards and protocols for cold chain infrastructure/building 
including post harvest management so as to harmonize with international 

 
 
standards and best practices and suggest mechanism for bench marking and 
certification of infrastructure/bui lding, process and services provided by cold 
chain industry. 
b. To suggest indicative guidelines for preparation of project reports for potential 
investors/entrepreneurs. 
c. To assess and develop appropriate IT -based management information system 
for the cold chain infrastructure. 
d. To undertake and coordinate Research and Development (R&D) work required 
for development of cold chain industry in consultation with stakeholders. 
e. To undertake and coordinate the task of Human Resource Development 
(HRD) and capacity bui lding. It may also conduct in -house training, short -
term/long term courses relevant for cold chain development. 
f. To launch publicity campaign to educate the stakeholders including awareness 
building about the benefits of integrated cold chain. 
g. To recommend appropriate policy framework relating to development of cold 
chain. 
h. To facilitate and foster the development of multi -modal transportation facilities 
for perishable agricultural, horticultural and allied commodities and 
establishment of National Green Grid Perishable Commodities. 
 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
DEVELOPMENT AND STRENGTHENING OF SEED INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES 
FOR PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF QUALITY SEEDS  
(Recommendation Para  No. 3.54) 
 
 The Committee observe that though the availability of quality seeds has 
exceeded the requirement for the same during the last five fiscals, yet the lack of 
proposals received from States/UTs and implementing agencies, non -submission of 
utilization certificates and physical progress report in regard to previous releases have 
led to actual expenditure being lower in comparison to the allocated amount. This factor 

 
 
which is inherent of the malaise rocking the extant system of implementation of 
schemes in a fed eral structure truly causes the Committee deep anguish. What makes 
the Committee ponder over this mismatch wherein in spite of low expenditure the 
availability of seeds exceeded the requirement. 
 
The Committee exhort upon the Department to motivate the Sta tes to exercise 
financial discipline by timely submission of utilization certificates of past allocations and 
forward fresh proposals in time. They also desire the Department to introspect to have a 
relook at the extant guidelines due to which the States a re not forthcoming to availing 
central funds as of now and devise strategies to remedy the situation at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The State Governments are invariably advised at the beginning of the financial 
year to submit proposals as per guidelines, which include submission of Utilization 
Certificates etc. Accordingly efforts are made to get the physical and financial progress 
reports from all implementing agencies regularly. Utilization certificate for future 
releases is insisted upon. Th is is pointedly reminded to the States during meetings and 
over phone. Moreover the sanctions issued from time to time under the Central Sector 
Scheme “Development and Strengthening of Infrastructure Facilities for Production and 
Distribution of Quality Se eds” provide  that the funds can only be utilized for the 
indicated purpose and the implementing agencies have to  submit quarterly physical 
and financial progress report etc as  also the utilization certificate in prescribed 
proforma. Keeping in view  the  recommendations, as aforesaid, State Governments are 
being addressed again to ensure that the budgetary allocations under the scheme are 
optimally utilized to enable the scheme to serve its mandated purpose and to submit 
proposals complete in all respect and as per guidelines including utilization 
certificates/physical progress etc.  
 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NO DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS ACTION TAKEN REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
(Recommendation  No. 2.32) 
 
 During the course of the Eleventh Plan period the Committee have repeatedly 
observed that in spite of the Department‟s expenditure being in the range of 95% of the 
amount finalized in the revised estimates, the Department were not allocated the entire 
approved outlay of Rs.66577.00 crore by the Planning Commission.  They are of the 
opinion that had the balance of Rs.5049.10 crore been allocated, the implementation of 
Schemes would ha ve been much better.  The Committee further observe that the 
allocations at BE vis -à-vis RE stage fluctuated in that while the fiscals 2007 -08 and 
2010-11 showed increased RE, in the remaining three Fiscals the RE was less than the 
approved BE.  They are p ained to note that their constant pleas to rectify the 
imbalances have gone unheard during the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  However, keeping 
in view the interest of Indian agriculture they cannot but reiterate their recommendation 
yet again. As the Twelfth Fi ve Year Plan has just commenced, the Committee impress 
upon all the agencies concerned i.e. the Planning Commission and the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Expenditure) to adopt a holistic approach and not hold the past 
as a benchmark.  The allocation o f funds to the Department must be evenly spread 
across all the five fiscals so as to avoid back loading of plan funds.  This would ensure 
that the Department is allocated maximum funds out of the approved outlay and it is 
able to absorb these funds easily and ensure optimum utilization of allocated resources.  
This in the opinion of the Committee would bring the figures of approved outlay and 
actual allocations on an even keel. 
 
  

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As against approved allocation of Rs.66,577 crore f or XI Plan, Planning 
Commission/Finance Ministry provided Rs.61,527.90 crore at RE stage after taking into 
consideration resource availability and demands from other competing national 
priorities.  Out of this, an amount of Rs.60,866.232 crore has been uti lized by the 
Department for the development of agriculture sector through various schemes 
implemented during Eleventh Plan period.  This works out to 98.92% of allocated 
resources.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
INVESTMENT IN AGRICULTURE 
(Recommendation Para  No. 2.34) 
 
 
The Committee note that in spite of the increase in public sector investment in 
agriculture being in the range of 17.6% to 22.5% and the Gross Capital formation (GCF) 
in Agriculture & Allied sectors at 2004-05 prices for the fiscal 2010-11 being 20.1%, they 
are of the strong opinion that this is a meagre amount considering the fact that 
agriculture is the principal source of livelihood for 58% of the populace. The candid 
acceptance of the Department that the present level of public investment is inadequate 
and funds crunch is retarding the progress of a number of vital schemes further 
buttresses their opinion. They were also flummoxed to note that budget of the 
Department was not even 50% of the budget of the Rural Development Department, 
when both the Depar tments are operating in the same setup. Keeping in view the stark 

 
 
reality that 60% of the population is living on 15% of the GDP, the Committee exhort 
upon the Planning Commission to go for a quantum enhancement of public investment 
in Agriculture sector d uring the Twelfth Plan Period so as to make it a sustainable and 
viable option for those who brave umpteen odds to venture into this vocation. The 
Committee also implore upon the Government to break free from the shackles of their 
extant piece-meal approach towards agriculture sector and go for a holistic approach. 
Not only will this change in approach ensure a turnaround in the agriculture sector but 
also align it on the path of sustainable growth, which it is craving for long.   
  
Reply of the Government 
 
Allocation of Central Plan Outlay for various sectors is done by the Planning 
Commission based on the overall resources available at the disposal of the 
Government, priorities assigned for competing sectors/objectives and after wide ranging 
consultations with the various stakeholders including the State Governments and the 
Central Ministries/Departments etc. Keeping in mind the low growth rates in Agriculture 
sector during the 10 th Five Year Plan, Government had made conscious efforts in 
stepping up the allocation to Agriculture & Allied sectors during Eleventh Five Year Plan 
by way of higher allocations and also incentivizing the State Governments to enhance 
public investment in these sectors to sustain and maintain capital formation and 
agriculture infras tructure. As a result, the Plan outlay on various schemes of this 
Department has increased substantially from Rs. 9530.33 crore in 2008 -09 to Rs. 
16515.05 crore in 2011 -12 (RE), the terminal year of Eleventh Five Year Plan. For the 
current financial year ( 2012-13), which is also the first year of the Twelfth Five Year 
Plan, the Budget Estimate is Rs. 20208.00 signifying an increase of 22.36% over the 
previous year‟s Revised Estimate (RE). 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
  

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
MARKETING RESEARCH AND INFORMATION NETWORK (MRIN) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.46) 
 
The under -utilization of funds witnessed under the scheme of Marketing 
Research and Information Network (MRIN) during the last five fiscals causes the 
Committee great anguish.  The main reason attributed for this by the Department is the 
lack of proposals from the States/UTs.  They are unable to fathom the fact that in this 
era of widespread use of Information Technology, States are not willing to avail central 
funds for establishing a nationwide information network by pr oviding electronic 
connectivity to important Agricultural produce markets spread over the length and 
breadth of the Country and the State Agricultural Marketing Boards and Directorates.  
Even after passage of almost twelve years, if the Scheme is under -performing, then the 
Department needs to do a quick and serious rethink on the fate of this scheme.  They 
fully support the stand of the Department, which is currently under consideration on 
consultation with the Planning Commission for merging this Scheme un der RKVY.  As 
States have some amount of freedom under RKVY, the Committee whole -heartedly 
endorse the stand of the Department, as in their opinion this would ensure that States 
finally endorse this Scheme and await the funds herein for strengthening their  
information technology paraphernalia.  They desire the Department to pursue the 
fructification of merger of the Scheme with RKVY and await a positive outcome thereon. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During XI Plan, a total of Rs. 20.00 crore was available for implementation of 
MRIN Scheme, with a plan outlay of Rs. 15.00 crore and Rs. 5.00 crore already 
available with NIC from savings of IX and X Plan period. The activities envisaged during 
XI Plan period included networking of 360 markets, replacement of 810 old computers, 

 
 
payment of incentives to marketing personnel and market led extension activities. 
However, 590 new computers were sanctioned against the target of 360 computers and 
574 old computer s (provided during 2000 -02) were sanctioned for replacement. The 
budget provided for new computers and replacement of old computers was not utilized 
due to availability of funds of with NIC from savings from IX and X Plan due to reduction 
of computer costs.  
 
2. Rs.14.10 crore was, therefore, utilized during XI plan against the available funds 
of Rs. 15 crore which included funds of Rs.5.56 crore released to the States for 
undertaking market -led extension activities, i.e. Training of farmers and Training of  
Trainers etc as per the proposals received from the states. As such, the under utilization 
of funds were due to availability of funds with NIC. 
 
3. Efforts have been made to intensify activities under the scheme. The 
AGMARKNET portal has been harmonized w ith State portals. The database developed 
under AGMARKNET is also serving various Commodity Directorates of Department of 
Agriculture & Co -operation by providing customized hyperlinks to data pertaining to 
specific commodities. The dissemination of market information is being made in 
association with other mobile service providers like REUTERS, IFFCO Kisan Sanchar 
Ltd., NOKIA and BSNL etc. through SMS to the farmers and other beneficiaries.   
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
GRAMEEN BHANDARAN YOJANA 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.47) 
 
 
 The Committee note the Grameen Bhandaran Yoana caters to creation of 
scientific storage capacity with allied facilities in rural areas to meet various 
requirements of farmers for storing farm produce, processed farm produces, agricultural 
inputs and prevention of distress sale by creating the facility of pledge loan and 
marketing credit.  During the Eleventh Plan out of the RE figure of Rs.468.00 crore the 
actual expenditure was Rs.447.69 crore which is about 95.66% of the RE amount.  
What causes concern to the Committee is the physical achievement part of the 
Scheme, as the data furnished by the Department only mentions the number of 
completed godowns and total capacity.  Further the Secretary during his deposition was 
unable to furnish data regar ding capacity utilization of these godowns.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Department to get this data collected and furnish the same to them 
at the earliest so that a proper and accurate assessment of this Scheme can be done at 
the earliest.  This factor attains importance due to the increased production in 
foodgrains witnessed in the last two fiscals, thus creating storage problems for both the 
Central and State Governments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Agriculture launched „Grameen B handaran Yojana‟ w.e.f. 
01.04.2001 with main objectives of creation of scientific storage capacity with allied 
facilities in rural areas to meet various requirements of farmers for storing farm produce, 
processed farm produce, agricultural inputs, etc., an d for prevention of distress sale by 
creating the facility of pledge loan and marketing credit. 
 
2. Since the inception of the scheme w.e.f. 1/4/2001 and up to 31 st May, 2012, 
28374 godowns having a capacity of 324.31 lakh tonnes  with subsidy of Rs. 878.2 6 
crores have been sanctioned all over the country. 
 

 
 
3.      Out of above, during the XI Plan period from April, 2007 to March, 2012, 13719 
rural godown projects having a capacity of 135.01 lakh tonnes have been sanctioned 
under the scheme against the target of 90 lakh tones.  
 
4. As the Rural Godown Scheme is construction linked and capital investment 
linked subsidy is provided under the scheme, data regarding capacity utilization of rural 
godown is not maintained. However, report of the Evaluation  of the Central Sector 
Scheme of construction of Rural Godown carried out in 2005 mentions that 95 % of 
godowns are used to store agriculture output and only 5 % store both input and output.           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
DEVELOPMENT AND STRENGTHENING OF SEED INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES 
FOR PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF QUALITY SEEDS  
(Recommendation Para  No. 3.55) 
 
 
As admitted by the Department that the present infrastructure of seed testing i.e. 
Seed Testing Laboratories is inadequate, the Committee desire the Department to work 
on strengthening this infrastructure at the earliest.  One positive step in the right 
direction would be getting the Scheme of National Mission on seeds cleared in quick 
time. They further desire the Department to establish Seed Testing Laboratories at 
more than one location in a district depending on the geographical size of the district.  
By doing so the farmers will be able to get firsthand knowledge about the quality of a 
particular seed before investing in it and hereby ensure that they get the best and 
certified seed for their investment which would finally ensure a quality produce and h elp 

 
 
improve his economic well  being.  They desire to be apprised of the steps taken in this 
direction.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
       The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation is giving utmost importance to 
Seed Quality.  To ensure availability of quality seeds, the Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation has been providing financial assistance for strengthening/establishing  of 
the Seed Testing Laboratories under the component “Quality control arrangements on 
seeds‟ of the Central Sector Scheme “Development and Strengthening of Infrastructure 
Facilities for Production and Distribution of Quality Seeds”.   Provision has been m ade 
in the scheme to provide financial assistance for various aspects of strengthening of 
seed testing laboratories, including establishment of DNA Finger Printing Laboratory.   
 
It is proposed to have more focused approach to the whole gamut of activities  
pertaining to Seed Sector in the proposed sub mission on “Seeds and Planting Material” 
of the new Centrally Sponsored Scheme “National Mission on Agricultural Extension 
and Technology”. The processes/approvals in this regard are being expedited. 
       
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
 WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
 ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
(MAJOR INITIATIVES FOR TWELFTH PLAN) 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.36)  
 
Having experienced the protractedness in finalizing the Eleventh Plan document 
by the agencies involved which has a cascading effect in terms of staggering of 
timelines and backloading of funds, the Committee in their Twenty-Second Report had 
recommended that the Planning Commission and other concerned agencies streamline 
the planning process and ensure timely finalization of the Twelfth Plan document and 
convey the same to all line Ministries/Department by 31  December, 2011 so that they 
are able to complete all necessary formalities at their end in the last quarter of the fiscal 
2011-12 and be in all readiness to implement the Twelfth Plan Schemes from day one 
i.e. 1 April, 2012.  However, much to their chagrin they hav e been apprised that the 
Twelfth Plan document is yet to be finalized and would take another three to four 
months before it is placed before the National Development Council.  Concerned at this 
rather sordid state of affairs of the extant planning process riddled with multi level 
clearances which are time consuming, the Committee recommend that all concerned 
should keep in view the detrimental effect of this time consuming process on the 
development of all sectors and finally wake up and undertake concrete steps to get the 
Twelfth Plan Document finalized within the next three months at the earliest and avoid 
repetition of the fate of Eleventh Plan Document. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Planning Commission is in process of finalizing the Twelfth Plan.  Appr oach 
Paper for Twelfth Five Year Plan has been approved by Full Planning Commission.  
Effort is being made to complete the process  at an early date. 
 
 [Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-7/2012-B&A Dated the 30th July, 2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                        BASUDEB ACHARIA 
28 August, 2012                   Chairman 
06 Bhadrapada,1934 (Saka)                       Committee on Agriculture 
  

 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FORTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday , the 28 August, 2012 from 1000 hours to          
1025 hours in Committee Room „D‟ (G/F), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOKSABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Thangso Baite 
4.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
7.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
8.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
               RAJYA SABHA 
9.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
10.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
11.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
12.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
13.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
14.  Shri S. Thangavelu 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri  K. Vijayakrishnan - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 
*2. xxxxxxxx    xxxxxxxx   xxxxxxxx  
*3. xxxxxxxx    xxxxxxxx   xxxxxxxx  
*4. xxxxxxxx    xxxxxxxx   xxxxxxxx 
5. Thereafter, the Committee took up Memorandum No. 10 regarding draft Report 
on action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations co ntained 
in the Thirty -fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation). 
6. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report without any 
modification.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
*   Matter not related to this Report. 
  
  

 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE THIRTY FOURTH REPORT (15th LOK SABHA) OF  
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-12)    
 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations                         17 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 2.33, 2.35, 3.44, 3.45, 3.48, 3.49, 3.50, 3.51, 3.52,  
3.53 and 3.54  
 
Total                   11 
  
Percentage                                     64.70% 
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
Total                         NIL 
       
Percentage                                      0% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos.  2.32, 2.34, 3.46, 3.47 and 3.55 
 
Total           05 
 
Percentage                            29.41% 
 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para No.  2.36 
 
Total                   01 
  
Percentage                         5.89% 