 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
                 
        
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                              
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND FISHERIES) 
              
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2011-2012)} 
 
          
FORTY-THIRD REPORT 
  
 
         
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) 
43 

FORTY-THIRD REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND FISHERIES) 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report 
of the Committee on Agriculture (2011-2012) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  26.02.2013 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 26.02.2013 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) 

COA No. ..... 
 
 
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
            
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
© 2013 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by 

<CONTENTS> 
                   PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ……………………………………      1  
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………    28 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government‟s replies …………………..    43 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….    46 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….    58 
 
ANNEXURE 
(i)  Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 22 February, 2013.           62 
                                      
(ii)  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report                64 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2011-2012). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2012-13) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.
  
 Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas  Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
30.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Ag riculture (201 2-2013) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Forty-third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee  on 
Agriculture (2011-12) on Demands for Grants (201 2-13) pertaining to Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries). 
 
2. The Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee was presented to the Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of R ajya Sabha on 30 April , 201 2. The Action Taken 
Replies on the Report were received from the Government on 23 July, 2012. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting 
held on 22 February, 2013. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee is given 
in Annexure II. 
 
 
      
                           
NEW DELHI                     BASUDEB ACHARIA 
22 February, 2013                                                                    Chairman, 
3 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)                                Committee on Agriculture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

CHAPTER 1 
 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Thirty -fifth Report of 
the Committee on Agriculture (2011 -12) on Demands for Grants 2012 -13 
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries) which was prese nted to Lok Sabha on 17 May 2012 and 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18 May 2012. 
1.2 The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries (DADF) 
have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 18 Observations / 
Recommendations containe d in the Report. These have been categorized as 
under: 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government: Recommendation Nos. 1.4, 3.54, 3.56, 3.57, 3.59, 3.61, 3.62 
and 3.63.  
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Commit tee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:  
Recommendation No.: 2.38.  
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which action taken 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  

Recommendation Nos.  2.33, 2.34, 2.35, 2.37, 2.39 and 3.55. 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited:  
Recommendation Nos. 3.58 and 3.60. 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and Final 
Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of 
this Report be furnished to them within a period of three months.  
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Implementation of Committee Recommendations  
(Recommendation Para No.1.4) 
 
1.5 Having noted that the Act ion Taken Replies regarding the action taken by 
the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-fourth Report of the Committee were not furnished by the Government 
within the stipulated three months and deeply perturbed to note  that the Minister 

concerned has not made the Statement under Direction 73 -A on the status of 
implementation of Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -
fourth Report of the Committee within the stipulated six months, the committee 
had desired that the statement be made without any further delay in the ongoing 
Budget Session (2012) itself.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
   
1.6 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that the 
recommendations of Parliamentary Standing Committee have been  taken note 
of. In future, the Department will ensure submission of Action Taken Report and 
laying the status of implementation of the Recommendations of the Report in the 
Lok Sabha / Rajya Sabha within the stipulated time. 
 It may be noted that the status  of implementation of recommendations of 
the Report, It is submitted that the Department had laid the Statement by Minister 
in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth Report of the Parliam entary 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries) on Demands for Grants (2011 -12)  in  Lok Sabha on 17 May, 
2012 and Rajya Sabha on 18 May, 2012. The requisite number of copies of 
above statement was also sen t to Lok Sabha Secretariat on 22 nd May 2012.The 
Department had also submitted further Action Taken Notes by the Government 
on the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -First Report of 
Committee of Agriculture (2011 -12) on the Action Taken by  the Government on 

the Twenty -Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries) to 
Lok Sabha Secretariat on 22nd May 2012.  
1.7 The Committee note with satisfactio n that in pursuance of their 
Recommendation, the Statement of Minister under direction 73A in the 
context of Twenty-fourth Report has been made during the Budget Session 
(2012).  They further note with satisfaction the timely submission of further 
Action T aken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty -first Report of the Committee which was a sequel to their 
Twenty-fourth Report.  The Committee expect the Government to always 
adhere to laid down stipulations of reporting and feedback  to Parliament 
and its institutions in further to facilitate them to discharge their 
responsibility of oversight.   
 
Budgetary Allocations 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 2 
PARAGRAPH NO. 2.33 & 2.34 
 
1.8 Having observed during the course of examination of Demand s for Grants 
of the Department for the Eleventh Plan period huge variation between the 
initially approved amount of Rs.8,174 crore and the actual allocation of Rs.5,910 
crore by the Planning Commission,  the Committee, keeping in view the 
importance of the  sector in providing sustenance to the economically weak 
farming community, had desired the Government to have a fresh look on this 

aspect during the Twelfth Plan and ensure that full quota of allocated funds are 
actually provided to the Department in the annual allocations in the Twelfth Plan. 
 
 The Committee noting further with regret that their repeated 
recommendations regarding enhancement of Plan allocation of the Department 
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries (DAHDF) so as to increase its 
share in comparison to the other two Departments of the Agriculture sector viz. 
Department of Agriculture (DAC) and Cooperation and Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education (DARE), had not yielded any positive result and that the 
share of the Departme nt continued to remain much lower compared to its sister 
Departments, the Committee while empathizing with the Department on this 
issue had once again urged the Planning Commission to quantitatively enhance 
the share of DAHDF in the Plan allocation as this  sector provides additional 
means of sustenance to the farming community mostly comprising of small and 
marginal farmers residing in the rural areas.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
1.9 In their Acton Taken Notes, the Government have stated that Planning 
Commission has informed that the allocation of funds to this Department is 
determined by the following criteria: 
 Over all resource position, 
 Absorption capacity of the Department, 

 Unspent balances, and 
 Financial support available through other major programmes like RKVY. 
 
The year-wise allocation of DADF has increased substantially as per the 
table given below. However the actual expenditure was less, though it has gone 
up in Financial Year 2010 -11 and 2011 -12. The Plan allocation of this 
Department for the year  2012-13 is 19.38% higher than the allocation for 2011 -
12. 
 
Year 
Approved 
outlay 
RE Actual 
Expenditure 
11th Plan (2007-
2012) 8,174.00   
2007-08 910.00 810.00 784.09 
2008-09 1,000.00 940.00 865.27 
2009-10 1,100.00 930.00 873.38 
2010-11 1,300.00 1,257.00 1,104.68 
2011-12 1,600.00 1,356.52 1270.15 
TOTAL 5,910.00 5,293.52 4897.57 
2012-13 1,910.00   
 
In addition, the livestock and fisheries sector is also getting the funding 
support under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) which is implemented by 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) which results in the 
enhancement of the share of plan allocation of this Department. The details of 

Year wise / sector wise summary of approved projects in the 11 th Plan for Animal 
Husbandry, Dairy Development & Fi sheries under RKVY for activities in animal 
husbandry, dairying and fisheries sector is given in the following table: 
Rs. in crore 
Year 
Animal Husbandry Dairy 
Development 
Fisheries 
11th Plan (2007-
2012) 
   
2007-08 104.80 56.76 63.69 
2008-09 666.31 203.45 142.16 
2009-10 712.02 154.85 109.12 
2010-11 734.71 333.36 278.96 
2011-12 847.31 281.58 390.60 
TOTAL 3065.15 1030.00 984.53 
 
Apart from the above, National Mission on Protein Supplements (NMPS) 
was launched in the year 2011 -12 in 22 identified States  as a part of Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana, with an outlay of Rs. 300 Crore. The objective of this 
programme is to increase production of animal protein like milk, meat and fish etc 
in order to meet rising demand for these products. In the current year 20 12-13, 
an amount of Rs. 500 crore has been allocated under different components of 
NMPS.  
Thus, under RKVY and NMPS, an amount of about Rs. 5,379.68 crore 
was allocated for Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries (AHDF) Sector 

during Eleventh Plan in addition to the approved outlay of Rs. 5,910 crore for this 
Department. 
 
1.10 The Committee are fully aware of the criteria followed by Planning 
Commission for determining the allocation of funds.  Overall resource 
position, absorption capacity of Department a nd unspent balances have 
been the major reasons adduced for reduced/curtailed allocation for all 
these years.  Financial support available through other major programmes 
like RKVY is, however, a recent phenomenon.  The Committee note from 
the Action Taken Note that apart  
from the Rs. 5910 crore plan Allocation of the Department during the 
Eleventh Plan a sum of about Rs. 5380 crore allocated to activities in 
animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors and the National Mission 
on Protein Supplements un der RKVY is also been shown as allocation for 
the AHD&F Sector during the Eleventh Plan.  The Committee find this logic  
of the Department strange.  RKVY is an additional Central Assistance 
Scheme operated by DAC which has nothing to do with the schemes of  
DAHD&F.  By no means can the intervention under RKVY be a substitute to 
the specific schemes of the Department.  Going by this logic the 
Department may someday also cite the allocation made to Military Farms 
Directorate and Remount and Veterinary Corps as  allocation for the AHDF 
sector.  The Committee’s limited concern was about the curtailing of funds 
to the Department for its specific schemes from the initially approved Rs. 

8174 crore to Rs. 5910 crore as actual allocation, which was further slashed 
down to Rs. 5293 crore at RE stage.  The Committee are not at all happy 
with these efforts of the Department to digress from the point raised by the 
Committee.  They, therefore, reiterate that the Department should earnestly 
strive for securing funds for their approved schemes rather than justifying 
their failure in doing so.  The animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries 
sector are the only constant in rural economy since agriculture is a 
seasonal vocation.  It is, therefore, but imperative that the schemes of 
Department for the purpose ought not languish just because the 
Department remains smug about funds for schemes of other department 
taking care of this crucial sector.  
Central Funds for Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Sector 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 3 
PARAGRAPH NO. 2.35, 2.36, 2.37 
 
1.11 The Committee had impressed upon the Department to get their own 
house in order and address the issues immediately due to which States / UTs are 
not coming up to avail Central Funds.  They had desired that all the  bottlenecks 
should be thrashed threadbare during the course of free and frank discussion 
wherein both parties put forth their views candidly and then arrived at a common 
ground. The Committee were pretty sanguine that if the States / UTs are taken 
up as e qual partners, then they would be motivated to avail Central Funds in 

increased quantities thereby furnishing timely fresh proposals as well as 
utilization certificates thus taking care of unspent balances.  
 
 Noting further that many State Governments wer e unable to utilize their 
funds to the extent possible due to infrastructural problems leading them to 
routinely park their funds to help them in their ways and means position. This had 
resulted in the current level of the unspent balances with the States at Rs.854 
crore. The Committee had already recommended in their earlier Report on 
Demands For Grants (2011 -12) that this situation could also be overcome by 
regular online monitoring of the funds released by the Department which would 
ensure that they are utilized only for the designated purposes. The Committee 
had again impressed upon the Department to issue unambiguous instructions at 
the highest level to all State Governments pointing out how the unspent 
balances, ultimately lead to the curtailing of their future funding and also to desist 
them from venturing into parking the funds allocated by the Department for other 
purposes.  
 
 Further noting that another reason for less expenditure was lack of critical 
manpower, especially scientists and technicians and the States are handicapped 
by poor infrastructure in respect of both veterinary and extension staff and 
hospitals / dispensaries, and have generally accorded less priority to this sector 
compared to crop husbandry, the Committee had felt that this genu ine problem 
could be resolved by giving one time relaxation at the time of recruitment. Also, a 

tie-up with UPSC may also help the Department to tide over this problem. They 
had accordingly advised the Department to prepare a roadmap in a time bound 
manner to overcome this situation.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
1.12   In their Action Taken Notes, the Government have stated that the 
schemes of the Department are basically intended to assist the States in the 
development of infrastructure and provide policy di rectives for promotion of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries (AHDF) sectors. The department is 
constantly taking up the matter with States for effective utilization of funds. The 
Department is also regularly monitoring the full utilization of funds a nd progress 
of the schemes through video conferencing with the States and State visits by 
the senior officers of this department from time to time.  
 
In order to liquidate to unspent balances, the Department is constantly 
taking up the matter with the Stat es through D.O letter from Secretary to Chief 
Secretaries of respective States. Recently, a D.O. letter from Hon‟ble Agriculture 
Minister has been issued to Hon‟ble Chief Ministers / Administrators of all 
States/UTs on 30th April 2012 in respect of unspent balance of funds released by 
Union Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.  
 
Hon‟ble Agriculture Minister has also written to the Chief Minister‟s 
emphasizing that the size of the unspent balance is a matter of concern, since it 

affects th e further release of funds to States, delaying the implementation of 
critical schemes and projects alongwith request to the States/Uts to take urgent 
action to reduce the unspent balance otherwise it will be difficult to release 
central funds in the current financial year 2012-13. 
 
In respect of lack of critical manpower, it is stated that the recruitment of 
all technical posts, whether through direct recruitment or promotion or deputation, 
is strictly guided by the Recruitment Rules of the post which are o f statutory 
nature.  Relaxation to these recruitment rules is solicited if there is a change in 
the guidelines of DOPT, etc. Union Public Service Commission and Staff 
Selection Commission are the nodal agencies to make recruitment to the 
technical posts of this department. The Department has already initiated exercise 
to fill up all the vacant technical posts as per the prescribed procedure.    
  
1.13 The Committee appreciate the various efforts made by the 
Department in the direction of mitigation the vari ous causes of unspent 
balances, diversion of funds, delay in furnishing of utilisation certificates, 
etc.  They are, however, hugely perturbed to note that these initiatives and 
effort of the Department are not yielding the desired results.  The unspent 
balances with States are mounting; the pendency of utilisation certificate is 
not improving a bit; the continued and abject lack of infrastructure 
including human resource is unabatedly leading to sub -optimal utilisation 
of previous funds.  The Committee, th erefore, strongly feel that since the 
efforts of the Department have not really made a dent in financial mess of 

the present, a paradigm shift in the approach to this long standing problem 
is immediately required.  The Committee desire that the Department of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of 
Programme Implantation and Statistics should collectively find out a 
solution in the matter after vigorous consultation with the States.   
Twelfth Five Year Plan 
(RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO 5)  
PARAGRAPH NO. 2.39 
 
1.14 Concerned on the account of the cascading effects of delay in finalizing 
the Twelfth Plan Document on implementation of the Schemes of the 
Department, the Committee had reiterated their recommendation that all 
agencies entrusted with the task of the planning process expedite clearances to 
the Twelfth Plan document so that it can be implemented at the earliest.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
1.15  In their Action Taken Notes the Government have stated that in respect of 
finalization of the Twelfth Five Year Plan, Planning Commission has informed 
that the Approach Paper to the 12 th Plan which broadly outlines the overall 
framework and directions of the 12 th Plan, has already been approved by the 
National Development Council ( NDC). The Approach Paper also gives the 
resource allocation priorities of the Plan. 
Various Working Groups and Steering Committees were constituted for 
preparing the Twelfth Plan. Ministries/Departments were represented in Working 

Groups/Steering Committee s concerning their respective sectors. Therefore, 
Ministries/Departments are aware of the Plan priorities as well as the sectoral 
goals, targets and objectives of the Plan. 
Even though the 12 th Five Year Plan has not yet been approved, the 
priorities of the Plan are duly taken care of in the allocation for the first year of the 
Plan, by taking due cognizance of the approved Approach Paper to the 12 th Plan 
as well as discussions of the Steering Committees of the 12 th Plan.  In any case, 
the first year‟s allo cations are dominantly those for 11 th Plan schemes.  New 
schemes are typically formulated and approved during the first year of the Plan. 
Planning Commission has informed that it is in an advanced stage of 
preparing the Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The Plan do cument is expected to be 
finalized soon.  
 
1.16  The Committee note with extreme concern that inspite of they having 
sounded the alarm, time and again, things are not moving at the desired 
pace.  Though in the inter -regnum some progress has been made towar ds 
finalisation and approval of the Twelfth Plan Document by the National 
Development Council, the purpose of this entire exercise would be served 
only when it is presented to the Parliament and the Parliament and its 
entities, thereafter, examine the Dema nds for Grants in the light of the Plan 
Document Last Fiscal this could not happen due to non -finalisation of the 
Plan Document.  The Committee are sure that the Government will lay the 
Twelfth Plan Document in the Parliament at the soonest in the forthcom ing 

Budget Session so that the Demands for Grants (2013 -14) are examined 
amongst at this in the light of Plan Document.   
 
Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 7 
PARAGRAPH NO. 3.55 
 
1.17 Noting that FMD control programme is being implemented in 221 specified 
districts of the country with 100% Central funding as cost of vaccine, 
maintenance of cold chain and other logistic support to undertake vaccination 
and the Department intends to cover all the 660 districts in the country u nder this 
Scheme during the Twelfth Plan.   Further noting that during the year 2012 -13, 
the Department plan to cover 63 more districts of Rajasthan and Odisha raising 
the total number of districts covered from the current 221 to 284 with total 
coverage of  about 36 million additional population of bovines, the Committee 
keeping in view the paramountcy of this programme in ridding the Nation of this 
epidemic, had desired the Department to prepare a road map to work on this 
Scheme for the entire Nation in a time bound manner.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 1.18 The Department in their Action Taken Note stated that they are 
implementing Foot & Mouth Disease Control Programme (FMD -CP) since 10th 
Plan period.  The programme has been expanded from 54 districts to 22 1 

districts in August 2010 during 11 th Plan period and now covers whole of 
southern peninsula including Maharashtra, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Punjab and 
16 districts of UP.  It envisages for vaccination in targeted animals i.e. 110 million 
cattle and buffalo  in the identified States/Uts at 6 monthly intervals.  The 
remaining districts in the country will be taken up during 12th Plan and beyond in 
phased manner so as to cover whole of India under FMD -CP. Accordingly, FMD-
CP programme in 12 th Plan will dovetail  the expansion of FMD -CP in the 
remaining districts of the country. Simultaneously, the monitoring of the 
programme is being strengthened to improve efficacy of the programme towards 
achieveing the objective of eradication of FMD.    
1.19 Having been previ ously assured by the Department about all 660 
districts of the country being covered made the Programme during the 
Twelfth Plan, the Committee are surprised by the present Action Taken 
Report as it states that the remaining districts will be covered during  the 
Twelfth Plan and beyond in a phased manner.  The foot and mouth disease 
exacts a huge cost in the form of economics losses to the livestock 
rearers.  Therefore, it requires to be eradicated at the soonest.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Governm ent not to vaccilate on this 
crucial issue for whatever reason and stick to then originally envisaged 
target of covering the entire country during the Twelfth Plan itself.   
ESTABLISHMENT AND STRENGTHENING OF EXISTING VETERINARY 
HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 8 
PARAGRAPH NO. 3.56 

 
 
1.20 Keeping in view the acute shortage of veterinary hospitals / dispensaries 
in the country and the lack of basic infrastructure in terms of building, equipment 
and adequate staff and based on the admissi on of the  representative of the 
Department that there is a need of 10,000 more veterinary hospitals / 
dispensaries in the country, the Committee, had recommended that the allocation 
for the Scheme `Establishment and Strengthening of Existing Veterinary 
Hospitals and Dispensaries‟ be augmented appropriately so that it is able to 
provide the much needed shot in the arm to the existing veterinary Hospitals / 
Dispensaries and strengthen then further. They had further desired that the 
shortage of veterinary doc tors and other staff in the existing hospitals and 
dispensaries should also be bridged at the earliest to improve the veterinary 
services. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
1.21 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that under 
Establishment and Str engthening of Existing Veterinary Hospital and 
Dispensaries (ESVHD), a sum of Rs.97.26 crore has been provided to the 
States/Uts for new construction/strengthening of veterinary 
hospitals/dispensaries as against the BE of Rs.68.90 crore during 2010 -11.  
Similarly, a sum of Rs.98.81 crore as against BE of Rs.90.00 crore has been 
released to the States/UTs during 2011 -12.  It is also mentioned that during 
2012-13, BE of Rs.91.00 crore has been provided.  Additional funds will be 
sought at RE stage as per the requirement in light of proposals received from the 

State Governments.  As regards to the shortage of veterinary doctor and other 
staff, it is stated that the veterinary hospital/polyclinic and dispensaries, etc. are 
set up by the States. The Department is  providing financial assistance to the 
States/UTs to set up new veterinary hospitals/dispensaries and to strengthen the 
existing ones as per the project proposal received from them under the scheme. 
In the proposal of sanction of ESVHD, the State Governmen t are required to 
provide the required number of veterinary doctors and other staffs. 
  
1.22  The Committee while taking note of the effort of the Government 
towards finding a solution to this vexed problem feel that a lot is still 
required to be done for reviving the mechanism of veterinary hospitals and 
dispensaries in the Country.  A shortage level of 10000 cannot by any 
means be expeditiously attended to by the present level of infusion of 
funds.  In fact, if a turn around is to be achieved and the Gove rnment is 
serious about it, then a massive dose of funds is the need of the hour.  The 
Committee, therefore, exhort the Government to at least now think in terms 
of finding solution to this problem by not only providing adequate funds for 
establishing now veterinary hospitals and dispensaries on war footing but 
also with a view to finding a lasting solution to the acute shortage of 
qualified human resource to man these installations.   
Livestock Insurance 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 9 
PARAGRAPH NO. 3.57 

 1.23 Observing that the Livestock Insurance Scheme of the Department covers 
300 selected districts and benefits the farmers and cattle rearers having 
indigenous / crossbred milch cattle and buffaloes. Benefit of the subsidy is 
restricted to two animals per ben eficiary per household. Premium of insurance is 
on the 50:50 basis – beneficiary and the Government of India and that the 
Department intended to modify this Scheme in order to extend coverage from 
300 districts to the entire country, insure more animals an d make the pattern of 
financial assistance more inclusive, realistic, effective and farmer friendly, the 
Committee, had desired the Department to not restrict its role to that of a mere a 
banker but also ensure that the targeted audience is actually able t o avail the 
benefits of their Scheme. The Committee had further desired that while revising / 
modifying this Scheme, the extant restriction of two animals per farmer per 
household should be done away with, so as to bring large number of farmers 
having indigenous / crossbred milch cattle and buffaloes under the ambit of this 
Scheme and the process of obtaining the claims from the insurance company be 
also simplified to the extent that the farmers are not made to run from pillar to 
post for their claim which otherwise forces them to knock at the doors of the 
unscrupulous moneylenders.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
   
1.24 The Government in their Action Taken Note have informed the Committee 
that the Department ensure through its their periodical review that the t argeted 
audience is actually able to avail the benefits of their Livestock Insurance Scheme 

and have accordingly constituted National, State and District Monitoring 
Committee for more inclusive, realistic, effective and farmer friendly 
implementation of sc heme. During Twelfth Plan, the scheme is proposed to be 
modified for insuring 5 animals per beneficiary per household instead of 2 animals 
per beneficiary per household so as to ensure more indigenous/crossbred milch 
cattle and buffaloes under the ambit of  this scheme. The procedure for claim has 
been also simplified as only three documents are required as per guidelines of 
scheme for settlement of claim within 15 days after submission of required 
documents namely (1) Policy (2) FIR with the company and (3)  Post Mortem 
Report. 
 
1.25 The Committee are glad to note that the Department in pursuance of 
their Recommendation have not only increased the number of animals 
insured from 2 to 5 per household but have also simplified the procedure 
for claims.  As of now  only three document viz.  policy, FIR and post 
mortem report are required to be submitted and the claim is settled within 
15 days of submission of these documents.  The Committee desire the 
Department to continue its good work in this regard by further use r friendly 
initiatives and constant monitoring for further improvisation.   
Central Minikit Testing Programme on Fodder Crops 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 10 
PARAGRAPH NO. 3.58 
1.26 Noting the acute shortage of green and dry fodder in the country and 
anguished over the fact that inspite of distribution of 12.67 lakh fodder seed 

minikits of legume and non -legume variety to the farmers, the Department are 
not in a position to ascertain the increase in the quantum of fodder crops / 
grasses / legumes produced in t he country, the Committee, had recommended 
that the Department should not only free the Scheme of its present geographical 
restrictions but also ensure that the targeted beneficiaries are actually able to 
avail the benefits of the Scheme. The Committee had  further desired that while 
distributing fodder minikits for testing they should keep in mind the objective of 
the Scheme and get feedback from the beneficiaries which needs to be taken 
into consideration while modifying in the Central Sector Scheme –The C entral 
Fodder Development Organisations, so as to enhance the viability of this 
Scheme and ultimately help in increasing the quantity of precious yet scarce 
fodder in the country.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
  
1.27 In their Action Taken Note, the Government have stated that the 
Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for necessary action. It is 
clarified that the Central Sector Scheme - The Central Fodder Development 
Organizations, of which the Minikit Testing Programme is a component is 
demand drive n and has no geographical restrictions.  The Fodder Minikit 
Programme aims to demonstrate the benefits of rising high yielding fodder seeds 
in different agro-climate regions. 
The Department has awarded a study to the National Productivity Council 
for evaluation of the Central Minikit Testing Programme.  The evaluation study 
includes an assessment of the impact of the scheme on different categories of 

beneficiaries and performance of the distributed seeds in terms of both 
productivity and yield. Getting feed back from the beneficiaries is also included in 
the terms of reference of the evaluation study.  
1.28 The Committee note with satisfaction that rather that going for suo -
moto modification of the scheme – Central Fodder Development 
Organisation, the Departm ent have entrusted the evaluation of Central 
Minikit Testing Programme to the National Productivity Council.  The 
evaluation would very aptly include an assessment of the impact of the 
scheme on different categories of beneficiaries and also performance of  
the seeds so distributed in terms of productivity and yield.   The Committee 
feel that this is a long awaited step in the right direction.  They desire that 
the evaluation be completed expeditiously and the outcome be shared with 
them at the earliest along with information about the necessary correctives 
put in place in the existing scheme and the its execution mechanism.  
Delhi Milk Scheme 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 12 
PARAGRAPH NO. 3.60 
 
1.29 Observing with concern the continuous decline in the performance of DMS 
over the years and taking a serious  view in regard to non -implementation of their 
recommendation in regard to DMS contained in their earlier Reports, the 
Committee had desired that instead of wasting their time any further on the 
vexed and contro versial issue of corporatization, the Government should 

immediately improve the infrastructure and wherewithal of DMS with state -of-the-
art machinery and equipments, so that it is able turn around and start making 
profits like other such industries in the profitable Dairy Sector. Since a lot of 
precious time and resources of the DMS have already been wasted in taking 
decision and proposal to be put up to the Union Cabinet, the Committee had 
reiterated that needful be done urgently by the Government so as to  ensure that 
DMS is restored as a flourishing, profit making entity like Mother Dairy and 
others. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
1.30 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that in principle 
approval for corporatization of DMS has been given by Cabinet. The Department 
is pursuing corporatization of DMS based on the in -principle approval of the 
Government. Pending Corporatization of DMS, the Department is taking action 
for improving its performance.  
 
1.31 The Committee strongly decry the tendency  of the Department to 
continuously obfuscate the issue and avoid a decision on the fate of this 
once flourishing institution.  During the examination of Demand for Grants 
of the Department over the years, Committee have been informed about the 
in principle decision of Cabinet  to corporatise DMS.  The matter, however, 
stands frozen at that point seemingly forever.  The Committee exhort the 
Government to shake its inertia on this vital matter and come up with a 

decision within a month of the presentation of t his Report to Parliament so 
that DMS perform its assigned mandate and does not continue to bleed 
further. 
 
Development of Freshwater and Brackishwater Aquaculture 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 13 
PARAGRAPH NO. 3.61 
 
1.35 Noting that while due to introduction of improved technology of fish 
farming and the efforts of FFDAs, the national average productivity of ponds and 
tanks covered under the programme has reached a figure of 2900 kg./ha/annum 
the water area covered during the fiscal 2011 -12 had fallen down to 13,125 ha 
from 26,420 ha in 2007 -08. Similarly, during the same period water area cover 
under the Scheme Brackishwater Aquaculture was 2,338 ha which came to the 
level of 1,471 ha. Deeply concerned at this alarming state of affairs, the 
Committee had recom mended that the Department pull up their socks and 
ensure that the due attention is paid to the proper implementation of the Scheme 
and the objectives of the Scheme be kept in the forefront to ensure a turnaround 
in its fortunes. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
1.36 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that 
Development of Freshwater and Brackishwater Aquaculture is undertaken 
under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme on „Development of Inland Fisheries 

and Aquaculture‟.  Many State Governments have fe lt a need for revision in the 
unit cost under the Scheme.  The Government has taken note of the suggestion 
and the unit costs are proposed to be revised during Twelfth Plan.  In addition, it 
has been observed that several FFDAs have become non -operational due 
mainly to financial difficulties faced by them.  In order to revive the FFDAs, it is 
proposed to support FEDAs in the 12th Plan.  The reason for reduction in the 
coverage of the area is due to the fact that emphasis during this period was on 
renovation and revival of existing ponds so as to improve its productivity. The 
scope of further increase in Brackishwater aquaculture is also limited.  
In addition, the National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) is also 
extending assistance in above areas through their Schemes. 
 
1.37 The Committee note that based on the inputs received from the State 
Governments the Union Government are revising the unit cost under the 
scheme of Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture.  They also 
note with satisfaction that  the Department also intend to support FFDAs 
with a view to revive them.   Apart from these efforts of the Department, the 
National Fisheries Development Board is also extending assistance its 
schemes.  The Committee desire that all these existing and inte nded 
schemes be fructified promptly so that their benefits stand flowing to the 
targeted groups without any further delay. 
FOOD SAFETY AND TRACEABILITY 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 15 
PARAGRAPH NO. 3.63 

 
1.38 The Committee had noted that the Department had en tered into a 
Technical Cooperation Programme with FAO to devise a strategy for animal 
identification and traceability system in India as they were venturing into 
unchartered territory with a view to help in upgradation of various livestock 
species in the f uture and to improve India‟s prospects for International trade of 
disease-free animals and animal products. The Committee were informed by the 
Department that during the Twelfth Plan Rs.50.00 crore have been proposed for 
this Scheme and the Budget Outlay o f Rs.5.00 crore has been provided for the 
fiscal 2012-13. Noting with concern that Action Plan of the Scheme in terms of 
strategy report is yet to be submitted by the FAO and the Department expected 
to get the Action Plan from FAO by September, 2012, the C ommittee desired the 
Department to finalise all procedural formalities like approvals, sanctions, etc. at 
their end in connection with this novel Scheme so as to be ready to implement 
the same from October, 2012.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
1.39 In their A ction Taken Note the Department have stated that they had 
approached FAO to devise a strategy for animal identification and traceability 
system in India.  The FAO had sent to the Department a study proposal under 
Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) on An imal Identification and 
Traceability (AI&T) system for India.  The TCP proposal was accepted in the 
Department and accordingly funds have also been released to FAO for 

Government of India contribution to the project.  The TCP has a total outlay of 
Rs.1.82 crores out of which the share of Government of India is Rs.1.1 crore.  
As per the TCP, FAO would carry out the study and submit a Strategy and 
Action Plan in terms of strategy report to the Department within 7 months.  The 
Inception workshop for the project was held by FAO on 8th February 2012.  FAO 
is, therefore, expected to submit its Strategy and Action Plan by September 
2012.  Therefore, the Strategy and Action Plan submitted by FAO will be 
examined in the Department for formulation of a pilot project w hich will be initially 
implemented in a few selected States.  The Department will make efforts to 
prepare the pilot project within the shortest period possible. 
1.40 The Committee note that the action on the part of the Depart is 
primarily dependent on the timely completion of studies and evaluations by 
the FAO.  Food Safety and Traceability has immense importance for the 
upgradation of livestock as well as improving the prospect of international 
trade in livestock.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Dep artment to 
continue with their efforts towards fructification of this scheme with due 
promptitude and also furnish an update on their effort to the Committee at 
the earliest.   
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Implementation of the Committee’s Recommendations 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.4) 
 The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty -fourth Report of the Committee were not furnished by the 
Government within the stipulated three months. The Committee further note that 
in pursuance of Direction 73 -A of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, the 
Minister concerned is required to make a Statement  on the status of 
implementation of Observations / Recommendations contained in the Original 
Reports of the Committee within six months of their presentation to the 
Parliament. The Committee are deeply perturbed to note that the Minister 
concerned has not made the Statement under Direction 73 -A in the context of 
Twenty-fourth Report of the Committee till date. The Committee take strong 

exception to the failure of the Ministry to adhere to stipulations laid down in 
Direction 73 -A in respect of Statements to be made by the Minister concerned 
and the inordinate delay in furnishing Action Taken Replies to them. They expect 
that there will not be a repeat of such lapses in future and the Statement on the 
status of implementation of Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-fourth Report is made without any further delay in the ongoing Budget 
Session itself. The analysis of the action taken by the Government reveals that 
76% Recommendations have been implemented. 19% Recommendations have 
not been imple mented and 5% of Recommendations are in various stages of 
implementation. The Committee desire the Government to take conclusive action 
in respect of the ten Recommendations commented upon in their Thirty -first 
Action Taken Report and furnish further actio n taken notes to the Committee 
expeditiously. 
Reply of the Government 
  The recommendations of Parliamentary Standing Committee have been 
taken note of. In future, the department will ensure submission of Action Taken 
report and laying the status of implem entation of the recommendations of the 
report in the Lok Sabha / Rajya Sabha within the stipulated time. 
It may be noted that the status of implementation of recommendations of 
the report, It is submitted that the Department had laid the Statement by Minis ter 
in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on status of implementation of the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-fourth Report of the Parliamentary 

Standing Committee on Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries) on Demands for Grants (2011-12)  in  Lok Sabha on 17.5.2012 
and Rajya Sabha on 18.5.2012. The requisite number of copies of above 
statement was also sent to Lok Sabha Secretariat on 22nd May 2012. 
The Department had also submitted further Action Taken Report by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -First 
Report of Committee of Agriculture (2011 -12) on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Twenty -Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Depar tment of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying & Fisheries) to Lok Sabha Secretariat on 22nd May 2012.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.7 of Chapter I of this  
Report.  
Allocation to Animal Husbandry Sector 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.54)  
 The Committee are perturbed to note that the Animal Husbandry Sector is 
not getting its due in terms of monetary allocations and this is hampering the 
implementation of variou s important schemes of the Department. In the ongoing 
fiscal it has been allocated a sum of Rs.1,063.10 crore out of the total allocation 
of Rs.1,910.00 crore. In percentage terms this works out to less than 56% of the 

total allocation of the Department. I n the previous three financial years from 
2009-10 to 2011 -12 this sector was allocated Rs.558.29 crore, Rs.792.15 crore 
and Rs.874.36 crore respectively. These allocations have been, as usual, 
curtailed further at the RE stages and the total actual expendi ture during these 
three years (upto 3 February, 2012) has been to the tune of Rs.435.84 crore, 
Rs.668.75 crore and Rs.511.05 crore which is at 78%, 84% and 59% of the BE 
respectively. This has hampered the implementation of the schemes of this 
sector. The Committee note with concern that if the Department continues to be 
served in the same manner, this would have a detrimental effect on the 
performance of the Department and they would not be able to achieve their 
targets. The Committee, therefore, desire th e planners and policy makers to 
provide the allocation to this Sector as per its needs to avoid the situation of 
hampered implementation of the Schemes of this Sector year after year. They 
further desire the Department to tone up the implementation apparat us so that 
they are in a better position to absorb the allocated funds resulting in attainment 
of set targets. 
Reply of the Government 
   In 2012-13, the department has kept a provision of Rs. 1063.10 crore at 
BE level under Animal Husbandry Sector which s hows 26% increase over the 
previous year i.e., 2011 -12. However, the 12 th Plan is yet to be finalized by 
Planning Commission. The present status of utilization of funds under Animal 
Husbandry sector during the last three year is given below:  

(Rs. in crore)  
Sl. 
No. 
Year Animal Husbandry  Sector 
Budgetary 
Estimate 
(BE) 
Revised 
Estimate 
(RE) 
Actual Exp % of Exp. 
w.r.t BE 
% of 
Exp. 
w.r.t RE 
1 2 4 5 6 7 8 
1 2009-10 558.29 459.20 435.84 78.07 94.91 
2 2010-11 792.15 763.01 668.75 84.42 87.65 
3 2011-12 874.36 798.51 749.14* 85.68 93.82 
4 20012-13 1063.10     
*: Provisional 
The department is constantly taking up the matter with States for quick 
absorption of funds and thus to spend the entire allocations. The department is 
also regularly monitoring the ful l utilization of funds and progress of the schemes 
through weekly expenditure review meetings, video conferencing with the States, 
visits to States by the senior officers of this department.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
Establishment and Strengthening of Existing Veterinary Hospitals and 
Dispensaries 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.56) 
 The Committee note with concern that there is an acute shortage of 
veterinary hospitals / dispensaries in the country and these institutions lack b asic 
infrastructure in terms of building, equipment and adequate staff. The 

representative of the Department himself admitted that veterinary hospitals / 
dispensaries are far short of what we need and there is a need of 10,000 more 
veterinary hospitals / d ispensaries in the country. The situation is further 
aggravated due to shortage of manpower in the existing veterinary hospitals / 
dispensaries year after year. The Committee are happy to be informed that 
during the year 2011 -12, the Department have releas ed Rs.98.81 crore as 
against the BE of Rs.90.00 crore under this Scheme. The Committee feel that 
this a Scheme from which the small and marginal farmers and landless 
labourers, i.e. the people who need focused attention as far as veterinary 
services are concerned. The Committee strongly recommend that this is the right 
time for the Department to buckle up and provide succor to the needy people of 
the country who are living in far flung areas by Establishing and Strengthening of 
Existing Veterinary Hospitals  and Dispensaries to provide veterinary services. 
Keeping in view the demand of the Scheme, the Committee, recommend that the 
allocation for this Scheme `Establishment and Strengthening of Existing 
Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries‟ be augmented approp riately so as to be 
able to provide the much needed shot in the arm to the existing veterinary 
Hospitals / Dispensaries and strengthen it further. They further desire that the 
shortage of veterinary doctors and other staff in the existing hospitals and 
dispensaries should also be bridged at the earliest to improve the veterinary 
services. 
Reply of the Government 

Under, Establishment and Strengthening of Existing Veterinary Hospital 
and Dispensaries (ESVHD), a sum of Rs.97.26 crore has been provided to the 
States/Uts for new construction/strengthening of veterinary 
hospitals/dispensaries as against the BE of Rs.68.90 crore during 2010 -11.  
Similarly, a sum of Rs.98.81 crore as against BE of Rs.90.00 crore has been 
released to the States/UTs during 2011 -12.  I t is also to mention that during 
2012-13, BE of Rs.91.00 crore has been provided.  Additional funds will be 
sought at RE stage as per the requirement in light of proposals received from the 
State Governments.  As regards to the shortage of veterinary docto r and other 
staff, it is stated that the veterinary hospital/polyclinic and dispensaries, etc. are 
set up by the States. The Department is providing financial assistance to the 
States/UTs to set up new veterinary hospitals/dispensaries and to strengthen th e 
existing ones as per the project proposal received from them under the scheme. 
In the proposal of sanctioned of ESVHD, the State Government are required to 
provide the required number of veterinary doctors and other staffs. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.22 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
Livestock Insurance 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.57) 

 The Committee observe that the Livestock Insurance Scheme of the 
Department covers 300 selected districts and benefits the farmers and cattle 
rearers having indigenous / crossbred milch cattle and buffaloes. Benefit of the 
subsidy is restricted to two animals per beneficiary per household. Premium of 
insurance is on  the 50:50 basis – beneficiary and the Government of India. The 
Department have also informed the Committee that they intend to modify this 
Scheme in order to extend coverage from 300 districts to the entire country, 
insure more animals and make the patter n of financial assistance more inclusive, 
realistic, effective and farmer friendly. The Committee share the same opinion 
that the benefit of the Scheme should percolate down to the weaker sections of 
the society that owns majority of livestock. The Committ ee, therefore, desire that 
the Department to not restrict its role to that of a mere a banker but also ensure 
that the targeted audience is actually able to avail the benefits of their Scheme. 
The Committee further desire that while revising / modifying th is Scheme, the 
extant restriction of two animals per farmer per household should be done away 
with, so as to bring large number of farmers having indigenous / crossbred milch 
cattle and buffaloes under the ambit of this Scheme and the process of obtaining 
the claims from the insurance company be also simplified to the extent that the 
farmers are not made to run from pillar to post for their claim which otherwise 
forces them to knock at the doors of the unscrupulous moneylenders. They 
desire to be informed of the progress made in this direction. 
Reply of the Government 

  The Department ensure through its periodical review that the targeted 
audience is actually able to avail the benefits of their Livestock Insurance Scheme 
and is accordingly constituted Nation al, State and District Monitoring Committee 
for more inclusive, realistic, effective and farmer friendly implementation of 
scheme. During Twelfth Plan, the scheme is proposed to be modified for insuring 
5 animals per beneficiary per household instead of 2 animals per beneficiary per 
household so as to ensure more indigenous/crossbred milch cattle and buffaloes 
under the ambit of this scheme. The procedure for claim has been also simplified 
as only three documents are required as per guidelines of scheme for  settlement 
of claim within 15 days after submission of required documents namely (1) Policy 
(2) FIR with the company and (3) Post Mortem Report. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.25 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
National Dairy Plan (NDP) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.59) 
 The Committee note that the demand for milk in the country is growing 
day by day. The Department with the help of National Dairy Develo pment Board 
envisages implementation of the National Dairy Plan -I to meet the projected 
national demand of 150 million tonnes of milk by 2016 -17 with assistance of the 

World Bank. The objective of the NDP -I is to launch a focused and scientifically 
planned multi state initiative to lay the path for new processes, supported by 
appropriate policy and regulatory measures leading to increase in the productivity 
of milch animals and thereby increase milk production to meet the rapidly 
growing demand for milk and  provide rural milk producers with greater access to 
the organised milk -processing sector. The Committee have been informed that 
NDP, Phase-I was approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs on 
16 February, 2012 and Administrative Approval for the Scheme was issued on 16 
March, 2012. Being well aware of the pivotal role to be played by this Scheme in 
bolstering the overall milk production in the country, the Committee desire that 
the Department start implementing this Scheme without any further del ay so that 
the objective of the Scheme can be achieved by the year 2016 -17 and the 
increasing demand of the milk in the country be matched with appropriate supply 
of the same. 
Reply of the Government 
 An amount of Rs. 4.00 crore was released for implementation of NDP-1 to 
NDDB On 29 th March 2012. The administrative approval of NDP -1 for the year 
2012-13 has been issued on 08/05/2012. In a meeting of Project Steering 
Committee held on 28.06.2012, five projects have been approved under the 
scheme. A budget pr ovision of Rs. 130 crore has been earmarked for 
implementation of NDP-I for 2012-13. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 

Development of Freshwater and Brackishwater Aquaculture 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.61) 
 The main objective of th e Scheme Development of Freshwater 
Aquaculture is to popularize modern fish farming, creating employment 
opportunities and diversifying aquaculture practices and providing assistance to 
fish farmers engaged in aquaculture. The Committee note that due to 
introduction of improved technology of fish farming and the efforts of FFDAs, the 
national average productivity of ponds and tanks covered under the programme 
has reached a figure of 2900 kg./ha/annum. They are anguished to note that 
water area covered durin g the fiscal 2011 -12 had falled down to 13,125 ha from 
26,420 ha in 2007 -08. Similarly, during the same period water area cover under 
the Scheme Brackishwater Aquaculture was 2,338 ha which came to the level of 
1,471 ha. Deeply concerned at this alarming s tate of affairs, the Committee 
recommend that the Department pull up its socks and ensure that the due 
attention is paid to the proper implementation of the Scheme and the objectives 
of the Scheme be kept in the forefront. If done, they are positive that this Scheme 
will surely witness a turnaround in its fortunes. 
Reply of the Government 
Development of Freshwater and Brackishwater Aquaculture is 
undertaken under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme on „Development of Inland 
Fisheries and Aquaculture‟.  Many Stat e Governments have felt a need for 
revision in the unit cost under the Scheme.  The Government has taken note of 

the suggestion and the unit costs are proposed to be revised during Twelfth 
Plan.  In addition, it has been observed that several FFDAs have be come non-
operational due mainly to financial difficulties faced by them.  In order to revive 
the FFDAs, it is proposed to support FEDAs in the 12th Plan.  The reason for 
reduction in the coverage of the area is due to the fact that emphasis during this 
period was on renovation and revival of existing ponds so as to improve its 
productivity. The scope of further increase in Brackishwater aquaculture is also 
limited.  
In addition, the National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) is also 
extending assistance in above areas through their Schemes. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 37 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
National Schemes of Welfare Programme of Fishermen 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.62) 
 Fully endorsing the Department‟s stand that the Government needs to do 
a lot more for the welfare of the fishermen who are engaged in an extremely risky 
occupation, the Committee urge the Government to give this sector i ts due finally 
and quantumly enhance the allocation for this Scheme in the Twelfth Plan so as 
to mitigate the risk encountered by the fishermen and thereby contribute towards 

enhancement of their overall well being. They desire to be informed of the 
progress made in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
An amount of Rs. 50.00 crore has been allocated during financial year 
2012-13 for the National Scheme of Welfare of Fishermen. The allocation of 
funds for the Twelfth Plan for the Scheme has not yet been finalized.  
It has also been decided by Government of India to issue uniform 
Biometric Identity Cards to all marine fishers. The Department had accordingly 
launched a “Central Sector Scheme (CSS) on Issuance of Biometric ID Cards to 
Coast Fishermen” at a t otal cost of Rs.72 crore keeping in view  the welfare of 
marine fishers.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
 
Food Safety and Traceability 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.63) 
 The Committee note that as stated by the Department that they  entered 
into a Technical Cooperation Programme with Food and Agriculture organization 
(FAO) to devise a strategy for animal identification and traceability system in 
India as they were venturing into unchartered territory. This will not only help in 

upgradation of various livestock species in the future but also improve the India‟s 
prospects for International trade of disease -free animals and animal products. 
The Committee were informed by the Department that during the Twelfth Plan 
Rs.50.00 crore have bee n proposed for this Scheme and the Budget Outlay of 
Rs.5.00 crore has been provided for the fiscal 2012 -13. The Committee note with 
concern that Action Plan of the Scheme in terms of strategy report is yet to be 
submitted by the FAO. The Department expects  to get the Action Plan from FAO 
by September, 2012. The Committee desire the Department to finalise all 
procedural formalities like approvals, sanctions, etc. at their end in connection 
with this novel Scheme so as to be ready to implement the same from O ctober, 
2012. They further desire to be apprised of the latest development achieved 
therein. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department had approached FAO to devise a strategy for animal 
identification and traceability system in India.  The FAO had sent to the  
Department a study proposal under Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) on 
Animal Identification and Traceability (AI&T) system for India.  The TCP proposal 
was accepted in the Department and accordingly funds have also been released 
to FAO for Government  of India contribution to the project.  The TCP has a total 
outlay of Rs.1.82 crores out of which the share of Government of India is Rs.1.1 
crore.  

As per the TCP, FAO would carry out the study and submit a Strategy and 
Action Plan in terms of strategy re port to the Department within 7 months.  The 
Inception workshop for the project was held by FAO on 8th February 2012.  FAO 
is, therefore, expected to submit its Strategy and Action Plan by September 
2012.  The Strategy and Action Plan submitted by FAO will  be examined in the 
Department for formulation of a pilot project which will be initially implemented in 
a few selected States.  The Department will make efforts to prepare the pilot 
project within the shortest period possible. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.40 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN  
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
Growth Rate of Livestock and Fisheries Sector 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.38) 
 The Committee note with concern that growth rate in Livestock and 
Fisheries sector is declining year after year which in their opinion do es not augur 
well for a country like India historically wealthy in livestock and fisheries. The 
Committee further observe that growth rate of this sector in the year 2007-08 was 
pegged at the level of 17.06% has slid down to 13.23% in the fiscal 2010 -11. The 

growth rate of this sector is being monitored by Central Statistics Office (CSO) 
and based on the production data for milk, meat, wool and eggs, the gross value 
of outputs using 2004 -05 prices for the Gross Value Addition under Constant 
Price and WPI (2 010-11) deflators of the relevant items is used to estimate the 
Gross Value of Outputs under current prices for the year 2010 -11. It is also a 
signal that the production of milk, meat, wool and egg are also decreasing in the 
country. The Committee are of t he firm opinion that the extant morass can be 
overcome, if all concerned parties are serious in their intent to redress this 
downslide of growth rate. The first step here would be to attain convergence of 
ideas. This can be arrived at by regular reviews wi th the State Government, 
regional meetings, conferencing with States, visits to States, constant monitoring 
of Schemes and identification and solution of the difficulties found, etc. This 
would help in arriving at a common ground and infuse a sense of part icipation 
amongst the States / UTs as the Centre would no longer be looked up as the Big 
Brother. This would then help the States / UTs to channel all their resources in 
the right direction and strive for firstly stabilizing the declining growth rate and 
then work towards its increase in the years to come. They would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken in this direction alongwith outcome thereof. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation has informed that 
Central Statistics Office (CSO) is entrusted with the responsibility  of compilation 
of Gross Value of Output (GVO) and Gross Domestic product (GDP) of all 
sectors of the economy including that of Livestock and Fishery Sector. CSO 

compiles the GDP of the economy including  that of livestock sector which is 
based on the production data in respect of milk, egg, meat and wool supplied by 
DADF and is not maintaining the growth rate of any sector in the economy 
including that of Livestock & Fishery.  
  The Department has no spec ific comments on the methodology being 
adopted by Central Statistical Office in estimating the GDP from the Livestock 
Sector. 
 The year-wise production of milk, meat, eggs and wool from 2007 -08 
to 2010 -11 is given below. The production estimates compiled b y this 
Department does not show decline in the production of milk, meat and egg. 
However, there is marginal decline in the estimates of wool production.  
 
Year 
Milk in 
million 
tonnes 
Meat in 
million 
tonnes 
Egg in 
million nos. 
Wool in 
million kgs. 
2007-08 107.9 4.0 53583 43.9 
2008-09 112.2 4.2 55562 42.8 
2009-10 116.4 4.5 60267 43.1 
2010-11 121.8 4.9 63024 43.0 
However, the department is taking necessary steps to increase the 
production and growth of the (AHDF Sector by regularly monitoring with States 
for full utilization of funds and progress of the schemes through review meetings, 

video conferencing with the States and visits to States by the senior officers of 
this department. Whenever, any deficiencies have been found, States have been 
requested to take the necessary steps to take corrective measure to remove the 
deficiencies.  Further, the additional investment in the AHDF sector through 
RKVY and National Mission on Protein Supplements (NMPS) would help in 
improving the overall growth rate of this sector. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Budgetary Allocations  

(Recommendation Para No. 2.33)  
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the 
Department for the Eleventh Plan period the Committee observed that there was 
a variation in figures between the amount initially approved of Rs.8,174 crore and 
the actual allocation of Rs.5,9 10 crore by the Planning Commission, thus leaving 
a gap of about Rs.2,264 crore. This realignment of figures by the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) bewilders 
the Committee. This being so as the Planning Commissio n after having 
undertaken a detailed exercise would have earmarked the funds for the 
Department at the start of the Eleventh Plan. Inspite of numerous pleas to the 
concerned agencies to give the Department their full allocation and to help them 
carry out t heir mandate successfully, no positive outcome has been witnessed. 
Keeping the importance of this sector in view of providing sustenance to the 
economically weak farming community, the Committee desire the Government to 
have a fresh outlook on this aspect during the Twelfth Plan and to ensure that full 
quota of allocated funds are actually provided to the Department in the annual 
allocations in the Twelfth Plan.  
Inter-sectoral Allocations  
(Recommendation Para No. 2.34)  
The Committee note with regret that  their repeated recommendations that 
Plan allocation of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries 
be increased so as to increase its share in comparison to the other two 
Departments of the Agriculture sector viz. Department of Agriculture and 

Cooperation and Department of Agricultural Research and Education, have not 
yielded any positive change in that, the share of the Department remains much 
lower compared to its sister Departments. The Committee do not buy the 
argument of the Department that compared to the Tenth Plan, the allocation for 
the Department in the Eleventh Plan exceeds the amounts allocated to DARE in 
terms of incremental increase. Irrespective of the fact that though DAHDF is the 
youngest constituent to share the Plan allocat ion it need not be the least, as is 
evident currently. The Committee empathize with the Department on this issue 
and once again urge the Planning Commission to quantitatively enhance the 
share of DAHDF in the Plan allocation as this sector provides additio nal means 
of sustenance to the farming community mostly comprising of small and marginal 
farmers residing in the rural areas. The Committee are confident that the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan would probably usher in a change of fortunes for the Department 
with increased Plan allocations.  
Reply of the Government 
Planning Commission has informed that the allocation of funds to this 
department is determined by the following criteria: 
 Over all resource position, 
 Absorption capacity of the department, 
 Unspent balances, and 
 Financial support available through other major programmes like RKVY. 
The year-wise allocation of DADF has increased substantially as per the 
table given below. However the actual expenditure was less, though it has gone 

up in Financial Year 2010-11 and 2011-12. The Plan allocation of this department 
for the year 2012-13 is 19.38% higher than the allocation for 2011-12. 
Year 
Approved 
outlay 
RE Actual 
Expenditure 
11th Plan (2007-
2012) 8,174.00   
2007-08 910.00 810.00 784.09 
2008-09 1,000.00 940.00 865.27 
2009-10 1,100.00 930.00 873.38 
2010-11 1,300.00 1,257.00 1,104.68 
2011-12 1,600.00 1,356.52 1270.15 
TOTAL 5,910.00 5,293.52 4897.57 
2012-13 1,910.00   
 
In addition, the livestock and fisheries sector is also getting the funding 
support under R ashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) which is implemented by 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) which results in the 
enhancement of the share of plan allocation of this Department. The details of 
Year wise / sector wise summary of approved projec ts in the 11th Plan for Animal 
Husbandry, Dairy Development & Fisheries under RKVY for activities in animal 
husbandry, dairying and fisheries sector is given in the following table: 
 
Rs. in crore 
Year Animal Husbandry Dairy 
Development 
Fisheries 
11th Plan     

(2007-2012) 
2007-08 104.80 56.76 63.69 
2008-09 666.31 203.45 142.16 
2009-10 712.02 154.85 109.12 
2010-11 734.71 333.36 278.96 
2011-12 847.31 281.58 390.60 
TOTAL 3065.15 1030.00 984.53 
 
Apart from the above, National Mission on Protein Supplemen ts (NMPS) 
was launched in the year 2011 -12 in 22 identified States as a part of Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana, with an outlay of Rs. 300 Crore. The objective of this 
programme is to increase production of animal protein like milk, meat and fish etc 
in order to meet rising demand for these products. In the current year 2012 -13, 
an amount of Rs. 500 crore has been allocated under different components of 
NMPS.  
Thus, under RKVY and NMPS, an amount of about Rs. 5,379.68 crore 
was allocated for Animal Husbandry,  Dairying and Fisheries (AHDF) Sector 
during Eleventh Plan in addition to the approved outlay of Rs. 5,910 crore for this 
Department. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.10 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 

 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.35, 2.36 and 2.37) 
Simultaneously the Committee also impress upon the Department to get 
their own house in order and address the issues immediately due to which States 
/ UTs ar e not coming up to avail Central Funds. All these bottlenecks should be 
thrashed threadbare during the course of free and frank discussion wherein both 
parties put forth their views candidly and then arrive at a common ground. They 
are of the strong belief  that if both Central and State Governments are truly 
interested in invigorating the AHDF sector they would strive to work towards 
convergence of ideas which in the present scenario seems to be bordering on 
the divergent. The Committee are pretty sanguine that if the States / UTs are 
taken up as equal partners, then they would be motivated to avail Central Funds 
in increased quantities thereby furnishing timely fresh proposals as well as 
utilization certificates thus taking care of unspent balances. This wo uld also 
ensure unhindered flow of funds, so that the last in the chain i.e. the beneficiary 
is benefitted in the true sense. This will further lead to increased allocation, 
optimum utilization of allocated funds and ultimately spur this sector towards the  
growth it presently craves for. They desire to be apprised of the steps taken in 
this direction.  
The Committee note that another area of concern for the Department is 
that many State Governments were unable to utilize their funds to the extent 
possible due to infrastructural problems leading them to routinely park their funds 

to help them in their ways and means position. The result of this is reflected in 
the current level of the unspent balances with the States at Rs.854 crore. The 
Committee had recomme nded in their earlier Report on Demands For Grants 
(2011-12) that this situation can also be overcome by regular online monitoring of 
the funds released by the Department which would ensure that they are utilized 
only for the designated purposes. The Commi ttee again impress upon the 
Department to issue unambiguous instructions at the highest level to all State 
Governments pointing out how the unspent balances, ultimately lead to the 
curtailing of their future funding and also to desist them from venturing i nto 
parking the funds allocated by the Department for other purposes. They therefore 
desire that effective steps be taken to bring down the level of unspent balances 
in the Twelfth Plan at least.  
Another reason attributed by the Department for less expend iture was due 
to lack of critical manpower, especially scientists and technicians. The States are 
handicapped by poor infrastructure in respect of both , veterinary and extension 
staff and hospitals / dispensaries, and have generally accorded less priority to 
this sector compared to crop husbandry. The Committee feel that this is a 
genuine problem which can be resolved by giving one time relaxation at the time 
of recruitment. Also, a tie -up with UPSC may also help the Department to tide 
over this problem. Th e Committee would like the Department to prepare a 
roadmap in a time bound manner to overcome this situation and fully espouse its 
cause as well. The Committee, therefore desire to be apprised of the action 
taken on this aspect at the earliest.  

 
Reply of the Government 
 The schemes of the Department are basically intended to assist the 
States in the development of infrastructure and provide policy directives for 
promotion of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries (AHDF) sectors. The 
department is constan tly taking up the matter with States for effective utilization 
of funds. The department is also regularly monitoring the full utilization of funds 
and progress of the schemes through video conferencing with the States and 
State visits by the senior officers of this department from time to time.  
In order to liquidate to unspent balances, the Department is constantly 
taking up the matter with the States through D.O letter from Secretary to Chief 
Secretaries of respective States. Recently, a D.O. letter from Hon‟ble Agriculture 
Minister has been issued to Hon‟ble Chief Ministers / Administrators of all 
States/UTs on 30th April 2012 in respect of unspent balance of funds released by 
Union Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.  
Hon‟ble Agricult ure Minister has also written to the Chief Minister‟s 
emphasizing that the size of the unspent balance is a matter of concern, since it 
affects the further release of funds to States, delaying the implementation of 
critical schemes and projects alongwith r equest to the States/U Ts to take urgent 
action to reduce the unspent balance otherwise it will be difficult to release 
central funds in the current financial year 2012-13. 

In respect of lack of critical manpower, it is stated that the recruitment of 
all technical posts, whether through direct recruitment or promotion or deputation, 
is strictly guided by the Recruitment Rules of the post which are of statutory 
nature.  Relaxation to these recruitment rules is solicited if there is a change in 
the guidelines of DOPT, etc. Union Public Service Commission and Staff 
Selection Commission are the nodal agencies to make recruitment to the 
technical posts of this department. The Department has already initiated exercise 
to fill up all the vacant technical posts as per the prescribed procedure.    
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 13 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
Twelfth Five Year Plan 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.39) 
 The Committee note with concern that inspite of their having espoused the 
cause of initiating corrective measures in the terminal phase of Eleventh Plan by 
the Planning Commission / Department well before the commencement of the 
next Plan so to avoid p rocedural delays in according clearances to a Scheme 
which results in staggering of timelines and reduced allocations, as was evident 
during the Eleventh Plan period, no concrete action has been initiated in this 
regard. Though the Department have complied  with their end of the bargain but 

as usual everything is stuck at the end of the Planning Commission. This fact 
was confessed to before the Committee by the representative of the Planning 
Commission during the course of his oral deposition in connection w ith 
examination of Demands for Grants of the Department (2012 -13). Inspite of the 
assurance given by the representative of the Planning Commission that all 
concerns raised by the Committee will be resolved by the end of July, 2012, the 
Committee apprehend that their worst nightmare might just come true and a 
repeat of the situation prevalent in the Eleventh Plan may resurface the Twelfth 
Plan. Taking into account the cascading effects of delay in finalizing the Twelfth 
Plan document on implementation of the  Schemes of the Department, the 
Committee once again recommend that all agencies entrusted with the task of 
the planning process expedite clearances to the Twelfth Plan document so that it 
can be implemented at the earliest. They further desire that the pr ogress 
achieved may be communicated to them at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
  In respect of finalization of the Twelfth Five Year Plan, Planning 
Commission has informed that the Approach Paper to the 12 th Plan which 
broadly outlines the overall fr amework and directions of the 12 th Plan, has 
already been approved by the National Development Council (NDC). The 
Approach Paper also gives the resource allocation priorities of the Plan. 
Various Working Groups and Steering Committees were constituted for 
preparing the Twelfth Plan. Ministries/Departments were represented in Working 

Groups/Steering Committees concerning their respective sectors. Therefore, 
Ministries/Departments are aware of the Plan priorities as well as the sectoral 
goals, targets and objectives of the Plan. 
Even though the 12 th Five Year Plan has not yet been approved, the 
priorities of the Plan are duly taken care of in the allocation for the first year of the 
Plan, by taking due cognizance of the approved Approach Paper to the 12 th Plan 
as well as discussions of the Steering Committees of the 12 th Plan.  In any case, 
the first year‟s allocations are dominantly those for 11 th Plan schemes.  New 
schemes are typically formulated and approved during the first year of the Plan. 
Planning Commi ssion has informed that it is in an advanced stage of 
preparing the Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The Plan document is expected to be 
finalized soon.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 16 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.55) 
 The Committee note with concern that FMD control programme is being 
implemented in 221 specified districts of the countr y with 100% central funding 

as cost of vaccine, maintenance of cold chain and other logistic support to 
undertake vaccination. The main aim of this programme is to prevent economic 
losses due to Foot and Mouth Disease and to develop herd immunity in cloven -
footed animals. It is a location specific programme. They further observe that day 
by day the demand for vaccination to control FMD is increasing in operative and 
non-operative areas since the programme showed desired results in terms of 
reduction in the incidence of disease. The Committee are happy to note that 
Department intends to cover all the 660 districts in the country under this 
Scheme during the Twelfth Plan. During the year 2012 -13, the Department plan 
to cover 63 more districts of Rajasthan and Odisha raising the total number of 
districts covered from the current 221 to 284 with total coverage of about 36 
million additional population of bovines to be vaccinated. Keeping in view the 
paramountcy of this programme in ridding the nation of this epid emic, the 
Committee, desire the Department to prepare a road map to work on this 
Scheme for the entire nation in a time bound manner. They further desire to be 
apprised of the details of the road map so drawn at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
  The Department is implementing Foot & Mouth Disease Control 
Programme (FMD -CP) since 10th Plan period.  The programme has been 
expanded from 54 districts to 221 districts in August 2010 during 11 th Plan period 
and now covers whole of southern peninsula includi ng Maharashtra, Goa, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Punjab and 16 districts of UP.  It envisages for vaccination in 
targeted animals i.e. 110 million cattle and buffalo in the identified States/Uts at 6 

monthly intervals.  The remaining districts in the country will be  taken up during 
12th Plan and beyond in phased manner so as to cover whole of India under 
FMD-CP. Accordingly, FMD -CP programme in 12 th Plan will dovetail the 
expansion of FMD -CP in the remaining districts of the country. Simultaneously, 
the monitoring of the programme is being strengthened to improve efficacy of the 
programme towards achieveing the objective of eradication of FMD.    
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Central Minikit Testing Programme on Fodder Crops 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.58) 

 From their  examination of Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the 
Department, the Committee note that there is a shortage of green and dry fodder 
in the country. Though a lot of work has already been done and still a lot remains 
to be done by the Department for increasi ng the production / availability of green 
and dry fodder in the country. They further note that in order to improve the 
quality of fodder and to increase the production of fodder, the Department have 
allotted fodder minikits to the States for distribution among the farmers, free of 
cost. The Committee, however, are anguished to note that inspite of distribution 
of 12.67 lakh fodder seed minikits of legume and non -legume variety to the 
farmers, the Department is not in a position to ascertain the increase in  the 
quantum of fodder crops / grasses / legumes produced in the country. It has 
been brought to their notice that Department is proposing major modifications in 
the Central Sector Scheme –The Central Fodder Development Organisations, of 
which the Minikit Testing Programme is a component in order to increase the 
number of beneficiaries and increase fodder supply. The Committee share the 
view of the Department that the benefits should percolate down to farmers who 
are actually engaged in production of fodder . The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should not only free the Scheme of its present 
geographical restrictions but also ensure that the targeted beneficiaries are 
actually able to avail the benefits of the Scheme. The Committee further desire 
that while distributing fodder minikits for testing they should keep in mind the 
objective of the Scheme and get feedback from the beneficiaries which needs to 
be taken into consideration while modifying in the Central Sector Scheme –The 

Central Fod der Development Organisation. This would enhance the viability of 
this Scheme and ultimately help in increasing the quantity of precious yet scarce 
fodder in the country. They desire to be apprised of the progress made in this 
direction. 
Reply of the Government 
  The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for necessary 
action. It is clarified that the Central Sector Scheme - The Central Fodder 
Development Organizations, of which the Minikit Testing Programme is a 
component is demand driven and has  no geographical restrictions. The Fodder 
Minikit Programme aims to demonstrate the benefits of rising high yielding fodder 
seeds in different agro-climate regions. 
The Department has awarded a study to the National Productivity Council 
for evaluation of t he Central Minikit Testing Programme.  The evaluation study 
includes an assessment of the impact of the scheme on different categories of 
beneficiaries and performance of the distributed seeds in terms of both 
productivity and yield. Getting feedback from the beneficiaries is also included in 
the terms of reference of the evaluation study.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.28 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 

Delhi Milk Scheme 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.60) 
 The Committee note that initial installed capacity of DMS was for 
processing / packing of 2.55 lakh litres of milk per day. However in order to meet 
increasing demand for milk in the city, the capacity was expanded in phases to 
the level of 5.00 lakh litres of milk per day. They further observed that the 
capacity utilization has never been full and rather the utilization of its capacity of 
processing / packing of milk is reducing year after year. This is  resulting in the 
fixation of low targets, their achievements continues to make losses year after 
year. The Committee take a serious view in regard to non -implementation of their 
recommendation in this regard contained in their earlier Reports. The Committ ee 
desire that instead of wasting their time any further on the vexed and 
controversial issue of corporatization, the Government should immediately 
improve the infrastructure and wherewithal of DMS with state -of-the-art 
machinery and equipments, so that it  is able turn around and start making profits 
like other such industries in the profitable Dairy Sector. A lot of precious time and 
resources of the DMS have already been wasted in taking decision and proposal 
to be put up to the Union Cabinet. The Committ ee, therefore, once again 
reiterate that needful be done urgently by the Government so as to ensure that 
DMS is restored as a flourishing, profit making entity like Mother Dairy and 
others. 
 

Reply of the Government 
In principle approval for corporatization  of DMS has been given by 
Cabinet. The Department is pursuing corporatization of DMS based on the in -
principle approval of the Government. Pending Corporatization of DMS, the 
Department is taking action for improving its performance.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 23rd July, 2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.31 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI       BASUDEB ACHARIA 
22 February, 2013                           Chairman 
03 Phalguna, 1934, (Saka)                 Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - I 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 2 2 February, 2013 from 1000 hours to 
1025 hours in Room  No. „62‟, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
MEMBERS 
                            LOK SABHA  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
 Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
Shri Premdas Katheria 
Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
Shri Patel Kishanbhai V. 
Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
  
  
  
  
  

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.C. Koul  -  Director 
2. Shri T.H. Rao  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
*2. At the outset the  Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the  
Committee.     
 xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up Memorandum No. 07 regarding draft 
Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty -fifth Report of the 
Committee on  Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries). 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report s without any 
modifications.  
*5. xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
* matter not related to this report.

ANNEXURE -  II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) PERTAINING TO MINISTRY 
OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND 
FISHERIES) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations               18 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Para Nos. 1.4, 3.54, 3.56, 3.57, 3.59, 3.61, 3.62 and 3.63. 
 
Total           08 
Percentage                          44.44%
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
Para No. 2.38.          
 
Total                   01 
Percentage                              5.55% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos.  2.33, 2.34, 2.35, 2.36, 2.37, 2.39 and 3.55    
Total             07  
Percentage              38.9% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para Nos.  3.58 and 3.60 
Total            02 
  
Percentage                 11.11%  