 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES  
 
              
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2009-2010) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the  
Recommendations/Observation contained in  
the Fifth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-2010)} 
 
         
        
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
16 

 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
          
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES  
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2009-2010) 
 
  
         
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observation 
contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-
2010)}  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on    08.03.2011  
        
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on       08.03.2011 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 


 
 
 
 
 
COA No. 239 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
<CONTENTS> 
                   
                 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ………………………………………   
     
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have    
   been accepted by the Government ……………     
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the  
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government‟s replies …………………..     
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect  
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….     
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of   
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….     
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting of the                   
  Committee held on 3  March, 2011.  
           
                                   ANNEXURE 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
 Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report                 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2009-2010).            
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
 
COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2010-2011) 
 
 Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhary  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera  
23. Shri Narendra Budania 
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi  
25. Shri A. Elavarasan 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31. Shri S. Tangavelu 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
4. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
5. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
         
I, the Chairma n, Committee on Agriculture (2010 -11) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Sixteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report  of the Committee on 
Agriculture (2009-10) on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) pertaining to Ministry 
of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Fifth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-10) on Demands 
for Grants (2009 -10) was first presented to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 18 
February, 2010 and later to Lok Sabha on 3 March, 2010 respectively.  The 
Report was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 3 March, 2010. The Action 
Taken Replies on the Report were received from the Ministry on 19 July, 2010. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
Sitting held on 3 March, 2011. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the  Fifth Report ( Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Annexure. 
 
 
      
                   
           
                                                                                   
                                                                                         
NEW DELHI;               BASUDEB ACHARIA 
7 March 2011                                                             Chairman, 
16 Phalguna, 1932(Saka)                                   Committee on Agriculture.
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
 
This Report of the Com mittee on Agriculture deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the R ecommendations contained in the Fifth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2009 -2010) on 
„Demands for Grants‟ (2009 -10) of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
which was presented first to the Hon‟ble Speaker and later to Lok Sabha on 18 
February and 03 March, 2010 respectively and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 03 March, 2010. 
 
1.2  The Ministry of Food Processing Industries have furnished Action Taken 
Replies in respect of all the 21 Observations/Recommendations  contained in 
the Report.  These have been categorised as under: 
 
 Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Recommendation Para Nos. 1.4, 2.11, 3.35, 3.37, 4.38, 4.39, 
4.40, 4.41, 4.43, 5.19 and 5.23   
 
 Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:  
Recommendation Para Nos. – Nil 
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by t he 
Committee  
Recommendation Para Nos. 2.12, 3.34, 3.36, 3.38, 3.39, 4.42 and 
5.20  
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited.   
Recommendation Para Nos. 3.33, 5.21 and 5.22  
 

 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/R ecommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to 
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any re ason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation.  The Committee desire that Further Action Taken Notes 
on the Observations/R ecommendations co ntained in Chapter -I and final 
Action Taken Replies to the R ecommendations contained in Chapter-V of 
this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS 
(Recommendation Para no. 2.12)  
 
1.5 Having noted that  in spite of the grossly insufficient financial stimulus , 
the Food Processing  Industry Sector was contributing hugely to the GDP as 
well as providing employment directly/indirectly to almost 50 million people, the 
Committee with a view to enable the hugely capital  intensive food processing 
industry sector to prosper and add to the economic prosperity of the nation  had 
desired the Government to take cogent and purposeful action for the 
development of this sector and  allocate funds in consonance with the genuine 
requirements of this sector. 
 
1.6 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in their Action Taken Note, 
have stated that the observations of Committee are being communicated to the 
Ministry of Finance and Pl anning Commission for suitable action and the 
Ministry while preparing the Annual Plan will be incorporating these observations 
while demanding higher allocation for the sector. 
 
1.7   In spite of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries communicating 
the recommendation of the Committee for a quantum enhancement of 
funds for the Ministry during the 2010 -11 fiscal to the Ministry of Finance 

 
 
and the Planning Commission, the Committ ee are constrained to note 
that no heed has been  given to the advice of the Committee  as is evident 
from the allocation of Rs. 400.00 crore  only to the Ministry for the Fiscal      
2010-11. Though the total allocation for the Eleventh Five Year Plan as 
approved by the Planning Commission was Rs. 4031.00 crore, the actual 
allocation during the first four years  is a measly Rs. 1280.00 crore. This 
leaves a whooping Rs. 2751.00 crore for the terminal year of the ongoing 
Five Year P lan, which going by the cu rrent scenario seems very unlikely 
to be allocated to the Ministry in the next fiscal. Though the Committee 
are aware that the overall availability of resource position and the inter -se 
prioritization amongst various Ministries/Departments may lead to some  
variations in actual allocations, yet the glaring gap between  the approved 
allocation and the actual allocation for the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries for the Eleventh Five Year Plan is indicative of a rather 
lackadaisical attitude towards proper  planning and management of  
finances by the Government for the so called Sunshine Sector. The 
Committee express their serious displeasure at this sordid state of affairs 
and at the cost of sounding repetitive recommend the Government to 
allocate a sizeabl e amount , if not the entire balance of the approved 
amount for the 2011-12 fiscal without fail. In the considered opinion of the 
Committee such a measure would really provide the much needed fillip to 
this sector as the Ministry have now reached a stage where their schemes 
would start delivering with the proper and timely infusion of funds. 
 
BUDGETARY PLANNING 
(Recommendation Para no.  3.33) 
 
 
1.8 The Committee note d that the planning process with regard to the 
Eleventh Plan for Ministry of Food Processing Industries commenced with the 
constitution of a Working Group on Food Processing Industries by the Planning 
Commission.  Based on the recommendations of this Workin g Group, the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries submitted their proposal for the Eleventh 
Plan to the Planning Commission.  Four of the Tenth Plan Schemes were 
continued in the Eleventh Plan with some modifications in the pattern of 

 
 
assistance or the procedures.  One old Scheme on Infrastructure Development 
was revamped and co -opted.  A new Scheme for upgradation of Quality of 
Street Food was also included.  Thus, in the Eleventh Plan the Ministry are 
pursuing six schemes.  
 
While on the Planning Proces s, the Committee also comment ed on the 
sloppy manner in which the Scheme for upgradation of Quality of Street Food 
has been handled.  This new Scheme was given in -principle approval by the 
Planning Commission but was held up for want of approvals of EFC/CC EA.  
The Scheme was recommended by the EFC in its mee ting held on 5 February, 
2008. The CCEA considered the proposal in its meeting held on 23 February, 
2009 more than one year after the Scheme was recommended by the EFC and 
even then the proposal was defe rred.  The result is that the Scheme is yet to 
see the light of the day.  The Committee were pained at the sorry fate befa lling 
this Scheme.  The Committee therefore recommend ed that the Government 
should act upon this Scheme without losing any further time so that at  least 
some of the places where this Scheme is to be implemented are ready before 
the Commonwealth Games, 2010. 
 
1.9 The Ministry in their action taken note stated t hat the scheme for 
“Upgradation of Quality of Street Food”, was approved by Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on 5 February, 2008.  Subsequently, the 
draft CCEA Note was circulated to the Ministry of Finance (Dept. of 
Expenditure), Tourism, Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation for seeking their 
comments.  
 
The Scheme was operationalized for undertaking initial preparatory work 
with the approval of the Hon‟ble Minister, Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries, by issuing an annual sanct ion order for the year 2008 -09.  
Thereafter, the draft CCEA Note was appropriately revised incorporating the 
observations of the Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Expenditure) and again 
circulated on 12 January 2009 to the Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Expenditure), 
Tourism, Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation for seeking their comments in 

 
 
this regard.  The same was considered by CCEA in its meeting held on 23  
February 2009 and it was „Deferred‟. 
 
   Draft CCEA note was again circulated to Planning Commission, Ministry 
of Finance (Dept. of Expenditure), Tourism, Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation for seeking their comments as required consequent upon the 
formation of the new Government.    
          All the concerned Ministries reiterated their earlier stand.  However, the 
Planning Commission did not support the Scheme.  Planning Commission was  
again requested by MoFPI to reconsider the proposal, they however, reiterated 
the earlier stand. 
            The scheme for “Upgradation of Quality of Street Food” was included in 
the working Group Report of the Eleventh Five Year Plan of the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries.  However no specific in –principal approval has 
been accorded by the Planning Commission, though Rs. 178.00 crore has been 
indicated in the proposed budget allocation of Rs. 4031 .00 Crore of the Ministry 
of Food Processing Industries for the Eleventh Five year Plan.  
 
The same does not construe as Planning Commission approval as these 
allocations are subject to the necessary approval after following due 
procedures. 
                    
  After receiving the comments on the draft CCEA note from Food Safety 
and Standard Authority, CCEA note has been sent to Cabinet Secretariat on 
08-06-2010 for placing before CCEA with due  approval of the Hon‟ble Minister 
FPI. 
 
1.10 The Committee are disappointed to observe from the reply of the 
Government to this recommendation that the necessary approvals for the 
Scheme for ‘Upgradation of Quality of Street Food’ are yet to be accorded 
by the concerned authorities.  It is highly disturbing and disconcerting to 
observe that on the one hand at the time of examination of Demands for 
Grants (2009 -10), they were informed that the P lanning Commission 
accorded ‘in -principle’ approval for this Scheme and on the other the 

 
 
action taken note states that Planning Commission did not support the 
Scheme and that no ‘in -principle’ approval has been accorded by the 
Planning Commission though a sum of Rs. 178 .00 crore has been 
indicated in the BE 2009 -10 for the Scheme for the Eleventh Plan.  Th ey 
are further surprised with reply of the Ministry that this does not construe 
as approval of Planning Commission and the indicated allocations are 
subject to necessary approvals following due procedures. 
 The Committee note further that a draft CCEA note approved by the 
Minister of Food Processing Industries has been sent on 8 June, 2010 for 
approval of CCEA.  The Committee cannot but conclude that the pa ce at 
which the approvals at different stages viz. EFC/CCEA etc. are taken 
leaves much to be desired and therefore, reiterate their recommendation   
made earlier .  They further desire to be apprised of the final decision 
taken in the matter at the earliest. 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
(Recommendation Para no. 3.34) 
 
1.11 Concerned that the planning and approval system in vogue now was 
leading to inordinate delays in a scheme being finally implemented as a lot of 
time was spent in getting  the necessary approvals due to which  the Ministry 
had been able to spend a sum of Rs. 405 .00 crore only in the first two fiscals 
out of the total allocation of Rs. 4031.00 crore, the Committee had 
recommended that the planning and approval system in vogue required a 
radical makeover  so that the implementation part of the Scheme gets a fair 
amount of time which is hitherto being spent on planning and approval stages. 
They had further desired that this should ideal ly be completed before the new 
Plan comes into effect.  
 
1.12 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in their Action Taken Note, 
have stated that the observations of Committee are being sent to the Planning 
Commission.  As regards action at the level of Ministry is concerned, it will be 
ensured that planning and proposal formulation will be undertaken well before 
the new Plan comes into effect. 

 
 
 
1.13   The Committee are highly perturbed by the casual manner in which 
the instant r ecommendation has been dealt with  by the Ministry . The 
system of planning and approvals in the Ministry needs a radical change. 
Due to inordinate delays in planning and approvals , very little time is left 
for the proper implementation of the scheme concerned leading to both 
cost and time overruns. In the present case, in the first two years o f the 
Eleventh Plan, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was able to 
spend just Rs. 370.00 crore out of Rs. 4031.00 crore  allocated to them for 
the Plan. If the figures of the third year are also factored in , the Ministry 
have been able to spend only Rs. 611.02 crore, which is about 15% of the 
allocated amount. The Committee have observed similar excruciating 
delays in planning and approval processes in the cases of other 
Ministries/Departments as well. On innumerable occasion s the 
Ministries/Departments have submitted before the Committee , the 
deleterious affects of these delays on the imp lementation of the Schemes 
and Programmes. 
 Keeping, in view, the urgent need to have sweeping changes in the 
planning/approval processes and the inter- ministerial ramifications of the 
instant recommendation of the Committee , ideally, the Ministry ought to 
have taken this matter to the Cabinet instead of a routine ‘passing the 
buck’ reference to the Planning Commission. Though a lot of time has 
already bee n wasted, the Committee desire that the needful be done 
forthwith so as to ensure a well considered and lasting solution to this 
perennial problem. 
 
GROWTH RATE – FPI SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para no. 3.36) 
 
1.14  The Committee having observed that the Minis try had no reliable and 
regular system of collection of data pertaining to various components and 
activities of the food processing industry sector in spite of being in existence for 
about two decades and  the Ministry‟s own admission that the absence of su ch 
a data base  is a major bottleneck in the planning exercise in the Ministry, had 
expressed their serious disbelief at the Ministry‟s lack of action for decades 

 
 
together on this vital issue and had desired the Ministry to whole -heartedly 
pursue the setting up of an Information System and ensure its functioning within 
three months. 
 
1.15 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in their Action Taken Note, 
have stated that the Ministry was created in 1988. Thereafter, they were  
merged with the Ministry of Agriculture as a Department  in 1999.  Finally the 
present Ministry came  into existence in the year 2001 .  The manpower in 
Ministry is highly inadequate.  No organization dealing with data collection is in 
existence in the Ministry.  Therefore, this system has not bee n able to develop.  
Ministry have  taken steps for developing reliable data.  Actions have already 
been initiated.   Once the system becomes operational, Ministry will be able to 
have reliable data. 
 
1.16  The Committee strongly deprecate the tone and te nor of the reply of 
the Government on a matter which has all  the potential of ushering the 
much needed information system in the Food Processing Industry Sector. 
Notwithstanding the fact , when the Ministry was merged with Ministry of 
Agriculture, when the present Ministry came into being or the inadequacy 
of manpower, the moot point still remains that t he Ministry have done 
precious little in over two decades of its existence  in taking con clusive 
action on the aspect of having a dedicated information system for 
relevant data on the F ood Processing Industry Sector thus hindering 
proper planning and execution of an  ideal roadmap for the sector. Even 
now, rather than taking conclusive action  within three months as desired 
by the Committee a very vague reply  has been given . The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should without any further loss of time 
draw out a blueprint with rigid time lines for having an Information 
System in plac e at the earliest and not late r than three months from 
presentation of this Report. They further desire that the blueprint for the 
purpose be furnished to the Committee urgently.  
 
 
 

 
 
EXCESSIVE Q-4 AND MARCH SPENDINGS 
(Recommendation Para no. 3.37) 
 
 
1.17 Concerned that the Ministry had breached the Q-4 spending ceiling of 
33% of O utlay stipulated by the Ministry of Finance in 2007 -08 as well as  the 
March spending ceiling of 15% of the O utlay in 2007-08 and 2008-09 and their 
silence inspite of repeated que ries as to whether these violations were brought 
to the notice of the Ministry of Finance, the Committee had recommended the 
Ministry approach  the Ministry of Finance for regularization of past violations 
and ensure that the Q -4 and March spending ceiling s as prescribed by the 
Ministry of Finance for prudent financial planning and for reducing expenditure 
asymmetry are followed in letter and spirit in the future.   
 
1.18 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in their Action Taken Note, 
have stated tha t the observations of the Committee are being noted for 
compliance. The spending ceiling is generally adhered to but because of the 
late receipt of the proposals, sometimes in the interest of the project, the 
ceilings are exceeded.  Observations of the Com mittee are noted for taking it 
up with Ministry of Finance for further necessary action. 
 
1.19 The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry have noted the 
observation of the Committee for adhering to the spending ceiling as 
stipulated by the Ministr y of Finance for compliance.  They further desire 
the Ministry to approach the Ministry of Finance for regularization of past 
violations of the spending ceiling at the earliest as well as ensure that the 
Q-4 and March spending ceiling as prescribed by them  are fully complied 
with.  In the ir considered opinion these steps would ensure that the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries is able to utilize funds evenly 
throughout the entire fiscal, thereby reducing the present expenditure 
asymmetry. 
 
  

 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2009-10 
 (Recommendation Para no. 3.38) 
 
1.20 Noting that the present lesser allocation to the Ministry was going to 
affect all their schemes in the ongoing Fiscal as well as have an adverse effect 
on the GDP share of the food processing i ndustry sector, the Committee had 
recommended the Government to enhance the fund allocation of the Ministry 
without any further delay. 
 
1.21 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in their Action Taken Note, 
have stated that the Ministry concur with the observation of the Committee. 
  
1.22 The Committee deprecat e the continued neglect of the food 
processing  industry s ector by the Planners and consider the meag re 
allocations during the course of the Eleventh Five Year Plan for this 
‘sunshine sector’,  whose contribution to our GDP is Rs. 280,000 crore ,  a 
real travesty of justice. In spite of the Committee having recommended on 
umpteen occasions for enhanced allocation , the pittance being doled out 
by the Government is really shocking and compels the Committee to 
ponder whether the Government is really serious about this sector ? The 
Committee further do not at all appreciate  the stock reply of the Ministry 
that they concur with the observation of the Committee seeking enhanced 
allocation albeit they are of the strong opinion that the Ministry  ought to 
come up with concrete  financial proposals at the earliest and forcefully 
take them up with the Planning Commission and Mi nistry of Finance so 
as to ensure that  the continued neglect of this important sector of our 
economy is a thing of past . The progress achieved in the matter  may be 
communicated to the Committee at  the earliest.   
 
MID TERM APPRAISAL 
(Recommendation Para no. 3.39) 
 
 
1.23 Noting that the Ministry intended to conduct an evaluation of their 
schemes for the years 2005 -06 to 2008-09 a period falling partly in Tenth Plan 
and partly in the Eleventh Plan and c onsidering it to be  not a sound way of 

 
 
evaluating performance, the Committee had desired that the Ministry conduct 
an evaluation from 2007 -08 upto 2009-10 in the period entirely within Eleventh 
Plan,  separately, so as to enable them to analyse their performance in the 
Eleventh Plan in a more realistic and hol istic manner and wherein they c ould  
also benefit form the inputs of the Mid-Term Appraisal being  undertaken by the 
Planning Commission. 
 
1.24 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in their Action Taken Note, 
have stated that the observations of the Committee are being communicated to 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. It has been further stated that 
the Ministry of Food Processi ng Industries will be complying with the 
suggestion on which they have to take action. 
 
1.25 The Committee are not satisfied with the rather casual reply of the 
Ministry with regard to conducting an evaluation of their Schemes from 
2007-08 upto 2009 -10. Rat her than acting upon this specific 
recommendation of the Committee  earnestly, the Ministry have merely 
stated that the observations of the Committee are being communicated to 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission.  They have further stated 
that they will be complying with the suggestion on which they have to 
take action.  The Committee  are also perplexed with regard  to the role of 
the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission in the evaluation of the 
Schemes of the Ministry of Food Processing Indust ries.  Instead of just 
passing the responsibility, the Committee desire that the Ministry on their 
own conduct an evaluation study of their Schemes from 2007 -08 upto 
2009-10 without any further loss of time.  Equipped with the inputs of Mid-
Term A ppraisal undertaken by the Planning Commission would enable 
the Ministry to analyse their performance in a more realistic and holistic 
manner.  They desire to be apprised of the action taken in the matter at 
the earliest. 
  

 
 
 
SCHEME FOR TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION, ESTABLISHMENT AND 
MODERNIZATION OF FPI 
(Recommendation Para no. 4.42) 
 
1.26 Concerned with the fact that all components of the Scheme  for 
technology upgradation, establishment and modernization of Food Processing 
Industries will be adversely affected as a result of the reduced allocations, the 
Committee had desired the Government to immediately re -assess the financial 
requirements of this Scheme and release funds post haste. They had further 
desired the Government to ensure t hat this Scheme is not starved of legitimate 
requirement of funds from next Demands for Grants onwards.   
 
1.27 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in their Action Taken Note, 
have stated that the realistic requirement has been worked out and projected.  
At RE stage, additional allocation of Rs. 18.00 crore was made.  100% RE 
allocation was utilized.  Still, there are over 2200 cases pending for 
disbursement of grant which has been highlighted in the Annual Plan 
formulation of next year. 
 
1.28 The Committee observe that under this Scheme the Revised 
Estimates have exceeded the Budget Estimates and the Actual 
Expenditure has always exceeded the Revised Estimates during the 
course of the Eleventh Five Year Plan. However, in spite of this fact , the 
Government have not allocated the requisite funds to the Ministry. The 
Committee deplore this sorry state of affairs wherein a particular scheme 
in spite of exhibiting good performance is being starved of legitimate 
funds. The Committee’s fears are furthe r compounded by the reply of the 
Ministry stating that there are still over 2200 cases pending for 
disbursement of grant. The Committee , therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge upon the Government to suitably enhance th e 
allocation of funds for this S cheme in the remainder of the Eleventh Five 
Year Plan to at least ensure that allocation is commens urate with 
utilization and the various activities under the Scheme does not languish 
due to paucity of funds. 

 
 
 
STRENGTHENING ORGANIZATIONAL SET-UP 
(Recommendation Para no. 5.20) 
 
1.29 Noting that the Ministry was facing shortage of manpower and total lack 
of field organiza tions due to separation of FSSAI  and that they were 
considering a proposal for strengthening their organizational set -up, the 
Committee had asked the Ministry for specific proposals in the matter. However 
taken aback by the casual reply of the Ministry that strengthening of its 
Organizational set -up and improving efficiency is a continuous matter, the 
Committee while expressing their strong disapproval of this response desired 
the Ministry to be extra cautious and diligent in the future 
 
1.30 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in  their Action Taken Note, 
have stated that the FPO and MFPO staff/Officers were transferred to FSSAI 
w.e.f. 01.12.2008. Since then, the Ministry has been facing acute shortage of 
staff. For an alternative arrangement this Ministry is proposing functioning of 
Zonal Offices at Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Delhi and Lucknow to implement 
the Policies/Programmes/Schemes of the Ministry in the cohesive manner and 
will also act as Nodal Interaction Point. To make these Zonal Offices functional, 
NIFTEM has been reques ted to provide personnel and logistic support for the 
offices located at Lucknow, Kolkata, and Delhi. Also IICPT, Thanjavur ( Tamil 
Nadu) an autonomous institution under the aegis of Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries has been requested to provide one each of their 
Scientists from their existing strength to man the offices at Mumbai, Chennai 
and Guwahati. Out of these two Scientists to be provided by IICPT, one will 
look after the scientif ic work and the other will take care of the marketing and 
extension work. 
 
1.31 The Committee voice their serious concern at the rather ingenuous 
human resource policy adopted by the Ministry to cope up with the 
manpower crunch it has been experiencing since 1 December, 2008 
consequent upon the transfer of FPO and MFPO staff/officers to FSSAI. 
Though they empathize with the Ministry on this issue and are all for it 

 
 
achieving sufficiency in human resources, yet they strongly disapprove 
of this stop -gap arrangement of transferring Officers from NIFTEM and 
IICPT and posting  them to the various Zonal Offices without any 
substitute. In the case of NIFTEM, which till date is not fully functional the 
transfer of officers is totally bewildering. Similar is the case of transfer of 
scientists from IICPT, as it would seriously hampe r its functioning. They 
are of the firm opinion that  this act of strengthening the human resource 
of on e institute whilst consequently  depleting the other one smacks of 
arbitrariness, adhocism and a lack of proper perspective planning on the 
part of the Ministry. While deprecating this move of the Ministry, the 
Committee desire that the transferred officers be repatriated to their 
parent organization s at the earliest and the Ministry take cogent 
measures to overcome the current manpower crunch either by f resh 
recruitment or filling up posts through deputation in its various Zonal 
Offices in a time  bound manner to ensure the smooth functioning of the 
vital institutions.  
  
VISION 2015 
(Recommendation Para no. 5.21) 
 
1.32 The Committee noted that the Ministry have formulated a Vision 2015 in 
2005 with the target of increasing I ndia‟s level of  food processing from 6% in 
2005 to 20% by 2015, value addition from 20% to 35% and share in global 
trade from 1.5% to 3%.  To flaunt the efficiency of Vision 2015, the Ministry 
have stated that already the level of processing has gone up to 10% with 
wastage of perishables coming down fr om Rs. 58 ,000 crore per year to less 
than Rs. 50,000 crore.  Value addition has gone up from 20 to 26 per cent and 
the sector‟s growth rate has gone up from 7 per cent in the pre 2005 to over 13 
per cent.  In view of the Ministry‟s admission of the reliability of data regarding 
Food Processing Industry Sector posed a big question mark because of various 
factors including delays of years together in data generation, the Committee , 
therefore, viewed the  figures furnished by the Ministry to be well of f the mark. 
The Committee also strongly fe lt that the financial implications of an estimated 
investment of Rs. 1 lakhs crore for achieving goals of Vision 2015 have been 
worked out in a hasty, unprofessional and unscientific manner by the Ministry 

 
 
without any conce rn for the ground realities.  This was apparent on more than 
one occasion during the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry.  
That such huge amount has been worked out by the Ministry without any formal 
sectoral break up confirms the Committe e‟s apprehensions expressed above.  
In the considered opinion of the Committee, Vision 2015 was  more of a 
pipedream which needs to be reworked right now in a more comprehensible, 
scientific and professional manner after extensive discussions and deliberations 
with all stakeholders so that it comes within the realm of possibility. 
 
1.33 The Ministry in the action taken reply stated that the  exercise for 
formulating Vision 2015 was initiated in the beginning of the 10 th Plan and the 
requirement of fund was based on the assessment and analysis of the firm that 
was hired to formulate the Vision. The Ministry has not finalized the system to 
create a comprehensive Food Processing Information S ystem (FPIS) that 
would contain real time data. The level of investment required would be worked 
out again on the basis of such data. 
 
1.34  The Committee observe that a  plain reading of the reply of the 
Government to this recommendation reveals that their conclusion of the 
Vision 2015 being a pipe dream have  come true sooner than expected.  It 
is absolutely shocking to note the Ministry’s admission that formulation 
of Vision 2015 at the beginning of the Tenth Plan and the requirement of 
funds for execution thereof as worked out by a firm hired to formulate this 
vision is yet to be finalised ow ing to non -finalisation of the system to 
create a compre hensive Food Processing Information System which 
would provide real time data.  It is a highly  disturbing fact revealing the 
non-seriousness of the Government to im plement the Vision 2015 
earnestly even though the Eleventh Plan is in its last leg. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Vision 2015 
requires to be sincerely reworked in a more comprehensive, scientific and 
professional manner to realise even half of the targeted goals therein.  
They desire to be apprised of the latest position obtaining in this regard.  
 
 

 
 
MANPOWER INTENSIVE NATURE OF FPI SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para no. 5.22) 
 
1.35 The Committee note d that in the perception of the Ministry a major 
constraint faced by the food processing sector is the low share of sale of food 
products through organized retail in the Country.  While globally, 72% or more 
of food sales is through organized retail, in Ind ia it is just 1%.  According to the 
Ministry, this situation exists because of the old practice of deploying large 
number of workmen even in respect of activities, which are fully or partially 
mechanized or can be mechanized.  The Committee, however, disag reed with 
the views of the Ministry in the instant case as in India traditionally food 
processing has been in the domain of cottage and small scale industry.  In fact, 
an overwhelming majority of activities are undertaken at the household level.  
They, therefore, felt that the issue requires serious introspection on the part of 
the Ministry so that the plans and schemes and even the Policy, desired to be 
formulated by them, are worked out by  the  Ministry, keeping invariably in view 
the manpower intensive c haracter of our economy in general and food 
processing sector in particular. 
 
1.36 The Ministry in their action taken note stated that they propose to 
undertake a study to ascertain the manpower intensive nature of food 
processing sector. 
 
1.37 The Committee note that Government intends to undertake a study 
to assess the manpower intensive nature of the Food Processing Sector 
in pursu ance of their recommendation to factorise the manpower 
intensive character of our economy while formulating Plans, Sch emes 
and the Policy of the Sector.  The reply, however, is silent on the time 
frame and other aspects related to the study proposed to be undertaken.  
While reiterating their recommendation, the Committee desire the 
Government to get the study completed in  a time bound manner and in 
any case get it completed and take further action thereon well before the 
commencement of the Twelfth Plan as already the attainment of the goals, 
a yet to be finalised Vision 2015 are getting jeopardised so that the much 

 
 
touted ‘Sunshine S ector’ of the e conomy really begins to shine. They 
desire to be informed of the progress made in this regard.   

 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION 
(Recommendation Para No.1.4) 
  
The Committee note that under Direction73A of Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha, a Statement on the status of implementation of 
recommendations contained in the Original Report of the Committee is to be 
made by the Minist er concerned within six months of presentation of the said 
Report to the Parliament.  The Committee are highly disappointed to find that in 
case of the Fortieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha), the Minister of Food 
Processing Industries made the Statement un der Direction 73A in the Lok 
Sabha on 6 August, 2009 i.e. after more than fifteen months of its presentation 
on 18April, 2008.  What is equally disconcerting is that the Statement contained 
information only on six of the ten Recommendations of the Committe e 
contained in the Original Report.  The Committee while expressing their strong 
disapproval in the matter, desire the Ministry to adhere to the stipulated 
timeframe of six months for making of the Statement by the Minister so as to 
ensure that such serious lapses do not recur.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Observations of the Committee are noted for compliance within the 
prescribed time frame.  
[Vide Ministry of  Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
 (Recommendation Para No. 2.11) 
 
The Committee are highly perturbed to note that though Indian figures 
amongst the largest producers in agricultural, animal husbandry, dairying and 
fisheries sectors, a substantial part of these painstaking efforts are going waste 

 
 
in the absence of suffici ent and proper food processing infrastructure.  The 
Committee, as the subsequent narrative will clarify, find that a separate Ministry 
for Food Processing Industries though being in existence for close tow decades 
now has not been able to make much dent in  the all pervading morass.  It is 
extremely shocking that in just one sector viz. fruits and vegetables, the post 
harvest losses, even as per conservative estimates stand at a mammoth Rs. 
55000 crore per annum.  
 
Reply of the Government   
Lack of infrastru ctural facilities, lack of continuous cold chain, lack of 
storage facilities are primarily responsible for huge post -harvest losses.  
Ministry has taken various measures to reduce these losses.  Various other 
Ministries and State Governments are also imple menting programmes to 
reduce post-harvest losses.  
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl. dated 
19 July, 2010] 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.35) 
 
The Committee find it extremely distressing that in spite of their 
recommendations in successive Reports for grant of sufficient funds for the 
food processing industry sector and the Government‟s own acknowledgement 
of the food processing industry being a „sunshine‟ sector, the Outlay for the FPI 
sector during the last five years has never ever crossed 1% of the Central Plan 
Outlay.  The Committee feel unless sizable investments are made in the FPI 
Sector, its true potential cannot be synergized with the nation building effort.  
The Committee, therefore, desire the M inistry to draw a comprehensive 
proposal on the requirements of public funds by the Food Processing Sector in 
the coming decade and take it up forcefully with the planners and the 
Government so that a holistic view is taken in the matter and the Food 
Processing Sector doesn‟t remain starved of funds anymore. 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government  
Ministry has prepared a comprehensive proposal bas ed on which 
allocation of Rs. 4 031.00 crore was made in the Eleventh Plan.  Ministry 
prepares its Annual Plan keeping in view  the annual allocation for different 
areas of the Five Year Plan but desired resources flow to the sector is not 
taking place.  Ministry is making all out efforts to have requisite fund flow into 
the sector. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M . No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
 
EXCESSIVE Q-4 AND MARCH SPENDING 
(Recommendation Para No.3.37) 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry have breached 
the Q-4 spending ceiling of 33% of outlay stipulated by Ministry of Finance in 
2007-08. Like -wise, they have also breached the March spending ceiling of 
15% of the outlay in both 2007 -08 and 2008-09. Since the Ministry during the 
course of the examination of the Demands for Grants failed to inform the 
Committee inspite of repeated queries if the violations were brought to the 
notice of the Ministry of Finance, the Committee presumes that th ey have filed 
on this mandatory aspect as well.  This is a serious matter. The Committee 
expect that the Ministry to approach the Ministry of Finance for regularization of 
past violations without any further delay and also ensure that the Q -4 and 
March spending ceiling which have been prescribed by the Ministry of Finance 
for prudent financial planning and for reducing expenditure asymmetry are 
followed in letter and spirit in future.    
 
Reply of the Government 
Observations of the Committee are noted for c ompliance. The spending 
ceiling is generally adhered to but because of the late receipt of the proposals, 
sometimes in the interest of the project, the ceilings are exceeded.  
Observations of the Committee are noted for taking it up with Ministry of 
Finance for further necessary action. 

 
 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
SCHEME FOR INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.38) 
 
The Committee observed that by its very objective of providing 
infrastructure and common facilities for use by small and medium 
entrepreneurs which enhance value addition, the Scheme for Infrastructure 
Development, if implemented properly and with promptitude can prove to be the 
much needed lifeline to the virtually stagnating food processing sector. The 
Committee are, however, constrained to observe that the performance of the 
Ministry under this Scheme is not at all satisfactory.  In none the four years 
since 2005-06 have they been able to utilize the BE amounts, leading to drastic 
curtailing at RE stages.  The Ministry have not been able to utilize even the 
substantially reduced RE allocations during 2006 -07 and 2007 -08. In the 
ongoing Fiscal also, they h ave not been able to spend even one fifth of the BE 
of Rs. 150.00 crore during the first six months.  The Committee cannot but 
conclude that this year too there will be a repeat of the performance of the 
previous years. The Committee, however, feel that a major portion of the blame 
for this under performance can be attributed to the planning and approval 
process. The approvals for two out of three components of the Scheme came in 
August and September, 2008 respectively i.e. about one and half year into the 
Eleventh Plan. Such substantial delays in the execution of capital intensive 
infrastructure projects are very damaging. In case of projects in PPP mode 
such delays can virtually sound the death knell of a project. The Committee, 
therefore, exhort the Minis try of at least now put their house in order and start 
the implementation of this Scheme on a war footing basis. The Committee are 
sure that unless that is done, the much needed turnaround of the Food 
Processing Industries sector will remain a distant goal . A similar situation 

 
 
obtains in all the three components of this Scheme which have been discussed  
in succeeding paragraphs   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Observation of the Committee suggesting for appropriate action has 
been initiated by the Ministry. Implementation of the scheme is on the fast 
pace. In each of the components of the infrastructure development scheme, 10 
projects were approved to be taken up in the first phase which have been 
selected and are at various stages of progress. Some of them a re nearing 
completion and are ready for operationalisation. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
 
FOOD PARKS 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.39) 
  
The Committee note that the Food Parks Scheme of the Tenth Plan, 
which has been rechristened as Mega Food Parks with some modifications is 
yet to show any revolutionary results. Out of total 56 Parks approved till date for 
assistance by the Ministry, 41 we re approved by August, 2003.  Apparently, 
during last more than six years not much headway has been made with only 15 
more Parks being added to the list. Added to this is the fact that even in the 
Parks which has been established the number of units operat ional is abysmally 
low. As pointed out by the Eleventh Plan Working Group, in 8 Parks only 28 
Units are operational, which is a matter of grave concern. Though the Ministry 
have now rightly enhanced the financial assistance for the Mega Food Parks 
from Rs.  4.00 crore to Rs. 50.00 crore, adopted a cluster based approach, 
worked out backward and forward linkages with the National Horticulture 
Mission and AEZs of APEDA, gone for the pre -marketing strategy, evolved a 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) model consisti ng of organized retailers, 
processors, service providers, farmers organizations, government agencies, 
etc. for ownership and management, still the outcome of the efforts is not on 
the expected lines. It appears to the Committee that notwithstanding the 

 
 
measures taken by the Ministry, the Scheme of Mega Food Parks needs to be 
reconsidered at the fundamental level and remodelled thereafter. In the 
considered opinion of the Committee, since the food processing industry 
predominantly consists of units in SSI, C ottage and households sectors, the 
Ministry need to consider remodelling the Food Parks on the co-operative mode 
adopted so successfully in the dairy sector. The Committee would like to have 
the considered views of the Government in the matter at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 Out of 10 projects of Mega Food Parks taken on pilot basis in the first 
phase, SPVs for six has been selected and the projects are under progress. In 
case of rest four projects, 37 applications has been received out of which most 
eligible 4 projects will b e selected for assistance. As this is an infrastructure 
development project with strong backward -forward linkages attempting to 
provide a total supply chain solution from farm gate to the consumer, the initial 
progress is though slow but in the desired dir ection. Each project is being 
concurrently monitored. Ministry feels that these projects will yield the desired 
results. As rightly pointed out by the Committee, it is a fact that majority of the 
players in this sector fall under Micro, Small and Medium en terprises. 
Accordingly in the mega food parks there would be provisions for plug & play 
facilities for the SMEs who can come up with the raw material in the mega food 
park, use the plug & play facility for processing and take away the final 
processed product. Due to such arrangement, tiny entrepreneurs are not even 
required to set up their own processing units. It also has the facility of business 
incubation where small entrepreneurs can develop their products and test its 
marketability before setting up th eir own units for commercial manufacturing of 
such products. The basic concept of mega food park is targeted towards the 
benefit of SMEs as it will provide all common, ancillary and basic enabling 
infrastructure for food processing. The entrepreneurs would only be focusing on 
their core business of processing. Big business houses can set up everything 
and do all backward -forward linkages of their own. For small entrepreneurs, 
solutions for these aspects are taken care of by the SPVs of mega food park.  
Therefore, it is submitted that to consider remodelling of scheme of mega food 

 
 
park as suggested by the C ommittee would be pre -mature at this juncture until 
and unless the pilot projects taken up in first phase did not yield the desired 
results. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
 
MODERNISATION OF ABATTOIRS 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.40) 
 
The Component – Modernization of Abattoirs unlike the Mega Food 
Parks Component suffers from a differe nt malady.  This Component has got a 
good response from the stakeholders with 26 DPRs being received by the 
Ministry.  However, the Approval Committee in its own wisdom has approved 
only 10 Abattoirs during Financial Year 2008 -09 for a cost of Rs. 127.00 c rore.  
Since the approval was accorded in the same Fiscal only 8 abattoirs could be 
assisted with funds worth Rs. 10.85 crore.  The Committee feel that with the 
almost four fold enhancement of financial assistance from a mere Rs. 4.00 
crore to Rs. 15.00 cr ore now, „Modernization of Abattoirs‟ has got the much 
needed fillip and the planning and approval agencies ought not nurse any 
apprehensions about the viability of this Component in its present form and 
they need to consider it liberally.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should take up the matter of clearances/approvals 
with fixed timelines from agencies concerned on top priority basis and get down 
to the job of implementing this component with utmost promptitude in the 
remaining period of Eleventh Plan.  The Committee expect concrete 
achievements from the Ministry in this endeavour and desire to be apprised of 
the outcome of efforts made in this direction. 
Reply of the Government 
 
During the F.Y. 2008 -09, 10 Abattoir cases we re approved by the 
Approval Committee. During the year 2009 -10, grant in aid amounting to Rs 
8.87 crores was disbursed and during the year 2010 -11 (till 30.6.2010), grant in 
aid amounting to Rs 0.07 crore was disbursed. 

 
 
After having approval of EFC for upgradation of the present scheme, 
fresh cases of abattoirs will be taken up. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
COLD CHAIN, VALUE ADDITION AND PRESERVATION 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.41) 
 
The Committee note that this Component failed to achieve anything 
tangible in the Tenth Plan. Barely, 12 Cold Storages chains, 3 Value Added 
Centres, 1 Packaging Centre and 4 Irradiation Facilities were supported. The 
main reason for this poor show being a low financial assistance package of 
maximum Rs. 2.00 crore when the cost of these facilities was in the range of 
Rs. 10 -30 crore. Apart from this, similar but well cushioned schemes of 
NABARD, NCDC, NAFED, NHB also led to there being less take rs for this 
Component.  It is, however, heartening to note that now when the financial 
assistance has been upscaled to Rs.10.00 crore, the number of responses 
have grown substantially. As many as 56 responses have been received by the 
Ministry. The only st umbling block being MoF and EFC who have 
recommended that only 10 integrated cold chain projects be taken up in the first 
instance in 2008-09 and 30 odd to be taken up during the entire Eleventh Plan.  
The Committee find it inexplicable as to why the MoF a nd EFC have throttled 
this project with such unwarranted restrictions. The integrated cold chains are 
an integral component of any successful strategy to augment the food 
processing potential of the country. They, therefore, strongly recommend that 
MoF and EFC ought to take a practical and pragmatic view on this issue and 
provide requisite funds and speedy approvals to as many integrated cold 
chains as are within the realms of possibility. The Committee also desire that 
rather than reconciling to their fate , the Ministry should also pursue this case 
vigorously with MoF and EFC so as to not miss this golden opportunity. In the 
larger context, however, the Committee would like the Ministry to further work 
out this Component of the Scheme for Infrastructure Dev elopment in a manner 
where it complements and supplements similar schemes of other 
Ministries/Departments/Agencies so that instead of working in different 

 
 
directions all of them work as force multipliers for the food processing sector so 
that the huge loss of perishables is prevented and controlled to the maximum. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Observations of the Committee suggesting for appropriate action by the 
Ministry has been initiated. It is submitted that the scheme guidelines of the 
integrated cold chain, value addition and packaging infrastructure provide for 
dovetailing of assistance by implementing agenci es from various Central and 
State Govt. schemes to improve the viability of projects and develop synergy so 
that a coordinated effort is effected to maximize the results. However, in the 
process of dovetailing and developing synergy, it is also ensured tha t there is 
no duplication of assistance for the same component/activity of the project. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FOOD TECHNOLOGY ENTREPRENEURSHIP & 
MANAGEMENT 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.43) 
 
The Committee note that the proposal to set up National Institute of 
Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) was 
considered and approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in its 
meeting held on 31 August, 2006 at an estimated cost of Rs. 244.60 crore.  The 
institutional building, whose construction has commenced only in July, 2008, 
was to cost Rs. 75.10 crore as per the approved Outlay of the civil construction.  
The Committee, however, note that th e cost of the institutional building has, on 
the advice of the partner, more than quadrupled to Rs. 314.16 crore owning to 
reasons like escalation in cost, increase in area of constructions, creation of 
additional facilities etc.  The Committee while agree ing with the imperative of 
developing NIFTEM as a world class institute are concerned with such a 
massive cost escalation.  They, therefore, desire that the revised cost estimates 
need to be considered carefully and in all their dimensions by the evaluatin g 
agencies/Ministries and a final decision arrived at accordingly.  The Committee 
would also prefer such a decision be taken after taking into consideration the 

 
 
role, aims and objectives of the already existing Central Food Technology 
Research Institute so  that there is no creation of such facilities at NIFTEM  
which may overlap with the mandate of CFTRI causing avoidable duplication of 
R&D and other efforts.  
Reply of the Government: 
The structure of NIFTEM as provided originally was reviewed with a view 
to ensure that they are in line with the best international practices. The revised 
cost estimates have been worked out with utmost diligence and it has been 
ensured that there is no duplication with the facilities in existing institutions in 
the country of fering courses in food processing. The project has also been 
consulted with other Ministries/ Departments of Government of India as per the 
procedure laid down in this regard. 
 
Unlike various other food science institutes in India, NIFTEM will function 
as a  centre for integrated education, research, enterprise incubation and 
outreach in the area of food sciences, technology, sociology, economics, 
nutritional sciences, genetics and more. For achieving these objectives 
NIFTEM has taken a different approach for  students, faculty, researchers and 
industrialists. It has designed a new course structure, which is unique in itself. 
The course curriculum is a mix of Core Course, Background Courses, General 
Courses, Electives, Village Adoption, Industry Internship, Sem inar, Research, 
Thesis etc. All these courses will be delivered by best of the faculties. 
FOOD PROCESSING POLICY 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.19) 
 
During the course of the examination of the Demands for Grants (2009 -
10) of the Ministry, the Committee found that apart from delay in the planning 
process and paucity of funds, the biggest contributor towards the non -
performance of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries is the lack of a clear-
cut National Long -Term Food Processing Policy.  The Committee find it 
incomprehensible as to why in spite of being in existence for almost two 
decades now, the Ministry have never thought of having such a Policy.  It is 
only now when questions were raised of the absence of such a Policy, that the 

 
 
Ministry have woken from its stupor and included the formulation of a Policy in 
the agenda of the First Conference of the Food Processing Minister‟s held on 6 
October, 200 9.  The Committee are aghast to note that even now when the 
Committee have raised this matter with the Ministry there are still no formal 
contours of timelines set for the same.  The Committee are of the firm opinion 
that a well laid out and cogent Nationa l Long Term Food Processing Policy will 
serve as the most important path -finder and directional support to all the 
stakeholders in the Food Processing Industry.  They, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry, without wasting even a moment, to get down to the tas k of drafting 
such a Policy and fructify it within the shortest possible time so that the Food 
Processing Sector gets the much needed benchmarks and guidance and 
flourishes as the sunshine sector of the Country‟s economy.  
 
Reply of the Government 
As the growth of food processing sector depends largely on the 
involvement of State Governments, Ministry is, therefore, pursuing with State 
Governments to formulate State -specific food processing policy.  Many States 
have formulated their food processing policie s.  Other States have been 
advised by the Ministry to formulate their food processing policies.  As regards 
formulation of National Food Processing Policy is concerned, action has been 
initiated. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
UTILISATION CERTIFICATE 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.23) 
 
The Committee note with deep concern that there is huge pendency of 
Utilisation Certificates with the State Governments/ Organisations 
Entrepreneurs. As on 30 Se ptember, 2009, 1997 Utilisation Certificates worth 
Rs. 305.20 crore are yet to be liquidated.  In the opinion of the Committee, the 
Ministry‟s decision to release second and final installment on the basis of 
documentary proof/ CA certificates that 100% of equity and term loan have 
been invested and commercial production has started, rather than insisting on a 

 
 
proper  Utilisation Certificate can be a major cause for pendency. It is but 
obvious that when half measures serve the purpose, nobody would bother fo r 
adhering to the more rigorous stipulations of Utilisation Certificates.  In such a 
scenario the Ministry‟s efforts to decrease pendency of Utilisation Certificates 
through various measures like joint monitoring by associating the State Nodal 
Agencies or asking the Chief Secretaries of States, State Nodal Agencies, 
banks, etc. to issue legal notices to units which have still not complied with the 
system of submitting Utilisation Certificates in time will also not bear the desired 
results. The Committee, th erefore, recommend that the Ministry need to 
immediately consider suitable alternatives in the matter.  
 
Reply of the Government  
Ministry has initiated a drive of issuing notices to the respective 
organizations / entrepreneurs against whom the UCs are pending.  In all cases 
now subsequent instalment is released only after the UCs of the earlier 
instalment is received.  Therefore, there is a general improvement.  As regards 
pending UCs is concerned, Ministry is taking special drive to ensure receipt of 
pending UCs. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil-

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE  
 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS 
(Recommendation Para no. 2.12)  
 
 The Ministry, though armed with an all encompassing mandate has 
unfortunately not made much headway due to the failure of the Government 
and the planners to realize the true potential of this sunshine sector.  The result 
is that the food processing sector which contributed a significant 14% of our 
GDP (in 2004 -2005) an d employs almost 50 million people directly/indirectly 
has remained starved of funds year after year.  The food processing industries 
sector is a hugely capital intensive sector which can be kick -started only with 
infusion of substantial funds.  Therefore,  expecting a turn around wi th amounts 
of Rs. 300-400 crore per annum is simply wishful thinking.  The committee note 
that in real terms the Ministry have been allocated 39% (BE Rs. 350.50 crore) 
more funds this year as compared to RE 2008 -09 (252.50 crore) .  However, if 
the Government is really keen to enable the food processing industries sector 
to prosper and add to the economic prosperity of the country in right measure, 
they would do well to move beyond their fixation of doling out funds in few 
hundred crore.  Despite this grossly insufficient financial stimulus, the sector is 
contributing a huge Rs.280000 crore (2004-05) to the GDP is note worthy.  The 
Committee hope that this Report would spur the Government into taking cogent 
and purposeful action for the development of food processing industries sector.  
To begin with, they hope that next Demand for Grants of the Ministry would 
break form this tradition and funds in consonance with the genuine 
requirements of the sector will be allocated to them. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 The observations of Committee are being communicated to the Ministry 
of Finance and Planning Commission of suitable action.  Ministry, while 
preparing the Annual Plan will incorporate these observations while demanding 
higher allocation for the sector. 

 
 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
(Recommendation Para no. 3.34) 
 
 The Committee are extremely unhappy with the way Budgetary 
Allocation are being made to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries.  Out of 
the total allocation of Rs. 4031.00 crore for the Eleventh Plan, the Ministry 
because of late release of funds have been able to spend a sum of Rs. 370.00 
crore only in the first two fiscal s which is only 9% of the total allocation.  This 
year also they have been allocated an amount of Rs. 340.00 crore against Rs. 
1229.06 crore sought by them.  Presuming the entire amount is utilized by the 
Ministry in the ongoing Fiscal, still almost 85% of the Plan Allocation need to be 
required to be spent in the remaining two years of the Plan.  This according to 
the Committee is not at all a healthy proposition, considering that almost all the 
investments are to be made in infrastructure development and other such long 
gestation projects.  The main culprits again for such delays are planning and 
approval stages as the EFC meeting in respect of five of the schemes of the 
Ministry were held in the months of February and March, 2008 and three of 
these Schemes required further approval of CCEA thus, staggering further the 
timelines. Keeping the extant situation in view, the Committee are of the firm 
opinion that the planning and approval system in vogue now required a radical 
makeover so that the implementatio n part of the Scheme gets a fair enough 
amount of time which hitherto is being spent on the planning and approval 
stages which could be ideally completed before a new plan comes into effect.  
The Committee would like to have the considered views of the Gov ernment on 
this crucial aspect. 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
The observations of Committee are being sent to the Planning 
Commission.  As regards action at the level of Ministry is concerned, it will be 
ensured that planning and proposal formulation will be u ndertaken well before 
the new Plan comes into effect. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
GROWTH RATE – FPI SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para no. 3.36) 
 
 The Committee note with disbelief that the Ministry do not have nay 
reliable and regular system of collection of data pertaining to the various 
components and activities of the food pr ocessing industry sector in spite of 
being in existence for about two decades now.  In such a situation, figures of 
growth rate shown for the FPI Sector and also other related statistics defy logic 
and appear to be conjectures.  More  so, the manner in whic h they chalk out 
strategies and visions, schemes and projects year after year in such a void is 
again a matter of guess work.  The Ministry‟s lack of action for decades 
together on this vital issue, which as per their own admission is a major bottle -
neck i n the planning exercise in the Ministry, required a serious explanation.  
The Committee feel that the Ministry have belatedly now woken up to the need 
for setting up a comprehensive Food Processing Information System to 
address the issue and make the relev ant data available on real time basis.  
They, therefore, desire the Ministry to whole -heartedly pursue the setting up of 
this Information System and ensure that it is functional within three months of 
presentation of this Report.  
  

 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries was created in 1988.  Thereafter , 
it was merged with the Ministry of Agriculture as a Department.  Finally the 
present Ministry came into existence in the year 1999.  The manpower in 
Ministry is highly inadequate.  N o organization dealing with data collection is in 
existence in the Ministry.  Therefore, this system has not been able to develop.  
Ministry has taken steps for developing reliable data.  Actions have already 
been initiated.   Once the system becomes opera tional, Ministry will be able to 
have reliable data. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2009-10 
 (Recommendation Para no. 3.38) 
 
 In the opinion of the Committee the allocation of Rs. 340.00 crores  by 
the Planning Commission to the Ministry of Food Processing Industry against 
Rs. 1229.06 crore sought by them for 2009-10 is a big travesty of justice.  For a 
sector which is being flaunted as a „sunshine‟ sector of our economy which is 
contributing Rs. 280,000 crore to the GDP, even the sum sought by the Ministry 
is a pittance.  It is inexplicable how the Planning Commission expects the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industry to deliver on such shoe -string budgets.  
While as per the admission of the Minist ry this lesser allocation is going to 
affect all their schemes in the ongoing Fiscal, what is more worrying them is the 
Ministry‟s admission that there would be an adverse effect on the GDP share of 
the Food Processing Industry also.  The Committee, theref ore, recommend the 
Government to revisit the whole issue and enhance the fund allocation to the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industry without any further delay. 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry concur with the observation of the Committee. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
MID TERM APPRAISAL 
(Recommendation no. 3.39) 
 
 The Committee have been given to understand that the Planning 
Commission have undertaken a Mid -Term review of the Eleventh Plan.  
However, in so far as the Ministry is concerned, they have conducted an 
evaluation of projects assisted by them during the Ten th Plan period for the 
years 2002 -03 to 2004 -05.  The Ministry further propose to conduct an 
evaluation of their Schemes for the years 2005 -06 to 2008 -09, a period which 
falls partly in the Tenth Plan and partly in the Eleventh Plan.  The Committee 
strongly feel this to be a not very sound way of evaluating performance.  It is 
common knowledge that Schemes vary from Plan to Plan, some of them may 
have be even recast or revamped.  Thus, there cannot be exact comparison of 
common performance indices.  The Com mittee, therefore, desires the Ministry 
to conduct an evaluation of their Schemes form 2007 -08 upto 2009 -10 i.e. the 
first three years of the Eleventh Plan separately, in the first instance wherein 
they would also get the benefit of inputs of mid -term appraisal undertaken by 
the Planning Commission which will enable them to analyse their performance 
in a more realistic and holistic manner.  They would like to be apprised of the 
Ministry‟s view on the subject at the earliest.  
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
Observations of the Committee are being communicated to Ministry of 
Finance and Planning Commission.  Ministry of Food Processing Industries will 
be complying the suggestion on which they have to take action. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O .M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
SCHEME FOR TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION, ESTABLISHMENT AND 
MODERNIZATION OF FPI 
(Recommendation Para no. 4.42) 
 
 The Committee are perturbed to note that for this Scheme the Ministry 
have been allocated Rs. 130.00 crore which is virtually half of the Rs. 250.00 
crore sought by them. To further compound the problems of the Ministry, a sum 
of Rs. 66.00 crore only has been actually allocated to them for this Scheme. 
With Rs. 53.00 crore or so already spent, the Committee can very well imagine 
the fate of the various projects under this Scheme.  The Ministry‟s candid 
admission that all com ponents of the Scheme will be adversely affected as a 
result of the reduced allocation confirms the worst fears of the Committee.  At 
the cost of repeating themselves for the umpteenth time, the Committee desire 
the Government to immediately re -assess the financial requirements of this 
Scheme even at this belated stage and release the requisite funds post haste. 
The Committee also desire that at least from the next Demands for Grants 
onwards, the Government should ensure that this Scheme is not starved of 
legitimate funds. 
Reply of the Government 
The realistic requirement has been worked out and projected.  At RE 
stage, additional allocation of Rs. 18.00 crore was made.  100% RE allocation 

 
 
was utilized.  Still, there are over 2200 cases pending for disbursem ent of grant 
which has been highlighted in the Annual Plan formulation of next year. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
STRENGTHENING ORGANIZATIONAL SET-UP 
(Recommendation Para no. 5.20) 
 
 While putting forth the problems and constraints being faced by them, 
the Ministry had informed them that as part of the Eleventh Plan strategy the 
Ministry needs to be strengthened appropriately in order to meet the challenges 
in implementing various sche mes proposed to energies the Food Processing 
Sector in the country. Further in a clarification, the Ministry informed the 
Committee about the shortage of manpower and total lack of field organisations 
with them particularly due to separate of FSSAO. They a lso stated that the 
proposal for strengthening the organizational set up of the Ministry was under 
consideration.  However, when asked by the Committee to come up with a 
specific proposal in the matter, the Ministry‟s response was hugely perplexing 
as its stated that the Strengthening of Ministry‟s Organisational set up and 
improving efficiency is a continuous process. Such a sloppy response to a 
query of a Parliamentary Committee is indicative of the non -application of mind 
and unprofessional attitude of t he Ministry. The Ministry should have 
appreciated that such a wayward response is not going to help the Committee 
in reaching right conclusions.  The Committee, therefore while expressing their 
strong disapproval of the Ministry‟s response in the instant c ase expect them to 
be extra cautious and diligent in future. 
Reply of the Government 
The FPO and MFPO staff/Officers were transferred to FSSAI w.e.f. 
01.12.2008. Since then, the Ministry is founding acute shortage of staff. For an 

 
 
alternative arrangement this Ministry is proposing functioning of Zonal Offices 
at Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Delhi and Lucknow to implement the 
Policies/Programmes/Schemes of the Ministry in the cohesive manner and will 
also act as Nodal Interaction Point. 
To make these Zonal Offices functional, NIFTEM has been requested to 
provide personnel and logistic support for the officers located at Lucknow, 
Kolkata, and Delhi. Also IICPT, Thanjavur ( Tamil Nadu) an autonomous 
institution under the aegis of Ministry of Food Processing Industries has been 
requested to provide each of their Scientist from their existing strength to man 
the offices at Mumbai, Chennai and Guwahati. Out of these two Scientists to be 
provided by IICPT. One will look after the scientif ic work and the other will take 
care of the marketing and extension work. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.31 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
 WHICH REPLIES OF THE FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
 ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
BUDGETARY PLANNING 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.33) 
 
The Committee note that the planning process with regard to the 
Eleventh Plan for Ministry of Food Processing Industries commenced with the 
constitution of a Working Group on Food Processing Industries by the Planning 
Commission.  Based on the recommendati ons of this Working Group, the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries submitted their proposal for the Eleventh 
Plan to the Planning Commission.  Four of the Tenth Plan Schemes were 
continued in the Eleventh Plan with some modifications in the pattern of 
assistance or the procedures.  One old Scheme on Infrastructure Development 
was revamped and co -opted.  A new Scheme for upgradation of Quality of 
Street Food was also included.  Thus, in the Eleventh Plan the Ministry are 
pursuing six schemes.  The Committ ee, however, also note that in the present 
scheme of things, the Ministry do not take recourse to Zero Based Budgeting 
(ZBB).  Whatever is being done on that front is at the Planning Commission 
level.  The Committee strongly feel that most of the delays in  Budgetary 
Planning are at the planning and approval stages.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Ministry to conduct a ZBB exercise while working out their five Year 
Plan proposals which will not only enable them to make a professional and 
dispassionate analysis of their achievements thus far but also to arrive a the 
rational and realistic estimate for their future activities.  Apart from this intrinsic 
advantage, such an exercise would also provide the Planning Commission and 
other agencies/bodies concer ned with their approvals/sanctions with a 
standards and reliable benchmark to further work upon these plan proposals.  
Going a step further the Committee also desire the Ministry to also work on the 
principles of ZBB while working out their Annual Plans in a more purposeful and 
professional manner.  

 
 
While on the Planning Process, the Committee would also like to 
comment on the sloppy manner in which the Scheme for upgradation of Quality 
of Street Food has been handled.  This new Scheme was given in -principle 
approval by the Planning Commission but was held up for want of approvals of 
EFC/CCEA.  The Scheme was recommended by the EFC in its meeting held 
on 5 February, 2008.  After obtain ing the comments of the Ministr ies of 
Finance, Tourism, Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation etc. on the draft 
CCEA note , a final note was sent by the Ministry for the consideration of 
CCEA.  The CCEA considered the proposal in its meeting held on 23 February, 
2009 more than one year after the Scheme was recommended by the EFC  and 
even then the proposal was deferred.  The result is that the Scheme is yet to 
see the light of the day.  The Committee are pained at the sorry fate befalling 
this Scheme.  Had the Ministry acted upon in a more diligent manner, several 
food streets and  food towns could have be en showcased as an added 
attraction for the people visiting the Country fo r and in connection with the 
Commonwealth Games, 2010.  Hoping against hope, the Committee therefore 
recommend that the Government should act upon this Schem e without losing 
any further time so that at  least some of the places where this Scheme is to be 
implemented are ready before the Commonwealth Games, 2010. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Noted for compliance while formulating the Annual Plan for next year.   
As regards, the scheme for “Upgradation of Quality of Street Food”, it was 
approved by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on 5 
February, 2008.  Subsequently, the draft CCEA Note was circulated to the 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Exp enditure), Tourism, Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation for seeking their comments. 
 
The Scheme was operationalized for undertaking initial preparatory work 
with the approval of the Hon‟ble Minister, Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries, by issuing an annual sanction order for the year 2008 -09.  
Thereafter, the draft CCEA Note was appropriately revised incorporating the 
observations of the Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Expenditure) and again 

 
 
circulated on 12 January 2009 to the Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Expenditure), 
Tourism, Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation for seeking their comments in 
this regard. 
 
Taking into account the comments of all the above Ministries, the final 
note was revised accordingly and was sent to the Cabinet Secretariat for t he 
consideration of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs.  The same was 
considered by CCEA in its meeting held on 23 February 2009 and it was  
„Deferred‟. 
 
   Draft CCEA note was again circulated to Planning Commission, Ministry 
of Finance (Dept. of E xpenditure), Tourism, Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation for seeking their comments as required consequent upon “Deferred‟ 
vide letter dated 23 June, 2009, after the formation of the new Government.    
 
          Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Housing  & Urban Poverty Alleviation and 
Food Safety & Standards Authority of India supported the draft CCEA note. 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Expenditure) reiterated its earlier stand.  
 
Planning Commission informed that, as a policy attempt should be made 
to wind down Centrally Sponsored Schemes in areas of joint responsibility, 
rather than floating more such schemes. The resource position also does not 
justify a new scheme, which is not already included in the Eleventh plan. Thus 
they did not support the Scheme.  Planning Commission was again requested 
by MoFPI to reconsider the proposal.  Planning Commission, however, 
reiterated the earlier stand. 
                
            The scheme for “Upgradation of Quality of Street Food” was included in 
the working Group Report of the Eleventh Five Year Plan of the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries.  However no specific in –principal approval has 
been accorded by the Planning Commission, thou gh Rs. 178 crore has been 

 
 
indicated in the proposed budget allocation of Rs. 4031 Crore of the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries for the Eleventh Five year Plan.  
 
The same does not construe as Planning Commission approval as these 
allocations are sub ject to the necessary approval after following due 
procedures. 
                    
After receiving the comments on the draft CCEA note from Food Safety 
and Standard Authority, CCEA note has been sent to Cabinet Secretariat on 8 
June, 2010 for placing befor e CCEA with due  approval of the Hon‟ble Minister 
FPI. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
VISION - 2015 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.21) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry have formulated a Vision 2015 in 
2005 with the target of increasing India‟s level of food processing from 6% in 
2004 to 20% by 2015, value addition from 20% t o 35% and share in global 
trade from 1.5% to 3%.  To flaunt the efficiency of Vision 2015, the Ministry 
have stated that already the level of processing has gone up to 10% with 
wastage of perishables coming down from Rs. 58000 crore per year to less 
than Rs. 50000 crore.  Value addition has gone up from 20 to 26 per cent and 
the sector‟s growth rate has gone up from 7 per cent in the pre 2005 to over 13 
per cent.  Confronted by the Ministry‟s own admission that the reliability of data 
regarding food process ing industries sector is a gig question mark because of 
various factors including delays of years together in data generation, the 
Committee cannot but take the figures furnished by the Ministry with a pinch of 
salt.  In the like manner, the Committee also  strongly feel that the financial 

 
 
implications of an estimated investment of Rs. 1 lakhs crore for achieving goals 
of Vision 2015 have been worked out in a hasty, unprofessional and unscientific 
manner by the Ministry without any concern for the ground rea lities.  This was 
apparent on more than one occasion during the oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry.  That such huge amount has been worked out 
by the Ministry without any formal sectoral break up confirms the Committee‟s 
apprehensions expressed above.  In the considered opinion of the Committee, 
Vision 2015 is more of a pipedream which needs to be reworked right now in a 
more comprehensible, scientific and professional manner after extensive 
discussions and deliberations with all stakehold ers so that it comes within the 
realm of possibility. 
 
Reply of the Government 
       The exercise for formulating Vision 2015 was initiated in the beginning of 
the Tenth Plan and the requirement of fund was based on the assessment and 
analysis of the firm that was hired to formulate the Vision. The Ministry has not 
finalized the system to create a comprehensive Food Processing Information 
System (FPIS) that would contain real time data. The level of investment 
required in the year 2005 would be worked out again on the basis of such data. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Commen ts of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.34 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
MANPOWER INTENSIVE NATURE OF FPI SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.22) 
 
The Committee note that in the perception of the Ministry a major 
constraint faced by the food processing sector is the low share of sale of food 
products through organized retail in the Country.  While globally, 72% or more 

 
 
of food sales is through organi zed retail, in India it is just 1%.  According to the 
Ministry, this situation exists because of the old practice of deploying large 
number of workmen even in respect of activities, which are fully or partially 
mechanized or can be mechanized.  The Committ ee, however, disagree with 
the views of the Ministry in the instant case as in India traditionally food 
processing has been in the domain of cottage and small scale industry.  In fact, 
an overwhelming majority of activities are undertaken at the household level.  
Thus, the Ministry‟s hypothesis about old practice of deployment of large 
number of workmen is not even remotely true in case of Country‟s food 
processing sector and seems to be a cliché borrowed from some of the other 
industrial sectors.  The Comm ittee, therefore, feel that the issue requires 
serious introspection on the part of the Ministry so that whatever plans and 
schemes and even the Policy, they have been asked to formulate by the 
Committee, are worked out by them, keeping invariably in view the manpower 
intensive character of our economy in general and food processing sector in 
particular. 
 
Reply of the Government  
Ministry proposes to undertake a study to ascertain the manpower 
intensive nature of food processing sector. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6-3/2010-Parl.          
dated 19 July, 2010] 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.37 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
     
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     BASUDEB ACHARIA 
3 March, 2011                    Chairman     
12 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)                       Committee on Agriculture
            
  

 
 
APPENDIX 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3rd March, 2011 from 1500 hours to 
1515 hours in Committee Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
      Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite  
4. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
9. Shri Prabodh Panda 
10. Shri Premdas 
11. Shri Uday Singh  
12. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
15.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  -        Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  -        Additional Director 

 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  They Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for 
consideration:  
 
 *(i) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
*(ii) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*(iii) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
 (iv) Action Taken Report on Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee (2009 -10) 
on Demands for Grants (2009 -2010) relating to the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries.  
  
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports.  
They also authorized the Chairman to finalise the above Draft Reports in the 
light of the factual verifications made by the concerned Ministry/Department 
and present the same to the Houses.   
 
*4. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
*Matter not related to this Report. 
  

 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON  THE FIFTH REPORT 
OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (15TH LOK SABHA) 
  
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              21 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 1.4, 2.11, 3.35, 3.37, 4.38, 4.39, 4.40, 4.41, 
 4.43, 5.19 and 5.23  
 
Total          11 
 
Percentage                52.38% 
  
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
Total                  NIL
        
Percentage                   0% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos.  2.12, 3.34, 3.36, 3.38, 3.39, 4.42 and 5.20 
 
Total          7
   
 
Percentage                              33.34% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para Nos.  3.33, 5.21 and 5.22 
 
Total            3
   
 
Percentage             14.28%
  