 
 
1 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
 
 
“CULTIVATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOOD CROPS – 
PROSPECTS AND EFFECTS” 
 
 
 
THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2012/Shravana 1934 (Saka) 
 
37 

 
 
2 
 
THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
 
 
CULTIVATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOOD CROPS – 
PROSPECTS AND EFFECTS 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on               09 August, 2012 
  Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on         09 August, 2012 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2012/    SHRAVANA, 1934 (Saka) 


 
 
3 
 
COA No.  
 
         
         
         
         
 
        
         
 
 
Price:  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
                            
 
 
         
© 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha  (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  

 
 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
INTRODUCTION 
Composition of the Committee  
Composition of the Committee (2009-10) – Annexure - I  
Composition of the Committee (2010-11) – Annexure - II 
List of Organisations/Individuals who tendered  
Oral Evidence before the Committee  – Annexure - III 
 
Abbreviations 
 
CHAPTER - I  GENESIS         
  
 (i) Introduction 
 (ii) Biotechnology in Agriculture and GM Food Crops 
 (iii) Advances made in Plant Biotechnology 
 (iv) Global Scenario of GM Crops  
 (v) Prospects and Effects of GM Food Crops    
  
 
CHAPTER – II PRESENT REGULATORY MECHANISM 
 
 (i) Rules and Regulations       
 (ii) Constituents 
 (iii) Bio-safety Guidelines 
 (iv) Procedure 
 (v) Renaming of GEAC 
 (vi) Role of Ministry of Environment & Forests 
 (vii) Organisational Set-up 
 (ix) Antibiotic Resistant Marker Genes 
 (x) Development of BN Bt/Bt NHH44 
       

 
 
5 
 
CHAPTER – III PRACTICES ELSEWHERE  
 
     Regulatory Framework in Various Countries 
 
(i) USA          
(ii) European Union 
(iii) Canada 
(iv) Australia 
(v) Argentina 
(vi) South Africa 
(vii) Japan 
(viii) China 
(ix) Norway 
(x) EU Directive        
  
 
CHAPTER – IV INTERNATIONAL REGULATIONS 
 
   (i) Convention on Biological Diversity     
   (ii) Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety  
(iii) Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit Sharing 
(iv) Nagoya – Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol  
on Liability and Redress in the Context of Cartagena  
Protocol on Biosafety 
(v) The World Trade Organization (WTO)-1995 
(vi) The International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC)-1952 
(vii) The Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC)-1972 
(viii) The World Organization for Animal Health (OIE)-1924 
(ix) The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD)-1961 
(x) Convention on Migratory Species 
(xi) Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES)  
(xii) Ramsar Convention 
(xiii) Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and 
Natural Heritage 
(xiv) United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(xv) United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 
(xvi) International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and 
Agriculture 
(xvii) UN Convention on the Law of the Seas 
 

 
 
6 
 
 
CHAPTER – V  SCIENTIFIC STUDIES AND REPORTS  
 
   (i) IAASTD Report                   
   (ii) Report of Six Science Academies 
   (iii) Report of Prof. David Andow on Bt. Brinjal           
 
CHAPTER – VI SYSTEM PREPAREDNESS  
 
   (i) Department of Agriculture & Cooperation     
   (ii) Department of Food and Public Distribution 
   (iii) Department of Consumer Affairs 
   (iv) Department of AYUSH 
   (v) Department of Commerce 
   (vi) Department of Health Research 
   (vii) National Biodiversity Authority 
   (viii) Food Safety and Standards Authority of India    
 
CHAPTER – VII  MAJOR ISSUES 
 
   (i) Constitutional Position       
   (ii) Regulation and Labelling 
    (a) Regulation 
    (b) Labelling 
   (iii) Food Production Scenario  
(iv) Violation of BD Act        
CHAPTER – VIII TRANSGENICS IN FOOD CROPS       
APPENDICES 
 
(i) Minutes of  20th Sitting of the Committee (2009-10) held on 04.03.2010  
(ii) Minutes of  36th Sitting of the Committee (2009-10) held on 15.07.2010  
(iii) Minutes of  2nd Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 28.09.2010  
(iv) Minutes of  3rd Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 11.10.2010  
(v) Minutes of  4th sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 19.10.2010  

 
 
7 
 
(vi) Minutes of  5th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 28.10.2010  
(vii) Minutes of  6th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 10.11.2010  
(viii) Minutes of  7th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 11.11.2010  
(ix) Minutes of  8th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 15.11.2010  
(x) Minutes of  13th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 22.12.2010  
(xi) Minutes of  15th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 18.01.2011  
(xii) Minutes of  17th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 10.02.2011  
(xiii) Minutes of  19th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 14.03.2011  
(xiv) Minutes of  20th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 15.03.2011  
(xv) Minutes of  29th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 10.06.2011  
(xvi) Minutes of  30th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 10.06.2011  
(xvii) Minutes of  31st Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 17.06.2011  
(xviii) Minutes of  32nd Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 17.06.2011  
(xix) Minutes of  33rd Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 14.07.2011  
(xx) Minutes of  35th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 22.07.2011  
(xxi) Minutes of  36th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 03.08.2011  
(xxii) Minutes of  37th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on 11.08.2011  
(xxiii) Minutes of  6th Sitting of the Committee (2011-12) held on 21.10.2011  
(xxiv) Minutes of  7th Sitting of the Committee (2011-12) held on 21.10.2011  
(xxv) Minutes of  8th Sitting of the Committee (2011-12) held on 03.11.2011  
(xxvi) Minutes of  9th Sitting of the Committee (2011-12) held on 03.11.2011 
(xxvii) Minutes of 42nd Sitting of the Committee  (2011-12) held on 03.08.2012 
 
ANNEXURES 
(I) Status of GM Crops approved for field trials by the RCGM/GEAC  
during 2007 – till date 
 
(II) Minutes of the meeting of the Genetic Engineering  
Appraisal Committee (GEAC) held on 27.04.2011 
 
(III) List of points on the Subject „Cultivation of Genetically  
Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects‟. 
 
(IV) Research Report of ICAR – Animal Feeding Trial on  
Bio-safety Studies with Biotechnologically Transformed  
Bt-Cotton Crop using Seed Meal  
 
(V) Top 19 items of 2009-10 against the top 20 countries of their export  
 
(VI) Area under Bt. Cotton Cultivation (Final), January, 2011. 
 
(VII) All India area and production of cotton.  
 
(VIII) Options for the Regulation of Genetically Modified  
Foods in India – A Resource Document Prepared by  
the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India. 
 
  

 
 
8 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty -seventh Report on 
„Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects‟. 
Taking cognizance of the serious differences of opinion amongst th e various 
stakeholders and the controversies surrounding the cultivation of transgenic food crops , the 
Committee on Agriculture (2009 -10) (Composition at Annexure – I) had selected this 
subject for detailed examination and Report to the Parliament.  In vie w of the vastness of 
the Subject, the multiplicity of issues and stakeholders and the intricacies involved , the 
examination of the Subject could not be completed during the term of the Committee on 
Agriculture (2009-10).  The Committee on Agriculture (2010 -11) (Composition at Annexure 
– II), therefore, re -selected to subject to continue further , the examination.  Since the 
examination remained inconclusive during the term of Committee on Agriculture (2010 -11), 
the present Committee again selected the Subject to complete the unfinished task.  In all 27 
Sittings of the Committee lasting 60 hours and 52 minutes were held for and in connection 
with the examination of this Subject of considerable sensitivity and importance.  
In order to elicit public opinion, a press communication was issued on 13 March, 
2010 seeking views and suggestions on the Subject from the various stakeholders. 467 
memoranda, most of them signed by several stakeholders were received.  In all , the 
Committee received documents running into 14826 pages.  The Committee also extensively 
interacted with various stakeholders including State Governments, farmers organizations, 
NGOs, farmers and their families, etc. during their Study Visits to the various parts of the 
Country during this period.  The Committee on the suggestion of some stakeholders also 
viewed „Poison on the Platter‟ a documentary on the Subject on 10 November, 2010.  50 
individuals and organizations tendered Oral Evidence before the Committee.  The list of 
individuals and organizations whose representatives tendered oral evidence before the 
Committee is given in Annexure - III. Verbatim record of proceedings of the Oral Evidence 
running into  863 pages has been kept.   

 
 
9 
 
The Committee wish to express their sincere thanks and gratitude to the officers of 
the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and other Ministries/Departments, 
Organisations and individuals for furnishing the information the Committee desired in 
connection with the examination of the Subject and for appearing before the Committee to 
tender evidence.  
The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on           
3 August, 2012. 
The Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold at 
the end of each Chapter of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi           BASUDEB ACHARIA 
07 August, 2012                                  Chairman, 
16 Shravan, 1934 (Saka)               Committee on Agriculture  
  

 
 
10 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-12) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
                                       Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
11.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12.  Shri Premdas  
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
15.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
16.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
17.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
18.  Shri Laxman Tudu 
19  Shri D. Venugopal 
20.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
21.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
  
           Rajya Sabha 
 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
*23.  Shri Narendra Budania 
*24.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
*26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 ______________________________________________________________ 
*   Nominated to the Committee on 04.05.2012.  
        
  
 
 
  

 
 
11 
 
Annexure – I 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2009-10) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia  - Chairman 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe  
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
14. Shri Prabodh Panda 
15. Shri Premdas 
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
21. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
 Rajya  Sabha 
 
 @22. Vacant 
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24. Shri A. Elvarasan 
 #25. Vacant 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
*31. Smt. B. Jayashree 
 
@ Vice Shri Narendra Budania who ceased to be a member of the Committee on his retirement from 
Rajya Sabha on 4 July, 2010. 
# Vice Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi who ceased to be a member of the Committee on his retirement 
from Rajya Sabha on 4 July, 2010. 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 2 July, 2010 vice Shri  Khekiho Zhimomi who retired from Rajya 
Sabha on 2 April, 2010. 
  

 
 
12 
 
Annexure – II 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2010-11) 
Shri Basudeb Acharia – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
14. Shri Prabodh Panda 
15. Shri Premdas 
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
21. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
 Rajya  Sabha 
 
22. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
23. Shri Narendra Budania 
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri A. Elavarasan 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31. Shri S. Thangavelu 
  

 
 
13 
 
Annexure – III 
 
List of Organisations/Individuals who tendered  
Oral Evidence before the Committee  
 
1. Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) 
2. Prof. Deepak Pental - Vice – Chancellor, Delhi University, New Delhi 
3. Dr. S. Nagarajan – Chairperson, Protection of Plant Varieties & Farmers‟ Right 
Authority, New Delhi.  
4. Prof. V.S. Chauhan – Director, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology, New Delhi  
5. Dr. C.R. Bhatia – Former Secretary, Department of Biotechnology 
6. Prof. A.K. Tyagi -  Director, National Institute of Plant Genome Research, New Delhi  
7. Dr. Rakesh Tuli – Director, National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute, Mohali, Punjab 
8. Shri Devinder Sharma -  Forum for Biotechnology & Food Security, Noida 
9. Dr. Ajay Parida – Executive Director, MS Swaminathan Research Foundation, Chennai 
10. Dr. R.S. Paroda – Former DG, ICAR and Chairman, Trust for Advancement of 
Agricultural Sciences, New Delhi 
11. Shri Sekhar Natarajan – Chairman, Monsanto India Limited, Mumbai 
12. Shri S. Ramchandra Pillai – President, All India Kisan Sabha, Ashoka Road, New Delhi 
13. Sh. K. Nageswara Rao – Vice President, All India Kishan Sabha (Ajoy Bhavan), Windsor 
Place 
14. Sh. Samit Aich - Executive Director, Greenpeace India Limited, Bengaluru 
15. Prof. N.K. Ganguly - Former DG, ICAR, Distinguished Biotech Scientist, THSTI. 
16. Ms. Sunita Narain - Director, Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi   
17. Dr. Vandana Shiva – Director, Director, Research Foundation for Science, Technology 
and Ecology, New Delhi 
18. Dr. Sagari R. Ramdas – Director, Anthra, Secundrabad, Andhra Pradesh 
19. Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti – Trustee, Kheti Virasat Mission, JAITU, Faridkot, Punjab 
20. Prof. G. Padmanabhan  – Scientist Emeritus, Department of Biochemistry, Indian 
Institute of Science, Bengaluru  
21. Sh. Prashant Bhushan - Advocate, Supreme Court of India, New Delhi 
22. Ms. Aruna Rodrigues - Sunray Harvesters, Mhow, Madhya Pradesh 
23. Sh. M. Prabhakar Rao - Chairman & Managing Director, Nuziveedu Seeds Pvt. Ltd., 
Hyderabad 
24. Dr. Sujatha Byravan – Former Director, Council for Responsible Genetics, USA and 
Senior Fellow, Centre for Development of Finance, Institute for Financial Management 
and Research, Chennai 
25. Dr. G.V. Ramanjaneyulu - Director, Centre for Sustainable Agriculture, Hyderabad  
26. Dr. G.P.I. Singh - Director, Adesh Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, Bathinda 

 
 
14 
 
27. Dr. S. Bhaskar Reddy – Head – Agriculture, FICCI, New Delhi 
28. Prof. R.N. Basu - Former Vice-Chancellor, Calcutta University 
29. Prof. T.K. Bose - Former Director, Bidhan Chandra Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya  
30. Dr. Pushpa M. Bhargava, Anveshna 
31. Dr. V.M. Katoch, Secretary, Department of Health Research & DG, Indian Council of 
Medical Research 
32. Sh. Aniruddha Ramchandra Murkute - President, Bhartiya Kisan Sangh, New Delhi  
33. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, 
Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy)  
34. Indian National Science Academy, New Delhi 
35. Indian National Academy of Engineering, New Delhi  
36. Indian Academy of Sciences, Bengaluru  
37. National Academy of Agricultural Sciences, New Delhi  
38. National Academy of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 
39. Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) 
40. Ministry of Science and Technology (Department of Biotechnology) 
41. Ministry of Science and Technology (Department for Scientific and Industrial Research 
and Council of Scientific and Industrial Research)  
42. Ministry of Science and Technology (Department of Science of Technology) 
43. Ministry of Environment and Forests 
44. Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
45. Ministry of Agriculture (Department Agricultural Research and Education/ICAR)  
46. Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee  
47. National Biodiversity Authority of India, Chennai 
48. Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of  Consumer 
Affairs) 
49. Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and 
Public Distribution) 
50. Shri P. Sainath – Rural Affairs Editor, The Hindu 
 
 
 
  

 
 
15 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 
GM  Genetically Modified 
Bt.  Bacillus Thuringiensis 
GEAC  Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee 
CBD  Convention on Biological Diversity 
CPB  Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety 
IAASTD International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Scien ce and 
Technology for Development 
GMO Genetically Modified Organism 
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy 
MT Metric Tonne 
NBA National Biodiversity Authority of India 
FSSAI Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
DAC Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
DARE Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forests 
ICMR  Indian Council for Medical Research 
ICAR Indian Council for Agricultural Research 
CSIR Council for Scientific and Industrial Research 
RCGM Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organisation 
DLC District Level Committee 
SBCC State Biotechnology Coordination Committee 
IBSC Institutional Biosafety Committee 
SOP Standard Operating Procedures  
OECD Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
IPCC International Plant Protection Convention 
MEC Monitoring–cum Evaluation Committee 
CCMB Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology 
DSIR Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
 
 
 
 

 
 
16 
 
  CHAPTER - 1 
  
GENESIS 
 
(i) Introduction 
 
1.1 India has made rapid strides in agriculture and allied sectors after 
independence.  From a n et importer of food grains the Country has not only 
achieved food security through domestic production, even export of several 
commodities is being regularly undertaken.  Statistically speaking we have 
gone up from a production of about 50 MT of food grains in 1950 to 241 MT 
in 2010-11.  In spite of such spectacular achievements the road to ensuring 
and maintaining food security in the years to come is full of challenges.  A 
more worrying and daunting problem to be attended to with equal 
seriousness would be the deceleration in the availability of food grains.     
 
1.2 The Ministry of Science and Technology  (Department of Science and 
Technology) in their written submission to the Committee while explaining 
this dilemma stated that e ver since domestication of crop plants ten 
millennia ago, man has endeavoured to improv e productivity of crop plants.  
Advances in mineral nutrition, irrigation and plant breeding have led to 
series of revolutions, resulting in increased manifold crop productivity and 
ensuring food security to ever -increasing population, worldwide.  India‟s 
population is expected to reach 1.5 billion by 2025, making food security 
most important social issue and food production will have to be increased 
considerably, to meet needs of growing population.  Dwindling water and 
land resources will further aggravat e enormity of challenge, since additional 
food will have to be produced on existing agricultural land or marginal soils.  
In addition, crop losses due to insects, pests, diseases and declining soil 
fertility, will worsen due to climatic conditions, which f avour insect pests and 
disease vectors.  This challenge calls for harnessing powerful tools of 
molecular biology and biotechnology in agriculture.  Scientific and 
technological advances in these fields have progressed, at remarkable pace, 
during last decad e and most compelling case of intervention of 
biotechnology is its capability to contribute to:  
 (i) increasing crop productivity thus contributing to global food, feed 
and fibre security,  

 
 
17 
 
 (ii) lowering production costs,  
 (iii) conserving biodiversity, as a land -saving technology capable of 
higher productivity,  
 (iv) more efficient use of external inputs – for more sustainable 
agriculture and environment,  
 (v) increasing stability of production – to lessen suffering during 
droughts due to abiotic and biotic stresses and  
 (vi) improvement of economic and social benefits and alleviation of 
poverty. 
 
(ii) Biotechnology in Agriculture and GM Food Crops 
 
1.3 In the International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science 
and Technology for Development ( IAASTD) Report Biotechnology is defined 
as „any technological application that uses biological systems, living 
organisms, or derivatives thereof, to make or modify products or processes 
for a specific use.‟  In this inclusive sense biotechnology can include 
anything from fermentation technologies to gene splicing.  It includes 
traditional and local knowledge and the contributions to cropping pract ices, 
selection and breeding of plants and animals made by individuals and 
societies for millennia.  It would also include the application of tissue culture 
and genomic techniques and marker assisted breeding or selection to 
augment natural breeding.  
 
1.4 According to IAASTD Report modern bio -technology is a term adopted 
by international convention to refer to biotechnological techniques for the 
manipulation of genetic material and the fusion of cells beyond normal 
breeding barriers.  The most obvious exam ple is genetic engineering to 
create genetically modified/genetically engineered organism (GMOs/GEOs) 
through „transgenic technology‟ involving the insertion or deletion of genes.   
 
1.5 Revolution in plant biotechnology and genomics has opened new 
perspectives and opportunities for plant breeders, who now apply molecular 
markers to assess and enhance diversity in germplasm collections, to 
introduce valuable traits from new sources and to identify genes that control 
key traits.  Functional genomics provides  another powerful tool for 
identification of such genes.  The ability to introduce beneficial genes under 

 
 
18 
 
control of specific promoters through transgenic approaches is another 
stepping stone in path towards targeted crop improvement.  Development 
and comm ercialization of transgenic crops, expressing wide range of 
agronomic traits during mid -nineties, has virtually revolutionized faced of 
global agriculture. 
 
1.6 In past forty years, advance s in plant breeding, water and nutrient 
management and control of p ests and diseases has led to substantial 
increase in crop productivity in India.  Food production will have to be 
doubled by 2025 to meet the needs of growing population.  Furthermore, 
crop loss due to insect, pests and diseases has to be controlled in eco -
friendly and sustainable manner.  Challenges of malnutrition, enhanced 
production and crop diversification can only be met by better resource 
management and by breeding more productive, more nutritious and at the 
same time, less resource input demanding crops.   
 
1.7 Amplifying further on this aspect the Report of the six Science 
Academies on Bt. Brinjal, which was taken on record by the Committee 
states that in the last century, the major increase in global food production 
was mainly due to the improvement in yield through the green revolution.  
This involved identification of gene(s) controlling agronomic traits and their 
introgression into local varieties of staple crops like rice and wheat.  At the 
beginning of the 21 st century, such efforts c ould help produce food enough 
to feed 6 billion people.  The number of people is likely to increase to 9 
billion by 2050.  This will necessitate a mega -jump in productivity, with 
dwindling land reserves, scarce water and nitrogen and daunting challenges 
of climate change.  Malnutrition of a billion people also needs to be 
addressed urgently for a healthy world.  The present growth of agricultural 
productivity, at the rate of about 2% per year, is much lower in comparison 
to the 3% growth required for food security. The food grain production in 
India has increased four times over the last five decades.  But, in India also, 
the yield of major food grain crops is reaching a plateau although its 
population continues to rise and is expected to reach 1.5 billion p eople in 
2050.  Also, 27% of world‟s undernourished people live in India.  This will 
require an increase of more than 50% in agricultural production and calls for 
judicious use of agricultural biotechnology.  

 
 
19 
 
 
(iii) Advances made in Plant bio-technology 
    
1.8 According to the Department of Science and Technology, plant 
biotechnology has made significant strides in past twenty years, 
encompassing developments in plant molecular biology and genetic 
engineering.  Variety of traits has  been introduced in plan t species which 
include: 
 Herbicide resistance 
 Pest resistance 
 Viral resistance 
 Slow-ripening 
 Fungal and bacterial resistance 
 Quality improvement (protein and oil) 
 Value addition (Vitamins, micro-and macro-elements) 
 
1.9 First commercial GM food crop variet y „FlavrSavr‟ tomato, released in 
1994, was engineered for slow -ripening character.  List of GM food crop 
species that have been commercialized in past fifteen years is given below: 
 
 Herbicide resistance :- Corn, Soybean, rice, corn, and Sugar 
beet 
 Insect Pest resistance:- Corn, rice tomato and potato 
 Viral resistance:- Papaya, Squash and potato 
 Slow-ripening and softening- Tomato and melon 
 Improved oil quality -Canola and soybean 
 Male sterility - Canola and corn 
 
1.10 GM food crops along with other GM non -food crops were grown by 
farmers in 134 million hectares, in 2009 in 25 countries. 
 
(iv) Global Scenario of GM Crops 
 
1.11 The Department of Science and Technology also informed the 
Committee that due to consistent and  substantial economic, environmental 
and welfare benefits of GM crops, 14 million farmers, including small and 
resource-poor, planted 134 million hectare of GM crops in 2009, across 25 
countries during fourteenth year of commercialization of GM crops with 
share of developing countries at 46%.  Out of 25 countries growing 
transgenic crops, countries growing transgenic crops in more than one 
million hectare, include USA, Brazil, Argentina, India, Canada, China, 

 
 
20 
 
Paraguay and South Africa.  India grows transgen ic Bt. Cotton in 8.4 million 
hectares.  Six EU countries also planted 94,750 hectares of Bt. Maize in 
2009.  Major transgenic crops include soybean, maize, cotton, and canola; 
and major engineered traits include insect resistance, herbicide tolerance 
and v irus resistance.  Thus GM crops can contribute to major challenges 
facing global society such as food security, sustainability, alleviation of 
poverty and hunger, and help mitigate some challenges associated with 
climate change. 
 
(v) Prospects and Effects of GM Food Crops 
 
1.12 About the prospects and effects of transgenic food crops the 
Department of Science and Technology were of the view that conventional 
technologies of agriculture are inadequate to meet formidable challenges of 
feeding burgeoning popul ation with limited land and water resources.  In 
addition, adverse effects of global climate change impose new limitations on 
crop production.  Some limitations of conventional breeding are:  
 
(a) Lack of germplasm resources for some of the major pests and 
pathogens of crops,  
(b) New plant types evolved for higher productivity are more 
vulnerable to pests and diseases,  
(c) Problems in sourcing genes from wild relatives,  
(d) Lack of nutritional qualities in major cereals crops,  
(e) Methodology of plant breeding is based on phenotypic selection 
and, 
(f) Plant-environment interactions affect selection process.  
Advances in modern biology, especially biotechnology, offer 
many advantages over traditional techniques of plant breeding 
in major food crops.  In addition to enhanced leve ls of crop 
production, human society can realize benefits of food, feed 
and fibre security, low production costs, conservation of 
biodiversity, more efficient use of external inputs for 
sustainable agriculture and environment, improvement of 
economic and social benefits and poverty alleviation. 
 

 
 
21 
 
1.13  Shri S. Ramchandra Pillai, President of All India Kisan Sabha (Ashoka 
Road) which is one of the largest farmers‟ organization in India while being 
technology in the agriculture sector a precautionary approach during his Oral 
Evidence on 19 October, 2010 said:  
 
“I am President of the All India Kisan Sabha.  I am for making 
use of the achievements of science and technology in agriculture as in 
the case of other areas.  Science and Technology has made great 
progress in the area of bio -technology and genetic engineering.  There 
are possibilities for increasing productivity and production in 
agriculture by making use of genetically modified crops. But there are 
many risks involved in the use of genetically modified crops.  The risks 
are much more in the case of food grains or food crops rather than in 
the case of non -food crops. So, all appropriate measures should be 
taken to avoid all ill effects of the genetically modified crops.  Very 
rigorous bio -diversity tests should be conducted to ensure that the 
genetically modified crops should not cause any ill effects on human 
life, other plant and animal life and also on the overall environment.   
These tests should be conducted by an independent and competent 
authority. 
1.14 Strongly advocating public sector intervention he further  stated :  
“The experience of the performance of the private sector in this 
area is totally disappointing.  The multinational companies charge 
exorbitant rates for the genetically modified crops.  This is the 
experience in the case of Bt. C otton that because of the patent regime 
they hold their monopoly power over the genetic resources; because 
of the high rates for the genetically modified seeds, the common 
peasants do not get benefits from the use of genetically modified 
crops.  Profit mot ive is the chief driving force of the activities of the 
private sector in this area.  So, because of their drive for more profits, 
they may fail even to give appropriate importance to the safety 
measures.  They may also not give adequate importance to harn ess 
the pro-poor features of the use of bio -technology to find solution to 
the problems of food security, malnutrition, poverty, unemployment 
and backwardness, etc.   

 
 
22 
 
Taking all these factors into consideration, I argue that the State 
should give appropria te attention and importance to the development 
of genetically modified crops.  The Indian institutions have not made 
adequate advances in using this technology for meeting the national 
needs. There are possibilities and need for developing salinity 
resistant, drought resistant and flood resistant variety of crops.  Efforts 
also should be made to produce food grains with enhanced level of 
micro nutrients.” 
1.15 He further added: 
“What I would argue is that it should be verified.  This is a new 
area of development.  Certainly we should make use of this new area 
of development for increasing productivity and production in 
agriculture.  When we use a new technology and a new achievement of 
science, yes, there may be risks.  We cannot take a position that all 
risks should be absolutely avoided.  It may not be possible.  But this is 
a new area of development, and when we use this new area of 
development, we should ensure the ill -effects of this new technology 
should not make any difficulties to other plant life, an imal life and 
human life.  So, it should be tested.  I am only arguing for appropriate 
tests in this regard………… There are reports in Maharashtra; there are 
reports in Andhra Pradesh that the production rate is not 
commensurate to the claims that they are m aking.  There are also 
reports that new pests are coming in and pests are affecting the BT 
cotton.  The producers of the BT cotton seeds themselves admitted it 
and they are now talking about new generation of seeds.”  
 
1.16 When the Committee took -up these  issues with the Chairman of 
Monsanto India Ltd. during his Oral Evidence on the same day (19 October, 
2010) he informed them: 
“Firstly, your question was on the need of the farmers to depend 
on us for a seed or a technology or a product.  In India, Bt cot ton 
technology is the most competitive in the world.  There are six 
technologies approved by the Government for Bt cotton in India as 

 
 
23 
 
against one in Brazil, two in Australia, two in US, one in South Africa 
and two in China.  Also, our seeds are licensed to  33 Indian seed 
companies. Around 80 Indian seed companies are marketing and 
selling Bollgard cotton to Indian farmers.  The beauty of GM crops is 
such that even as a technology provider and the owner of the 
technology, my market share in Bt cotton is only  six per cent.  So, I 
am irrelevant player as far as Bt cotton is concerned.  Also, the largest 
player in India is Nuziveedu seeds which is 20 per cent market share. 
There are a lot of Indian companies selling Rasi seeds, Mahyco, 
Namdhari, Vibha, Ankur, Krishi dhan, and others.”  
1.17 Clarifying on the issue of Bt. Cotton seed pricing he stated:  
“The next important question that you had asked was about 
technology cost.  Every company that introduces a technology is 
always very careful about pricing.  It is because you cannot get the 
prices wrong as farmers have a choice.  If you get the pricing wr ong, 
people are not going to buy it. When we did the initial studies for Bt. 
cotton before 2006, we found that farmers used to spend Rs. 3,700 for 
seed and bollworm control which Bt. cotton does.  We priced it at less 
than half for him as the cost, giving him more than sixty per cent. 
Even after the change in the price as mandated by the Government, 
the price was Rs. 750.  One of the important things which need to be 
understood is that for every acre, the Bt. cotton farmer saves around 
Rs. 3,000 on account of seeds and insecticides, plus he saves on the 
yield, due to increased yield.  So, on an average Rs. 10,000 is the 
gain.  In fact, the farmers of Bt. cotton earn Rs. 20,000 crore of 
additional income from Bt. cotton.  That is why it caught up so very 
fast and has become so popular.  Also, in the first four years even 
when we had the higher price – in those years of early adoption – the 
farmers never felt the product was costly enough.  That is why the 
demand went up from 72,000 packets to 33 lakh packets. 
1.18 Queried as why then there was need for judicial intervention to bring 
down Bt. Cotton seed prices, he admitted:  
“The royalty at that point of time was Rs. 700 per packet to 
MMB.  I think when competition comes in, as the volume goes up, the 

 
 
24 
 
prices ha ve to come down because that is the only way in which 
economics will work.  It is unfortunate that the intervention has been 
made.  I think it is also an important lesson learnt by the companies 
like us who have been operating for sixty years in India.  We  have to 
work with the State Governments to get the pricing right.  We have 
been selling seeds in all markets in all parts of the country. Even now 
we are working with the Governments in almost seven States.   We 
acknowledge the fact that we should have ta ken that into account as 
we had started off.  But the pricing was right because for Rs. 10,000 
benefit, we used to charge around Rs. 700 for the technology.”   
 
1.19 GM crops are released in environment only after stringent evaluation 
of food/biosafety pro tocols/issues. To have a holistic and comprehensive 
view on the pros and cons of application of bio -technology on agricultural 
sector the Committee took on record IAASTD Report as it is an authentic 
research document prepared after painstaking effort of fo ur years by 400 
scientists from all over the world.  India is a signatory to this Report which 
has been extensively quoted in a subsequent Chapter of the present Report 
of the Committee.  Amongst various recommendations germane to all 
spheres of agricultur e and allied activities and sectors, the following 
recommendations on bio -technology caught the attention of the Committee 
in all context of their present examination:  
 
 Conventional  biotechnologies, such  as  breeding  techniques,  tissue  
culture,  cultivation  practices  and  fermentation are readily accepted 
and used. Between 1950 and 1980, prior to the development GMOs, 
modern varieties of wheat may have increased  yields up to 33%  
even in the absence of fertilizer.  Even modern biotechnologies used 
in containment have been widely adopted. For example, the industrial 
enzyme market reached US$1.5 billion in 2000.  Biotechnologies  in  
general  have  made  profound  contributions that  continue   to  be  
relevant   to  both  big  and small  farmers  and   are  fundamental to  
capturing any  advances  derived  from  modern  biotechnologies and  
related nanotechnologies.   For example,  plant breeding is 

 
 
25 
 
fundamental to developing locally adapted plants  whether  or not 
they are GMOs.  These biotechnologies c ontinue  to be widely 
practiced by farmers because they were developed  at the local level 
of understanding and are supported by local research. 
 
 Much more controversial is the application of modern biotechnology 
outside containment, such as the use of GM crops. The controversy 
over modern biotechnology outside of containment includes technical, 
social, legal, cultural  and economic  arguments. The  three most  
discussed  issues  on biotechnology in the IAASTD concerned: 
 
o Lingering  doubts  about  the  adequacy  of efficacy  and 
safety  testing,   or  regulatory frameworks for  testing GMOs ; 
o Suitability  of GMOs  for addressing  the needs of  most 
farmers  while not harming  others,  at least within some 
existing  IPR  and   liability   frameworks; 
o Ability  of  modern   biotechnology to  make  significant 
contributions to the resilience of small and subsistence 
agricultural systems. 
  
 The pool of evidence of the sustainability and productivity of GMOs  in 
different  setting s is relatively anecdotal, and the findings from 
different contexts are variable, allowing  proponents and critics to hold  
entrenched  positions  about  their present  and potential value. Some 
regions report increases in some crops and positive financial  returns  
have been reported for GM cotton  in studies including  South Africa, 
Argentina, China, India  and  Mexico. In contrast, the  US and  
Argentina  may  have  slight  yield de- clines in soybeans,  and also for 
maize in the US .   Studies on GMOs  have also shown the  potential  
for  decreased  insecticide  use,  while  others show increasing 
herbicide use. It is unclear whether detected benefits will extend to 
most agroecosystems or be sustained in the  long  term  as resistances  
develop  to  herbicides  and insecticides. 
 
 Biotechnology in general, and modern biotechnology in particular,  
creates both costs and benefits, depending  on how it is incorporated 
into  societies and  ecosystems  and  whether  there is the will to 

 
 
26 
 
fairly share benefits as well as costs. For example,  the use of modern  
plant  varieties has raised grain yields in most parts  of the world,  
but sometimes  at the expense of reducing biodiversity  or access to 
traditional foods. Neither costs nor benefits are currently perceived to 
be equally shared, with the poor tending to receive more of the costs 
than the benefits. 
 
1.20 The Committee note with great appreciation the fantastic 
achievements of India‟s farmers and agriculture scientists leading 
to an almost five times growth in food grains production in the 
country during last six decades or so.  From a paltry 50 million 
tonnes in 1950 the Country has produced a record 241 million 
tonnes in 2010 -11.  In spite of this spectacular achievement that 
has ensured the food security of the nation , things continue to be 
bleak on several fronts.  Agriculture sector‟s contribution to GDP 
has slid down from 50% in 1950 to a mere 13% now , though the 
sector continues to provide employment and subsistence to almost 
70% of the workforce.  The lot of the farmer has worsened with 
increasing indebt edness, high input costs, far less than 
remunerative prices for his produce, yield plateau, worsening soil 
health, continued neglect of the agriculture sector and the farmer 
by the Government, dependence on raingods in 60% of cultivated 
area, even after six and a half decades of Country‟s independence, 
to cite a few.  All these factors and many more have aggravated the 
situation to such an extent that today a most severe agrarian crisis 
in the history is staring at us.   The condition of the farming -
Community in the absence of pro -farmer/pro-agriculture policies 
has become so pitiable that it now sounds unbelievable that the 
slogan Jai Jawan – Jai Kisan was coined in India.  

 
 
27 
 
  
1.21 There is, therefore, a pressing need for policies and strategies 
in agriculture and allied sectors which not only ensure food security 
of the nation , but are sustainable and have in built deliverable 
components for the growth and prosperity of the farming  
community.  It is also imperative that while devising such policies 
and strategies the Government does not lose track of the fact that 
70% of our farmers are small and marginal ones.  As the second 
most populous Country in the world, with a growing econom y 
ushering in its wake newer dietary habits and nutrition norms , a 
shrinking cultivable area, a predominantly rainfed agriculture , the 
task is indeed enormous.   
 
1.22 In the considered opinion of the Committee biotechnology 
holds a lot of promise in fruct ification of the above -cited goals.  
Several of conventional bio -technologies viz. plant breeding 
techniques, tissue -culture, cultivation practices, fermentation, etc. 
have significantly contributed in making agriculture what it is 
today.  The Committee note that for some years now t ransgenics or 
genetical engineering is being put forward as the appropriate 
technology for taking care of several ills besetting the agriculture 
sector and the farming community.  It is also stated that this 
technology is enviro nment friendly and, therefore, sustainable.  
Affordability is another parameter on which policy makers and 
farming communities world over are being convinced to go for this 
nascent technology.  The Committee further note that in India , 
transgenics in agric ulture were introduced exactly a decade b ack 
with the commercial cultivation of Bt. Cotton which is a commercial 

 
 
28 
 
crop.  With the introduction of Bt. Cotton , farmers have taken to 
cotton cultivation in a big way.  Accordingly, the area under cotton 
cultivation in the Country has gone up from 24000 ha in 2002 to 8.4 
million ha at present.  Apart from production, productivity has also 
increased with the cultivation of the transgenic cotton.  The 
Committee also take note of the claim of the Government that inpu t 
costs have also gone down due to cultivation of transgenic cotton 
as it requires less pesticides, etc..  
 
1.23 Notwithstanding the claims of the Government, the policy 
makers and some other stakeholders about the various advantages 
of transgenics in agriculture sector, the Committee also take note 
of the various concerns voiced in the International Assessment of 
Agriculture, Science and Technology for Development Report 
commissioned by the United Nations about some of the 
shortcomings and negative aspects of use of transgenics/genetical 
engineering in the agriculture and allied sectors.  The technical, 
social, legal , economic, cultural and performance related 
controversies surrounding transgenics in agriculture, as pointed out 
in IAASTD report , should not be completely  overlooked, moreso, 
when India is a signatory to it.  The apprehensions expressed in the 
report about the sustainability and productivity of GMOs in different 
settings; the doubts about detected benefits of GMOs extending to 
most agro -eco systems or sustaining in long term; the conclusion 
that neither costs nor benefits are currently perceived to be equ ally 
shared, with the poor tending to receive more of the costs than 
benefits all point towards a need for a revisit to the decision of the 

 
 
29 
 
Government to go for transgenics in agriculture sector.  This is all 
the more necessary in the light of Prime Minist er‟s exhortion on 3 
March, 2010 at the Indian Science Congress about full utilisation of 
modern biotechnology for ensuring food security but without 
compromising  a bit on safety and regulatory aspects.  The present 
examination of the Committee, as the succeeding chapters will bear 
out, is an objective assessment of the pros and cons  of introduction 
of genetical modification/transgenics in our food crops which 
happened to be not only the mainstay of our agriculture sector but 
also the bedrock of our food security.          
 
 
  

 
 
30 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
PRESENT REGULATORY MECHANISM 
 
(i) Rules and Regulations 
 
2.1 The Genetically Engineering Appraisal Committee previously known as 
Genetic Engineering Approval Committee (GEAC) is the apex regulatory body 
for genetically engineered organism s and their products  in India.  GEAC  
when asked about the regulatory framework in place in the Country to 
regulate the activities involving and relating to the use of genetically 
engineered organisms, their products, etc. informed the Committee that  
Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) and products thereof including GM 
crops are regulated products in India under the „Rules for the Manufacture, 
Use/Import/Export and Storage of Hazardous Micro Organisms/ Genetically 
Engineered Organisms or Cells notified  by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests through their Notification No. 621 in Official Gazette of Gov ernment 
of India on December 5, 1989 under the provisions of the „Environment 
(Protection) Act‟, 1986 with a view  to ensure sound  application of 
biotechnology making it possible to accrue benefits arising from modern 
biotechnology while minimizing the risks to environment and human health.  
 
2.2 These rules and regulations commonly referred as „Rules 1989‟ cover 
areas of research , as wel l as large scale applications of GMOs and their 
products. These rules and regulations are implemented by MoEF, DBT and 
State Governments.  
 
2.3 About the procedure GEAC informed the Committee that t he 
development and commercialization of a genetically engineered crop can be 
broadly categorized into four stages namely  laboratory and greenhouse 
experiment, open field trials for generation of biosafety data,  
commercialization and market approval with large scale production. In view 
of various concerns related to the safety of GE crops extensive evaluation 
and regulatory approval process takes place before any GE plant is 
introduced for commercial cultivation. This includes generation and 
documentation of relevant biosafety information/data and its elaborate 
analysis to ensure food, feed and environmental safety.  

 
 
31 
 
(ii) Constituents 
 
2.4 The Rules 1989 also define the competent authorities and composition 
of such authorities for handling of various aspect s of the Rules.  Presently 
there are six competent authorities.  The mandate of the six Committees 
notified under Rules 1989 is as follows:  
 
 Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RDAC): The 
functions of RDAC are of an advisory nature and involve review 
of d evelopments in biotechnology at national and international 
levels and recommend suitable and appropriate safety 
regulations for India in recombinant research, use and 
applications from time to time. 
 Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM ): 
Established under the DBT , its functions are to monitor the 
safety related aspects in respect of on -going research projects 
and activities (including small scale field trials) and bring out 
manuals and guidelines specifying procedure for regulatory 
process with respect to activities involving genetically engineered 
organisms in research, use and applications including industry 
with a view to ensure environmental safety. 
 Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee (GEAC): 
Established under MoEF , GEAC is the apex body to accord 
approval of activities involving large scale use of hazardous 
microorganisms and recom binants in research and industrial 
production from the environ mental angle. GEAC is also 
responsible for granting ap provals relating to rele ase of 
genetically engineered organisms and products into the 
environment including experimen tal field trials (Biosafety 
Research Level trial-I and II known as BRL-I and BRL-II). 
 State Biotechnology Coordination Committee s (SBCC‟s): 
SBC h as a major role in monitoring. It also has powers to 
inspect, investigate and take punitive action in case o f violations 
of statutory provisions.   
 District Level Committees (DLCs): DLC h as a major role in 
monitoring the safety regulations in installations engaged in the 

 
 
32 
 
use of genetically modified organisms/hazardous microorganisms 
and its applications in the environment. 
 Institutional Biosafety Committee  (IBSC): IBSC i s 
established under the institution engaged in GMO re search to 
oversee such research and to interface with the RCGM in 
regulating it.  
 
(iii) Bio-safety Guidelines 
 
2.5 Rules 1989 is supported by the following bio -safety guidelines which 
are regularly updated keeping in tune with the international practices and 
developments in biotechnology:  
 
 Recombinant DNA Safety Guidelines, 1990  
 Revised Guidelines for Research in Transgenic Plants and 
Guidelines for Toxicity and Allergenicity Evaluation, 1998  
 Guidelines and SOPs for the conduct of Confined Field Trials of 
Transgenic Plants, 2008  
 Guidelines for the Safety Assessment of GM Foods, 2008  
 Protocol for Safety Assessment of Genetically Engineered Plants 
/crops, 2008.  
 
2.6 In 1990, the DBT formulated the „Recombinant DNA Safety Guidelines‟.  
These guidelines cover genetically engineered organisms, genetic 
transformation of green plants and animals, rDNA technology in vaccine 
development, and large scale production and deliberate/accidental release of 
organisms, plants, animals, and products derived by rDNA technology. The 
guidelines also deal with import and shipment of genetically modified plants 
for research purposes. DBT revised these guidelines to accommodate the 
safe han dling of GMOs in research applications and technology transfer in 
1994.  „Revised Guidelines for Research in Transgenic Plants and Guidelines 
for Toxicity and Allergenicity Evaluation, 1998‟ included considerations to be 
followed for conducting limited fie ld experiments of GE crops i.e. strip trials, 
multi location research trials and large scale trials on the lines of varietal 
testing in plant breeding. These also include the guidelines for toxicity and 
allergenicity of transgenic seeds, plants and plant parts.  
 

 
 
33 
 
2.7 GEAC further informed the Committee that w ith the successful 
adoption of Bt cotton in the country, the research and development efforts 
received a momentum and applications for field trials of several different 
crops with new genes/events were submitted to regulatory agencies. DBT 
and MoEF initiated an exercise to provide detailed guidance on the conduct 
of confined field trials so as to strengthen the management and monitoring 
mechanism.  A series of documents have been prepared which include 
„Guidelines and SOPs for the conduct of Confined Field Trials of Transgenic 
Plant, 2008‟.  The objective of the guidelines   is to ensure that confined field 
trials are conducted under appropriately controlled conditions and in 
workable and efficient manner . A new application format has been designed 
to seek detailed information at the beginning of the process itself. A glossary 
of terms has been prepared to ensure the uniform usage of various terms.  
Four crop specific biology documents for Cotton, Maize, O kra and Rice have 
also been prepared. To address health safety issues „Guidelines for the 
Safety Assessment of GM Foods, 2008‟  formulated by Indian Council for 
Medical Research (ICMR) and  „Protocol for Safety Assessment of Genetically 
Engineered Plants / crops, 2008‟ formulated by DBT  have also been adopted 
by the RCGM/GEAC.  
 
2.8 These guidelines cover areas of recombinant DNA research on plants 
including the development of transgenic plants and their growth in soil for 
molecular and field evaluation.  Genetic engineering experiments on plants 
have been grouped under three categories based on risk factor. The 
guidelines include complete design of a contained green house for 
conducting research with transgenic plants. Besides, it provides the basis for 
generating food safety information on transgenic plants and plant parts 
 
2.9 Recognizing that regulation is a dynamic process, these guidelines and 
protocols are being regularly reviewed / updated through a consultative 
approach and following the internation al norms prescribed by the 
Organization for Economic Co -operation and Development (OECD), CODEX 
Alimentarius Commission and International Plant Protection Convention 
(IPPC).  
 
2.10 When asked about the Laws, Rules and Guidelines pertaining to and 
having a bearing on the Subject; the adequacy or otherwise of the extant 

 
 
34 
 
Laws, Rules and Guidelines and suggestions of GEAC for any additional 
provisions  safeguards  and  measures  it  was  submitted  that the following 
Laws, Rules and Guidelines pertained to the subject matter:  
 
 The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
 The „Rules for the Manufacture, Use/Import/Export and 
Storage of Hazardous Micro Organisms/ Genetically 
Engineered Organisms or Cells, 1989 
 Recombinant DNA Safety Guidelines, 1990 & 1994  
 Revised Guidelines for Research in Transgenic Plants and 
Guidelines for Toxicity and Allergenicity Evaluation, 1998  
 Guidelines and SOPs for the conduct of Confined Field Trials 
of Transgenic Plant, 2008  
 Guidelines for the Safety Assessment of GM Foods, 2008  
 Protocol for Safety Assessment of Genetically Engineered 
Plants / crops, 2008.  
 
2.11 No comments were offered on the remaining two querries of the 
Committee. 
 
(iv) Procedure 
 
2.12 The Government of India is following a policy of case by case approval 
of GM crops. Any company involved in the development of GM crops has to 
undertake extensive biosafety assessment which includes environmental 
safety assessment as well as food and feed safety even if it has been 
approved for commercial cultivation in other countries.  The environmental 
safety assessment includes studies on pollen escape out -crossing, 
aggressiveness and weediness, effect of the gene on non -target organisms, 
presence of the protein in soil and its effect on soil micro -flora, confirmation 
of the absence of Terminator Gene and baseline susceptibility studies. The 
food and feed safety assessment studies include allergenicity and 
toxicological studies dietary exposure and substantial equivalence using test 
protocols such as: protein thermal stability, pepsin digestibility, molecular 
characterization, compositional assessment, acute oral toxicity (mice or rat), 
90-day sub-chronic rat feeding, and livestock feeding (case by case basis).  
 

 
 
35 
 
2.13 For the development of GM crops at the laboratory stage, confined 
multi-location trials for generation of biosafety data known as Biosafety 
Research T rials – I and Biosafety Research T rials-II (BRL -I  and BRL -II) 
require prior approval of the  RCGM and the GEAC set up under the Rules, 
1989.  The compliance of the regulatory procedures during GM crop field 
trials is monitored by the Monitoring –cum Evaluation Committee (MEC). The 
agronomic performance of the GM crops is also evaluated under the I ndian 
Council of Agriculture & Research testing system. The GEAC takes into 
consideration the findings of the biosafety and agronomic studies as well as 
recommendations of the RCGM, ICAR and MEC before according approval for 
environmental release. Only tho se transgenic crops which are found to be 
safe for human consumption as well as the environment are approved for 
commercial release.   
 
2.14 The regulatory and control mechanism prescribed by the GEAC during 
field trials of GM crops to minimize contamination due to gene flow include: 
 
(i) Maintaining a crop specific isolation distance from the periphery 
of the experimental site to other sexually compati ble rice fields 
as prescribed under the Indian Minimum Seed Certification 
Standards.   
(ii) Biological barrier by planting border rows all around the 
experimental plot.  The width of the border row would vary on a 
case to case basis.  
(iii) Maintaining a physical barrier around the experimental plot to 
keep away unauthorized persons. 
(iv) Submission of a va lidated event specific test protocol of 0.01% 
before undertaking the trials. 
(v) Designating a lead scientist who would be responsible for 
conducting the trial. 
(vi) Field trials (BRL -1) for new events are not permitted in the 
farmers‟ field.  BRL -1 should be under taken by the 
Companies/Institutions either in their own premises, research 
farms, long -leased land (minimum of three years) or at the 
SAU/ICAR institutions.  

 
 
36 
 
(vii) Event selection for new events should be undertaken by the 
Company in their own premises/ research farms.  
(viii) Post harvest restrictions include (a) burning of the border rows 
and left over plants and plant parts from the entire 
experimental plot; (b) the trials sites should not be used for 
planting  the same plant species and (c) the site should be 
monitored for volunteers and rendered non -viable before 
flowering. 
 
2.15 Field trials form an integral part of research and development and 
serve multiple purposes as under:  
 
(i) For the plant breeder, they provide the first opportunity to 
evaluate the agronomic po tential of novel -plant trait 
combinations in open environment which is not possible in 
contained conditions of greenhouse.  
 
(ii) It is necessary to measure the level of protein expression from 
any newly introduced genes in the plant tissues to assess its 
efficacy in the open environment and impact on the target and 
non target organisms consuming the genetically modified plant.  
 
(iii) It allows the production of sufficient quantities of plant material 
for use in livestock feeding studies/trials and to conduct 
compositional analyses, which are necessary for human food 
safety assessment.  
 
(iv) Such trials are also necessary to collect the agronomic and 
ecological data required to complete the environment safety 
assessment of genetically modified plant.  
 
2.16 To ascertain the efficacy of the extant system in general and role of 
GEAC as the apex regulator in particular, the Committee sought the views of 
Dr. P.M. Bhargava, founder Director of Centre for Cellular and Molecular 
Biology,  Hyderabad  and  currently  the  Supreme  Court nominee on GEAC.   
The witness informed the Committee during his Oral Evidence on 22 
December, 2010: 
 

 
 
37 
 
“Actually in our country about half a dozen tests have so far 
been done on Bt. cotton, which is the only GM product released in the 
environment or others that are in the pipeline, like Bt. brinjal. Even 
these tests have been done either by the company itself or by an 
accredited laboratory, but on the samples given by the company. In 
India, we are dealing largely with Monsanto. Please all ow me to say 
that if we were to make a list of unethical companies in all areas of 
industry around the world, the Monsanto will be the number one. I 
have given you some material which establishes that. It is known for 
bribing, for example, in Indonesia.  I t is known for hiding data, 
falsifying data or presenting wrong data and so on. All these charges 
that I am making have been validated over and over again. I have 
made them publicly also. The Monsanto is free to take me to court for 
defamation, but they ha ve not done that so far. Not only me, but 
these charges have been made by a large number of people around 
the world. So, there is no doubt in my mind that taking these 
considerations alone in mind, we have to be extremely careful. I am 
not suggesting or asking that we put a permanent ban on release of all 
GM organisms. All that I am saying is that they must be adequately 
tested and we have defined very clearly what adequate testing is.”  
 
2.17 Elaborating further the witness added: 
 
“It is true that the net  yield of cotton after we introduced Bt. 
Cotton in India has increased, perhaps not to the extent it is claimed 
but there is no question, it has increased substantially. However, we 
have to recognise the following three facts. First is, when we engage in 
such an activity, it must be sustainable. We already have reports of 
resistance to Bt. Cotton to the pests that it is supposed to kill in 
Gujarat. It is documented in Shri Jairam Ramesh‟s report, I have a 
copy of it. I have also talked to Gujarat farmers. I n Punjab, now 
instead of the pests that normally attacks cotton (the Boll worm ) now 
the mini-bug has come which is resistant to Bt. Cotton. Punjab farmers 
now say that the yields have stabilised. All this was predictable. Then 
we also have worrying cases in Andhra Pradesh. I have all the 
documentation here of several thousand cattle dying after eating the 

 
 
38 
 
remnants of the Bt. Cotton plant after the cotton was harvested over 
two years. Now the Andhra Government has issued a dictum that 
farmers should not all ow their cattle to be fed on the remnants of 
these plants which could be toxic. In Gujarat, there is also a report 
that  the soil after it has been used for Bt. Cotton for several years 
becomes incapable of sustaining any other crop possibly because of 
dehydration and loss of micro -nutrients. So, to the question that we 
had asked right in the beginning, whether it is going to be sustainable, 
the answer is no.” 
  
2.18 In response to the concern s of the Committee about human health, 
the witness stated:  
 
“We refused to do chronic toxicity studies on GM crops in this 
country. Why? They are scared that if these studies were to be done, 
they will not be able to market their products. Our nation‟s health is 
being taken to ransom; we must not allow that. When Bt. Cotton came 
into the market, about that time, Dr. Raj Paroda was the DG of ICAR, 
a very old friend of mine and Shri Mashelkar was the DG of CSIR; I 
said to both of them that why do not you together set up a lab in 
which we can do all the necessary tests for GM crops. I also wrote an 
article at that time in Economic and Political Weekly; this was before I 
was nominated by the Supreme Court on the GEAC. I did not 
understand why they were so reluctant to set up a lab where all these 
tests can be done so that  we do not need to rely on the company for 
doing the tests. Now, I understand that because they were under 
pressure not to set up a lab, can you believe that a country like India 
with all this technological advancements, does not have a lab of our 
own where we can do all these tests. I gave a proposal when I became 
a member of the GEAC, saying that this lab should be set up. I gave 
the whole plan, I have set up several institutions, if I may say so, I set 
up the CCMB, I set up Sun Pharma Advanced Research C entre in 
industry.  And I have set up other institutions. We know what goes 
into making an institution. I gave them (GEAC) within seven days, an 
entire plan of setting up an institution. It has been put into a spin by 
the GEAC. They do not want to set it u p. If we had a lab of our own, 

 
 
39 
 
believe me, Bt. Cotton would never have been allowed. Then, we 
would have forced the Government to do all the tests. Today we do 
not have a lab of our own. The whole nation does not have a lab where 
all the required tests could be done on GM organisms.”  
 
2.19 To a pointed query regarding the role of GEAC as the apex regulator of 
GMOs and related matters the witness replied:  
 
“When Bt cotton was introduced, people were not aware.  There 
was lack of awareness.  As I mentioned to you, it was introduced 
surreptitiously.  The nation did not even know that Bt cotton was being 
tried.  As I said, there was a dinner party which I attended; if I had 
not attended this dinner party in a five star hotel in Hyderabad, the 
nation probably w ould not have known for another few years that Bt 
cotton was being tried in the country.  The world-wide information that 
we have on GM crops also did not exist. 
As far as Bt brinjal is concerned, there is new awareness.  People 
understand what it is all a bout.  Large amount of literature has 
appeared on it.  If I may again say so, I became the nominee of the 
Supreme Court on this Committee and, therefore, I also spent a lot 
more time than I would have spent otherwise on this matter.  I 
carefully looked at the Report of the Expert Committee Two (EC -II) 
which recommended the release of Bt brinjal and found that it was a 
third-rate scientific report.  It is not just my opinion.  I have sent you 
material from other people‟s opinion.  In the document of Shri Jai ram 
Ramesh, several critiques of this Report have been mentioned.  At that 
time the kind of information that we today have was not there.  That is 
what makes it even more suspicious.  
Given this information, to come up with that Report on the basis 
of whic h the Genetic Engineering Approval Committee hurriedly 
approved Bt brinjal on 14th October, 2009, was un -understandable.  
That Report was perhaps written by a PRO of a company as it was not 
a scientific report. 
I have documented that Arjula Reddy, the Chai rman of the 
Committee that wrote that Report, is the Vice Chancellor of one of the 
universities in my State of Andhra Pradesh. I have known him since 

 
 
40 
 
the beginning of his career.  He called me one day and told me that 
this is a confidential conversation wh en I said: “I would keep it 
confidential unless a situation arises when I morally feel that 
conversation may be made public so, please go ahead.  If there is 
anything that you do not want to tell me, feel free not to tell me”.  He 
said: “No, I want to tell you.  Tests that you have said should be done, 
which should have been done, have not been done on Bt brinjal, and 
even the tests that have been done have been done badly”.  Imagine, 
this is the Chairman of the Committee calling me and saying to me.  
And he said: “I am under pressure.  I have had calls from industry, 
from the Genetic Engineering Approval Committee and from the 
Minister”.   I did not ask him which Minister.  So, I do not know that.  
He asked me: “What shall I do?”  I said: “Follow your conscience”.   
I must say that after this conversation, I felt that his Committee 
is not going to approve Bt. brinjal.  On the 14th October, 2009, a 
Wednesday, a GEAC meeting was to be held. When I went to my office 
in Hyderabad on the12th October, Monday, my a dministrator said that 
a 108 page of EC -II has just come on the e -mail.  I looked at the 
report and said that tonight I will have a look at it because Monday 
was a very busy day for me.  At two o‟clock on the night of that 
Monday I looked at the report cur sorily.  I have been the editor of 
many national and international scientific journals.  One thing we learn 
is to pick holes very quickly and I said: “My God, it is a terrible 
report”.  I did not get time to go through it and so I said at this 
meeting to give us one month to go through this report but they were 
not even prepared to do that and the report was approved on the 14th 
October.  Later on, we commented on it and those comments are with 
you.  It is an amazingly bad report.  I do not understand how a  group 
of scientists in 2010 can write such an obviously un -authentic and 
scientifically irrelevant and poor report.  It is not my opinion.  Every 
sensible scientist around the world has said exactly the same thing. 
There are simple arithmetical errors in the Report; errors of 
addition.  Things are said in the report which are not there in the 
original documentation that I have with me here on Bt . brinjal.  So, 
you contradict your own data because it suits you to contradict it at 
that moment.” 

 
 
41 
 
 
2.20 The wit ness summing up his views on the scientific merits of GEAC 
functioning stated: 
 
 “May I also mention to you that brinjal has alkaloids in it – two 
major and two minor? Alkaloids are generally toxic. The two major 
alkaloids‟ level in brinjal is just about w hat man can tolerate. In Bt. 
brinjal, one of these alkaloids increases by 30 per cent. This is the 
primary data of Monsanto which available on the net. But EC -II 
Report, on the basis of which Bt. brinjal  was cleared  by GEAC on 
14.10.2099, says that there is no difference. Now this difference of 30 
per cent is a lot of difference. Then, it has two minor alkaloids which 
are highly toxic. There, even if there is an increase of 20 per cent, it 
would mean that brinjal becomes toxic. VÉcÉÄ iÉBÉE àÉÖZÉä àÉÉãÉÚàÉ c è +ÉÉ{É ¶ÉÉªÉn àÉÖZÉä ºÉcÉÒ 
BÉE® ºÉBÉEiÉä cé* càÉÉ®ä nä¶É àÉå +ÉÉè® +ÉxªÉ VÉMÉc ¤ÉSSÉÉå BÉEÉä ¤ÉéMÉxÉ xÉcÉÓ ÉÊnªÉÉ VÉÉiÉÉ cè* =ºÉBÉEÉÒ ´ÉVÉc ªÉcÉÒ cè ÉÊB ÉE 
=ºÉàÉå ]ÉìÉÎBÉDºÉxÉ cÉäiÉÉ cè* Since it has these toxic alkaloids, should they not have 
looked at these minor alkaloids before giving approval? They have not 
done that.”  
 
(v) Renaming of GEAC 
 
2.21 The Genetic Engineering Approval Committee was renamed Genetic 
Engineering Appraisal Committee in 2010.  When asked about changes if any 
in its mandate, status, role and responsibilities after the renaming, it was 
submitted that the Genetic Engineering Approval Committee (GEAC) was  
established by the MoEF under Section 4 (4 ) of Rules 1989.  Apart from 
according approval of activities involving large scale use of hazardous 
microorganisms and recombinants in research and industrial production from 
the environ mental angle , th e GEAC is also responsible for ap proval of 
proposals relating to release of genetically engineered organisms and 
products into the environment, including experimen tal field trials (BRL-I and 
BRL-II). 
 
2.22 MoEF had organized public consultation on Bt Brinjal at seven locations 
during January-February 2010. The public consultations were chaired by the 
former Minister for Environment & Forests  (I/C), Shri Jairam Ramesh 
himself. In that consultation, one of the points which came was that when it 

 
 
42 
 
is called Genetically Engineered Approval Committe e then it creates an 
impression that its job is to give the “Approval”.  Therefore, the change in 
name was to suggest that it is going to appraise the safety of the genetically 
modified organism. Accordingly, MoEF issued a Notification No. GSR 613 (E) 
dated 16 July 2010 changing the name of the GEAC to Genetic Engineering 
Appraisal Committee.  There is no change in the mandate after change in 
name from Genetic Engineering Approval Committee to Genetic Engineering 
Appraisal Committee. 
 
2.23 Asked further about the role envisaged for GEAC  as far as regulation 
of activities involving and relating to the use of genetically engineered 
organisms, the products, etc. in the Country are concerned  it was stated 
that the role and responsibility of GEAC is to address only biosafety issues 
(both environment and health safety) before according approval for 
environmental release. The GEAC also has the powers to prohibit, revoke, 
supervise and take punitive action in case of non compliance, furnishing of 
wrong information or in case of any damage to the environment.   
 
2.24 The GEAC has no role in policy matters related  to research and 
development of GM crops, food security, pricing of GM seeds, 
commercialization of GM crops and labeling for consumer awareness.   
 
(vi) Role of Ministry of Environment and Forests 
 
2.25 The MoEF (nodal Ministry of GEAC) perception about itself in so far as 
research into the effects of genetically modified/transgenic crops/edible 
commodities on bio -diversity, bio-safety, environment, human health, flora 
and fauna are concerned is that MoEF calls for and also support research into 
the effects of GM/transgenic crops on biodiversity, biosafety and 
environment, both as part of pre approval evaluation and post release 
surveillance.  During the course of the safety assessment process of GM 
crops, the project components are asked to undertake research and 
generate data on specific effects on case by case basis.  
 
2.26 For example in case of Bt brinjal evaluation, Indian Institute of 
Vegetable Research, Varanasi was requested to undertake crossability 

 
 
43 
 
studies with the related specie s for two years to understand effect of Bt 
brinjal on diverse flora of brinjal existing in the country. Similarly as part of 
the post approval surveillance, Central Institute of Cotton Research, Nagpur 
has been identified as the agency for studying the dev elopment of insect 
resistance to Bt gene in the target pest across the cotton growing areas. The 
Ministry is also providing financial support to Central Institute of Cotton 
Research (CICR)  to monitor the baseline susceptibility of Bt gene in 
bollworms as part of  post release surveillance of Bt cotton since 2002.  
2.27 Further, the Ministry has schemes and programs to support projects 
for evolving regulatory guidelines and methodology to assist in evaluating 
the impact of GM crops on biodiversity, flora an d fauna etc. . As part of this 
initiative, MoEF jointly with DBT has developed (i) Guidelines and SOPs for 
the conduct of Confined Field Trials of Transgenic Plant, 2008; (ii) Biology 
documents for five crops namely Cotton, Rice, Okra, Brinjal and Maize; ( III) 
Guidance document on information /data to be generated during Biosafety 
Research Level trials of Genetically Engineered Crops. 
 
2.28 The safety assessment of Genetically Modified Crops/Commodities with 
regards to human health is generally on the following aspects: 
 
(a) direct health effects (toxicity); 
(b) tendency to provide allergic reaction (allergenicity); 
(c) specific components thought to have nutritional or toxic 
properties; 
(d) the stability of the inserted gene; 
(e) nutritional effect associated with genetic modification; and 
(f) any unintended effects which could result from the gene 
Insertion. 
 
2.29 The Committee, therefore, asked GEAC as to in how many cases  had 
it performed / contributed /assisted such assessments, if any, In the c ontext 
of Genetically Modified/transgenic Crops /Commodities introduced /intended 
for introduction in the Country at various stages of their trials and launch 
and the results of their such endeavours.  
2.30 In response they were informed that the GEAC does  not directly 
perform studies on safety assessment. As per the requirements of the 
biosafety guidelines, the applicants are required to generate data on food 

 
 
44 
 
and environmental safety including (a) to (f) above in the recognized public 
and private sector laboratories so as to submit the information to RCGM and 
GEAC. Accordingly the GEAC is involved in the review of the biosafety data 
submitted by the applicants.  Minutes of the GEAC are regularly posted on 
the MoEF website.  Biosafety data submitted by the a pplicant is also posted 
on the Ministry‟s website ( http://moef.nic.in/index.php) for inviting 
comments from concerned stakeholders before a final decision on 
environmental release is taken.   
2.31 As of date the GEAC has evaluated the efficacy and biosafety of Bt 
cotton and Bt brinjal which has been conducted as per the biosafety 
guidelines under the Rules 1989.  The results of the various studies indicate 
that (i) the insect resistant trait is stably integrated i n the crop genome and 
there is no likely evidence of crop instability, (ii) the products are safe for 
environmental release both from the health and environmental angle. 
Reports and findings of the study are available on the MoEF website. 
2.32 It was also stated that t he practice for data generation by the 
applicant are in line with the national and international norms followed in 
case of other products such as pharmaceuticals. When the same query was 
put to the MoEF, they seconded the version of GEAC.  During the Oral 
Evidence on 28 September, 2010 when director, National Institute of Plant 
Genome Research was asked to clarify in the matter, he stated: 
“On the whole I defend the technology and approach of the GEAC.  I 
agree that most of these tests, particul arly in the beginning when we 
learn about it should be done by the third party rather than by those 
who are involved parties. Because of that, doubts will arise and it is 
true that in this case some of the tests have been done by the 
involved parties. Alth ough at the same time, tests have also been 
done by State Agricultural Universities or private paid industries to 
which these tests were outsourced. This requires strengthening of 
infrastructure so that we are able to provide an intervention from the 
third party. But GEAC regulations at that point did not forbid those 
tests to be done by a involved party and therefore, those tests up to 
that level were done by this party and were found to be satisfactory. 
This GEAC not only includes scientists. At one time I have also worked 

 
 
45 
 
as a Member of GEAC and it also involves other people along with 
those from agriculture, molecular biology and from protein area and so 
it is a large panel that has been constituted. That is my view about the 
approach of GEAC.”    
 
2.33 Asked further about the stand of the Ministry before the competent 
authority with regard to introduction/field trials/cultivation of GM/transgenic 
crops in the Country during each of the last five years and the extent to 
which the stand of the Ministry has  been accepted by the competent 
authority while deciding upon each of these cases, the Ministry stated that 
the specific views of the Ministry are not solicited by the competent authority 
(viz. GEAC in the instant case) as it involves case by case safety a ssessment 
and is regulated under a legal frame work. During the last 5 years, the GEAC 
had recommended open field trials of various GM crops with new 
genes/events.  
 
2.34 All field trials are monitored by designated monitoring teams 
constituted for the pur pose by the RCGM/GEAC.   Status of GM crops 
approved for field trials by RCGM/GEAC from 2007 onwards is at   
Annexure-I. There are three stages of trials, namely: 
 
(i) Event selection trials: Preliminary trials after green -house testing 
for confirmation of efficacy and gene stability which allows for 
selection of best events that can be taken forward for purpose of 
regulatory clearance.  
(ii) Biosafety Research Level Trial -I (BRL-I): For generation of 
Biosafety data conducted at 2 -3 locations in an area of not more 
than one acre (0.4 ha) per trial per location for two years. 
(iii) Biosafety Research Level Trial -II (BRL -II): For generation of 
Biosafety data conducted at minimum of 8-9 locations in different 
agro-climatic zones.   
 
2.35 Approvals for Event selection trials and BRL -I trials are issued by 
RCGM/DBT after approval of GEAC.   
 

 
 
46 
 
2.36 BRL-II trials fall under the purview of GEAC.  As of date, BRL -II trials are 
being conducted by M/s. Dow Agro Sciences India Ltd. and M/s. Mahyco for GM 
Cotton Crop and BRL-II trials by M/s. Monsanto with respect to GM Maize.   
  
2.37 The recommendation of the GEAC to accord approval for 
environmental release of Bt cotton in 2002 was supported by the Ministry.  
However on the recommendations of the GEAC to approve Bt brinjal event 
EE-1 the Ministry received   strong views (both in favou r and against) the 
release of Bt brinjal. Subsequently, the Ministry organized public 
consultations chaired by the Minister for Environment and Forests (IC) at 
seven locations.  
 
2.38 Several  concerns emerged during the national consultations which 
include health issues, loss of biodiversity, dependence on MNCs for seeds, 
loss of indigenous varieties through contamination of gene pool, 
sustainability of the technology, consumer choice and labeling, adequacy of 
regulatory process etc have.  In the absence of scientific consensus and 
opposition from the State Governments and others,  the Ministry,  on 
February 09, 2010  decided to impose a moratorium on commercialization of 
Bt brinjal until all concerns expressed by the public, NGOs, scientists and the 
State Governments are addressed adequately.   
 
2.39 The Minister for Environment and Forests (IC) while imposing 
moratorium on Bt brinjal Event EE-1 had also issued the  following directions 
to the GEAC:   
 
1. Identify further studies and tests with appropriate protocols in 
appropriate laboratories.  
2. Review of all materials received by the Minister as part of the 
consultation process.  
3. Interact with all those scientists, institutions and civil s ociety 
groups who have submitted written representation to the 
Minister.  
4. Consult with scientists like Prof M S Swaminathan, Dr P M 
Bhargava, Dr G Padmanabhan, Dr M Viyayan,  Dr Keshav Kranthi 
and Dr Madhav Gadgil and others to draw up fresh protocols for 
specific tests that will have to be conducted to generate public 
confidence. 
 

 
 
47 
 
2.40 As a follow up to the above directions, a meeting of the GEAC to 
consult experts and scientists on the issue of Bt. Brinjal during the post -
moratorium phase was held on Apri l, 27, 2011.  Minutes are at    
Annexure-II 
 
(vii)   Organisational Set-up 
 
2.41 About the adequacy of the organisational set up available with them 
for ensuring that the designated role is discharged in conformity with the 
power vested upon them, GEAC informed the Committee that presently, the 
GEAC Secretariat in the MoEF comprises of Chairman GEAC (Additional 
Secretary, MoEF); Vice Chair (Joint Secretary, MoEF), Member Secretary 
GEAC (Dir –MoEF) and one Research Officer.  The secretarial support staff is 
minimal.  The Co -chair a nominee of DBT is an accomplished scientist 
outside DBT but having independent professional responsib ilities. 
Administrative and technical support for review of the large number of 
applications is not provided to the Co-Chair and Member Secretary under the 
present system.  To address this issue, GEAC is following a Committee based 
approach by constituting sub-committees and experts bodies.  
 
2.42 The RCGM under DBT is also functioning with minimum staff and 
infrastructure.   In light of the new developments in the areas of modern 
biotechnology, the dependence on a committee based review approach 
needs to b e changed with a more robust review mechanism consisting of 
dedicated staff and infrastructure. It is in this context the Cabinet has 
approved the Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India Bill, 2010 under 
DBT.  
 
2.43 About the extent to which the role o f GEAC differed or was in 
conformity with similar entities functioning in the Countries where 
substantial activities involving genetically engineered organisms, their 
products, etc. are being undertaken, as also in the countries which are on 
the threshold of entering the substantial activities ambit in near future like 
India, the Committee were informed that countries have different regulatory 
systems sometimes based on new acts that have been exclusively framed to 
deal with GMOs or based on regulations und er the auspices of existing legal 
instruments. Further, these regulatory systems are very dynamic responding 

 
 
48 
 
to the needs of advancing biotechnology research.   While the objective and 
methodology of biosafety assessment being followed is similar in most 
countries, the agencies involved in the regulation may differ.  Some 
countries have dedicated „Authorities‟ to implement the biosafety regulation 
whereas others have a „Biosafety Committee‟ based system as in India. In 
several countries the Ministry of Envir onment and Forests is the nodal 
ministry for implementing the Biosafety laws.  
 
2.44 The Committee were further informed that whereas the role of GEAC is 
broadly in conformity with regulatory process adopted in other countries, the 
responsibilities depend on the type of products and activities being regulated 
viz drugs, GM food, GM crops, transgenic animals, clinical trials, field trials , 
etc. 
 
(viii) Antibiotic Resistant Marker Genes 
 
2.45 There is a view point that Gene Transfer from Genetically Modified 
Crops/Commodities to cells of the body or to bacteria in the gastro intestinal 
tract would be of concern, if the transferred genetic material adversely 
affects human health.  This would be particularly relevant if antibiotic 
resistant genes, used in creating GMOs, were to be transferred.  Inspite of 
the probability of such transfer being low, the use of technology without 
antibiotic resistant genes has been encouraged by FAO/WHO expert panel.  
 
2.46 In order to u nderstand the issue in its all ramifications the Committee 
sought the views of ICAR in the matter.  In response, ICAR informed the 
Committee that antibiotic resistance marker genes have been in wide use by 
plant molecular biologists to develop transgenic p lants since 1983; many of 
which are present in the GM crops commercially cultivated globally. The 
biosafety of these genes/enzymes has been well established (Nap et al., 
1992; EFSA, 2001 and 2007, USEPA, 2004). Experiments have shown that 
the likelihood of  horizontal transfer of these genes from transgenic plants 
and foods derived thereof to bacteria and other organisms is extremely 
negligible. In conclusion, antibiotic resistance marker genes are totally 
biosafe, environmentally safe and can be continuousl y used without any 
adverse consequences. GM crops developed using marker genes have so far 

 
 
49 
 
not shown any adverse effect at different stages of development including 
release at commercial scale. 
 
2.47 The Council further informed the Committee that while th e use of 
antibiotic resistance genes in GM crop development has been verified by 
experts to be safe,  ICAR will be looking for options of developing GM crops 
free from such antibiotic resistance marker gene as encouraged by WHO and 
this is being currently pursued by some of the ICAR institutes. There are well 
established strategies available for development of marker free transgenics. 
Other options are also available which include excision or segregation of 
marker genes from the host genome after regenerati on of transgenic plants 
through co-transformation.  
 
2.48 When GEAC  was asked to clarify on this issue they informed the 
Committee through a written reply that a ntibiotic resistance marker genes 
have been in wide use by plant molecular biologists to develop transgenic 
plants since 1983. The selectable market genes such as nptII, hpt and aaD 
are sourced from ubiquitous bacteria such as E. coli  (transposon 5), and 
gram-negative bacteria (Transposons 7 and 21) and are extensively used in 
the development of transgenic plants/crops/ many which are commercially 
cultivated globally.  It is a matter of policy issue on whether to allow GM 
crops with antibiotic resistance markers since technology for g enerating 
marker free transgenic plants is available.  
 
2.49 The Committee were further informed that the matter was deliberated 
in the 105 th GEAC meeting held on 8.12.2010 wherein it was noted that GM 
crops in the pipeline have been developed several years ago based on the 
technology available at that point of time. Further, it takes several years to 
complete the safety and efficacy assessments of GM crops.  Therefore, any 
decision to disallow release of GM crops with antibiotic resistant genes would 
make almost all transgenic plants that are under consideration of 
GEAC/RCGM ineligible for release.  T echnological interventions and 
improvements are ongoing pro cess and would be made available for newer 
products.   
 
2.50 In view of the above, the GEAC decided that the GM crops containing 
markers for antibiotic resistant genes currently in the pipeline may continue 

 
 
50 
 
to be evaluated on a case by case basis unless sc ientific evidence  is 
established otherwise on the ground .  For newer products it was decided to 
have wider consultations on the matter taking into consideration 
technologies available and international experience.    
 
2.51 When the same query regarding the  antibiotic resistant mark a genes 
was put forth to the Ministry of Environment and Forests, who are the 
controlling Ministry of GEAC, they also dittoed the stand of GEAC in the 
matter.  
 
2.52 The Department of Science and Technology, who are the nodal 
authority for science and technology in the Country informed the Committee 
on this aspect that experts in the area generally adopt the general principle 
of risk minimized strategy in dealing with GM crops and employ scientific 
tools and techniques for assessing the risk potential prior to field trials.  It is 
true that the there are concerns with respect to the risk of gene transfer to 
the cells in the body or micro -organisms.  The perceived views of FAO/WHO 
expert panels with respect to encouraging technologies without the antibiotic 
resistant genes emanates from their risk minimization approach.  At this 
stage of development of GM technologies, “minimization rather than total 
elimination of risks”  might form the pragmatic approach.  The Department 
holds a view on this issue that while risk minimization based on rigorous 
scientific assessment is an acceptable current approach, further research for 
Zero-risk standards of GM food crops should be supported.  
 
2.53 The Department also stated that they shared the views of RCGM and 
GEAC on this important issue by virtue of the process adopted by them 
which are science based regulatory deliberations and they take into account 
of the current technology paradigm in the world.  
 
2.54 The Department of Biotechnology, who are the nodal Department for 
RCGM informed the Committee that they endorsed the following views of 
RCGM and GEAC on this issue which are science based regulatory 
deliberations in recent period:   
 
“In its 96th meeting of RCGM the issue was discussed in detail. It 
has been stated by RCGM that markers for antibiotic resistance should 

 
 
51 
 
not be an issue, since transfer of these genes from transgenic crops to 
bacteria living in the gut of humans and livestock is an extremely rare 
event under natural conditions.  Antibiotic resistant genes are already 
found in some bacteria. Furthermore, non e of the transgenic crops 
released for cultivation in the past is marker -free, and no case of any 
transfer of marker gene or its toxic effect has ever been reported 
during the last 15 years of commercialization of crops. GEAC in its 
105th meeting on 8.12.2 010 has accordingly reviewed and decided 
that the GM crops containing markers for antibiotic resistant genes 
currently in the pipeline may continue to be evaluated on a case by 
case basis unless scientific evidence is established otherwise.”  
 
2.55 Since the Department of Health Research/ICMR under the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare is the nodal Department for all human health 
related research the Committee wanted to not only know their views on the 
use of antibiotic resistant mark er  genes in creat ing GMOs but they also 
wanted to know as to whether the Department/ICMR had taken any initiative 
in this regard with a view to discourage use of antibiotic resistant genes, in 
case they subscribed to the views of FAO/WHO expert panel. 
 
2.56 In response, th e Department informed the Committee that h orizontal 
gene transfer from plants to bacteria has not been demonstrated 
experimentally under natural conditions and deliberate attempts to induce 
such transfers have so far not been successful. The likelihood of brinjal 
genes transferring to humans and other animals perhaps are negligible. 
Modern biotechnology should develop marker genes other than antibiotic 
resistance ones though from available scientific data and reports, the 
possibility of gene transfer is very remote. 
 
2.57 Asked further as to what role DHR/ICMR perceived for themselves in 
so far as research into the effect of Genetically Modified crops/edible 
commodities on human health is concerned it was stated that the 
Department shall critically review all the toxicological data generated during 
the biosafety research level studies (BRL) relevant to human health and 
carry out a risk as sessment to ensure that the GM food crop would be safe 

 
 
52 
 
for human consumption.  Department will support research to examine these 
aspects also.   
 
2.58 However, when the views of Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research were sought by the Committee on this issue, it was stated by them 
that CSIR favours marker free transgencis (i.e. those without antibiotic 
resistance genes) and molecular breeding is the preferred option for food 
crops and medicinal plants.  
 
  
(ix)  Conflict of Interest 
 
2.59 Taking note of a media report appear ing in a national daily regarding 
alleged favoritism by GEAC in dealing with case of the kin of a GEAC 
member, the Committee asked GEAC to submit a factual note on the report.  
In a written submission GEAC informed that the facts of the case are as 
follows:  
 
1. The GEAC in its 104 th meeting held on 15.11.2010 had allowed 
event selection trials on seven transgenic rice (oryza sativa L) by 
the Department of Botany, Calcutta University at Rice Research 
Station, Chinsurah.  The concerned member was not present in the 
GEAC meeting.  
 
2. The proposal was recommended to the GEAC by the RCGM in its 
94th meeting held on 26.10.2010 wherein the prescribed isolation 
distance was only 10 m.  During the GEAC deliberation, the 
Committee noted that the proposed isolation measure is not in line 
with the Indian Minimum Seeds Standard Certification (IMSCS) 
which pr escribes 200 m isolation distance. Accordingly the GEAC 
approved the proposal subject to compliance of 200 m isolation 
distance. RCGM was also informed to issue the permit letter 
accordingly.  
 
3. Subsequently the Member Secretary, GEAC received a mail fro m 
the concerned member stating “ Please see the 104th meeting of 
GEAC :a proposal from Calcutta Univ on Event selection of 
transgenic rice for high iron rice, it was recommended for the 200 

 
 
53 
 
m isolation distance. It should be  3 meter as inbreed lines (as per  
guidelines of IMSCS 1988).  It is not hybrid rice. Can you please 
check this matter?” 
  
4. The matter was placed before the GEAC in the 106 th GEAC meeting 
held on 12.1.2011. The Committee noted that as per IMSCS, 1988, 
for inbred lines the isolation distan ce is 3 meter and for hybrids it 
is 200 m.  As the trials conducted by the University of Calcutta 
with inbred lines, it was observed that 10 m isolation distance is 
adequate. Accordingly, the GEAC conveyed its „no objection‟ to 
maintain 10 m isolation dist ance during the event selection trials 
with transgenic rice developed by University of Calcutta.   
 
5. Meanwhile DBT directed Calcutta University to submit „no 
objection‟ from the State Government for the event selection trials.  
Directorate of Agriculture , Government of West Bengal vide 
communication No.210 -PS dated 24.3.2011 has given their 
consent   with the condition of plastic barrier to be placed around 
the GM rice field trial site.  DBT has recently issued the approval 
letter for event selection tria ls. However, the trials have not been 
initiated. 
 
2.60 In view of the newspaper report, the GEAC in its meeting held on 
6.7.2011, reconsidered the issue of approval given to GM rice trials 
developed by Calcutta University. The above matter was discussed in  the 
absence of the concerned member.  The Committee reconsidered the case 
and reiterated its earlier decision to allow Calcutta University to conduct 
event selection trial maintaining an isolation distance of 10 m. In light of the 
fact that the isolation distance under Indian Minimum Seed Certification 
Standards (notified under Seed Act 1966) is 3 m for inbred rice lines, the 
Committee was of the view that the 10 m isolation distance stipulated by 
GEAC is adequate.  
 
2.61 It may also be noted that the newspaper report states that the GEAC 
has flouted the SC direction for maintaining 200 m isolation distance. In this 
regard it may be noted that the order dated 8.5.2007 which stipulates that 

 
 
54 
 
an isolation distance of 200 m sho uld be maintained for all GM crop field 
trials has been waived through an order dated 8.4.2008.  As the isolation 
distance is crop specific, the GEAC had constituted a Sub -Committee to 
review the SC orders. Based on the recommendations of the sub -committee, 
the Ministry had filed an application for waiver of the condition.  The SC in 
its order dated 8.4.2008 noted that: 
 
“On 8th May, 2007 this Court had directed that when field trials are 
conducted, there must be 200 meters isolation distance between the 
trial fields and the neighbouring fields having cultivation of same 
crop, to avoid contamination. It is submitted on behalf of the 
applicants in I.A.s 22 and 23 that the distance to be maintained 
should depend upon the nature of the crop. It is submitted that some 
crops may require less than 200 meters and some may require more 
than 200 meters. GEAC will examine this issue and prescribe the 
isolation distance depending upon the nature of the crop”.  
 
In light of the above, the GEAC has not flouted any of the Supreme 
Court direction. 
 
2.62 In view of the media reports about conflict of interest of some of the 
members on the Committee/bodies of GEAC. The Committee sought a 
detailed note in the matter as also details of action taken in case any of 
these instance/matter was actionable. In response they were apprised that 
the GEAC in its 105 th GEAC meeting held on 8.12.2010, had adopted the 
following criteria to address issues related to conflict of interest based on the 
recommendations of the sub-committee constituted by the GEAC: 
 
I. A member of the GEAC is either a team leader or member of a 
team that has developed a transgenic plant which has come up 
for consideration before the GEAC shall  not participate in the 
discussion regarding such an application. 
 
II. A member o f the GEAC is a consultant for an industry/research 
foundation that has developed a transgenic plant which has 
come up for consideration before the GEAC shall  not participate 
in the discussion regarding the said application.  
 

 
 
55 
 
III. A Member of the GEAC is invo lved in the development of 
transgenic plant constituting the same crop/trait of interest that 
is being considered by the GEAC or is involved in the 
development of a recombinant vaccine/drug against the same 
disease. The GEAC member shall not participate in  the 
discussion regarding such an application. 
 
IV. Further, in all the three situations mentioned above, the GEAC 
member should not be involved in the conduct or monitoring of 
field trials/clinical trials with regard to an application being 
considered by the GEAC. 
 
2.63 The criteria for „Declaration and Statement of Independence‟ to be 
submitted to the GEAC were specific to the involvement of the Member with 
respect to an application under consideration of the GEAC.  
  
2.64 The matter was reconsidered in the GEAC meeting in light of a recent 
report.  The GEAC has now decided that the „Conflict of Interest‟ clause 
would be triggered if the member or his/her spouse or children are involved 
in terms of the criteria mandated above.   
 
2.65 The GEAC has also decided to constitute a Sub -Committee to ensure 
that there is no Conflict of Interest and suggest further measures for 
avoiding such situations.   
 
2.66 The Committee also sought the views of Prof. N.K. Ganguly, former 
Director-General, ICMR and Distinguished Biotech Scientist, THSTI on this 
aspect.  He informed the Committee during his Oral Evidence on 19 October, 
2010: 
“Again, in real terms several of ou r councils have not done 
because in agricultural area the public health is weak, in the pure 
science areas public health is weak.  So, many of these are public 
health concerns and we need to really create a seamless system in our 
place where such assessmen ts are taught or passed on to appropriate 
stakeholders.  Although, we have something like GEAC, the processes 
need to be put in place.  I have seen about 10 or 15 people are 
gathered in a place, they come with huge documents which they have 

 
 
56 
 
not even read.  Many of them read them on the table and sitting for 
few hours they give their impression and opinion.  This is not how the 
opinions are made.  It is a process and each step of the process is very 
important.  So, all these committees, whether it is GEAC or  Food 
Security Authority, etc., should have SOPs for the meeting and these 
SOPs should also deal with conflict of interest.    
We hardly ask conflict of interest.  Like, I came here as a 
witness, perhaps you have called me as a technical expert because I 
am the Chair of the Food Safety Technical Committee and also chaired 
the committee on its introduction in India for 10 to 12 years, but you 
never asked me whether I have a conflict of interest or not; whether I 
was a consultant on Monsanto or not.  Nobody a sked me to fill up a 
form.  This is very important in the committees.  In India, hardly such 
declaration is asked for.  When I go to attend international meetings, 
this is the first declaration which is taken from me and the total 
processes are put in plac e.  Any violation of that process does not 
complete the meeting.  Like, in the stakeholders if we have members 
of religious bodies, members of the lay public then their opinion is also 
very important.  Sometimes they ask very germane questions which 
need t o be answered.  If anyone of them is missing in these 
committees then nobody accepts the committee‟s rulings and verdict.  
So, this will again be my recommendation that composition of these 
committees should be very deeply looked into and their processes 
should be in place according to the strict SOPs and they should not 
deliberate for just few hours and then give a verdict of such an 
importance.” 
2.67 Shri Prashant Bhusan, Advocate, Supreme Court of India while 
emphasizing the need for an independent regul ator to eliminate any  conflict 
of interest told the Committee during his Oral Evidence on  
28 October, 2010: 
  
“VÉ¤É <ÆÉÊb{Éåbå] ºÉÉ<ÆÉÊ]º]ÂºÉ ÉÊµÉEÉÊ]BÉE BÉE® BÉEä +É{ÉxÉä -+É{ÉxÉä BÉEàÉå]ÂºÉ nä nå, iÉ¤É ABÉE ÉÊ¤ÉãÉBÉÖEãÉ <ÆbÉÒ{Éåbå] 
®èMÉÖãÉä]ÅÉÒ ¤ÉÉìbÉÒ ªÉc näJÉä ÉÊBÉE <ºÉºÉä BÉEÉä<Ç JÉiÉ®É cÉäMÉÉ ÉÊBÉE xÉcÉÓ cÉäMÉÉ, BÉÖEU A´ÉÉÒbåºÉ ÉÊxÉBÉEãÉÉ ÉÊBÉE xÉcÉÓ ÉÊxÉBÉEãÉÉ 
+ÉÉè® iÉ¤É +ÉMÉ® ªÉc ÉÊnJÉä ÉÊBÉE cÉÆ, BÉEÉä<Ç JÉiÉ®É xÉcÉÓ cè, iÉ¤É =ºÉBÉEÉ ÉÊ®ãÉÉÒVÉ AãÉÉ= ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ VÉÉA* <ºÉBÉEä ÉÊãÉA ªÉc 

 
 
57 
 
VÉ°ô®ÉÒ cè ÉÊBÉE  VÉÉä £ÉÉÒ +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÉÒ ®èMÉÖãÉä]ÅÉÒ ¤ÉÉìbÉÒ cè ªÉÉ ®èMÉÖãÉä]ÅÉÒ +ÉlÉÉìÉÊ®]ÉÒ cè, =ºÉàÉå ºÉÉ®ä <ÆbÉÒ{Éåbå] ãÉÉäMÉ cÉäxÉä 
SÉÉÉÊcA*  
VÉÉÒ.<.A.ºÉÉÒ. VÉÉä lÉÉÒ, =ºÉBÉEä BÉEÉä -SÉäªÉ®àÉèxÉ lÉä bÉì. ºÉÉÒ.bÉÒ. àÉÉ<Ç* ´Éä +ÉÉ<Ç.AºÉ. ÉÊ]Å{ÉãÉ A BÉEä ¤ÉÉäbÇ +ÉÉì{ÉE 
bÉªÉ®èBÉD]ºÉÇ àÉå lÉä, ªÉÉxÉÉÒ ÉÊBÉE =ºÉÉÒ +ÉÉMÉæxÉÉ<VÉä¶ÉxÉ BÉEä ¤ÉÉäbÇ àÉå lÉä, VÉÉä +ÉÉMÉæxÉÉ<VÉä¶ÉxÉ àÉÉéºÉå]Éä uÉ®É {ÉEÉ =Æbäb AÆb 
{ÉEÆbäb lÉÉÒ* ÉÊVÉºÉä àÉÉéºÉå]Éä SÉãÉÉiÉÉ cè, =ºÉ +ÉÉMÉæxÉÉ<VÉä¶ÉxÉ BÉEä ¤ÉÉäbÇ +ÉÉì{ÉE bÉªÉ®èBÉD]ºÉÇ àÉå cé +ÉÉè® ªÉcÉÆ ®èMÉÖãÉä]ÅÉÒ 
¤ÉÉìbÉÒ BÉEä BÉEÉä-äSÉªÉ®àÉèxÉ cé* <ºÉÉÊãÉA ªÉc ¤ÉcÖiÉ VÉ°ô®ÉÒ cè ÉÊBÉE ®èMÉÖãÉä]ÅÉÒ ¤ÉÉìbÉÒ AäºÉÉÒ cÉäxÉÉÒ SÉÉÉÊcA ÉÊBÉE =ºÉBÉEä BÉEÉä<Ç 
BÉEÉìÉÎx{ÉDãÉBÉD] +ÉÉì{ÉE <Æ]®èº]ÂºÉ xÉ cÉå* =ºÉBÉEä ¤É½ä ºÉJiÉ àÉÉ{ÉnÆb cÉå ªÉc näJÉxÉä BÉEä ÉÊãÉA ÉÊBÉE  <xÉBÉEä BÉEÉä<Ç 
BÉEÉìÉÎx{ÉDãÉBÉD] +ÉÉì{ÉE <Æ]®èº]ÂºÉ iÉÉä xÉcÉÓ cé* <xÉBÉEÉ BÉEÉä<Ç BÉExÉèBÉD¶ÉxÉ xÉcÉÓ cè =xÉ BÉEÆ{ÉÉÊxÉªÉÉå ºÉä ÉÊVÉxÉBÉEÉ <ºÉàÉå 
BÉEàÉ¶ªÉÇãÉ <Æ]®èº] cè +ÉÉè® =xÉºÉä ªÉä ãÉÉäMÉ {ÉèºÉä iÉÉä xÉcÉÓ ãÉäiÉä* ªÉä ºÉ¤É ¥ÉÉìb <¶ªÉÚVÉ cé, ÉÊVÉxÉ {É® càÉ ãÉÉäMÉÉå BÉEÉä 
ºÉÉäSÉxÉÉ +ÉÉè® ÉÊ´ÉSÉÉ® BÉE®xÉÉ cè*”  
(x) Development of BN Bt/Bt NHH44 
 
2.68 During the currency of the Committee‟s examination of the present 
subject a news item appeared on 30 December, 2011 in a national daily 
which reported that two Bt cotton variants developed by scientists in public 
sector were found to be carrying genes from the original patented product of 
a multinational company.  The Committee immediately sought a factual note 
from the Government in the matter. 
 
2.69 In their explanation in the matter ICAR stated that the Objective was 
to develop and commercialize low cost alternative Bt cotton varieties and 
hybrids through public sector institutions. The chronology of events relating 
to development of Bikaneri Narma  Bt  cotton variety and Bt NHH44 cotton 
hybrid is as follows: 
 
1. 2000-2001 : National Researc h Centre on Plant Biotechnology     
(NRCPB) provided the cry 1 Ac gene construct to University of 
Agricultural Sciences, (UAS),  Dharwad which was used to 
transform shoot apex explants of Bikaneri Narma through 
Agrobacterium mediated transformation to develop the BNBt 
event „BNLA106‟  
2. 2003: NRCPB confirmed gene integration and copy number by 
Southern analysis.  
3. 2002-04: The material brought from UAS Dharwad in 2002 was 
tested by Central Institute for Cotton Research (CICR), Nagpur 

 
 
58 
 
and confirmed the expression of Cry 1Ac protein. Subsequently, 
UAS, Dharwad conducted insect bioassays and advanced the BN 
Bt to T3 generation.. 
4. 2005: BN Bt seeds developed at UAS, Dharwad were grown in 
Glasshouse of CICR, Nagpur in May 2005. Biosafety studies were 
initiated by CICR, Nagpur.  
5. 2006-2007: The work was published in Current Science (I. S. 
Katageri, H. M. Vamade vaiah, S. S. Udikeri, B. M. Khadi and 
Polumetla A. Kumar. 2007. Genetic transformation of an elite 
Indian genotype of cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.) for insect 
resistance. Current Science, 93, 1843-1847). 
6. 2005-2008: Applications to Review Committee on Gene tic 
Manipulation (RCGM) and Genetic Engineering Approval 
Committee (GEAC) were submitted by Director, CICR, Nagpur. 
Contained Open Field Trial, Multilocation Research Trials and 
Biosafety studies were carried out. The BN Bt variety and „Bt 
NHH 44‟ were tested under RCGM “Contained Open Field Trial” at 
three locations in three cotton growing zones during 2005 -2006 
and Multi-Location Research Trials (MLRT) in 12 locations in all 
the three zones in 2006-07 and 2007-08. The BN Bt and Bt NHH 
44 showed over-all yield superiority in both seed cotton and lint 
yield when compared with Non -Bt check and local checks. 
Biosafety studies were carried out at various institutions through 
CICR. 
7. 2006-07: The BNBt event was characterized by outsourcing the 
work to M/S Avasthagen, Bangalore.  
8. 2008: After completing all the mandatory biosafety testing and 
field experimentation, the „BN Bt variety‟ was approved for 
commercial cultivation in the 84th meeting of GEAC held on 2nd 
May 2008 
9. 2008: A meeting was held under the Chairmansh ip of Deputy 
Director General (Crop Sciences), ICAR regarding the roadmap 
for the promotion and utilization of BNBt cotton. 
10. 2008: To finalize the commercialization modalities of „BN -Bt‟ Bt-
cotton event, BN-Bt variety and the Bt -cotton hybrids developed 
using the „BN -Bt‟ event, a Meeting was held on 12th December 

 
 
59 
 
2008 under the Chairmanship DDG (CS) in New Delhi. 
Commercialization and seed production plans were finalized.   
11. 2008: UAS, Dharwad produced 250 quintal seed in 2008 -09 
kharif season. The seed was s ent to CICR in two lots (165 Q on 
4th May and 84 Q on 6th May 2009) at Rs 50 per Kg. The seeds 
were packed at CICR in 2kg seed bag containing packs of 200g 
pigeonpea refugia seed and were distributed to various agencies. 
12. 2009: The hybrid „Bt NHH 44‟ was ap proved by GEAC on 13th 
May 2009 for commercial cultivation in the Central and South 
zones during Kharif season 2009. „BN Bt‟ is female parent and 
AC738 is the male parent for Bt NHH 44. UAS Dharwad produced 
15 quintals Bt NHH 44 seed and sent to CICR at Rs  370 per Kg 
on 28th May 2009. The seeds were packed at CICR in 750 g Bt 
NHH 44 seeds per bag and were distributed to various 
institutions 
13. 2009: A meeting was convened at New Delhi on 10 -12-2009 
under the Chairmanship of DDG (CS) to examine the reported 
presence of Mon 531 in BNBt seeds. Based on the evidence 
available, it was decided to stop production and commercial sale 
of BNBt and Bt NHH 44 seeds. 
14. 2011: To explore the way forward in utilizing Bt genes from 
available sources for introgression into elite p ublic sector 
varieties and hybrids, a meeting was convened at New Delhi on 
27-04-2011 under the Chairmanship of DDG (CS). Options were 
also suggested for purification of the BNBt event. 
15. 2011: In view of emerging reports regarding the presence of 
Mon531 in BNBt cotton , a meeting was held on 27 -12-2011 
under the Chairmanship of DDG (CS) and it was noted that the 
seed multiplication of BN Bt and Bt  NHH 44 was suspended after 
2009. It was suggested that the Vice -Chancellor, UAS, Dharwad 
may look into the proces s of BN  Bt development, seed 
multiplication and other related aspects. The authors of the 
Current Science paper are advised to submit immediately a 
Corrigendum to rectify the vector map. As a way forward to 
utilize the Genetically modified (GM) cotton events available with 
the public sector, concerted efforts may be initiated by CICR to 

 
 
60 
 
develop multi -gene stacked elite cotton varieties. The events 
available with the public sector institutions may be evaluated 
and the best events may be stacked together thro ugh inter -
institutional collaborative programmes to be taken up on priority. 
16. Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) is constituting an 
Expert Committee to examine the entire issue related to BNBt 
cotton event and Bt NHH44, and suggest appropriate measures.  
 
INSTITUTIONS INVOLVED: 
NRCPB, New Delhi 
 
1. Provided Cry 1Ac gene construct  
2. Conducted PCR  
3. Confirmed gene integration and copy number by Southern 
blot analyses. 
 
UAS Dharwad 
 
1. Development of BNBt event BNLA106 through genetic 
transformation of shoot apex explants and regeneration of 
transformed tissues through tissue culture methods 
2. Screening of the transformed events to select the best 
event 
3. Breeding methods to carry forward the best event plant 
progeny through 5 generations to obtain homozygous 
plants of BNLA106 event 
4. Conducted insect bioassays 
5. Conducted ELISA tests 
6. Multiplied and provided seeds for all bio -safety studies and 
field trials 
7. Provided „BNBt‟ seed to plant breeder in 2005 for gene 
introgression into elite varieties 
 
CICR, Nagpur 
 
1. Coordinated the biosafety studies for BNBt seeds provided 
by UAS, Dharwad institutions) 
2. Conducted biosafety testing on soil micro-organisms and 
studies on pollen-flow  

 
 
61 
 
3. Conducted Institute Biosafety Committee meetings 
regarding BNBt 
4. Applied for RCGM permission and GEAC approval 
5. Submitted application for registration to PPV-FRA  
6. Distribution of the seeds from UAS Dharwad during May 
2009 to the seed corporations 
 
Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) :  
 
Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation in its 53rd meeting in year 
2007 noted that the applicant has not completed the biosafety studies. 
The feeding studies in large animals viz., cows and goats are not 
complete. The committee also observed that the app licant has not 
complied with the Supreme Court directive “Prior to bringing out the 
GM material from the green house for conduct of open field trials, the 
approved institution should submit a validated event specific test 
protocol at an LOD of at least 0.0 1% to detect and confirm that there 
has been no contamination”. However, the Committee also felt that 
the applicant has already completed most of the biosafety studies as 
per the DBT guidelines and no adverse effects have been observed in 
the studies condu cted so far. Moreover, the feeding studies on cows 
and goats will be completed within the next six months. In view of 
this, the Committee recommended the case to GEAC to take a view on 
the request of the applicant.  
 
Genetic Engineering Approval Committee ( GEAC)  
 
Genetic Engineering Approval Committee approved BNBt and Bt NHH 
44 for commercial release in the meetings of 2-5-2008 and 13-05-
2009, respectively.  
 
Current Status 
 Seed production of BNBt and Bt NHH44 has b een 
suspended after 2009 
 University of Agricultural Sciences, Dharwad was requested 
to consider reviewing the process of BNBt development and 
also the reported presence of Monsanto‟s gene/event in 
BNBt seeds 

 
 
62 
 
 The ICAR is constituting an Expert Committee of Scientists 
to examine the entire issue of  BNBt and Bt NHH44 and 
suggest appropriate measures. 
 
2.70 With a view to acquire further clarity in the matter the Committee sent 
a list of points to Government on this issue.  The said list of p oints alognwith 
replies of ICAR is at Annexure - III. 
 
2.71 The Department of Biotechnology submitted the following information 
in the context of role of RCGM in the matter: 
   
1. As per the information submitted by UAS, Dharwad to RCGM on 
21.06.2005, the task  of making the hybrid NHH -44 (Bt version) 
was assigned to Agricultural Research Station, Dharwad farm 
under NATP in collaboration with NRCPB, IARI, New Delhi by 
ICAR.  As per this information, cry1Ac gene belongs to NRCPB, 
IARI, New Delhi which was transfe rred to Bikaneri N arma, a 
female parent of NHH -44 by following genotype independent 
transformation technique developed at ARS, Dharwad farm.  
 
2. The Department has not funded any project to UAS, Dharwad or 
CICR, Nagpur for development of  Desi Bt cotton i.e. Bikaneri 
Narma (BN) Bt Cotton indigenous variety with cry1Ac gene. The 
Biosafety Reports on Bt transgenic cotton hybrid NHH 44 Bt 
conducted during 2006 -07 [toxicity, allergenicity and feeding 
studies in small laboratory animals (rats, rabbits & guinea pigs ); 
livestock animals (cows & goats), birds (chicken), fish; and other 
environmental parameters including gene flow, out crossing, non-
target organism and soil biota] by Central Institute of Cotton 
Research (CICR), Nagpur was evaluated by RCGM in its 53rd 
meeting held on 22.5.2007.  The extracts from the 
recommendations of RCGM are reproduced below: 
 
“The committee deliberated on the issue and observed that 
the applicant has not completed the biosafety studies.  The 
feeding studies in large animals viz., cow s and goats are not 

 
 
63 
 
complete.  The committee also observed that the applicant has 
not complied with the Supreme court directive „Prior to bringing 
out the GM material from the green house for conduct of open 
field trials, the approved institution should su bmit a validated 
event specific test protocol at an LOD of at least 0.01% to detect 
and confirm that there has been no contamination”.  However, 
the Committee also felt that applicant has already completed 
most of the biosafety studies as per the DBT guide lines and no 
adverse effects have been observed in the studies conducted so 
far.   Moreover, the feeding studies on cows and goats will be 
completed within the next six months.  In view of this, the 
committee recommended the case to GEAC to take a view on the 
request of the applicant”.  
 GEAC in its 93rd meeting held on 13.5.2009 considered the 
application from CICR, Nagpur for commercial release and taking into 
consideration the fact that NHH -44 Bt was developed by using BN Bt 
as female parent which contains the same cry 1AC gene and even t 
that has already been approved for commercial cultivation, the 
Committee approved commercial release of NHH -44 Bt cotton hybrid 
developed by CICR, Nagpur. The detailed decisions are available at 
GEAC website http://moef.nic.in/divisions/csurv/geac/decision-may-
93.pdf.   
2.72 The Report on „Animal Feeding Tri al on Bio -Safety Studies with 
Biotechnologically Transformed Bt cotton Crop Seed Meal obtained by the 
Committee from ICAR is pl aced at Annexure - IV.  The study which was 
funded by CICR was conducted by Division of Animal Nutrition, Central 
Sheep and Wool Research Institute, Avikanagar, Rajasthan.  
 
2.73 The MoEF furnished the following information in respect of bio -safety 
approvals granted in the instant case(s) by GEAC: 
 
(1) Regulatory Mechanism of Genetically modified organisms 
(GMOs) 
 
 All Genetically modified organisms (GMOs) and products thereof 
including GM crops are regulated products in India under the „Rules for 

 
 
64 
 
the Manufacture, Use/Import/Export and Storage of Hazardous Micro 
Organisms/ Genetically Engineered Organisms or Cells notified by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests through their Notification No. 621 
in Official Gazette of Govt. of India on December 5,  1989 under the 
provisions of the „Environment (Protection) Act‟, 1986 with a view 
ensure sound application of biotechnology making it possible to accrue 
benefits arising from modern biotechnology while minimizing the risks 
to environment and human health.  The Rules 1989 also define the 
competent authorities and composition of such authorities for handling 
of various aspects of the Rules.   
 
(2) Functions of various committees 
  
(i) The functions of the Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation 
(RCGM) established under the DBT are to monitor the safety related 
aspects in respect of on -going research projects and activities 
(including small scale field trials) and bring out manuals and guidelines 
specifying procedure for regulatory process with respect t o activities 
involving geneti cally engineered organisms in research, use and 
applications including industry with a view to ensure environmental 
safety. 
 
(ii) The Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee (GEAC) 
established by the MoEF under Section 4 (4) o f Rules 1989 is the apex 
body to accord approval of activities involving large scale use of 
hazardous microorganisms and recom binants in research and 
industrial production from the environ mental angle. The GEAC is also 
responsible for ap proval of propos als relating to release of genetically 
engineered organisms and products into the environment, including 
experimental field trials (Biosafety Research Level trial -I and II known 
as BRL-I and BRL-II).  
 
(iii) The GEAC is following a policy of case by case event based 
approval in case of Genetically Modified (GM) foods or food crops.  
Evaluation of the safety of GE crops and regulatory approval process 
takes place right from the research stage. This includes generation and 
documentation of relevant biosafety information/data and its elaborate 

 
 
65 
 
analysis to ensure food, feed and environmental safety. The  
development of GM crops at the laboratory stage, confined multi -
location trials for generation of biosafety data known as biosafety 
research trials – I and biosafety  research trials-II (BRL-I  and BRL-II) 
require prior approval of the RCGM and the GEAC set up under the 
Rules, 1989 respectively.  The compliance of the regulatory procedures 
during GM crop field trials is monitored by the Monitoring Committees 
set up by the RCGM/GEAC.. The GEAC takes into consideration the 
findings of the biosafety and agronomic studies as well as 
recommendations of the RCGM before according approval for 
environmental release. Only those transgenic crops which are found to 
be safe for human consumption as well as the environment are 
recommended for environmental release.   
 
(3) Initiation of multi-location trials/ large scale trials (LST) of 
Bikaneri Narma (BN) Bt (Variety) and NHH- 44 Bt 
In view of the above process and procedures laid down under Rules 
1989, the research and development of Bikaneri Narma (BN) Bt 
(variety) and NHH 44 Bt including multi -locational field trials by CICR 
was initiated with the approval of RCGM.  The proposal fo r large scale 
trials (LST) was referred to the GEAC by the RCGM only in 2007.  The 
recommendation of RCGM was based on the biosafety data presented 
by Director  CICR, Nagpur with respect to toxicity, allergenicity and 
feeding studies in small laboratory an imals (rats, rabbits & guinea 
pigs); livestock animals (cows & goats), birds (chicken), fish; gene 
flow, out crossing, impact on non-target organism and soil biota in the 
RCGM meeting held on 22.5.2007. While recommending the proposal 
for LST and ICAR tria ls and seed production in the North, Central and 
South zone, RCGM also observed that the applicant has not completed 
the following requirements: 
 
(i) Feeding studies in large animals (cows and goats); 
(ii) The Institute has not submitted a validated event -specific 
test protocol at a LoD of at least 0.01 % as per the 
requirement of Supreme Court Order; 

 
 
66 
 
 
As the above information will be available within six months, the RCGM 
recommended that the GEAC may consider according approval for LST 
and ICAR trials and seed production. 
 
(4) Chronological sequence of events subsequent to RCGM 
recommendation falls under the purview of the GEAC.  
 
a. The recommendations of RCGM and application submitted by 
CICR, Nagpur was considered by the GEAC in its meeting held 
on 22.6.2007 wherein it was noted that  (i) BN Bt (variety) and 
NHH 44 Bt  indigenously developed transgenic cotton 
developed by CICR expresses Bt cry 1 Ac  (Truncated and 
codon-modified) gene which is very similar to the Cry 1Ac toxin 
expressed by MON 531 event developed by M/s Monsanto as 
well as event 1 of IIT, Kharagpur both of which are already 
under commercial cultivation; (ii) The Bt technology has been 
deployed for the first time in a known varietal background; (iii) 
BN Bt (variety) was developed by CICR in accordance with the 
prescribed protocol and procedures and after obtaining the 
approval of RCGM; and (iv) The biosafety studies conducted by 
the Institute so far  indicate that there is no adverse effects on 
the environment and human health. However, the GEAC after 
detailed deliberation recommended that the request for LST 
and ICAR trials and seed production will be recommended only 
after completion of the biosafety studies and submission of 
event specific test protocol at LoD of 0.01%.   
b. On completion of the feeding studies and submission of event -
specific test protocol, the request of CICR for LST and ICAR 
trials and seed production of BN Bt (variety) and NHH44 Bt in 
the North zone was considered by the GEAC meeting held on 
2.4.2008. During the deliberations, the fol lowing points 
emerged: 
 
 Bt technology has been for the first time introduced in a 
varietal background whereby the farmers can save the 
seeds. 

 
 
67 
 
 Bt technology has been introduced in a popular and well 
established agronomic background. 
 No cost to the trait value which would provide cheaper 
options to the farmers. 
 Adequate data on Cry 1Ac protein is available. 
 The seeds generated during the trials would be made 
available to the farmers free of cost. 
c. In the above meeting, the Supreme Court invitee, Dr P.M. 
Bhargava opined that since the Bt crops expressing cry1 Ac 
toxin is already under commercial cultivation and in the 
national interest, he suggested that as an exceptional and 
unique situation, the GEAC may consider commercial release of 
the BN Bt (variety). H owever, CICR, Nagpur informed that 
currently seeds are available only for LST and ICAR trials.  The 
GEAC further opined that several public sector institutions are 
developing new GM crops with new traits and therefore it is 
advisable that the regulatory pr ocedure is complied with in all 
cases.   
d. In light of the above discussions, the GEAC in its meeting held 
on 2.4.2008 approved the LST and ICAR trials and seed 
production in an area of 100 hectares in the North zone.  
e. In the GEAC meeting held on 2.5.2008, t he request of CICR for 
LST and ICAR trials and seed production of BN Bt (variety and 
NHH 44 Bt in the Central and South zones was considered by 
the GEAC wherein it was felt that there is a need for review of 
the decision directing CICR to conduct larger sc ale trials with 
the BN Bt (variety) on the following grounds: 
 
 Bt technology has been for the first time introduced in a 
varietal background whereby the farmers can save the 
seeds;  
 Bt technology has been introduced in a popular and well 
established agronomic background; and  
 No cost to the trait value which would provide cheaper 
options to the farmers and  

 
 
68 
 
 Approvals for LST for a variety and a hybrid have different 
implications because in the case of a variety, approval for 
large scale trials would tantamount to commercial release 
as the farmers can save the seeds for planting in the next 
season.  
(5)  Approval of BN Bt (Variety)  
In light of above discussions, the GEAC in its meeting held on 2.5.2008 
approved the commercial release of BN Bt (variety) developed by CICR 
in the North, Central and South zones.  
(6) Approval for Large scale field trials (LST) and  ICAR trials 
for NH-44 Bt 
In the same meeting NHH 44 Bt was approved for LST and ICAR trials 
and seed production in an area of 100 ha in the Central and South 
zones. 
(7) Approval of GEAC for commercial release of NHH 44 Bt  
On completion of the LST and ICA R trials, the GEAC approved the 
commercial release of NHH 44 Bt in the meeting held on 13.5.2009.  
(8) Discontinuation of Seed Production of BN Bt (Variety) 
Subsequent to the approvals granted by the GEAC, the Committee has 
not received any complaint or in formation from CICR/ICAR indicating 
that seed production of BN Bt (variety) has been discontinued as it 
contains Cry 1Ac gene MON 531 event; which is a proprietary of M/s 
Monsanto. 
2.74 The Committee note that as on date genetically modified 
organisms and products, thereof, including genetically modified 
crops are regulated under the „ Rules for the Manufacture, 
Use/Import/Export and Storage of Hazardous Micro 
Organisms/Genetically Engineered Organisms or Cells ‟ notified by 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests  on 5 December, 1989.   
These Rules also called Rules 89 have been framed under the 

 
 
69 
 
„Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.  The Rules inte nd to ensure 
sound application of biotechnology , making it possible  to accrue 
benefits arising from modern biotechnology , while minimizing the 
risks to environment and human health.  These Rules are 
supplemented by various guidelines issued from time to time to keep 
pace with international practices and developments in th e field of 
biotechnology.   
 
2.75 The Committee further note that the regulatory mechanism to 
enforce these rules consists of six committees.  The chain begins 
with the Institutional Bio -Safety Committee , which is established 
under the institution engaged in GMO research for oversight and to 
interface with  Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM).  
RCGM functions under the Department of Biotechnology and is 
mandated with the responsibility of monitoring and regulating safety 
related aspects of ongoin g research projects and activities including 
small scale fie ld trials.  There is a recombinant DNA Advisory 
Committee (RDAC) which is of an advisory nature and which 
recommends suitable and appropriate safety regulations in 
recombinant research, use and applications from time to time.  The 
Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee (GEAC)  previously known 
as Genetic Engineering Approval Committee is the apex body to 
accord approval of activities involving large scale use of hazardous 
micro-organisms and reco mbinants in research and industrial 
production from environmental angle.  More importantly it is also 
mandated with the authority for approving release of genetically 
engineered organism  and products into the environment including 

 
 
70 
 
experimental field trials.  GEAC functions under the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests . Then t here are State Biotechnology 
Coordination Committees (SBCCs) who are mandated with the power 
of State level monitoring.  SB CCs also have powers to inspect, 
investigate and take punitive  action in case of violations.  The last 
tier of the regulatory mechanism are the District Level Committees 
(DLCs) who are tasked with the role of monitoring the safety 
regulations in installations engaged in the use of GMOs/hazardous 
microorganisms and th eir applications in the environment.  Apart 
from these six Committees, the Committee note there is a 
Monitoring-cum-Evaluation Committee  which monitors the 
compliance of regulatory procedures during field trials of GM crops.  
 
2.76  The procedure in vogue preceding approval is that the 
company involved in development of GM crop undertake s in 
containment, several biosafety assessment including environmental 
safety, food and feed safety assessments.  This is followed by Bio-
safety Research Trials in two stage s BRL-I and BRL-II which require 
prior approval of RCGM and GEAC respectively.  Approval for 
environmental release is accorded by GEAC after taking into 
consideration the findings of bio -safety and agronomic studies as 
well as recommendations of RCGM , ICAR and MEC.  Finally 
commercial release is permitted by GEAC for only those transgenic 
crops which are found to be safe for human consumption as well as 
the environment.  Committee note that  the Government ha ve also 
put a strict regimen in place at all stage s of assessment and 
evaluation procedure.            

 
 
71 
 
 
2.77 While everything appears to be in order on paper, the 
disclosures made by Dr. P.M. Bhargava, founder Director of Centre 
for Cellular and Molecular Biology and the Supreme Court nominee 
on GEAC have  alarmed the Committee no end.  His testimony that  
the requisite number of tests were not done on Bt. Cotton in the 
Country and even th ose tests that were performed were done either 
by the company itself or by an accredited laboratory but on the 
samples provided by the company.  The same thing happened in case 
of Bt. brinjal also.  In both  the instances, the promoter company is 
same and according to Dr. Bhargava it is known for unethical 
practices the world over including bribery charges in Indonesia, 
hiding data, falsifying data or presenting wrong data.  If the 
regulatory mechanism including RCGM and GEAC faltered on these 
counts, it is a serious lapse in the opinion of the Committee and 
needs to be investigated indepth.  
 
2.78 Furthermore, Dr. Bhargava has also pointed out that the 
growing failures of Bt. cotton on the front of resistance to pests it 
was supposed to kill, increasing attacks of secondary pests, etc. 
prove that the technology is not sustainable.  The death of cattle and 
other livestock in Andhra after grazing on Bt. cotton fields, which 
apart from Dr. Bhargava was also brought to the notice of the 
Committee by Dr. Sagari Ramdas of Anthra and Ms. Kavitha 
Kuruganti of Kheti Virasat Mission , also raise doubts about th e 
safety of Bt. cotton as feed.  Similarly, how the regulatory 
mechanism has missed the 30 % increase in toxic alkaloid content in 
Bt. brinjal and approved it for environmental release are all 

 
 
72 
 
perplexing questions which  need honest answers , as all these 
developments could have devastating effects on environment and 
human and livestock health.    
 
2.79 The most damaging piece of evidence about the functioning of 
the extant regulatory mechanism provided by Dr. P.M. Bhargava in 
his testimony before the Committee is about the confession of the 
Co-chairman of GEAC (Prof. Arjula Reddy) to him that the tests 
asked for by Dr. Bhargava for assessing Bt. brinjal were not carried 
out and even the tests undertaken were performed badly.  And that 
he (Co-Chairman, GEAC) was under tremendous pressure as he was 
getting calls from industry, GEAC and from the Minister to approve 
Bt. brinjal.  Nothing can be more disconcerting to the Committee 
than these goings on as they are not merely slippages due to 
oversight or human  error but indicative of collusion of worst kind.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend a thorough probe into the Bt. 
brinjal matter from the beginning upto the imposing of moratorium 
on its commercialization by the then Minister of Environment and 
Forests (I/C) on 9 February, 2010 by a team of eminent independent 
scientists and environmentalists.   
 
2.80 The Committee find that the Bt. brinjal controversy also led to 
renaming of Genetic Engineering Approval Committee as Genetic 
Engineering Appraisal Committee.   The Ministry of Environment and 
Forests issued a notification on 16 July, 2010 effecting the change.  
The notification which was published in the Gazette of India dated 
22 July, 2010 , inexplicably does not mention any reasons for the 
renaming nor does it mention any change in the role and 

 
 
73 
 
responsibility and the mandate of GEAC.  On a query of the 
Committee, the Government has justified the change on the ground 
that the old name gave GEAC the aura o f being the approval agency 
and the new one would suggest that it is meant to appr aise the 
safety of GMO.  To another query of the Committee the Government 
have also clarified that there is no change in the mandate of GEAC 
due to rechristening.  The Commit tee are, however, not satisfied 
with the apparently contradictory stands taken by the Government 
in the matter.   As per Rules 89 , GEAC is the apex approval body in 
the regulatory mechanism for GMOs related matters.  How the 
Government has then chosen to rename it with a view to convey that 
it is doing appraisal only defies logic.  They, therefore, expect a 
detailed clarification from MoEF in the matter including the inputs 
and decision making leading to the issue of Notification No. GSR 
613(E) dated 16 July, 2010.   
 
2.81 These contradictory stances are not restricted to the renaming 
issue only, but permeate in several  other aspects.  To say the least, 
the demarcation of roles and responsibilities between MoEF and 
GEAC seems to be hazy.  While Rules 1989 are very clear and 
unambiguous about the authority of according approval for 
environmental and commercial release vesting with GEAC, the 
information submitted to the Committee by MoEF and GEAC from 
time to time , for and  in connection with the examination of the 
subject, conveyed an intent to obfuscate the matter.  At some places 
the authority of GEAC to accord approvals was truly reflected, at 
others it was couched as „recommendation of GEAC to accord 

 
 
74 
 
approval‟ and at st ill others it was stated that GEAC accorded 
approval for environmental release and had no role in 
commercialization of GM crops.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
feel that this uncertainty is not in the interest of the regulatory 
mechanism in place for such a sensitive matter.  They, therefore, 
recommend the Government to come up with a detailed statement 
clarifying on all aspects of the matter so as to put the ongoing 
controversies to rest.      
 
2.82 The Committee note with concern that both GEAC and R CGM 
who are in existence for several years now and are mandated with 
very very sensitive functions have no organizational set -up and 
infrastructure worth mentioning.  Due to these severe and 
debilitating impediments , both the agencies have to depend on a 
Committee based approach, which in the opinion of the Committee , 
is not the most optimal way of functioning for agencies tasked with 
such sensitive responsibilities.  The Committee are in full agreement 
with GEAC that the ever evolving dynamics of modern bi otechnology 
cannot be kept fully tracked of with the Committee based review 
approach and a more robust and dedicated review mechanism is 
urgently called for.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that an 
immediate review of the organizational set -up and infrastructure of 
GEAC and RCGM be got done by the Government and necessary 
augmentation, both in terms of men and material be carried out 
immediately and without linking it to the proposed omnibus 
regulatory authority that may still take years to come into existence. 
 

 
 
75 
 
2.83 While on the aspect of  organizational structure, the Committee  
also feel it their duty to point out to the composition of GEAC.  It is 
chaired by civil servant who also doubles up as Additional Secretary 
in the MoEF.  The Vice -Chairman is also a civil servant, who is 
concurrently a Joint Secretary in MoEF.  The Co -Chairman of GEAC, a 
nominee of DBT , is a biotechnologist , whose primary vocation is 
Vice-Chancellorship of a University in Andhra Pradesh.  What 
directional support and policy guidance would be forthcoming from 
these top functionaries to GEA C is a moot point.  The Committee 
shudder to think that ensuring environ mental safety, health safety, 
food and feed safety of the entire Country from induction of GMOs 
has been left at the mercy of such a disparate set -up for these many 
years without an eye being raised.  They, therefore, recommend that 
while reviewing the org anizational set-up of GEAC the Government 
should also keep this aspect in mind.         
 
2.84 The Committee note that FAO/WHO expert panel, IAASTD 
report and several other studies have recommended the use of anti -
biotic resistant marker free genes technology while creating GMOs.  
According to such studies though the possibility of such a transfer is 
low but any transfer of such genes from GM crops/commodities to 
cells of the body or to bacteria in the gastro-intestinal tract would be 
of concern.  I n our context , while GEAC has stuck to the argument 
that such possibilities are remote , most of the other 
ministries/departments whose views were sought by the Committee 
have shown a marked inclination for technologies without antibiotic 
resistant marker genes.  Most of the independent scientists and 

 
 
76 
 
other witnesses appearing before the Comm ittee have also 
expressed their concern on use of anti -biotic resistant marker gene 
in developing GMOs.   
2.85 Inspite of some of the stakeholders emphasising about the 
remote possibility of the antibiotic resistant marker gene 
transferring from GM crop or  commodity to cells of body or to 
bacteria in gut, an overwhelming majority of stakeholders who 
appeared before the Committee are in favour of use of anti -biotic 
marker resistant gene free technology.  GEAC has, however, taken 
the stand that since technolo gy for generating marker free 
technology is available it is a matter of policy whether to allow GM 
crops with antibiotic resistance markers.  Side by side GEAC has also 
informed the Committee that it had taken note of this matter in its 
meeting held on 8 D ecember, 2012 and had found that a ny decision 
to disallow release of GM crops with antibiotic resistant genes would 
make almost all transgenic plants that are under consideration of 
GEAC/RCGM ineligible for release.  GEAC has further given its mind 
on this crucial matter by stating that technological interventions and 
improvements are ongoing process and would be made available for 
newer products.    
2.86 The Committee cannot but express their extreme displeasure at 
this mindset of a regulatory agency which is mandated with ensuring 
safety of environment, human health, food and feed of the Country.  
The above -cited response of GEAC betrays a complete lack of 
concern towards its role and responsibility.  Rather it conveys in 
unequivocal terms its strong inclination towards the benefit of 

 
 
77 
 
industry.  The  Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to 
not leave such a crucial decision in the hands of GEAC but come up 
with a clear-cut policy in this regard without any further loss of time. 
2.87 While making enquiries in the light of some media reports of 
conflict of interest in GEAC , the Committee have come to know that 
GEAC has laid down a criteria to address the conflict of issue matters 
in December, 2010.  After the said media report th e ambit of conflict 
of interest criteria has been extended to apart from a member of 
GEAC to his/her spouse or children.  The Committee feel that 
considering the slew of activities that GEAC is concerned with , the 
present conflict of interest criteria woul d not suffice.  The situation 
demands a delinking of interest groups/individuals from the decision 
making tiers of the regulatory mechanism without the regulatory 
mechanism being deprived of the professional inputs of the 
groups/individuals in question .  T he Committee would like the 
Government to come up with their well considered views on this 
vexed issue.  
2.88 During the course of the examination of the Subject the 
Committee were seized of controversy surrounding the development 
of BN Bt variety and Bt NHH 44 hybrid cotton variants by University 
of Agricultural Science, Dharwad.  CICR, Pune  is also involved 
closely with the project.  It was reported in the media on 30 
December, 2011 that these two variants were found to be carrying 
genes from the origina l patented product of a multinational.  The 
Committee sought explanation of  concerned players including ICAR, 
DBT and MoEF.  It transpires that the gene construct f or the event 

 
 
78 
 
was provided to UAS Dharwad by National Research Centre on Plant 
Biotechnology.  UAS Dharwad carried out the genetic transformation 
of the cotton variety Bikaneri N arma using this cry1A C gene 
construct.   CICR was involved in undertaking and coordinating 
RCGM and GEAC regulatory trials as well as generation of bio -safety 
data.  The p resence of the controversial gene was, however, 
according to ICAR , not detected either in southern analysis carried 
out by NRCPB when they  confirmed gene integration and copy 
number or by M/s Avesthagen, who characterized the BN Bt event in 
2006-07.  GEAC approved commercial cultivation of BN Bt variety on 
2 May, 2008  and hybrid Bt NHH 44 on 13 May, 2009.   In September 
– October, 2009 representatives of M/s Mahyco – Monsanto met 
ICAR officials and pointed out the presence  of Monsanto gene and 
event, MON 531 in BN Bt and Bt NHH 44 seeds.  On 10 December, 
2010 ICAR decided to stop production of seeds of these two 
variants.  It was also decided that production could only be 
restarted, after complete purification for uniformity and 
homozygosity of cry1AC gene BNLA106 original event.  UAS, 
Dharwad was entrusted with this task.  CICR , who  had applied to 
Protection of Plant Variety and Farmers  Rights Protection Authority 
in May, 2009 for commercialization , withdrew its application from 
the Authority on 3 August, 2011.  The permission was granted by the 
Authority on 16 January, 2012.  UAS Dharwad and NRCPB are 
working on purification of BN Bt as of now.  ICAR has also decided to 
set-up an expert Committee consisting of experts from outside ICAR 
to look into the entire issue and advise further course of action.  

 
 
79 
 
2.89 The Committee are extremely perturbed with these 
developments as they pertain to a research venture in public sector 
domain and with public good in mind.  Though not being a scientific 
entity, they are still not convinced by the inexplicable time lags and 
information gaps in the explanations furnished by various agencies 
of Government involved with the matter.  They, therefore, exhort 
ICAR to go ahead with the setting up of the  proposed experts  
Committee without any further loss of time and convey their findings 
to the Committee within three months of presentation of this Report 
to Parliament.  Any further delays in the matter will only add to the 
environment of suspicion prevalent about the issue nowadays.  
2.90 While on this aspect the Committee would also refer to the 
findings of the report on animal feeding trial on biosafety studies 
with biotechnologically transformed Bt cotton crop seed meal 
conducted at Central Sheep and  Wool Research Inst itute, 
Avikanagar, Rajasthan in 2008.  Some of the findings are Bt cotton 
seed feeding increased RBC and decreased WBC in blood, the weight 
of kidney, spleen, pancreas, heart, lung, penis, kidney fat, cole fat, 
GI tract, ingest and empty GI tract were not different among Bt 
cotton seed and non Bt cotton seed fed lambs.  However, Bt cotton 
seed feeding increased liver weight, testicle weight and testicle fat 
g/kg empty live weight.  The Committee as laymen, cannot fathom 
the import of these findings , but sin ce there are deviations  in 
important biological attributes in the target group , when fed with Bt 
cotton seed , they would definitely like a professional evaluation of 
these developments, their possible causes and consequences by an 

 
 
80 
 
expert committee comprisi ng of eminent scientists from ICMR, 
pathologists, veterinarians and nutrition experts.   
2.91 Furthermore, and again as laymen they would like to point out 
that the data in the said report pertaining to kidney weight, spleen 
weight, heart weight, lung weig ht, kidney fat, cole fat, pancreas 
weight and penis weight also shows  variations in Bt cotton seed fed 
lambs and non Bt cotton seed fed lambs.  They would, therefore, 
recommend a relook by the expert committee constituted for the 
purpose, into all these fi ndings and apprise the Committee about 
their evaluation and interpretation of the data at the soonest.  
Lastly, the Committee desire RCGM and GEAC to furnish their  
considered views on this feed study report and how it fa red in their 
consideration while de ciding the bio -safety and health safety 
aspects of the product in question.           
2.92 Having gone through the voluminous evidence gathered by 
them the Committee can safely conclude that all is not well with the 
regulatory mechanism put in place by the Government for oversight 
of cutting edge technology as sensitive as GMOs and products 
thereof.  Firstly, GEAC being an entity created under rules rather 
than an Act of Parliament deprives it of the status, powers and more 
importantly autonomy and independence that a statutory regulator 
ought to have.  The enforceability of Rules, albeit made und er some 
Act only, does not have as much definitiveness and clarity as under 
an Act.  Furthermore, unlike an Act, there is a lot of scope for varied 
interpretation of Rules as also flexibility to implement them.  The 
confusion about the recommendatory/appro ving authority of GEAC 

 
 
81 
 
whether due to genuine confusion or deliberate; the confession of 
the Co -Chairman of GEAC, the only technocrat in the top three 
positions of GEAC, about minister/GEAC/industry pressuring him to 
favour a bad technology; the various ac ts of omission and 
commission of GEAC that have been documented in various chapters 
of this Report, all go on to cement the view of the Committee that 
the regulatory mechanism definitely requires the protection and 
support of an Act of the Parliament which  leaves no scope for 
ambiguity or complacency.  The problem, however, is that the 
Government has inordinately dithered in bringing an appropriate 
bio-safety friendly legislation in the matter before the Parliament.  
Nonetheless, the Committee feel that the  failure of the Government 
to bring a legislation on the subject till now should not in any way 
prevent or pre-empt the monitoring, oversight and evaluation of the 
extant regulatory system by the Parliament and its entities.  Given 
the fact that the two major constituents of the present regulatory 
system viz. GEAC and RCGM are under the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests and the Department of Biotechnology re spectively and 
both MoEF and DBT are under the jurisdiction of  the Department -
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and 
Technology, Environment and Forests.  The Committee request their 
sister Committee to take up GEAC and RCGM for an indepth  and 
comprehensive examination at their earliest convenience.    
  

 
 
82 
 
CHAPTER - III 
PRACTICES ELSEWHERE 
Regulatory Framework in Various Countries 
3.1 A brief overview of the international practices for release of GM crops 
and bio-safety regulations in various countries as furnished by DAC is given 
below: 
(i) USA: 
3.2 The US regulatory system operates in a coordinated framework 
involving three government agencies as given in Table below: 
US regulatory authorities for crop biotechnology products 
Agency Jurisdiction Laws 
USDA Plant pests, plants, 
veterinary biologies 
Federal Plant Pest Act (FPPA) 
FDA Food, feed, food 
additives, veterinary 
drugs, human drugs, 
medical devices 
Federal Food, Drug and 
Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) 
EPA Microbial and plant 
pesticides, new uses 
of existing pesticides, 
novel microorganisms 
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, 
and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA); 
FFDCA; Toxic Substances 
Control Act (TSCA) 
 
3.3 The USDA‟s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Services (APHIS) is the 
lead agency for the regulation of genetically engineered plants including the 
experimental evaluation of these products in confined field trials.  The 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is responsible for assuring the 
human and environmental s afety of pesticidal substances engineered into 
plants, and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is responsible for 
assuring that foods and drugs derived from genetic engineered are as safe 
as their traditional counterparts.  Products are generally regula ted according 
to their intended use, with some products being regulated under more than 
one agency e.g. pesticidal plants. 
3.4 It may be noted that no new laws have been enacted in USA for 
regulation of GMOs products thereof and provisions have been made i n 

 
 
83 
 
existing laws only.  However, the products developed using genetic 
engineering are subjected to much higher degree of scrutiny as compared to 
those derived through traditional breeding, selection or accelerated 
mutagenesis.  All the three regulatory agen cies have the legal power to 
demand immediate removal from the market place of any product post 
commercialization if any new and valid date indicates a question of safety for 
consumers or the environment. 
3.5 Regarding research and development activities, the National institutes 
of Health (NIH) have developed guidelines to describe facilities and practices 
intended to prevent unintended release or inadvertent exposure to GMOs or 
products thereof.  Compliance with NIH guidelines is mandatory for working 
with GMOs for all scientists receiving federal funding or working for federal 
agencies. 
3.6 Shri Ajay Kanchan of Forum for Biotechnology and Food Security while 
sharing his experience about the situation obtaining in USA stated during 
this Oral Evidence on 15 September, 2010:  
“There are three problems related to GM food.  One is basically 
acute toxicity. +ÉÉ{ÉxÉä +É£ÉÉÒ JÉÉªÉÉ, +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEä >ó{É® =ºÉBÉEÉ iÉÖ®ÆiÉ +ÉºÉ® cÉäMÉÉ*  
nÚºÉ®É ºÉ¤É-µÉEÉäÉÊxÉBÉE ]ÉäÉÎBÉDºÉÉÊºÉ]ÉÒ cÉäiÉÉ cè* +ÉÉ{É =ºÉä iÉÉÒxÉ-SÉÉ® ºÉÉãÉ JÉÉªÉåMÉä iÉÉä +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÉÒ ÉÊBÉEbxÉÉÒ, ãÉÉÒ´É®, BÉEéºÉ® 
+ÉÉÉÊn BÉEÉÒ |ÉÉì¤ãÉàÉ ¤ÉfÃåMÉÉÒ +ÉÉè® ÉÊ{ÉE® µÉEÉäÉÊxÉBÉE ]ÉäÉÎBÉDºÉÉÊºÉ]ÉÒ cÉäiÉÉ cè* <ºÉ iÉ®c ºÉä µÉEÉäÉÊxÉBÉE ]ÉäÉ ÎBÉDºÉÉÊºÉ]ÉÒ +ÉÉè® ºÉ¤É-µÉEÉäÉÊxÉBÉE 
]ÉäÉÎBÉDºÉÉÊºÉ]ÉÒ BÉEä ÉÊãÉA BÉEÉä<Ç £ÉÉÒ VÉÉÒAàÉ {ÉÚEb BÉEÉä BÉEcÉÓ {É® £ÉÉÒ 180 ÉÊnxÉ ºÉä VªÉÉnÉ ]èº] xÉcÉÓ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ MÉªÉÉ cè* VÉ¤É càÉ 
ãÉÉäMÉ =ºÉä +É{ÉxÉÉÒ {ÉÚ®ÉÒ ãÉÉ<{ÉE ºÉÉ<ÉÊBÉEãÉ àÉå JÉÉªÉåMÉä, VÉ¤É iÉBÉE +ÉÉ{É =ºÉä ÉÊBÉEºÉÉÒ àÉèàÉãÉ {É® ]èº] xÉcÉÓ BÉE®åMÉä, iÉ¤É iÉBÉE {ÉiÉÉ 
xÉcÉÓ SÉãÉäMÉÉ* ªÉÉÊn ABÉE SÉÚcä BÉEÉÒ =©ÉÂ BÉEä´ÉãÉ 24 àÉcÉÒxÉä cÉäiÉÉÒ cè +ÉÉè® =ºÉä càÉ 24 àÉcÉÒxÉä {ÉÚ®ÉÒ iÉ®ÉÒBÉEä ºÉä x ÉcÉÓ ÉÊJÉãÉÉiÉä cé, 
=ºÉBÉEÉÒ àÉã]ÉÒ VÉxÉ®ä¶ÉxÉ BÉEÉä xÉcÉÓ ÉÊJÉãÉÉ iÉä cé, +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÉä <ºÉ ¤ÉÉiÉ BÉEÉ BÉE£ÉÉÒ {ÉiÉÉ xÉcÉÓ ãÉMÉäMÉÉ ÉÊBÉE ªÉc +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEä ÉÊãÉA 
cÉàÉÇ{ÉÖEãÉ cè ªÉÉ xÉcÉÓ* ÉÊºÉ{ÉEÇ BÉÖEU ºÉÉ<ÆÉÊ]º]ÂºÉ xÉä <ÆÉÊb{Éèxbèx] º]bÉÒVÉ BÉEÉÒ cé +ÉÉè® +ÉÉÉÎº]ÅªÉÉ àÉå ABÉE º]bÉÒ cÖ <Ç cè, ÉÊVÉºÉàÉå 
=xcÉåxÉä àÉã]ÉÒ VÉxÉ®ä¶Éx É ]ÅÉªÉãÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉä cé +ÉÉè® =ºÉàÉå =xcÉåxÉä ªÉc ºÉÉ{ÉE ÉÊnJÉÉ ÉÊnªÉÉ ÉÊBÉE lÉbÇ VÉxÉ®ä¶ÉxÉ iÉBÉE +ÉÉiÉä -+ÉÉiÉä 
VÉxÉ®ä¶ÉxÉ {ÉÚ®ÉÒ iÉ®c ºÉä <xÉ{ÉE]ÉÇ<ãÉ cÉä VÉÉiÉÉÒ cè*  ºÉBÉEä +ÉÆn® {ÉÚ®ÉÒ <ÆºÉäÉÊxÉ]ÉÒ, VÉÉä +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEä ãÉè¤É AÉÊxÉàÉãºÉ cé, =ºÉBÉEä +ÉÆn® 
¤ÉfÃ VÉÉiÉÉÒ cè* +ÉMÉ® +ÉÉ{É =xÉ nä¶ÉÉå BÉEä ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå näJÉå VÉcÉÆ {É® ãÉÉäMÉ BÉEÉ{ÉEÉÒ ºÉàÉªÉ ºÉä <ºÉä JÉÉ ®cä cé, +ÉàÉäÉÊ®BÉEÉ à Éå ´É­ÉÇ 
1996 BÉEä ¤ÉÉn ºÉä AãÉVÉÉÔVÉ àÉå 1500 {É®ºÉå] BÉEÉ <ÆµÉEÉÒVÉ cÖ+ÉÉ cè, +ÉãVÉÉ<àÉ® +ÉÉè® ÉÊbàÉäÉÎxºÉªÉÉ àÉå 9000 {É®ºÉå] B ÉEÉ 
<ÆµÉEÉÒVÉ cÖ+ÉÉ cè* +É¤É +ÉÉ{É BÉEc ºÉBÉEiÉä cé ÉÊBÉE càÉÉ®ä {ÉÉºÉ BÉEcÉÓ £ÉÉÒ <ºÉ ¤ÉÉiÉ BÉEÉ BÉEÉä<Ç |ÉàÉÉhÉ xÉcÉÓ cè ÉÊBÉE ªÉc ºÉ¤É 
VÉäxÉäÉÊ]BÉEãÉÉÒ àÉÉäÉÊb{ÉEÉ<b µÉEÉì{É BÉEÉÒ ´ÉVÉc ºÉä cÉä ®cÉ cè, ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ BÉEÉä<Ç <ºÉ ¤ÉÉiÉ ºÉä <xBÉEÉ® £ÉÉÒ xÉcÉÓ BÉE® ºÉBÉEiÉÉ cè ÉÊBÉE ªÉc 
=ºÉBÉEÉÒ ´ÉVÉc ºÉä xÉcÉÓ cÉä ®cÉ cè* ªÉc =ºÉBÉEä ºÉÉàÉxÉä ºÉ¤ÉºÉä ¤É½É |ÉàÉÉhÉ cè +ÉÉè® näÉÊJÉªÉä +ÉàÉäÉÊ®BÉEÉ àÉå ºÉ¤ÉºÉä Vª ÉÉnÉ 
VÉäxÉäÉÊ]BÉEãÉÉÒ àÉÉäÉÊb{ÉEÉ<b {ÉÚEb VÉÉxÉ´É®Éå BÉEÉä ÉÊJÉãÉÉªÉÉ VÉÉiÉÉ cè* <ÉÎxb{Éåbå] ºÉÉ<ÉÎx]º] Éå xÉä +É{ÉxÉÉÒ º]bÉÒVÉ àÉå ÉÊnJÉÉªÉÉ cè 

 
 
84 
 
ÉÊBÉE <ºÉBÉEÉ ºÉ¤ÉºÉä VªÉÉnÉ ¤ÉÖ®É +ÉºÉ® ãÉÉÒ´É® {É® {É½iÉÉ cè* càÉÉ®ä ¶É®ÉÒ® àÉå +ÉMÉ® ]ÉìBÉDºÉÉÒÉÊºÉ]ÉÒ ¤ÉfÃäMÉÉÒ iÉÉä =ºÉB ÉEÉ ºÉ¤ÉºÉä ¤ÉÖ®É 
+ÉºÉ® ãÉÉÒ´É® {É® cÉäMÉÉ* àÉéxÉä +É£ÉÉÒ ´ÉcÉÆ {É® +ÉàÉäÉÊ®BÉEÉ àÉå BÉEàÉ  ºÉä BÉEàÉ bäfÃ ºÉä nÉä àÉcÉÒxÉä iÉBÉE ¤ÉcÖiÉ ºÉÉ®ä ´Éä]äxÉäÉÊ®ªÉxºÉ ºÉä 
¤ÉÉiÉ BÉEÉÒ* =xcÉåxÉä BÉEcÉ ÉÊBÉE ÉÊ{ÉUãÉä SÉÉ®-{ÉÉÆSÉ ºÉÉãÉ ºÉä VÉ¤É càÉ ãÉÉäMÉ VÉÉxÉ´É®Éå BÉEÉ {ÉÉäº]àÉÉ]ÇàÉ BÉE®iÉä cé ªÉÉ =xcå BÉEÉ]iÉä cé 
iÉÉä näJÉiÉä cé ÉÊBÉE =xÉBÉEÉ ãÉÉÒ´É® AäºÉä xÉVÉ® +ÉÉiÉÉ cè VÉèºÉä =ºÉBÉEä +ÉÆn® ÉÊBÉEºÉÉÒ iÉ®c BÉEÉÒ BÉEãÉº]® ¤ÉÉÉÏà¤ÉMÉ cÖ<Ç cè* VÉ¤É iÉBÉE 
+ÉÉ{ÉxÉä ABÉE {ÉÚEb BÉEÉä 180 ÉÊnxÉ ºÉä +ÉÉMÉä ]èº] cÉÒ xÉcÉÓ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ cè +ÉÉè® ºÉ¤ÉºÉä ¤É½ÉÒ SÉÉÒVÉ ªÉc cè ÉÊBÉE càÉ ãÉÉäMÉÉå ºÉä ªÉc BÉEcÉ 
VÉÉiÉÉ cè ÉÊBÉE A{ÉEbÉÒAxÉAºÉ BÉEÉä |ÉàÉÉÉÊhÉiÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ cÖ+ÉÉ cè* A{ÉEbÉÒA BÉEÉ ABÉE £ÉÉÒ ÉËºÉMÉãÉ ãÉÉì AäºÉÉ xÉcÉÓ cè VÉÉä ÉÊBÉEºÉÉÒ £ÉÉ Ò 
BÉEÆ{ÉxÉÉÒ BÉEÉä àÉVÉ¤ÉÚ® BÉE®iÉÉ cÉä ÉÊBÉE +ÉÉ{É <ºÉä ]èº] BÉEÉÒÉÊVÉªÉä* +Éã]ÉÒàÉä]ãÉÉÒ ªÉc càÉÉ®ä ¤ÉÉÒSÉ àÉå ABÉE <ºÉ iÉ®c BÉEÉ {ÉÚEb ãÉÉxÉä 
BÉEÉÒ BÉEÉäÉÊ¶É¶É BÉEÉÒ VÉÉ ®cÉÒ cè* BÉEä´ÉãÉ BÉEÆ{ÉÉÊxÉªÉÉÆ <iÉxÉÉ iÉªÉ BÉE® ãÉäiÉÉÒ cé ÉÊBÉE +ÉÉ{É =ºÉä JÉÉBÉE® iÉÖ®xiÉ xÉ àÉ® VÉÉªÉå* ´É­ÉÇ 
1989 àÉå +ÉàÉäÉÊ®BÉEÉ àÉå AãÉÉÊ]Å{]Éä {ÉEèxÉ BÉEä xÉÉàÉ ºÉä ABÉE ¤ÉcÖiÉ ¤É½ÉÒ ]ÅäVÉäbÉÒ cÖ<Ç lÉÉÒ* AãÉÉÊ]Å{]Éä {ÉEèxÉ ÉÊ{ÉUãÉä BÉEàÉ ºÉä BÉEàÉ ºÉÉè 
ºÉÉãÉ ºÉä ABÉE AäºÉÉ cèãlÉ ]ÉìÉÊxÉBÉE lÉÉ, ÉÊVÉxcå xÉÉÓn xÉcÉÓ +ÉÉiÉÉÒ lÉÉÒ, ÉÊVÉxcå ÉÊb|Éä¶ÉxÉ lÉÉ, ´Éä =ºÉä ãÉäiÉä lÉä* ABÉE BÉEÆ{ÉxÉÉÒ xÉä VÉ¤É 
=ºÉä ¤ÉxÉÉxÉÉ ¶ÉÖ°ô ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ iÉÉä =ºÉä ãÉäxÉä BÉEä ¤ÉÉn ABÉE nàÉ ºÉä BÉEàÉ ºÉä BÉEàÉ 100 BÉEä +ÉÉºÉ{ÉÉºÉ ãÉÉäMÉ àÉ® MÉªÉä +ÉÉè® BÉEàÉ ºÉä 
BÉEàÉ 10 ºÉä 15 cVÉÉ® ãÉÉäMÉ càÉä¶ÉÉ BÉEä ÉÊãÉA µÉE{ÉãÉ cÉä MÉªÉä* àÉé ¤ÉcÖiÉ ºÉÉ®ä AäºÉä ãÉÉäMÉÉå ºÉä ÉÊàÉãÉÉ cÚÆ, VÉÉäÉÊBÉE  =ºÉä JÉÉxÉä BÉEä 
¤ÉÉn µÉE{ÉãÉ cÖA cé* <ºÉºÉä ªÉc ¤ÉÉiÉ VÉÉÉÊc® cè ÉÊBÉE VÉ¤É iÉBÉE +ÉÉ{ÉxÉä =ºÉä ABÉE ãÉÉÆMÉ ]àÉÇ +ÉÉè® <ÆÉÊb{Éåbå]ãÉÉÒ ]èº] xÉcÉÓ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ 
cè, iÉ¤É iÉBÉE +ÉÉ{É BÉE£ÉÉÒ £ÉÉÒ =ºÉBÉEä ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå ªÉBÉEÉÒxÉ ºÉä xÉcÉÓ BÉEc ºÉBÉEiÉä cé* àÉä®ä JªÉÉãÉ ºÉä <ºÉBÉEä ºÉÉlÉ VÉÉä àÉÖZÉä ºÉ¤ÉºÉä ¤É½ÉÒ 
ÉÊnBÉDBÉEiÉ xÉVÉ® +ÉÉiÉÉÒ cè, ´Éc ªÉc cè ÉÊBÉE <ºÉä càÉ ºÉ£ÉÉÒ JÉÉªÉåMÉä* +Éã]ÉÒàÉä]ãÉÉÒ ªÉc càÉ ºÉ£ÉÉÒ BÉEÉÒ ÉÊVÉààÉänÉ®ÉÒ cÉäiÉÉÒ  cè ÉÊBÉE 
BÉEàÉ ºÉä BÉEàÉ càÉ ãÉÉäMÉ nÚºÉ®Éå BÉEä +É£ÉÉÒ iÉBÉE BÉEä AìBÉDºÉ{Éä®ÉÒàÉå] ºÉä, ãÉÉäMÉ ÉÊVÉºÉ +ÉxÉÖ£É´É ºÉä MÉÖVÉ®ä cé, =xÉBÉEä +ÉxÉÖ£É´É ºÉä càÉ 
ãÉÉäMÉ BÉÖEU ºÉÉÒJÉ ãÉå* +ÉàÉäÉÊ®BÉEÉ àÉå ÉÊ{ÉUãÉä nºÉ ºÉÉãÉ ºÉä ºÉ¤ÉºÉä VªÉÉnÉ iÉäVÉÉÒ ºÉä VÉÉä SÉÉÒVÉ ¤ÉfÃÉÒ cè, ´Éc +ÉÉìMÉ æÉÊxÉBÉE {ÉÚEb BÉEÉ 
AbÉì{¶ÉxÉ cè* ãÉÉäMÉ ´ÉcÉÆ {É® xÉÉìxÉ VÉÉÒAàÉ+ÉÉä ºÉ]ÉÔ{ÉEÉ<b BÉE® ®cä cé, ãÉÉäMÉ ´Éc ÉÆ {É® xÉÉìxÉ VÉÉÒAàÉ+ÉÉä ºÉÉÒãÉ ãÉMÉÉBÉE® +É{ÉxÉÉ 
JÉÉxÉÉ JÉÉ ®cä cé* càÉ ãÉÉäMÉ AäºÉÉ {ÉÚEb +É{ÉxÉä ªÉcÉÆ {É® =ºÉ ºÉàÉªÉ ãÉÉ ®cä cé, VÉ¤É ãÉÉäMÉ =ºÉ iÉ®{ÉE ºÉä c] ®cä cé*”  
(ii) European Union 
3.7 Since 1990, European Union states have had a harmonized ap proach 
to address the issues of GMOs and genetically modified microorganisms 
(GMMs) under the Directive 90/220/EC.  A new framework under the 
Directive 2001/18/EC, replaced this Directive on April 17, 2001.  The new EU 
directive sets forth regulations  governing the deliberate release into the 
environment of GMOs.   The Directive puts in place a step by step approval 
process on a case by case assessment of the risks to human health and the 
environment before any GMO or product consisting of, or containing GM Os 
can be released into the environment or placed on the market.  
3.8 Essentially the approval process requires submission of the notification 
to the competent authority in a member state where the GMO will be field 
tested/marketed. The competent authority produces a summary/assessment 
report which is forwarded to the commission and competent authorities of all 
member states.   In addition to the member states, public is also provided 

 
 
85 
 
an opportunity to provide comments which are discussed in an attempt to 
reach agreement.  At the end of review process, the competent authority 
provides a written consent for marketing the GMO for a period of no more 
than 10 years.  The period of validity, the conditions for marketing the 
product, the labeling and monitoring re quirements are all specified in the 
consent.  The Directive requires that the labeling include the words „this 
product contains genetically modified organisms‟. 
3.9 Some of the other provisions which are noteworthy in Directive 
2001/18/EC include the following: 
 The phasing  out of antibiotic resistance genes; 
 The use of the precautionary principle‟ when assessing GMO 
effects; 
 The authority for the competent authority to conduct inspections 
and compliance measures; 
 The requirement to trace the GMO at all stages to market; 
 The ability to keep  confidential  sensitive business information 
while providing the public information about the GMO and its 
environmental risk assessment. 
 The ability of a Member State to restrict or prohibit use of an 
approved GMO if new or additional information provides „detailed 
grounds for considering that a GMO …constitutes a risk to human 
health and/or the environment‟; 
 A statement that Member States may take into consideration 
ethical aspects‟ when reviewing GMO. 
(iii) Canada 
3.10 In Canada, the regulations of the biotechnology products is coordinated 
by Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA), Health Canada and 
Environment Canada.  The CFIA is responsible for regulating the import, 
environmental release, variety registration an d use in livestock feeds of 
plants with novel traits.  Health Canada is solely responsible for assessing 
the human health safety of foods.   Environment Canada is responsible for 
administering the new substances notifications regulations and for 
performing environmental risk assessment of toxic substances, including 

 
 
86 
 
organisms and microorganisms that may have been derived from 
biotechnology.  These agencies regulate biotechnology products under the 
authority derived from at least ten pieces of preexisting leg islation that have 
been amended time to time to deal with new products.   A list of regulatory 
responsibilities of these agencies along with the relevant legislation is given 
below for agriculture biotechnology products: 
Regulatory agencies for agricultural biotechnology products in Canada and 
the products regulated 
Department/ 
Agency 
Products 
regulated 
Relevant 
legislation 
Regulations 
Canadian 
Food 
Inspection 
Agency 
Plant and seeds, 
including those 
with novel traits; 
animal vaccines 
and biologies; 
fertilizers; 
livestock feeds 
Consumer 
packaging and 
labelling act 
Feeds Act 
Fertilizers Act 
Food and Drugs 
Act Health of 
Animals Act 
Seeds Act Plant 
Protection Act 
Feeds Regulations 
Fertilizers Regulations 
Health of Animals 
Regulations Food and 
Drug Regulations 
Environment 
Canada 
Biotechnology 
products under 
CEPA. Such as 
microorganisms 
used in 
bioremediation; 
waste disposal, 
mineral leaching of 
enhanced oil 
recovery 
Canadian 
Environmental 
Protection Act 
New Substances 
Notification Regulations 
(These regulations apply 
to products not 
regulated under other 
federal legislation) 
Health Canada Food; drugs; 
cosmetics; medical 
devices; pest 
control products 
Food and Drugs 
Act Canadian 
Environmental 
Protection Act 
Pest Control 
Products Act 
Cosmetic Regulati ons 
Food and Drug 
Regulations Novel Foods 
Regulations Medical 
Devices Regulations New 
Substances Notification 
Regulations Pest Control 
Products Regulation 
Fisheries and 
Oceans 
Potential 
environmental 
release of 
transgenic aquatic 
organisms 
Fisheries Act Under Development 
 
3.11 Canada is the only country were regulatory oversight is triggered 
solely by the novelty of traits of the means by which the novel traits were 
introduced,  The Canadian regulatory system refers to plants with novel 
traits (PNT) and novel foods in place of GM plants or GM foods. 

 
 
87 
 
3.12 Under this regime, all agricultural commodities and food products, 
whether they are produced using conventional technologies or 
biotechnologies, are governed under the same acts.  Depending on the type 
of product, the relevant piece of legislation is applied i.e. Seeds Act, Feeds 
Act, Fertilizers Act, Food and Drugs Act, Health of Animals Act, or the 
Canadian Environmental Protection Act (CEPA).  For example, a herbicide 
tolerant  Canola produced using genetic engineering or accelerated 
mutagenesis (more established plant breeding tool) are subject to same 
environmental or food safety risk assessment although the later has been in 
use for about 70 years and is not subject to stringent regulations in other 
countries. 
(iv) Australia 
3.13 In Australia, research, manufacture, production, commercial release 
and import of GMOs are regulated under the Gene Technology Act 2000 by 
Gene Technology Regulator (GTR).  Every dealing with a GMO needs to be 
licensed by GITR, unless the dealing is an Exe mpt Dealing, a Notifiable Low 
Risk Dealing or on the Register of GMOs. Three advisory committees, the 
Gene Technology Technical Advisory Committee (GTTAC), the Gene 
Technology Community Consultative Committee (GTCCC) and the Gene 
Technology Ethics Committe e (GTEC), provide advice to GTR and the 
Ministerial Council.   
3.14 Dealings with GMOs and GM products are also regulated by a number 
of other regulatory agencies where they are to be used for specific 
purposes. These include the National Registration Auth ority (NRA) for 
agricultural and veterinary chemicals; the National Industrial Chemicals 
Notification and Assessment Scheme (NICNAS) for industrial chemicals; the 
Food Standards Australia New Zealand for foods intended    for human 
consumption; the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) for therapeutic 
goods; and the Australian Quarantine and I nspection Service (AQIS) for the 
import of plants, animals and biological. 
  

 
 
88 
 
National Gene Technology Regulatory System in Australia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) Argentina 
3.15 Argentina regulates biotechnology, including transgenic plant and 
genetically engineered food products through a combination of GMO -specific 
legislation and pre existing laws covering seeds and veterinary products.   
Approvals for the environment release o f GMOs and their use in human food 
or livestock feed are administered by the Secretary of Agriculture, Livestock, 
Fisheries and Food (SAGPyA) created the Commission Nacional Asesora de 
Biotecnologia Agropecuaria (The National Advisory Committee on 
Agricultural Biosafety or CONABIA) as a mec hanism to provide advice on 
technical and biosafety requirements for environmental releases, human 
food, and livestock feed uses of genetically engineered plant and animal 
materials.  CONABIA‟s membership is composed of b oth public and private 
sector representatives with a wide range of expertise in agricultural 
biotechnology.  Members are selected according to a transparent process 
and are approved by SAGPy A.  Argentina regulations concerning the 
environmental release of GMOs were developed by CONABIA and  are  based 
in guidelines in the form of non -legislative resolution that are integrated in 
the overall regulatory system and there is no specific law that makes the 
resolutions legally binding. 

 
 
89 
 
(vi) South Africa 
3.16 In 1997, the Genetically Modified Organism Act was passed in 1997 as 
a new legal instrument specifically to regulate GMOs in South Africa.  The 
Act which came into force in 1999 created an executive council, a scientific 
advisory committee and an inspectorate for implementation of its provisions.  
The Act has been developed to promote the responsible development, 
production, use and application of GMOs.  In addition, all imports and 
exports for agriculture material required a permit issued under the 
Agricultural Pests Act 1983,  The safety of all foods, including foods derived 
from biotechnology, is regulated under the Foodstuff, Cosmetic and 
Disinfectants Act, 1972. 
(vii) Japan 
3.17 Japan uses a series of voluntary guidelines administered through four 
governmental agencies to ensure safe use and application of recombinant 
technologies.  These include Ministry of Science and Technology for lab level 
work, Ministry of International Trade and Industry for industrial applications, 
Ministry of Agriculture, F orestries and Fisheries to oversee the safety of 
animal feeds, ,feed additives and environmental release of GMOs and 
Department of Health and Welfare for food and food additives produced by 
rDNA technology.  These guidelines are not legally binding but are  followed 
on a voluntary basis. 
(viii) China  
3.18 China‟s first biosafety guidelines were produced by the State Science 
and Technology Commission in December 1993, under which the 
administrative responsibility for biosafety of various products has been 
assigned to the relevant administrative departments.  In 2002, China has 
established rules on GMOs to strengthen the safety and management of 
GMO products.  Besides other detailed procedures, these rules require all GM 
products to be labeled.   
3.19 In South -east Asia, Philippines and Malaysia have completed their 
biosafety guidelines.  Thailand has approved field t estings after finalizing its 

 
 
90 
 
regulations in 1993.  India has notified rules for manufacture, import, use , 
etc. of GM products in 1989 under Environment Protection Act, 1986.   
3.20 A comparison  of principle features and components of regulatory 
regimes in different countries is presented below with respect to GMO 
applications in  agriculture: 
Comparison of principal features of regulatory regimes in different countries  
for GMO applications in agriculture 
 
Parameter 
Countries 
USA Canada EU Austral
ia 
Argentina South 
Africa 
India 
Use of 
existing 
legislation 
Yes Yes No No Yes No Yes 
New 
legislation 
and/or 
regulations 
New 
regulations 
only 
No Yes Yes New 
resolutions 
and decrees 
Yes New 
regulation 
only 
States 
involved 
Plant 
Protection 
Act; FIFRA, 
FFDCA 
10 
pieces 
of 
legislati
on 
EU Directed 
2001/18/EC 
(2001); EC 
regulation 
258/97(1997) 
Gene 
Act 
2000 
Numerous 
laws, 
resolutions 
and decrees  
Genetically 
Modified 
Organisms 
Act (1997) 
Rules for 
handling 
GMOs, 
(1989) 
under 
Environment 
Protection 
Act 1986 
Agencies 
involved 
USDA, FDA 
and EPA 
Canadia
n Food 
Inspecti
on 
Agency, 
Health 
Canada 
and 
Environ
ment 
Canada 
Members 
states 
competent 
authorities 
and European 
Commission 
Office 
of the 
Gene 
Techno
logy 
Regula
tor 
Secretariat 
of 
Agriculture, 
Fisheries 
and Foods 
Agriculture 
Ministry 
Ministry of 
Environment 
& Forests 
and  
Department 
of 
Biotechnolog
y 
Products 
covered 
Plants that 
could 
become 
plant pest, 
plants 
engineered 
to produce 
pesticides, 
plants 
intended as 
food 
Plants 
with 
novel 
traits 
All genetically 
modified 
organisms; 
all novel 
foods and 
novel food 
ingredients 
All 
genetic
ally 
modifie
d 
organis
ms  
All 
genetically 
modified 
organisms 
All 
genetically 
modified 
organisms 
All 
genetically 
modified 
organisms 
and 
products 
thereof 
Established 
safety 
standard in 
legislation 
Yes (for 
example 
unreasonabl
e adverse 
effects on 
the 
environment
) 
– Yes (for 
example 
foods must 
not present a 
danger to 
consume) 
– Yes  No – 
Transparency 
(Information 
about 
regulatory 
process 
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  
Transparency 
(Application 
and 
EPA provides 
partial 
information, 
– Summary 
information 
made 
– No Summary 
information 
is provided 
– 

 
 
91 
 
supporting 
data for field 
trial and 
commercializ
ation) 
USDA 
sometimes 
provide 
information, 
FDA does 
not 
available for 
commercializ
ation, 
legislation 
silent on 
information 
about field 
trials or food 
safety 
assessment 
Public 
participation 
(On individual 
applications) 
Yes for 
applications 
to EPA and 
commercial 
releases at 
USDA 
otherwise no 
– Yes for 
environmenta
l release, no 
for food 
safety 
– No Yes No 
Regulators. 
If desired, 
can call for 
public 
opinion. 
Use of 
outside 
scientific 
experts 
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes 
Post-approval 
activities 
Partial 
conducted 
by EPA but 
not by USDA 
or FDA 
– Yes – Unknown Not 
required by 
legislation 
Yes  
Enforcement 
authority 
Yes but it is 
not used on 
regular basis 
– Yes – Yes and all 
field trials 
are 
inspected 
Yes and 
inspections 
are carried 
out 
Well defined 
mechanism 
for 
enforcement 
Inclusion of 
other societal 
concerns 
No – Yes – Yes Yes Yes 
 
(ix) Norway 
3.21 Apart from  the information submitted by DAC on this  issue the 
Committee have also been given to understand that Norway also has a very 
comprehensive and bio -safety friendly law for regulation of GMOs. The 
purpose of the legislation is very clearly laid down in the first Chapter this 
Act No.38 of 2 April, 1 993 relating to the Production and Use of Genetically 
Modified Organisms, etc. as follows: 
 Purpose of the Act     
 The purpose of this Act is to ensure that the production and use 
of genetically modified organisms and the production of cloned animals 
take place in an ethically justifiable and socially acceptable manner, in 
accordance with the principle of sustainable development and without 
adverse effects on health and the environment.  
Substantive scope of the Act 
The act applies to the production and us e of genetically modified 
organisms.  The Act also applies to the production of clone vertebrates 
and crustaceans.  The provisions of the Act relating to genetically 

 
 
92 
 
modified organisms also apply to substances and products that consist 
of or contain genetically modified organisms.  
The Norwegian Law also contains separate provisions for impact 
assessment; making public methods and plans for monitoring and 
emergency response and also assessment of forseable effects; public 
consultation; compensation; coercive fines; penal measures; etc.   
(x) EU Directive 
3.22 From the material furnished to them the Committee found that the 
European Union have the Directive 2001/18/EC of April 17, 2001 to address 
the issues of GMOs and genetically modified organisms.  Amongst other 
stipulations the Directive prescribed that the public policy provided an 
opportunity to provide comments before any GMO or products consisting of 
Genetically Modified Microorganisms can be released in the environment or 
placed on the market.  
3.23 About the situation obtaining in this regard in India as far as 
agriculture is concerned , GEAC stated that in the matter of biosafety laws 
and policies, India was one of the early movers in the developing world, 
having introduced the national biosafety rules even before the Convention on 
Biological Diversity (CBD) was adopted at Rio de Janeiro in 1992. The 
introduction of the biosafety rules in 1989 spelling out the implementation 
mechanism involving various committees at institutional, district, state and 
central levels was a pioneering step that was enabled by the Environment  
(Protection) Act, 1986.   
3.24 Rules 1989 was framed based on the global best practices available at 
that point of time. Therefore, public hearing is not a mandatory component. 
However, since 2004, all information related to biosafety regulations in India 
including minutes of the GEAC meeti ng and biosafety data on Bt cotton & Bt 
brinjal is available in the public domain and may be viewed at  
http://moef.nic.in/modules/project-clearances/geac-clearances/and 
http://igmoris.nic.in/ 
3.25 Comments from the public/stakeholders are invited on policy issues, 
guidelines, and biosafety issues before any decision is taken by the GEAC.  

 
 
93 
 
In case of Bt Brinjal, the biosafety data was posted on the website for public 
comments.  The concerns/public vi ews were considered by an Expert 
Committee (EC-I) before the GEAC allowed large scale trials with Bt brinjal 
event EE-I.  Subsequent to the large scale trials, the GEAC again constituted 
another Expert Committee (EC -II) to address concerns received from th e 
public and other relevant stakeholders. Further, the decision of GEAC dated 
14 October 2009 to allow Bt Brinjal event EE -I for release and the EC -II 
Report was again posted on the Ministry‟s website for comments. The  
Minister for Environment & Forests a lso obtained views of both national and 
international experts as well as views of the State Government s. Based on 
the outcome of the public consultation, a moratorium was issued on 9 
February 2010.  
3.26 It is therefore submitted that a mechanism has been put in place to 
integrate public opinion in the decision making process even though it is not 
mandatory under Rules 1989. However, this aspect has been addressed in 
the new Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India Bill where it is 
mandatory for the authority to consult the public.   
3.27 The same EU Directive also stipulates that at the end of the review 
process the competent authority provides consent only for marking of GMO 
for a period of no more than 10 years.  
3.28 About reasons due to which consent is only provided for marketing the 
GMO for a period of no more than 10 years in the European Union , GEAC 
informed the Committee that as per Article 15(4) of the Directive 
2001/18/EC of April 17, 2001, the consent for marketing the GMO is given 
for a period of no more  than 10 years in accordance with Council Directives 
70/457/EEC  and 70/458/EEC, which are applicable to all plant varieties 
including GMOs.   It has been indicated in these directives that the 
acceptance of a variety shall be valid until the end of the tenth calendar year 
following acceptance and may be renewed at given intervals if it is still 
cultivated on such a scale as to justify this and provided that the 
requirements as to distinctness, uniformity and stability are still satisfied.  It 
may be noted that the system for granting marketing approval for a period 
of no more than 10 years in EU  is not specific for  GMOs but applicable to all 
plant varieties.  

 
 
94 
 
3.29 When querried about the position in this regard in India as far as such 
products in agriculture sector are concerned it was stated that in India under 
the system of notified varieties by the Ministry of Agriculture, a variety is 
notified for 15 years and is subject to renewal after that. However, the 
notification of varieties is not ma ndatory, and the seeds can be marketed as 
truthfully labeled.  Therefore, this limitation is not applicable to marketing of 
seeds in general.   
3.30 In case of GMOs, as per clause 13(ii) of Rules, 1989, the approval is 
given for four years followed by rene wal of two years. Accordingly, the first 
approvals for Bt cotton was given for three years followed by renewal on a 
two year basis.  Subsequently, following the adoption of recommendations of 
Task Force on Agricultural Biotechnology under the chairmanship of Prof. 
M.S. Swaminathan and Sub -Committee on Bt cotton and related issues 
under the chairmanship of Dr. C.D. Mayee, GEAC has adopted an event 
based approval system.  In view of the new policy, the requirement of 
subsequent renewal of each variety/hybrid is no longer applicable.    
3.31 However, the New Seed Bill, 2004 which is under consideration 
prescribes mandatory registration of all seeds including GM seeds for a 
specific period of 15 years.  
3.32 Some of the other provisions of the Directive 2001/18/ EC are as 
follows: 
(i) The phasing out of antibiotic resistance genes; 
(ii) The use of the „precautionary principle‟ when assessing GMO 
effects; 
(iii) The authority for the competent authority to conduct inspections 
and compliance measures; 
(iv) The requirement to trace GMO at all stages to market; 
(v) The ability to keep confidential sensitive business information 
while providing the public information about the GMO and its 
environmental risk assessment; 
(vi) The ability of a Member State to restrict or prohibit use of an 
approved GMO if new or additional information provides „detailed 

 
 
95 
 
grounds for considering that a GMO … constitutes a risk to human 
health and /or the environment‟; 
(vii) A statement that „Members States may take into consideration 
ethical aspects‟ when reviewing GMO. 
3.33 GEAC when asked about the position obtaining in India , in so far as 
agriculture sector is concerned , in the context of all seven provisions 
mentioned above  stated that in the matter of biosafety laws and policies, 
India was one of the early movers in the developing world, having 
introduced the national biosafety rules even before the Convention on 
Biological Diversity (CBD) was adopted at Rio de Janeiro in 1992. The 
introduction of the biosafety rules in 1989 was a pioneering step that was 
enabled by the E nvironment (Protection) Act, 1986.  Therefore, Rules 1989 
was framed based on the global best practices available at that point of 
time. Subsequently, scientific developments in the area of biotechnology 
have progressed exponentially resulting in newer cha llenges. Recognizing 
this, the Government of India has formulated the Biotechnology Regulatory 
of India Bill 2010 which is in accordance with the best practices available 
globally and national experiences. 
3.34 Keeping in view the above, the India‟s position on the seven provisions 
mentioned above is as follows: 
(i) The phasing out of antibiotic resistance genes 
Antibiotic Resistance Marke r Genes have been in wide use by 
plant molecular biologists to develop transgenic plants since 
1983. The selectable marke r genes such as nptII, hpt and aaD 
are sourced from ubiquitous bacteria such as E. coli     
(transposon 5), and gram -negative bacteria (Transposons 7 and 
21) and are extensively used in the development of transgenic 
plants/crops/ many of which are commercially cultivated 
globally. 
It is a matter of policy issue on whether to allow GM crops with 
antibiotic resistance markers since technolog y for generating 
marker free transgenic plants is available.  

 
 
96 
 
The matter was deliberated in the 105 th GEAC held on 8.12.2010 
wherein it was noted that GM crops in the pipeline have been 
developed several years ago based on the technology available 
at that point of time. Further, it takes several years to complete 
the safety and efficacy assessments of GM crops. Therefore, a ny 
decision to disallow release of GM crops with antibiotic resistant 
genes would make almost all transgenic plants that are under 
consideration of GEAC/RCGM ineligible for release.  Technological 
interventions and improvements are ongoing process and would 
be made available for newer products.   
In view of the above, GEAC decided that the GM crops containing 
markers for antibiotic resista nt genes currently in the pipeline 
may continue to be evaluated on a case by case basis unless 
scientific evidence is established otherwise. For newer products it 
was decided to have wider consultations on the matter taking 
into consideration technologies available and international 
experience.   
(ii) The use of the „precautionary principle‟ when assessing GMO 
effects 
As a precautionary approach, the Government of India is 
following a case by case approval of assessing the safety of a 
GMO even if it is approved for commercial release in other 
countries.  
GEAC has taken the „Precautionary Approach‟ in attaching 
conditions to the approval of each GM crop on a case - by- case 
for environmental release and cultivation. For example, while 
approving Bt cotton, GEAC conditions interalia included   (a) 
every cotton field where Bt cotton is planted shall be fully 
surrounded by a b elt of land called 'refuge' in which the same 
non-Bt cotton shall be grown; (b) develop plans for Bt based 
Integrated Pest Management and include this information in the 
seed packets. (c) undertaking awareness and education 
programs for farmers, (d) recording impact on non-target insects 

 
 
97 
 
and crops, (e) providing testing procedures for identifying the 
transgenic varieties by DNA and protein methods , etc. and (f) 
Monitoring of susceptibility of bollworms to be undertaken by 
CICR, Nagpur.  
It may be stated, ho wever, that there are many GM crops with 
new gene conferring traits in regulatory pipeline posing technical 
and organizational challenges in near future for monitoring and 
surveillance. Therefore, there is a need to strengthen the 
existing system in terms of investments, human resource, and 
infrastructure providing new institutional frame work for pre and 
post release monitoring and management 
(iii) The authority for the competent authority to conduct inspections  
and compliance measures 
As per Clause 4 (v) & (vi) of Rules 1989, the State Biotechnology 
Coordination Committee and District level Committees are the 
competent authorities to conduct inspection and compliance 
measures.  
(iv) The requirement to trace GMO at all stages to market 
Labeling of GM seeds or food or food products derived from them 
is to provide information required to address market and 
consumer preference.  
The labeling of GM/transgenic seeds, food crops and 
commodities derived from them do not fall under the purview of 
GEAC.  However, for  sale of GM seeds (in case of Bt cotton), 
GEAC has prescribed labeling conditions related to a) packing, b) 
labeling, c) physical and genetic description of the seeds, d) 
information on sowing pattern in packets in addition to 
complying with the requiremen ts for regulating the quality of 
certain seeds for sale in accordance with Seed Act 1966 and 
Seed Control Order, 1983 and subsequent amendments 
implemented by Ministry of Agriculture.   

 
 
98 
 
According to Food Safety and Standards Act, 1986, no person 
shall manufacture, distribute, sell or expose for sale or dispatch 
or deliver to any agent or broker for the purpose of sale, any 
packaged food products (including genetically modified or 
engineered food or food containing such ingredients) which are 
not marked and labeled in the manner as may be specified by 
regulations. The regulations for labeling of GM foods are being 
formulated by Food Safety and Standards Authority.  
Globally different countries follow voluntary or mandatory 
labeling system for products derived  from GM crops. In some 
countries, the threshold levels of adventitious presence of GM 
ingredients in non -GM products have also been notified and are 
usually in the range of 0.9 to 5 percent depending upon the 
stage of processing and the state of final product.   
(v) The ability to keep confidential sensitive business information  
while  providing  the  public  information  about the GMO and its 
environmental risk assessment 
Issues pertaining to keep confidential sensitive business 
information are dealt with as per the RTI Act. However, GEAC 
does not post confidential, sensitive business information on 
GEAC website. 
It is submitted that  this aspect has been addressed in the new 
Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India Bill, 2010. 
(vi) The ability of a Member State to restrict or prohibit use of an 
approved GMO if new or additional information provides „detailed 
grounds for considering that a GMO…. constitutes a risk to 
human health and/or the environment‟ 
Clause 13 (ii) of Rules 1989 pertaining to grant of approval 
states:  
 “(ii) All approvals of the Genetic Engineering Approval 
Committee shall be for a specified period not exceeding four 
years at the first instance renewable for 2 years at a time. The 

 
 
99 
 
Genetic Engineering Approval Committee shall have powers to 
revoke such approval in the following situations: 
(a) If there is any new information as to the harmful 
effects of the genetically engineered organisms or 
cells. 
(b) If the genetically engineered organisms or cells cause 
such damage to the environment, nature or health as 
could not be envisaged when the approval was given, 
or 
(c) Non compliance of any condition stipulated by Genetic 
Engineering Approval Committee.” 
Therefore, the biosafety regulation in India provides for 
revoking the approval in case of either non compliance or any 
new information pertaining to harmful effects which was not 
envisaged at the time of approval.  
(vii) A statement that „Members States may take into consideration 
ethical aspects‟ when reviewing GMO 
The role and responsibility of GEAC is to address only biosafety 
issues (both environment and health safety) before according 
approval for environmental release. GEAC has no role in policy 
matters related research and development of GM crops, food 
security, pricing of GM seeds, commercialization of GM crops, 
labeling for consumer awareness or ethical issues, etc.   
3.35 The Committee have examined the regulatory mechanisms for 
release of GM crops and other products in some of the countries.   
The issue of GMOs and genetically modified micro organisms in the 
European Union States were initially being addressed under the 
Directive 90/220/EC (since 1990) until a new framework under the 
Directive 2001/18/EC replaced it on 17 April, 2001.  Basically  the 
Regulatory System in EU States consists of a step by step approval 

 
 
100 
 
process on a case by case assessment of risk to human health and 
environment before any GMOs or product thereof or a product 
containing GMOs is released into the environment or placed in the 
market.  The procedure involves notification to the competent 
authority in the member State where the GMOs will be field 
tested/marketed.  The assessment report of the competent authority 
is, thereafter, forwarded to the EU Commission and competent 
authority of all member States.  With a view to reach agreement 
general public is also provided an opportunity to express their views.  
The review process culminates with the competent authority 
providing consent for marketing of the GMOs for a period not 
exceeding ten years.  The EU Directive mandatorily requires the 
labeling of such products to include the words „this product contains 
genetically modified organisms‟.  Some of the salient features of the 
EU directive include phasing out of antibiotic resis tant genes; 
requirement to trace the GMO at all stages to market; taking into 
consideration ethical aspects when reviewing GMO.  
3.36 In case of China, their first Biosafety Guidelines were worked 
out in December, 1993 by the State Science and Technology 
Commission.  Under these guidelines the responsibility for biosafety 
of various products vests with the relevant administrative 
department.  With a view to strengthen the safety and management 
of genetically modified products China has also framed rules on 
GMOs in 2002.    A notable feature of all these rules is that all 
genetically modified products are required to be labeled in China.     

 
 
101 
 
3.37 In Canada, the regulatory mechanism for biotechnology 
products consists of Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA), 
Health Canada and Environment Canada.  The CFIA is responsible for 
regulating import, environmental release, variety registration and  
use of plants with novel traits in livestock feeds.  An assessment of 
human health safety of foods is mandated with Health Canada.  The 
administration of new substances notifications/regulations and for 
performing environmental risk assessment of toxic su bstances, 
including organisms and micro -organism that may have been 
derived from biotechnology are responsibility of Environment 
Canada.  These three agencies derive their authority atleast from ten 
legislations for the purpose of regulating biotechnology products.  
The Committee also note that another agency for fisheries and 
oceans with a view to regulate potentional environmental release of 
transgenics aquatic organisms  is under development in Canada.  In 
Canada genetically modified plants or foods are typically referred to 
plants with novel traits and novel foods.  Under the Canadian 
regulatory system all agricultural commodities and food products 
whether produced using conventional technologies or modern 
biotechnologies are covered under the same Act.  
3.38 As in the case of Canada, the US regulatory system for GMOs 
and products, thereof, involves three different Government Agencies 
viz. United States Agriculture Department (USDA), US Food and Drug 
Administration ( FDA) and US Environmental Protection Ag ency 
(EPA).  The jurisdiction of USDA extends to plant pests, plants and 
veterinary biologies.  The FDA is responsible for food, feed, food 

 
 
102 
 
additives, veterinary drugs, human drugs and medical devices.  
Similarly, EPA has the jurisdiction over the microbia l and plants 
pesticides, new uses of existing pesticides and novel micro -
organisms.  While in the case of several products these agencies 
have exclusive jurisdiction, some products are regulated by more 
than one agency e.g. pesticidal plants.  The Committe e also find that 
in case of USA no new law was enacted for regulation of GMOs or 
products, thereof, albeit, suitable provisions have been made in the 
existing laws.  However unlike in Canada , products developed using 
genetic engineering are subjected to much higher degree of scrutiny 
as compared to those derived through traditional methods.  All the 
three agencies are vested with the powers to order immediate recall 
from the market of any prod uct, if any new and valid data indicates 
involves a question of safety for consumer or environment.    
3.39 Japan follows a number of voluntary guidelines administered 
through four different Agencies of the Government.  The Ministry of 
Science and Technology oversees laboratory level work, the Ministry 
of International Trade and Industry takes care of industrial 
applications, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forest eries and Fisheries 
oversees the safety of animal food, feed and environmental release 
of GMOs and the Department of Health and Welfare is responsible for 
food and food additives produced by recombinant DNA technology.          
3.40 The Committee have been informed that Norway has a very 
comprehensive law for regulation of GMOs and products thereof.  
The primary focus of the Act No. 38 of 2 April, 1993 relating to the 
production and use of Genetically Modified Organisms is biosafey , 

 
 
103 
 
ethics and sustainable development without any adverse effect s on 
the health and the environment.  It also has separate pr ovisions for 
impact assessment; making public methods and plans for monitoring 
and emergency response and also assessment of forseable effects; 
public consultation; compensation; coercive fines; penal measures; 
etc..   
3.41 In Argentina transgenic plants a nd genetically engineered food 
products are regulated with the help of a GMOs specific law and pre -
existing laws covering seeds and veterinary products.  Furthermore, 
the regulation concerning the environmental release of GMOs which 
have been developed by the National Advisory Committee on 
Agricultural Biosafety, are based in the form of non -legislative 
resolution that are integrated in the overall regulatory system and 
there is no specific law to make the resolutions legally binding.   
3.42 South Africa ha s in the form of Genetically Modified Organism 
Act a legal instrument specifically to regulate GMOs.  The Act which 
came in force in 1999 created an executive council, a scientific 
advisory committee and an inspectorate for implementation of its 
provisions.  Apart from this Act, South Africa has Foodstuff 
Mechanism and Disinfectants Act, 1972 to regulate the safety of all 
foods including foods derived from biotechnology.   
3.43 As has been stated previously in this Report the regulatory 
mechanism in India d erives its authority from Rules 1989 and the 
guidelines and regulations made thereunder from time to time.  As 
the Rules 1989 were drafted more than two decades ago based on 
the then prevalent global best practices modifications have been 

 
 
104 
 
carried out from time to time to keep the regulatory mechanism 
update and in tune with latest developments.  The regulatory 
mechanism, as stated previously,  consists of six committees, (i) 
Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee, (ii) Review Committee on 
Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) , (iii) Recombinant DNA Advisory 
Committee (RDAC), (iv) State Biosafety Coordination Committees 
(SBCC), (v) District Level Committees (DLC) and  (vi) Institutional 
Biosafety Committees (IBSC).  While GEAC is at the apex to accord 
approval for environmental release and commercial release, IBSC is 
where primary studies and assessments are undertaken and data 
generation takes place.  This IBSC is within the company which 
intends to market the GMO product being worked upon.  RCGM is the 
body to  assess and evaluate the studies undertaken and data 
generated by IBSC.  RDAC is advisory in nature, while SBCC and DLC 
are tasked with monitoring at State and district levels respectively.   
3.44 From the evidence placed before the Committee and their 
interaction with eminent scientists and experts IBSC is the weakest 
link in the chain.  Modern bio-technology research and development 
are mostly in the private sector.  The capital intensive nature of the 
R&D in this sector and the compelling need to make su ch ventures 
commercially profitable at the earliest opportunity, is the driving 
force for the private sector institutions to get their product in market 
at the soonest.  Similarly the charm of patent and IPR is too strong a 
motivation for not only the priv ate sector, but public sector as well, 
for quick commercialization of such products. 

 
 
105 
 
3.45 Under such circumstances when the stakes are so high, the 
Committee have strong reasons to agree with the apprehensions 
expressed by several stakeholders who deposed before the 
Committee that the basic assessments and data generation by IBSC 
as also the evaluation of these assessments and data by the 
accredited laboratories and regulatory agencies based on the 
samples provided by the company cannot be relied upon fully .  The 
case of Bt BN and Bt NHH44 mentioned in the Report is a case in 
point.  Another tier in the regulatory mechanism viz. the RCGM 
functions under the administrative control of DBT which is the 
promoter Department for biotechnology particularly modern 
biotechnology in the Government of India. Quite obviously inspite of 
their best efforts to do justice with their mandate to assess 
biosafety, environmental safety, human health safety, food and feed 
safety, there is a strong possibility of conflict of interest creeping in.   
3.46 RDAC, which is an advisory committee incidentally also 
functions under the administrative control of the Department of 
Biotechnology.  Coming to GEAC, as the Committee have also 
mentioned in the previous Chapter, it is headed by a civil servant 
who is also func tioning in another capacity in the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests, the controlling authority of GEAC.  The Co -
Chairman of GEAC is a biotechnologist who though purportedly from 
outside, is nominated by DBT, the promoter Department.  The Vice -
Chairman is again a civil servant, simultaneously discharging a few 
more responsibilities in another role in the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests.  By its very composition , the Committee does not have 

 
 
106 
 
regular existence and meets monthly, only when some decisions are 
to be taken. It is also a sad reality that modern biotechnology being 
a nascent discipline in the Country, we have a serious dearth of 
scientists of eminence in sufficient numbers, therefore, more or less 
the same set of people sit on both the sides i. e. to develop 
technologies and products as also to assess, evaluate and approve 
them. 
3.47 The Government time and again justified , before the 
Committee, the existing regulatory mechanism as based on best 
global practices and systems which are followed successfully in the 
pharmaceutical sector also.  It is common knowledge that the 
regulatory mechanism in the pharmaceutical industry is beset with 
several problems and shortcomings.  In fact the Department Related 
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfa re in their 59 th 
Report on “ The Functioning of the Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation (CDSCO)” presented to the Parliament on 8 May, 2012 
have severely criticized CDSCO for several malpractices including 
working against the interest of patients, collusion with industry and 
numerous other acts of omission and commission and have 
recommended to the Government a complete overhaul of the 
regulatory mechanism for the pharmaceutical industry.  Since the 
Government have drawn a parallel between the regula tory 
mechanism for GMOs and products thereof with the regulatory 
mechanism for the pharmaceutical industry, the Committee are of a 
very strong view that the former also requires to be overhauled, 
even created de novo  in the interest of biosafety, environme ntal 

 
 
107 
 
safety, human and livestock health safety.  Al beit, it is to be ensured 
that due concern is paid to the interest of the industry.  From their 
examination of the subject the Committee have found that , hitherto, 
the tendency of the regulatory mechanism in the absence of 
specialized infrastructure and R&D facilities in the Country is to base 
their decision making on practices and st udies elsewhere, as also on 
the assessments and data generated by the company concerned.  
This type of precautionary approach has lot of scope for mistakes, 
errors, misrepresentation and misinterpretation.  It is, therefore, not 
at all an ideal  regulatory mechanism for a County like India which is 
the centre of origin, as also one of the richest centres of biodiversity 
in the world.  We should also not forget that we are the second most 
populous country in the world and have a huge population of 
livestock, as well.  The p resent state of our health services and 
various other social sector services also does not inspire confidence  
that remedial action , post commercialization would be forthcoming , 
with any degree of alacrity.   In such a situation what the Country 
needs is no t a biotechnology regulatory legislation  but an all 
encompassing umbrella legislation on biosafety which is focused on 
ensuring the biosafety, biodiversity, human and livestock health, 
environmental protection and which specifically describes the extent 
to which biotechnology, including modern biotechnology , fits in the 
scheme of things without compromising with the safety of any of the 
elements mentioned above.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
to the Government with all the power at their command to 
immediately evolve such a legislation after due consultation with all 
stakeholders and bring it before the Parliament without any further 

 
 
108 
 
delay.    In this context the Committee would advise Government to 
duly consult the Norwegian Law which emulates this s pirit to a large 
extent.  
3.48 In th eir tearing hurry to open the economy to private 
prospectors, the Government should not make the same fate befall 
on the agriculture sector as has happened to the communications, 
pharma, mineral wealth  and several other sectors in which the 
Government‟s facilitative benevolence preceded setting up of 
sufficient checks and balances and regulatory mechanism s, thereby, 
leading to colossal, unfettered loot and plunder of national wealth in 
some form or the other , incalculable  damage to environment, bio -
diversity, flora and fauna and unimaginable suffering to the common 
man. 
  

 
 
109 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
INTERNATIONAL REGULATIONS 
 
4.1 The Committee desired to be apprised about the major International 
agreements/conventions/protocols pertaining and/or relevant to the matter, 
to which India is a signatory  and the  salient features and the binding 
conditionalities imposed by them on the signatory nations.  In their reply the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests informed the Committee that India Is a 
signatory to the following International Conventions and Protocols pertaining 
to biodiversity and biosafety: 
 
I. Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) 
 
4.2 CBD is a legally binding agreement adopted during Rio Earth Summit 
in 1992. India signed the CBD on 5 th June, 1992 and ratified it on 18 th 
February, 1994. CBD has near universal membership with 193 countries as 
Parties.  USA is the only major country which is a non -Party to this 
Convention. 
 
4.3 While reaffirming sovereign rights of nat ions over their natural 
resources, this Convention establishes three goals: conservation of biological 
diversity, sustainable use of its components, and fair and equitable sharing 
of benefits arising from the use of genetic resources. Provisions relating t o 
the third objective of CBD, also called access and benefit sharing (ABS) form 
the core of the CBD.   
 
4.4 Ten meetings of the Conference of the Parties (CoP) to the CBD held 
so far.  India is hosting CoP -11 to the CBD to be held in Hyderabad in 
October 2012, which is the year of 20th anniversary of Rio Earth Summit. 
 
4.5 There are two unqualified obligations on all Parties to the CBD, 
including developing country Parties.  One relates to the preparation of a 
National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (Article 6), the other relates 
to preparation of national reports to the CoP on measures taken for 
implementation of the Convention (Article 26).  India prepared „National 
Policy and Macrolevel Action Strategy on Biodiversity‟ in 1999, which was 
revised as the „National Biodiversity Action Plan‟ that was approved by the 

 
 
110 
 
Cabinet in November 2008.  Towards fulfilment of reporting obligations, 
India has submitted its first, second, third and fourth national reports in 
January 1999, August 2001, November 2005 and May 2009 respectively. 
 
4.6 In pursuance of the CBD India has also enacted the Biological Diversity 
Act in 2002, and notified Biological Diversity Rules in 2004, to give effect to 
the various provisions of the CBD, including those relating to ABS.  
 
4.7 In this regard, ICAR, clarifying further informed the Committee that  
the Convention on Biological Diversity , in its Article 19.3 provides for the 
safe transfer, handling and use of LMOs  in recognition of the potential risk 
arising from living modified organisms (LMOs) . The Article 8 (g) of the 
Convention directs the members to establish or maintain means to regulate, 
manage or control the risks associated with the use and release of LMOs 
resulting from biotechnology which are likely to have adverse environmental 
impacts that could affect the conservation and sustainable use  of biological 
diversity, taking also into account the risks to human health.  
 
II. Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (CPB).  
 
4.8 The CPB, the first international regulatory framework for safe transfer, 
handling and use of LMOs was negotiated under the aegis of the Convention 
on Biological Diversity. The Protocol was adopted on 29 th January 2000.  
India has acceded to the Biosafety Protocol on 17 th January 2003. The 
Protocol has come into force on 11 th September 2003.  As of date 162  
countries are Partie s to the Protocol. F ive meetings of the Conference of 
Parties serving as Members of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol (COP -
MOP) on Biosafety have been held so far.  
 
4.9 The objective of the Protocol is to contribute to ensuring an adequate 
level of protection in the field of the safe transfer, handling and use of LMOs 
resulting from modern biotechnology that may have adverse effects on the 
conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, taking also into 
account risks to human health, and spec ifically focusing on transboundary 
movements.  
 

 
 
111 
 
4.10 The Protocol promotes biosafety by establishing rules and procedures 
for the safe transfer, handling, and use of LMOs, with specific focus on 
transboundary movements of LMOs.  It establishes an advance i nformed 
agreement (AIA) procedure for ensuring that countries are provided with the 
information necessary to make informed decisions before agreeing to the 
import of such organisms into their territory. The Protocol contains reference 
to a precautionary approach and reaffirms the precaution language in 
Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development. The 
importing country is required to make its decisions in accordance with 
scientifically sound risk assessments as outlined in Article 15  & 16 and 
Annex–III of the Protocol.  To facilitate its implementation, the Protocol 
establishes a Biosafety Clearing -House for Parties to exchange information, 
and contains a number of important provisions, including capacity -building, 
financial mechanism , compliance procedures and public awareness and 
participation. The Protocol attempts to reconcile the respective needs of 
trade and environmental protection in the light of rapidly growing 
biotechnology industry. 
 
4.11 As a Party to the Protocol, the firs t and foremost requirement is the 
setting up of a National Biosafety Regulatory Framework. In the matter of 
biosafety laws and policies, India was one of the early movers in the 
developing world, having introduced the national biosafety rules even before 
the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) was adopted at Rio de Janeiro 
in 1992.  The second commitment relates to fulfillment of the reporting 
obligations.  India has submitted its First National Report on Implementation 
in February 2008 and is in the p rocess of preparing the Second National 
Report which is due for submission on September 30, 2011.   
 
4.12 Even though the text of the Protocol has been adopted, several critical 
issues such as risk assessment, liability and redress, documentation and 
identification of LMOS for Food Feed and Processing, etc are  still being 
discussed in the meetings of COP -MOP.  Therefore, globally, progress  in the 
implementation of the Protocol is slow due to the complexity of the issues 
involved and lack of capacity.   
 
 
 

 
 
112 
 
4.13 Elaborating  on  the  salient  features  of  Cartagena  Protocol,  (ICAR 
informed the Committee) which regulates transboundary movement of LMOs 
as follows:  
 The Protocol comprising 40 articles is a legally binding 
agreement to ensure adequate levels of protection for safe 
transfer, handling and use of LMOs resulting from modern 
biotechnology that may have adverse effects on human health 
and conservation & sustainable use of biological diversity.  
 It covers transboundary movement, transit, handling and use of 
LMOs but does not cover non -food or non-feed products derived 
from LMOs (e.g. paper from GM trees) and LMOs that are 
pharmaceuticals for humans.  
 It allows the members to take decisions on the import of LMOs 
intended for direct use as food or feed, or for processing 
(LMOsFFPs), under their domestic regulatory framework.  
 The Protocol also promotes cooperation to help developing 
countries acquire resources an d capacity to use biotechnology 
safely and more efficiently and encourages training to promote 
safe transfer of technology. 
 
III. Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit Sharing 
 
4.14 The CoP -10 to the CBD held in Nagoya, Japan in October 2010 
adopted the Nagoya Protocol on ABS after six years of intense negotiations, 
and nearly 18 years after adoption of CBD.  India has made significant 
positive contributions in finalisation of the Nag oya Protocol, which is being 
considered as a milestone achievement in multilateral environmental 
negotiations. India is a megadiverse country rich in biodiversity and 
associated traditional knowledge.  Hence, implementation of the ABS 
provisions of CBD is of special interest to us.   
 
4.15 The Protocol has been opened for signature from 2 February, 2011 to 
1 February, 2012.  As on date, 24 countries have signed the Protocol.  India 
has signed the Protocol on 11 May, 2011 after obtaining approval of the 
Cabinet on 20 April, 2011.  The Nagoya Protocol will enter into force 90 days 
after its 50 ratification.  In case 50 ratifications are received by 10 July, 

 
 
113 
 
2012, the first CoP- MoP of the Protocol will be held in Hyderabad in October 
2012 along with the CoP-11 to the CBD.  
 
4.16 The objective of Nagoya Protocol is the fair and equitable sharing of 
benefits arising from utilisation of genetic resources.  The Protocol 
establishes a clear framework on how researchers and companies can obtain 
access to genetic reso urces and to associated traditional knowledge, and 
how benefits arising from the use of such material or knowledge will be 
shared.  The Protocol also sets out clear obligations for Parties to provide 
that users of genetic resources within their jurisdictio n respect the domestic 
regulatory framework of Parties from where the resource has been accessed.  
The ABS Protocol is expected to address the concerns of biodiversity rich 
countries such as India relating to misappropriation of genetic resources and 
associated traditional knowledge and lead to a more balanced 
implementation of CBD.   
 
4.17 The domestic regulatory framework on ABS is already in place in India 
in the form of Biological Diversity Act and Rules.  There is therefore no need 
to enact any new leg islation or set up a separate national regulatory 
authority to implement the Nagoya Protocol.  If required, necessary changes 
may be made in the Act or Rules to align it with the Protocol. 
 
IV. Nagoya – Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability 
and Redress in the Context of Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety 
 
4.18 The COP-MOP 5 to the CPB held at  NAGOYA, Japan in October 2010 
has adopted the Nagoya Kuala Lumpur  Supplementary Protocol on Liability 
and Redress to the CPB after six years of intense negot iations. India is 
centre of origin/ diversity to several crops. India also has a strong research 
base and qualified scientist involved in the research and development of 
products from modern biotechnology in agricultural and health care sector 
both of whic h are critical to India. Hence, implementation of the provisions 
of the Supplementary Protocol on liability and redress is of special 
importance to us.   
 
4.19 The Supplementary Protocol fulfils the commitment set forth in Article 
27 of the Cartagena Proto col to elaborate international rules and procedures 

 
 
114 
 
on liability and redress for damage to biodiversity resulting from 
transboundary movements of LMOs. 
 
4.20 The Supplementary Protocol aims to contribute to the conservation 
and sustainable use of biodiversity by providing international rules and 
procedures for liability and redress in the event of damage resulting from 
LMOs.  The Supplementary Protocol reaffirm s the precautionary approach 
contained in Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and 
Development and recognizes the need to provide for appropriate response 
measures where there is damage or sufficient likelihood of damage, 
consistent with the CPB.  
4.21 The Scope of the Supplementary Protocol applies to damage resulting 
from LMOs which  find their origin in a transboundary movement. It applies 
to damage resulting from any authorized use of LMOs as well as illegal and 
unintentional transboundary movement that started after the Supplementary 
Protocol has come into force.   The domestic law implementing the 
Supplementary Protocol shall also apply to damage from transboundary 
movements from non -parties. The Supplementary Protocol specifies the 
measures that need to be taken in response to damage resulting from LMOs 
that find their origin in a transboundary movement. In the event of damage 
or  sufficient likelihood of damage to biological diversity, a Government, 
through a competent authority, would r equire the person in control of the 
LMO, i.e. the operator, to take appropriate response measures, or would 
take such measures itself with a right of recourse against the operator. The 
right of Parties to provide for financial security is also enshrined in  the 
Supplementary Protocol. Financial security is important to ensure that, if for 
any reason, the responsible party cannot pay for the damage caused by an 
LMO, there will be some means available to do so. 
 
4.22 The Supplementary Protocol takes an “admini strative approach” 
whereby responses measures are required of the operator (person or entity 
in control of the LMO) or the competent authority if the operator is unable to 
take response measures. This would cover situations where damage has 
already occurre d, or when there is a sufficient likelihood that damage will 

 
 
115 
 
result if timely response measures are not taken.  However, countries can 
still provide for civil liability in their domestic law. 
 
4.23 As a Party to the Supplementary Protocol, a special legislation in the 
field of liability and redress for damage resulting from LMOs would need to 
be enacted to meet the obligations under the Supplementary Protocol as the 
EPA 1986 and Rules 1989 and the proposed BRAI Bill do not address the 
concept of (i) damage and sufficient likely hood of damage from LMOs and 
(ii) response measures including financial security to take preventive 
measures. 
 
4.24 The Protocol has been opened for signature at the United Nations 
Headquarters in New York from 7 th March, 2011 to 6 th March 2012.  As of 
date 23 countries are signatories to the Supplementary Protocol.  The 
Protocol will enter into force on the ninetieth day after the date of deposit of 
the 40th instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or acces sion. MoEF 
is in the process of seeking approval of the Cabinet for signing the 
Supplementary Protocol. 
 
4.25 Apart from the above regulations/institutions, ICAR informed the 
Committee that the following other international institutions were also 
involved in the regulation of trade of GM crops and GM food:  
 
1. The World Trade Organization (WTO) -1995: The WTO 
Agreement on Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) 
Measures is related to procedures of risk analysis of plant and 
animal pests and diseases, and food safety. This Agreement 
concerns the application of food safety and animal and plant 
health regulations, which should be based on science, applied 
only to the extent necessary and not discriminate between 
countries with similar conditions. The guid elines for pest risk 
analysis (PRA) ensure that all restrictions in trade are based on 
the assessment of risks and are not arbitrary or discriminate 
against any exporting country with the same pest status. 
 
2. The International Plant Protection Convention (IP PC)-
1952: The IPPC develops International Standards on 

 
 
116 
 
Phytosanitary Measures (ISPMs) against pests of plants and 
plant products including GMOs. The guidelines include 
phytosanitary risks that might be associated with LMOs as they 
are included within the s cope of pests and hence, should be 
considered for PRA to make decisions regarding their risk 
management. The potential of risk from LMO pests depends in 
part on the intended use. As for other organisms, certain 
intended uses (such as high security containe d use) may 
significantly manage risk. For LMOs, as with other pests, options 
within the country also include the use of emergency measures 
related to phytosanitary risks. 
 
3. The Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) -1972: The CAC 
develops international standards including those for food safety 
and food labeling. The Codex‟s aim is to anticipate not only the 
direct risks, but also the indirect/ unanticipated risks that the 
products of modern agriculture might pose for human health. It 
states that all the methods including protoplast fusion and/or 
recombinant DNA technology have the potential to generate 
unanticipated effects in plants. 
 
4. The World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) -1924: 
The OIE harmonizes trade regulations for animals and animal 
products, and develops standards on animal health including for 
infectious animal diseases.  It ensures transparency in the global 
animal disease situation to improve the legal framework and 
resources of national veterinary services. It establishes 
standards, guid elines and recommendations relevant to animal 
diseases and zoonoses in accordance with its statutes and as 
defined in the WTO-SPS Agreement. 
 
5. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD) -1961: The OECD undertakes 
harmonization of international regulations, standards and 
policies. The OECD was the first to set international safety 
guidelines for industrial, agricultural and environmental 
applications of biotechnology. It presents scientific principles that 

 
 
117 
 
could underlie risk management for the release of GMOs into the 
environment. The 1992 OECD report follows from this and 
defines “Good Development Principles” for the design of safe, 
small-scale field trials of GM plants and microorganisms. 
 
4.26 On the aspect of major international agreements/conventions/ 
protocols pertaining to/relevant to bio-diversity to which India is a signatory, 
the National Biodiversity Authority informed the Committee that India has 
participated in major international eve nts on environment and biodiversity 
conservation since 1972. India has also contributed to developing the agreed 
texts, ratified, and complied with the commitments in various international 
conventions relating to biodiversity. These agreements are: Bonn 
Convention on Migratory Species (CMS), Convention on International Trade 
in Endangered Species of flora and fauna (CITES), Ramsar Convention on 
Wetlands, World Heritage Convention. Some other international agreements 
which have bearing on biodiversity to whi ch India is a Party include United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), United 
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, International Treaty on Plant 
Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture(ITPGRFA) and UN Convention on 
the Law of the Seas (UNCLOS). 
 
4.27 The Authority further drew the attention of the Committee to the 
following Conventions/Treaties which pertain to bio -diversity and to which 
India as a signatory is obliged to follow:  
 
1. Convention on Migratory Species 
 
The Convention acknowledges the importance of migratory 
species being conserved and of Range States agreeing to take 
action to this end whenever possible and appropriate, paying 
special attention to migratory species the conservation status of 
which is unfavou rable, and taking individually or in co -operation 
appropriate and necessary steps to conserve such species and their 
habitat. The Convention also acknowledges the need to take action 
to avoid any migratory species becoming endangered. 
 

 
 
118 
 
In particular, the Parties are requested to promote, co-operate in 
and support research relating to migratory species; endeavour to 
provide immediate protection for migratory species included in 
Appendix I (individual species) and endeavour to conclude 
Agreements covering the  conservation and management of 
migratory species included in Appendix II (groups of species)  
respectively of the convetion. 
 
2. Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) 
 
The CITES focuses on regulating and pr ohibiting trade in 
endangered species, within an International context. Appendix I of 
the convention includes all species threatened with extinction which 
are or may be affected by trade. Trade in specimens of these 
species must be subject to particularly strict regulation in order not 
to endanger further their survival and must only be authorized in 
exceptional circumstances.  Similarly, Appendix II includes (a) all 
species which although not necessarily now threatened with 
extinction may become so unless trade in specimens of such 
species is subject to strict regulation in order to avoid utilization 
incompatible with their survival; and (b) other species which must 
be subject to regulation in order that trade in specimens of certain 
species referred to in (the convention)  may be brought under 
effective control. Appendix III include s all species which any Party 
identifies as being subject to regulation within its jurisdiction for the 
purpose of preventing or restricting exploitation, and as needing the 
co-operation of other Parties in the control of trade. Parties shall 
not allow trade in specimens of species included in Appendices I, II 
and III except in accordance with the provisions of the present 
Convention. 
 
3. Ramsar Convention 
 
The Convention on Wetlan ds (Ramsar, Iran, 1971) -- called the 
"Ramsar Convention" -- is an inter -governmental treaty that 
embodies the commitments of its member countries to maintain the 
ecological character of their wetlands of international importance 

 
 
119 
 
and to plan for the "wise use", or sustainable use, of all of the 
wetlands in their territories. Unlike the other global environmental 
conventions, Ramsar is not affiliated with the United Nations system 
of Multilateral Environmental Agreements, but it works very closely 
with the o ther MEAs and is a full partner among the "biodiversity -
related cluster" of treaties and agreements.  
 
4. Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural 
and Natural Heritage 
 
Each State Party to this Convention recognizes that the duty of 
ensuring the identification, protection, conservation, presentation 
and transmission to future generations of the cultural and natural 
heritage situated on its territory, belongs primarily to that State. It 
will do all it can to this end, to the utmost of its own resources and, 
where appropriate, with any international assistance and co -
operation, in particular, financial, artistic, scientific and technical, 
which it may be able to obtain. 
 
5. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
 
The ultimate objective of this Convention and any related legal 
instruments that the Conference of the Parties may adopt is to 
achieve, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the 
Convention, stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the 
atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic 
interference with the climate system. Such a level should be 
achieved within a time frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to 
adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is 
not threatened and to enable economic development to proceed in 
a sustainable manner. 
 
6. United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 
 
The objective of this Convention is to combat desertification and 
mitigate the effects of drought in countries experien cing serious 
drought and/or desertification, particularly in Africa, through 
effective action at all levels, supported by international cooperation 
and partnership arrangements, in the framework of an integrated 

 
 
120 
 
approach which is consistent with Agenda 21,  with a view to 
contributing to the achievement of sustainable development in 
affected areas. Achieving this objective will involve longterm 
integrated strategies that focus simultaneously, in affected areas, 
on improved productivity of land, and the rehab ilitation, 
conservation and sustainable management of land and water 
resources, leading to improved living conditions, in particular at the 
community level. 
 
7. International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and 
Agriculture 
 
The objectives of thi s Treaty are the conservation and 
sustainable use of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture 
and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of their 
use, in harmony with the Convention on Biological Diversity, for 
sustainable agriculture and food security. 
 
8. UN Convention on the Law of the Seas 
 
Recognizing the desirability of establishing through this 
Convention, with due regard for the sovereignty of all States, a 
legal order for the seas and oceans which will facilitate interna tional 
communication, and will promote the peaceful uses of the seas and 
oceans, the equitable and efficient utilization of their resources, the 
conservation of their living resources, and the study, protection and 
preservation of the marine environment. 
 
4.28 The Committee have  taken note of various international 
conventions which have in some way or the other a significant 
bearing on the subject and related matters.  
4.29 The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) adopted at Rio 
Earth Submit was signed by India on 5 June, 1992 and ratified on 18 
February, 1994.  CBD very unambiguously reaffirms sovereign rights 
of nations over their natural resources and establishes three  clear 

 
 
121 
 
goals viz.  conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of its 
components and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from 
the use of genetic resources.  The access and benefit sharing 
objective forms the core of CBD.  CBD also dire cts the members to 
establish or maintain means to regulate, manage or control risks 
associated with the use and release of LMOs resulting from 
biotechnology, which are likely to have adverse environmental 
impacts affecting the conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity as also human health.  
4.30 The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (CPB) which India 
acceded to on 17 January, 2003 exhorts the signatories to contribute 
to ensuring adequate level of protection in the field of safe transfer, 
handling and use of LMOs resulting from modern biotechnology that 
may have adverse affects on the conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity, taking also into account risks to human health and 
specifically focusing on trans boundary movements.  The Committee 
find that unfortunately even after the adoption of the Protocol, 
several critical issues such as risk assessment, liability and redress, 
documentation and identification of LMOs for food, feed and 
processing are still being discussed.  Thus, globally the progr ess in 
the implementation of protocol is slow due to complexity of the 
issues involved and lack of capacity.  
4.31 The Nagoya Protocol on access and benefit sharing in which 
India has made significant contributions, lays down fair and 
equitable sharing of resources arising from utilization of genetic 
resources.  The Nagoya Protocol is expected to address the concerns 

 
 
122 
 
of biodiversity rich countries like India relating to misappropriation 
of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge and lead 
to a more balanced implementation of CBD.  The domestic regulatory 
framework on access and benefit sharing is already in existence in 
India in the form of Biological Diversity Act and Rules.   
4.32 Nagoya – Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability 
and Redress in the context of CPB is of special importance to India.  
Being a megadiverse country, which is also centre of origin/diversity 
to several crops, the Supplementary Protocol is meant to contribute 
to the conservation and sustainable use of biodivers ity by providing 
international rules and procedures on liability and redress damage 
resulting from LMOs.  The Committee understand that as a party to 
the Supplementary Protocol a special legislation, in the field of 
liability and redress for damage resulti ng from LMOs would need to 
be enacted to meet the obligations under the Supplementary 
Protocol as Environment (Protection) Act  1986 and Rules 1989 as 
also the proposed BRAI Bill do not address the concept of damage 
and sufficient likelihood of LMOs and the response for measures 
including financial security to take preventive measures.    
4.33 The World Trade Organisation Agreement on Application of 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures is related to procedures of risk 
analysis of plant, health regulations wh ich should be based on 
science, applied only to the extent necessary and not discriminate 
between countries with similar conditions.  This apart the guidelines 
for pests risks analysis ensure that of restriction in trade are based 

 
 
123 
 
on the assessment of risk s and are not arbitrary or discriminate 
against any exporting country with the same pest status.    
4.34 Apart from these major conventions and treaties there are 
several more conventions/protocols/treaties/agreements pertaining 
to the subject.  The Commit tee note that other than the WTO whose 
primary focus is facilitation of trade , all other relevant treaties, 
conventions, protocols and agreement very unambiguously  
underline the need for ensuring biological diversity and 
sustainability and eliminating any  risk to the human health due to 
use of LMOs, GMOs and products thereof.  The Committee are 
however appalled by the existing state of affairs in these matters in 
the Country.  While we have become signatories to these 
conventions/protocols/agreements/treaties with alacrity , we have 
simultaneously not ensured that the necessary wherewithal, 
scientific expertise , infrastructure and manpower for ensuring 
compliance is also created.  As the succeeding narrative will prove , 
the Biological Diversity Authority  and PPV and FRA  could have 
played a crucial role as an advisor and regulator in several matters 
pertaining to safety and sustainability of biodiversity but they are 
just a cosmetic presence. The Committee need not reiterate their 
observation regarding the sta te of affairs in the extant regulatory 
mechanism for the LMOs and products thereof, as it has been 
already commented upon in one of the previous chapters.  However, 
hugely concerned with the situation on the ground , the Committee 
cannot but reiterate that the Country require s an all encompassing 
Bio-safety Authority without any further loss of time.   

 
 
124 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
SCIENTIFIC STUDIES AND REPORTS 
 
(i) IAASTD Report 
 
5.1 The Committee have been apprised that in August, 2002, the World 
Bank and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations 
initiated a global consultative process to determine whether an international 
assessment of agricultural knowledge, science and technology (AKST) wa s 
needed.  This was stimulated by discussions at the World Bank with the 
private sector and NGOs on the state of scientific understanding of 
biotechnology and more specifically transgenics.  During 20 03, eleven 
consultations were held, overseen by an inter national multistakeholder 
steering committee and involving over 800 participants from all relevant 
stakeholder groups, e.g., governments, the private sector and civil society.  
Based on these consultations the steering committee recommended to an 
Intergovernmental Plenary meeting in Nairobi in September 2004 that an 
international assessment of the role of AKST in reducing hunger and 
poverty, improving rural livelihoods and facilitating environ mentally, socially 
and economically sustainable development was needed.  The concept of an 
International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology 
for Development (IAASTD) was endorsed as a multithematic, multi -spatial, 
multi-temporal in tergovernmental process with a multistakeholder Bureau 
cosponsored by the FAO, the Global Environment Facility (GEF), United 
Nations Development Programme (UNEP), United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), the World Bank and  World 
Health Organization (WHO). 
 
5.2 About 400 of the world‟s experts were selected by the Bureau, 
following nominations by stakeholder groups, to prepare the IAASTD Report 
(comprised of a Global and five Sub -Global assessments).  These experts 
worked in  their own capacity and did not represent any particular 
stakeholder group.  Additional individuals, organizations and Governments 
were involved in the peer review process. 
 

 
 
125 
 
5.3 The IAASTD development and sustainability goals were endorsed at 
the first Int ergovernmental Plenary and are consistent with a subset of the 
UN Millennium Development Goals (MDGs): the reduction of hunger and 
poverty, the improvement of rural livelihoods and human health, and 
facilitating equitable, socially, environmentally and eco nomically sustainable 
development. Realizing these goals requires acknowledging the 
multifunctionality of agriculture: the challenge is to simultaneously meet 
development and sustainability goals while increasing agricultural 
production. 
 
5.4 Meeting these  goals has to be placed in the context of a rapidly 
changing world of urbanization, growing inequities, human migration, 
globalization, changing dietary preferences, climate change, environmental 
degradation, a trend toward biofuels and an increasing popul ation.  These 
conditions are affecting local and global food security and putting pressure 
on productive capacity and ecosystems.  Hence there are unprecedented 
challenges ahead in providing food within a global trading system where 
there are other competi ng uses for agricultural and other natural resources.  
AKST alone cannot solve these problems which are caused by complex 
political and social dynamics, but it can make a major contribution to 
meeting development and sustainability goals. 
 
5.5 The followin g Governments accepted the Executive Summary of the 
Synthesis Report as also the Synthesis Report: 
 
 Armenia, Azerbajjan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, 
Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Cameroon, People‟s Republic of China, Costa 
Rica, Cuba, Democratic Republic of Congo, Dominican Republic, El 
Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia, Ghana, Honduras, India, 
Iran, Irland, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People‟s Democratic Republic, 
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Maldives, Republic of Moldova, 
Mozambique, Na mibia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, 
Philippines, Poland, Republic of Palau, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, 
Solomon Islands, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, United Republic of 
Tanzania, Timor -Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United 
Kingdom of great Britain, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia (58 Countries). 
 

 
 
126 
 
5.6 The  following  Governments  did  neither  fully  accept the Executive 
Summary of the Synthesis Report nor the Synthesis Report. 
 
Australia, Canada, United States of America (3 Countries).  
 
5.7 The reservations of these three Countries on the IAASTD Synthesis 
Report are given hereunder: 
 
Australia: Australia recognizes the IAASTD initiative and reports as a 
timely and important multistakeholder and multidisciplinary exercise 
designed to assess and enhance the role of AKST in meeting the global 
development challenges.  The wide range of observations and views 
presented however, are such that Australia cannot agree with all 
assertions and options in the report.  The report is therefore noted as 
a u seful contribution, which will be used for considering the future 
priorities and scope of AKST in securing economic growth and the 
alleviation of hunger and poverty. 
 
Canada: In recognizing the important and significant work 
undertaken by IAASTD authors, S ecretariat and stakeholders on the 
background Reports, the Canadian Government notes these 
documents as a valuable and important contribution to policy debate 
which needs to continue in national and international processes.  While 
acknowledging the valuabl e contribution these Reports provide to our 
understanding on agricultural knowledge, science and technology for 
development, there remain numerous areas of concern in terms of 
balanced presentation, policy suggestions and other assertions and 
ambiguities.  Nonetheless, the Canadian Government advocates these 
reports be drawn to the attention of Governments for consideration in 
addressing the importance of AKST and its large potential to contribute 
to economic growth and the reduction of hunger and poverty. 
 
United States of America: The United States joins consensus with 
other Governments in the critical importance of AKST to meet the 
goals of the IAASTD. We commend the tireless efforts of the authors, 
editors, Co-Chairs and the Secretariat.  We welcome the IAASTD for 

 
 
127 
 
bringing together the widest array of stakeholders for the first time in 
an initiative of this magnitude.  We respect the wide diversity of views 
and healthy debate that took place. 
 
5.8 As we have specific and substantive concerns in each of the reports, 
the United State s is unable to provide unqualified endorsement of the 
reports, and we have noted them.  
 
5.9 The United States believes the Assessment has potential for 
stimulating further deliberation and research.  Further, we acknowledge the 
reports are a useful contri bution for consideration by Governments of the 
role of AKST in raising sustainable economic growth and alleviating hunger 
and poverty. 
 
5.10 The Report has an exclusive theme devoted to biotechnology. Some of 
the major observations in the Report are as follows: 
 
 Conventional  biotechnologies, such  as  breeding  techniques,  
tissue  culture,  cultiva tion  practices  and  fermenta tion are 
readily accepted and used. Between 1950 and 1980, prior to 
the development of GMOs, modern varieties of wheat may have 
increased  yields up to 33%  even in the absence of fertilizer.  
Even modern biotechnologies used in containment have been 
widely adopted. For example, the industrial enzyme market 
reached US$1.5 billion in 2000.  Biotechnologies  in  general  
have  made  profound  con tributions that  continue   to  be  
relevant   to  both  big  and small  farmers  and  are  
fundamental to  capturing any  advances  derived  from  
modern  biotechnologies and  related nanotechnologies.   For 
example, plant breeding is fundamen tal to developing locally 
adapted plants whether  or not they are GMOs.  These 
biotechnologies continue to be widely practiced by farmers 
because they were developed  at the local level of 
understanding and are supported by local research. 
 
 Much more contr oversial is the application of modern 
biotechnology outside containment, such as the use of GM 

 
 
128 
 
crops. The controversy over modern biotechnology outside of 
containment includes technical, social, legal, cultural  and 
economic  arguments. The  three most  di scussed  issues  on 
biotechnology in the IAASTD concerned: 
 
o Lingering  doubts  about  the  adequacy  of efficacy  and 
safety  testing,   or  regulatory frameworks for  testing 
GMOs ; 
o Suitability  of GMOs  for addressing  the needs of  most 
farmers  while n ot harming  others,  at least within some 
existing  IPR  and   liability   frameworks; 
o Ability  of  modern   biotechnology to  make  significant 
contributions to the resilience of small and subsistence 
agricultural systems. 
 
 Some controversy may in part be due to the relatively short time 
modern biotechnology, particularly GMOs, has existed compared 
to biotechnology in general. While many regions are actively 
experimenting with GMOs  at a small scale, the highly 
concentrated cultivation  of GM  crops  in a few  countries  
(nearly  three- fourths  in only the US and Argentina,  with 90%  
in the four countries  including  Brazil and  Canada) is also  
interpreted as an indication of a modest uptake  rate. GM crop 
cultivation  may have increased by double digit rates for the past 
10 years, but over 93%  of cultivated  land still supports 
conventional cropping. 
 
 The pool of evidence of the sustainability and productivity of 
GMOs  in different  settings is relatively anecdotal, and the 
findings from different conte xts are variable, allowing  
proponents and critics to hold  entrenched  positions  about  their 
present  and potential value. Some regions report increases in 
some crops and positive financial returns  have been reported for 
GM cotton  in studies including   South Africa, Argentina, China, 
India  and  Mexico. In contrast, US and Argentina  may  have  
slight  yield declines in soybeans,  and also for maize in US .   
Studies on GMOs  have also shown the  potential  for  decreased  

 
 
129 
 
insecticide  use,  while  othe rs show increasing herbicide use. It 
is unclear whether detected benefits will extend to most 
agroecosystems or be sustained in  the  long  term  as 
resistances  develop  to  herbicides  and insecticides. 
 
 Biotechnology in general, and modern biotechnology  in 
particular,  creates both costs and benefits, depending  on how 
it is incorporated into  societies and  ecosystems  and  whether  
there is the will to fairly share benefits as well as costs. For 
example,  the use of modern  plant  varieties has raised grain 
yields in most parts  of the world,  but sometimes  at the 
expense of reducing biodiversity  or access to traditional foods. 
Neither costs nor benefits are currently perceived to be equally 
shared,  with the poor tending to receive more of the costs than 
the benefits. 
 
 Biotechnologies  affect  human  health  in a variety  of  ways. 
The  use of DNA -based technologies,  such  as  microchips, for  
disease  outbreak surveillance  and  diagnostics  can  
realistically  contribute to  both  predicting  and  curtailing  the 
impacts  of infectious  diseases.  The  application  of these  
technologies  would  serve human  health objectives both 
directly and indirectly, because they could be applied  to known  
human  diseases and to plant  and animal diseases that   might 
be the source of new human  diseases or which could reduce 
the quantity or quality of food. 
 
o Other  products of modern  biotechnology, for example 
GMOs  made from plants  that  are part  of the human  
food supply but developed for animal feed or to  produce 
pharmaceuticals that would be unsafe as food, might 
threaten human health. Moreover, the larger the scale of 
bio/nanotechnology or product distribution, the more 
challenging containment of harm can become. 
 
o All  biotechnologies must  be  better  m anaged  to  cope 
with  a  range  of  ongoing   and  emerging  problems. 

 
 
130 
 
Holistic  solutions  may be  slowed,  however,  if GMOs  are 
seen as sufficient for achieving development and 
sustainability goals and consequently consume a 
disproportionate  level of  funding and attention. To use 
GMOs  or not is a decision  that  requires  a comprehensive  
understanding of the products, the problems  to be solved 
and  the societies in which they may be used. Thus, 
whatever choices are made, the integration of 
biotechnology must be within an enabling environment 
supported by local research and education that  empowers 
local communities. 
 
 How  agriculture is  conducted influences  what  and  how much 
a society can produce.  Biotechnology and the production 
system are inseparable, and biotechnology must work with  the  
best  production system  for  the  local community.  For  
example,  agroecosystems of  even the poorest  societies have 
the potential through ecological agriculture and  IPM to  meet 
or significantly  exc eed yields produced by conventional 
methods,  reduce the demand  for land conversion  for 
agriculture, restore  ecosystem  services (particularly water), 
reduce the use of and need for synthetic fertilizers derived from 
fossil fuels, and the use of harsh  insecticides and herbicides. 
 
 Plant  breeding  and other  biotechnologies (excluding 
transgenics  discussed  below)  have  made  substantial  
historical  contributions to yield. While yield may have “topped 
out”  under  ideal conditions, in developing  cou ntries  the 
limiting factor  has been ac - cess to  modern  varieties  and  
inputs  instead  of an  exhaustion of crop trait diversity, and 
therefore plant  breeding  remains  a  fundamental  
biotechnology for contributing to sustainability and development 
goals. 
 
o Biotic and abiotic stresses, e.g., plant pathogens, drought 
and salinity, pose significant challenges to yield. These 

 
 
131 
 
challenges are expected to increase with the effects of 
urbanization, the conversion  of more marginal lands to 
agricultural use  and climate change. Adapting  new 
cultivars to these conditions is difficult and slow, but it is 
again plant  breeding  perhaps  complemented with  MAS,  
that  is expected to make the most substantial 
contribution. Genetic  engineering also  could  be used  to 
introduce these traits. It may be a way to broaden the 
nutritional value of some crops. If GM crops were to 
increase productivity and prevent the conversion  of land to 
agricultural use,  they  could  have  a significant  impact  
on  conservation.   However, the use of some  traits  may 
threaten biodiversity and agrobiodiversity by limiting 
farmers‟ options to a few select varieties. 
 
 Breeding  capacity  is therefore  of great  importance  to 
assessments  of  biotechnology in  relation  to  sustainabili ty 
and  development goals. In developing countries, public plant 
breeding institutions are common but IP and globalization 
threaten them. As privatization fuels a transfer of knowledge 
away from the commons, there is a contraction both  in crop 
diversity and numbers  of local breeding  specialists. In many 
parts  of the world  women  play this role, and thus a risk exists 
that privatization may lead to women losing economic 
resources and social standing  as their plant breeding 
knowledge  is appropriated. A t the same time, entire  
communities run  the risk of losing control of their food 
security. 
 
 The decline in numbers  of specialists in plant breeding, 
especially from  the public  sector,  is a worrisome  trend  for 
maintaining and  increasing  global  capacity  for  crop  
improvement. In addition, breeding supplemented with the use 
of MAS can speed up crop development, especially for simple 
traits. It may or  may not  also  significantly  accelerate  the  
development  of traits  that  depend  on multipl e  genes .   

 
 
132 
 
Provided  that  step s  are  taken  to  maintain lo cal ownership 
and control  of crop varieties, and to increase capacity  in plant  
breeding,  adaptive selection and breeding remain viable options  
for meeting development and sustainability goals. 
 
 GM plants have been adopted mainly  in high chemical  input  
farming systems thus far, the debate has focused on  whether   
the  concomitant changes  in  the  amounts or types of some 
pesticides    that  were used in these systems prior to the 
development of commercial  GM plants  creates a net 
environmental benefit. Regardless of how this debate  resolves, 
the benefits of current GM plants  may not translate into all 
agroecosystems. For example,  the benefits of reductions in use 
of other insecticides  through the introduction of insecticide -
producing (Bt) plants seems to be primarily  in chemically 
intensive agroecosystems such as North and South America and 
China. 
 
 Biotechnology  must be considered  in a holistic sense to 
capture  its true  contribution to AKST and  achieving 
development and sustainability goals. On the one hand, this 
may be resisted because some biotechnologies, e.g., genetic 
engineering,  are  very controversial and  the  particular 
controversy can cause many to prematurely  dismiss the value 
of all biotechnology  in general. On the other  hand,  those who 
favour technologies that are most amenable  to prevailing IP 
protections may resist broad  definitions of biotechnology, 
because past  contributions made  by many  individu als,  
institutions and societies might undermine  the exclusivity of 
claims. 
 
 A problem -oriented approach to  biotechnology  R&D  would 
focus investment on local priorities identified through 
participatory and  transparent  processes,  and  favo ur  
multifunctional solutions  to local problems. This emphasis 
replaces a view where commercial drivers determine supply. 
The nature of the commercial  organization is to secure the IP 

 
 
133 
 
for products and methods development. IP law is designed to 
prevent the  unauthorized use of IP rather  than as an 
empowering right to develop products based on IP. Instead,  
there needs to be a renewed emphasis on public sector 
engagement in biotechnology. It is clearly realized that the 
private sector will not replace the pu blic sector for producing 
biotechnologies  that  are used on smaller scales, maintaining 
broadly  applicable  research and development  capacities,  or 
achieving some goals for which there is no market. In saying 
this, an IP -motivated  public engagement  a lone would  miss 
the point,  and the public sector must also have adequate 
resources and expertise to produce  locally understood and 
relevant  biotechnologies and products. 
 
 A systematic redirection of  AKST will  include  a  rigorous  
rethinking of biote chnology, and  especially  modern 
biotechnology, in the decades to come. Effective long -term  
environmental and health  monitoring and surveillance pro - 
grams,  and training  and education of farmers  are essential to  
identify  emerging  and  comparative impacts  on  the  
environment and  human  health,  and  to  take  timely  counter  
measures.  No regional long -term  environmental and health 
monitoring programs exist to date in the countries  with the 
most  concentrated GM  crop  production. Hence, long -term  
data on environmental implications of GM crop production are at 
best deductive or simply missing and speculative. 
 
5.11 Since India has accepted IAASTD Report, the Committee was desirous 
of knowing the considered views of the Department of Agricultur e and 
Cooperation on the Report.  They also desired to know that based on their 
views on the said Report, what policy initiatives have been taken by the 
Department or what inputs for policy initiatives have been provided by the 
Department to Government for  ushering necessary correctives in the extant 
policy framework.  The Committee further desired to be appr ised of the 
specific action been taken by DAC as the nodal Department on the 
recommendations contained in the Report. 

 
 
134 
 
 
5.12 In a written reply the Department informed the Committee that the 
IAASTD study was initiated in 2002 as a global consultative process to 
determine whether an international assessment of agricultural knowledge, 
science and technology was needed. The first part of the report cover s a 
wide range of issues relating to reduction of hunger and poverty, 
improvement of rural livelihoods and human health, equitable, socially, 
environmentally and economically sustainable development. The second part 
of the report deals with cross cutting t hemes which include bio -energy, 
biotechnology, climate change, human health, natural resource 
management, trade and market, traditional and local knowledge, community 
based innovation, and women in agriculture. The report suggested strategies 
like Integrat ed Pest Management, organic agriculture and conservation 
agriculture for achieving sustainable agriculture.  DAC recognises importance 
of the issues related to bio -energy, biotechnology, improvement of rural 
livelihoods, poverty alleviation, food security and health care issues, in 
context of conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity. In 
matters related to sustainable agriculture, DAC follows the policy guidelines 
of NPF with major goals such as improving economic viability of farming, 
conserving land, water biodiversity and genetic resources to provide quality 
inputs for farming, strengthening bio -security of crops, and creating 
sustainable rural livelihoods etc., which are also the objectives of the 
schemes implemented by Government of India. 
 
5.13  Dwelling upon the Report ICAR informed the Committee that IAASTD 
Report has laid emphasis in its section on „Biotechnology‟ on IPR, investment 
in R&D in modern biotechnology and other agricultural research. The report 
has shown concern on concentration of ownership of agricultural resources 
as a result of IPR frameworks; however, IPR is a good instrument to attract 
investment in agriculture and to claim ownership. According to the IAASTD 
Report, “biotechnology should be used to maintain loc al expertise and 
germplasm so that the capacity for further research resides within the local 
community.”  With regard to improvement in agriculture, ICAR has prepared 
recently its own document on Vision-2030. ICAR takes into consideration the 
feedback fro m each State/region in the country through the Regional 
Committees, AICRIP workshops, etc.  

 
 
135 
 
 
5.14 When queried about the policy initiatives taken by the ICAR and inputs 
for policy initiatives provided by them to Government for ushering necessary 
correctives in the extant policy framework ICAR stated that i n addition to 
IAASTD report, ICAR/DARE along with DAC are constantly making efforts to 
develop strategies for achieving sustainable agriculture which  include the 
following: 
 
1. Integrated Natural Resource  Management - INRM practices are 
based on the addition of ecological principles to more widely 
recognized areas of agronomy, livestock husbandry and natural 
resources management.  
2. Integrated Pest Management  - IPM emphasizes cultural and 
biological contr ols and selective application of chemicals where 
necessary that do not harm human health, biodiversity or populations 
of pest predators, parasitoids and other standing of agro -ecosystems 
as complex webs of in crop protection.  
3. Organic agriculture (where ver possible and applicable)  - Organic 
Agriculture encompasses practices that promote environmental quality 
and ecosystem functionality. Organic systems are knowledge -intensive 
and based on replacing the use of synthetic inputs with ecologically 
based approaches to soil fertility and pest management.  
4. Conservation Agriculture  - Reduced tillage and conservation 
agriculture are low -cost systems that include reduced wind and water 
erosion, and enhanced conservation of soil organic matter.  
 
5.15 The Committee also sought the views of Department of Science and 
Technology on the Report.  Through a written reply they were informed that 
the Department agree with the recommendations of IAASTD.  It is observed 
that  development and sustainability goals shou ld be placed  in the context 
of: 
(1) current social and economic inequities and political uncertainties 
about war and conflicts;  
(2) uncertainties about the ability to sustainably produce and access 
sufficient food;  
(3) uncertainties about the future of world food prices;  
(4) changes in the economics of fossil-based energy use;  

 
 
136 
 
(5) the emergence of new competitors for natural  resources;  
(6) increasing chronic diseases that are partially a consequence of poor 
nutrition and poor food quality as well  as food safety; and  
(7) changing environmental conditions  and the growing awareness of 
human responsibility for the  maintenance of global ecosystem 
services. 
 
5.16 The Committee were further informed that the Department are of the 
view that the study has made a case for an international assessment of 
agricultural knowledge, science and technology.  Such studies are 
particularly important in the wake of globalized economy and trad e as well 
as sustainability goals of the countries in the world.  However, policies of the 
Governments are derived on the basis of national goals and needs and are 
contextual.  India needs to enunciate clearly national policies on the subject.  
The Department of Science & Technology have not formulated any policies 
as the subject is not in the Business of Allocation of the Department.  
However, the Department are committed to provide scientifically assessed 
inputs for derivation of policies on GM food as a p art of the inter -ministerial 
consultation mechanism as and when such a policy formulation process for 
regulation is initiated. 
 
5.17 The opinion expressed by the Ministry of Environment and Forest 
before the Committee was that the Report covers a wide rang e of issues 
which is broadly coming under the purview of Ministry of Agriculture.  As and 
when issues concerning environment are referred to this Ministry, necessary 
action would be initiated. While the Ministry are not directly involved in 
policy matters related to poverty alleviation, food security and health care 
issues, they recognize the importance of these issues in the context of 
conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.   In matters related 
to modern biotechnology, the overall object ive is to promote the safe use of 
modern biotechnology by enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of 
regulatory procedures and promote responsible use of biotechnology for 
safeguarding the health and safety of the people of India and to protect the 
environment.  In this context, the Ministry have provided constructive inputs 
to the proposal to set up Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India under 
the aegis of the DBT which has been approved by the Cabinet on November 

 
 
137 
 
18, 2010 with a view to streamline  the existing regulatory process and 
ensure compliance with international norms and commitment. The Ministry 
have also provided inputs to the New Seed Bill, 2004 and the Food Safety 
and Standards Act 2005.  
 
5.18 When this question was put to GEAC by the C ommittee it dittoed the 
views of its nodal Ministry viz. Ministry of Environment and Forests.  In a 
written submission to the Committee it stated that the Report covers a wide 
range of issues which is broadly coming under the purview of Ministry of 
Agriculture.  As and when issues concerning environment are referred to this 
Ministry, necessary action would be initiated.  While the GEAC is not directly 
involved in policy matters related to poverty alleviation, food security and 
health care issues, it recognizes the importance of these issues in the 
context of conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.   In 
matters related to modern biotechnology, the overall objective is to promote 
the safe use of modern biotechnology by enhancing the effectiveness and 
efficiency of regulatory procedures and promote responsible use of 
biotechnology for safeguarding the health and safety of the people of India 
and to protect the environment.  In this context, the MoEF which serves the 
GEAC have provided constructive inputs to the proposal to set up 
Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India under the aegis of the DBT 
which has been approved by the Cabinet on Novemb er 18, 2010 with a view 
to streamline the existing regulatory process and ensure compliance with 
international norms and commitment. The MoEF have also provided inputs to 
the New Seed Bill, 2004 and the Food Safety and Standards Act 2005.   
 
5.19 The opinion of CSIR was that Report deals with thematic areas such as 
poverty and livelihoods, food security, environmental sustainability, human 
health and nutrition, equity, investments, themes such as bio -energy, 
biotechnology, climate change, human health, natu ral resource 
management, trade and markets, traditional and local knowledge and 
community based innovation and women in agriculture.  CSIR are generally 
in agreement in particular to approach in the Report where R&D investment 
is prioritized as per local n eeds, which get identified through participatory & 
transparent process.  However, every nation is to evolve its own approach.  
At the same time Department must look for inclusive solutions. It is for this 

 
 
138 
 
reason that CSIR in 2008 launched CSIR – 800 progra m to empower the 
farmers through technology intervention.   As regards the policy initiatives 
taken by them for ushering necessary correctives in the extant policy 
framework, it was stated that  CSIR launched CSIR – 800 in 2008 and 
extensively supported mar ker assisted selection technology and R&D on 
apomixes technology which is the technology of the future.  While deposing 
before the Committee on 10 June, 2011, Secretary, DSIR and DG, CSIr 
stated in regard to IAASTD Report and related matters:  
  
“I think it is all market -demand driven, when we get connected 
globally. But the nation‟s responsibility is to protect its people and do 
what is best for the people of the Country. However, so far, farmer 
option, it is like this. It is a western concept of giving consent. When 
the genome was done, the western world wanted saying that you take 
the written consent of the people. So, I used to tell them that the last 
time a poor man or a farmer has signed, he lost his property. In India, 
it does not work. He do es not even understand what you are getting 
his signature for. So, it is important that you tell all the world, in WHO 
in the United Nations, I got them convinced on genome that the 
informed consent of the people has to be video recorded that you 
actually explain them correctly that this taking of blood sample has 
this benefit and the benefit of those research must go back to the 
people. Today world has accepted it and India is the first country to 
implement and put that.  
The United Nations has given a gui deline and we are all 
signatory in that except three countries, America, Canada and 
Australia. I think, you must be having a copy of that guideline that the 
United Nations guideline is very clear. It clearly tells and the major 
thrust of the report is that  the technology that is developed should be 
responsive to local needs and should involve participation of farmers. 
This is IA ASTD, that is called, Report on International Assessment of 
Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for Development. This 
report has been signed by all except three countries of America, 
Canada and Australia. I think, this guideline is very good guideline. 
And there is no reason for India which is also the signatory and that is 

 
 
139 
 
a good guideline. That is what I feel. It is like this. It is important as 
consent, option and freedom to choose is there. But if the person is 
not educated enough, his choice does not make any sense. It is a 
responsibility of the educated people to understand. That is why I sit 
here, it is my job. That i s why I have said that I have my loyalty 
towards my profession and to my people before it is to my 
Government or to my Department or to my scientist because ethics 
and people are first and that is what I believe. I have expressed it very 
clearly. It is very important that we stay with high technology but it is 
also very important that we take all precautions correctly.”  
5.20 Dwelling further on the Subject he added: 
“All drugs and medicines we take, has some side effect. 
Therefore before we take the medicine, we are aware that it may 
cause nausea, it may cause vomiting. But you asked a question, by 
not taking a medicine, I will die out of heart trouble and by taking a  
medicine I may have some swelling in my leg. This risk benefit has 
been done by human for health care. As I mentioned, the genetic 
modifications are of many types. First I gave you the suggestion which 
is safe, that is, scheme using molecular breeding not  by modifying 
what is not there in the nature. Next take from one food item to 
another food item, both exist in the nature is also all right. This has 
been going on by classical trial and error. Now you can go it more 
smartly and fast.   Introducing antibi otic resistance marker is not 
acceptable, according to me. It should be marker free. In this case, 
there is already a marker. That is what bothers me because marker is 
not a good idea – two drug marker. The last is, even if we are using 
GM, it has gone for  cotton and things which are not eatable. So, 
therefore,  technology is not bad but as you said correctly, until each 
technology is proved safe in the laboratory - hundred per cent. Science 
is never 100 per cent truth.  It is an approach to truth. Every da y new 
results will come. Anytime, the medicine you have consumed, and you 
get a new report that it is having a problem. So, that medicine gets 
withdrawn. Unfortunately, when you withdraw medicine, it is taken out 
of the market. But when you withdraw a blac k or bacteria is gone, it is 
very difficult to take it back from earth. So, pollens have gone. 

 
 
140 
 
Therefore, it is this query that all tests must be completed before it is 
commercially released to the public. That is my view.  But technology 
should not be thr own. I am only telling this because tomorrow what 
will happen is, if you give a signal, the technology is bad, and India is 
not with this new technology, world will look at us, we are behind.” 
5.21 The Department of Biotechnology informed that Committee that they 
agreed with the recommendations of IAASTD  Report.  About the policy 
initiatives taken by the Department and the inputs for policy initiatives 
provided by them to Government for ushering necessary correctives in the 
extant policy framework they st ated that several of these policy directives 
are also reflected in the Eleventh Plan approach and continue to be pursued 
in formulation of Twelfth plan proposals. The Biotechnology Development 
Strategy formulated by the Department for implementation from 2 006 
onwards also has a Overall Vision of the Department  to “ create 
biotechnology tools and technologies that address the problems of 
agricultural productivity, food production, nutrition security, health care and 
environmental sustainability affecting the  large section of the society, 
provide new and emerging products and services at affordable prices, 
generate employment opportunities and make India globally competitive in 
the emerging bio-economy”. In line with these principles, the Department is 
now revising the strategy to include recent developments and principles of 
use of biotechnology in the changing global scenario.  In making the 
Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India Bill 2011 through consultative 
process, the elements of autonomy, accountab ility, transparency, 
inclusiveness in terms of organized public consultation, inter ministerial 
opinion, role of stakeholders in governance of the authority, participation of 
State Governments have also been adequately addressed with an overall 
goal to pro mote the safe use of modern biotechnology by enhancing the 
effectiveness and efficiency of regulatory procedures  and promote 
responsible use of biotechnology for safeguarding the health and safety of 
the people of India and to protect the environment.  
 
(ii) Report of Six Science Academies  
 
5.22 In view of serious objections from several quarters to the release of 
Bt. Brinjal the then Minister of State (I/C) of the Ministry of Environment and 

 
 
141 
 
Forests had asked the six science academies to submit their report on Bt. 
Brinjal.  The Report, however, became controversial as reportedly some of 
its content has been plagiarized.  It was stated that the portions relating to 
regulatory tests carried out on Bt. Brinjal and its effects on animals were 
taken from a newsletter of Department of Biotechnology  and some other 
sources.  DBT is the promoter of transgenics technologies in the Country.  
The six apex science academies, thereafter, came up with a revis ed report.  
Giving the background to the Committee in the matter Director National 
Institute of Plant Genome Research, New Delhi stated during the Oral 
Evidence on 28 September, 2010: 
 
  “I am a fellow of the four National Academies of Sciences and 
also of the Third World Academy of Sciences. So, being a member of 
these national academies, I am aware a little bit of the overall 
process. When the Minister Shri Jairam Ramesh visited the Indi an 
National Science Academy, he had asked the scientists to give the 
views of the scientific community about the GM technology. That was 
the letter which was sent. So, an effort was made to bring all the six 
academies, which includes the three science acad emies, engineering, 
medical and agricultural academies, together, which, if you allow me 
to say, is a rare event. Normally scientists pursue their field of 
activity individually, but they try to come together. So, letters were 
sent to all the fellowships, which may amount almost to 2000, as of 
now, from India collectively, from all the academies. Those who could 
express their views had communicated their views through the email 
system and then a meeting was arranged in the Indian National 
Science Academy in  which almost everyone who was present there, 
gave his view. Let me say that the situation was like this that except 
for two, most of the members were in favour of release of GM crops 
in India. When the report was submitted, it was considered that 
there sh ould be a communication with the people at large and 
therefore, a highly technical report is not what has been presented. 
It is a consolidated view which has been presented, which is in a 
simplified language, giving the impression of the community and it 
has also been mentioned that like any scientific endeavour, there is 
room for improvement and there is room for re -examination and 

 
 
142 
 
there is also due recommendation given as to how we could proceed. 
So, certainly the report says that there is need to strengt hen the 
infrastructure to evaluate the GM technology, there is a need to 
communicate with the public more effectively, there is need also to 
do surveillance after the release. So, it is not that the Academies 
have said that you may just release it and forg et it.  
Academies have said that there are several precautions which need 
to be taken, but as per the existing requirements of the regulatory 
process, all the requirements have been fulfilled. So, Bt. Brinjal is a 
product which is ready for release. Now, regarding the controversy, if 
you allow me to say and it is my personal view, I was aware of it that 
there would be several questions because the subject is so sensitive.  
So, it was not unexpected, but something unexpected has happened 
and we should admit this – it has been reported in the Media – the 
views of one of the scientists who works on Bt. Brinjal were also 
taken. It seems that the views that he expressed are also printed 
somewhere else by him, which have been incorporated into this 
report as well. So, the Press is saying, why two views are so similar 
or is it that the views are of an individual rather than a combined 
opinion of the scientists. But in the overall wisdom that part was 
included, not because it is the view of an individual scientist, b ut 
because the contents which were a part of that were considered to be 
appropriate for inclusion into the report. So, that is the larger 
controversy which is, in a sense, a matter of ethics rather than of 
science. Scientifically, that part which is consid ered to have been 
repeated is also reflecting the views which are scientifically correct, 
which is my opinion about that particular report. 
I should tell you that today at 11 o‟clock, the President of the 
Indian National Science Academy has certainly regre tted this event 
and has sent letters to all of us. He had said that we should not throw 
the baby with the bath water and we should improve it which we will 
do. The first thing was that we will admit that there is a mistake and 
that mistake should be correc ted. That will be done for sure. The 
scientists will correct that part as well. He has also said that as far as 
the recommendation and the general consideration of the subject of 

 
 
143 
 
GM crop technology is concerned, the views of the scientists have been 
reflected in that report.” 
     
5.23 In view of the fact that the report had been commissioned by the then 
Minister with a view to assess the environmental and bio -safety aspects of 
the Bt. Brinjal crop, the Committee sought the opinion of several 
stakeholders on the report.  
  
5.24 In response, DARE/ICAR informed them that the report by the six 
science academies advocated the release of Bt -brinjal event EE1 after 
considering the guidelines and regulation norms of releasing a GM crop in 
the country.  The Committee were further informe d that the D epartment 
fully endorses the recommendations of the above report on GM Crops. The 
recommendation pertaining to Bt brinjal as reproduced below is in 
consonance with the views of the Department: 
 
 “The issue of Bt brinjal deserves special attenti on in terms of its 
immediate relevance. The overwhelming view is that the available 
evidence has shown, adequately and beyond reasonable doubt, 
that Bt brinjal is safe for human consumption and that its 
environmental effects are negligible. It is appropria te now to 
release Bt brinjal for cultivation in specific farmers‟ fields in 
identified states. Appropriate distance isolation needs to be 
maintained, although no deleterious environmental effect is 
anticipated. The performance in the field, in all its aspe cts, should 
be monitored by an independent committee which should not 
include the suppliers or their representatives”. 
 
5.25 The Department of Biotechnology stated in a written submission that 
Bt. brinjal  contains the same gene as that of Bt cotton approved for 
commercial use by the same regulatory frame work under EPA 1986 (Rules, 
1989), however, with more stringent internationally harmonized revised 
safety guidelines. The recommendations of RCGM  and GEAC on safety 
assessment were further examined by two more Expert Committees (EC -I 
and EC -II) constituted by the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The 
findings of the independent Report of the six science academies (GEAC 

 
 
144 
 
Report) on Bt. Brinjal further reiterated the food and environmental safety of 
the product without ambiguity. The Department therefore endorses the 
Report of the six science academies (GEAC Report) on Bt. Brinjal. 
 
5.26 The Department of Science and Technology virtually echoing the  views 
of the Department of Biotechnology stated that the Bt Brinjal  contains the 
same gene as that of Bt cotton approved for commercial use by the same 
regulatory frame work under EPA 1986 (Rules, 1989), however, with more 
stringent internationally harmo nized revised safety guidelines. The 
recommendations of RCGM and GEAC on safety assessment were further 
examined by two more Expert Committees (EC -I and EC -II) constituted by 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests.  The findings of the independent 
report of the six science academies (GEAC Report) on Bt. Brinjal further 
reiterated the food and environmental safety of the product without 
ambiguity. The Department therefore endorses the report of the six science 
academies (GEAC Report) on Bt. Brinjal. 
 
5.27 When the views of the Ministry of Environment and Forests were 
sought in the matter they opined that as a follow -up to the moratorium on 
Bt brinjal, the Ministry have received several reports from both nation al and 
international experts on the merits and d emerits of GM crops in general and 
Bt brinjal in particular. GEAC in consultation with eminent experts and 
scientists are examining the contents of the report.  
 
5.28 The Department of Health Research were of the opinion that the report 
of the science acad emies seems to be a balanced view based on scientific 
data available. However chronic toxicity and other associated tests need to 
be carried out as per requirement, independently after exposure for 
sufficient period. 
 
5.29 When the views of the Department of AYUSH were sought on the 
Report, initially they stated that there are two reports viz. (1) Report on the 
Expert Committee (E -II) on Bt. Brinjal Event EE -1, October, 2009 and (2) 
Inter-Academy Report on GM Crops under the auspices by six Academics 
(December 2010).  Department of AYUSH is examining at present both the 
reports from the perspective of medicinal values of GM crops. 
 

 
 
145 
 
5.30 In a subsequent detailed note to the Committee, they informed that 
there are two reports viz. (1) Report on the Expert Comm ittee (E-II) on Bt. 
Brinjal Event  EE-1, October, 2009 and (2) Inter -Academy Report on GM 
Crops under the auspices by six Academics (December 2010).  The food, 
agriculture and bio-safety issues with respect to GM crops in general and Bt. 
Brinjal in particul ar, have been duly dealt in these reports.  Each report 
contains a set of recommendations.  The expert Committee (EC -II) 
concluded that the benefits of Bt. Brinjal event EE-I developed by Ms Mahyco 
far outweigh the perceived and projected risks.  According to the Committee, 
Bt. Brinjal event EE -I is safe for environmental release in India and no 
additional studies/review are necessary.  Inter -Academy report on GM crops 
sought to enunciate a national strategy on GM Crops and recommended 
release of Bt. Brinja l for cultivation in specific farmer‟s fields in identified 
States.  However, these reports did not cover medicinal values perspective 
in comprehensive manner, particularly comparative compositional analysis of 
the GM Crops vis-a-vis traditionally cultivated crops and corresponding 
selective bio -activity should have been incorporated.  Therefore,                   
in the view of  the  Department, the following studies should have also been  
incorporated/recommended with respect to med icinal values of GM Crops 
including Bt. Brinjal: 
 
1. Compositional Comparative Analysis: Compositional comparative 
analysis will reveal the chemical profile of both traditional and 
Genetically modified crops.  On comparison of chemical profiles, 
the chemic al changes will be observed. The compositional 
change may alter the medicinal values. 
2. Bio-activity: Some transgenic crops may be u sed in the 
preparation of medicines of traditional systems.  Therefore, the 
bioactivity study of cultivated transgenic crop s particularly with 
reference to known therapeutic uses may reveal the potential, 
differences and new bioactivity.  This study may be undertaken 
by selecting suitable in-vitro and in-vivo models.  The study shall 
provide necessary information about the med icinal values of 
transgenic crops. 
 

 
 
146 
 
5.31 To avoid any conflict of interest, the aforesaid studies may be 
undertaken by Public Sector Scientific Institutions. 
 
5.32 CSIR‟s view o n the report was that the academies have studied in 
detail the subject and prev ailing scenario.  Thus they have arrived to some 
recommendation which requires due deliberation.  India has rich biodiversity 
and agro climatic zones; detailed studies are required now to arrive at a 
policy decision. 
 
(iii) Report of Prof. David A. Andow on Bt. Brinjal 
 
5.33 Several of the stakeholders seeking a ban on transgenics in food crops 
and on Bt. Brinjal release, etc. have cited before the Committee  the Report 
of Prof. David A. Andow on Bt. Brinjal in support of their plea.  The said 
report is a scientific evaluation of the scope and adequacy of Environmental 
Risk Assessment for hybrid EE-1 Bt. Brinjal.  
 
5.34 When the Committee sought the views of Department of Biotechnology 
on the said report they informed the Committee that according to Dr. Andow 
“GEAC set too narrow a scope for environmental risk assessment (ERA) of 
hybrid Bt brinjal, and it is because of this overly narrow scope that the EC -II 
is not an adequate ERA .  …….most of the possible environmental risks of Bt 
brinjal have not been adequately evaluated; this includes risks to local 
varieties of brinjal and wild relatives, risks to biological diversity, and risk of 
resistance evolution in brinjal fruit and shoot bore r (BFSB )”. In the report a 
detailed account of environmental and socio -economic  issues have  been 
enumerated.  The contents of the report are also discussed and analyzed by 
GEAC.  The Department ha ve examined the report. The report is an 
independent scientific review based on available literature. The Department 
is of the view that regulation while from ideal standpoint has to consider 
application of every scientific concepts, tool and technique for assuring that 
new genetic modifications in crops are safe , however, one has to be careful 
to assure whether the suggested tools and concepts are possible to interpret 
and are unambiguous. The regulatory systems are developed globally, based 
on scientific evidence and experimentation with measurable end points th at 
are reproducible and can be interpreted under various circumstances. 
Concepts, methods, tools encountered in scientific literature in this context 

 
 
147 
 
need to be tested and adequately validated so that interpretation of results 
is not beset with ambiguity w hile interpreted by others. If simple, 
reproducible, cost effective and interpretable scientific processes and 
procedures are able to assess and predict possible risk, it is time consuming 
and expensive to use concepts and tools which are not validated and  have 
no rational for the purpose.  
 
5.35 The Department of Science and Technology more or less repeated the 
reply of Department of Biotechnology and stated  that in the report it is 
stated that “GEAC set too narrow a scope for environmental risk assessment 
(ERA) of hybrid Bt Brinjal, and it is because of this overly narrow scope that 
the EC-II is not an adequate ERA”. -–“most of the possible environmental 
risks of Bt Brinjal have not been adequate ly evaluated; this includes risks to 
local varieties of Brinjal and wild relatives, risks to biological diversity, and 
risk of resistance evolution in Brinjal fruit and shoot borer (BFSB )”. In the 
Report  a detailed account of environmental and socio-economic  issues have 
enumerated. The Department is aware of this report. The report is an 
independent scientific review based on available literature. The Department 
is of the view that GEAC has adopted adequate scientific to ols for assessing 
the specific case of Bt. Brinjal and does not suffer from infirmity of scientific 
rationales.  The process is based on general principle of risk minimization 
rather than elimination as an approach. It is true that regulation should 
flow from an ideal standpoint and may ha ve to consider application of every 
known scientific concepts, tool and technique for assuring that new genetic 
modifications in crops are safe as enshrined in the said report.  However, 
decision support systems should also be careful to take into account that the 
suggested tools and concepts are pragmatic and is sure to lead to 
interpretable and unambiguous conclusions.  
 
5.36 The regulatory systems are developed globally based on scientific 
evidence and experimentation with measurable end points that are 
reproducible and can be interpreted under various circumstances. Concepts, 
methods, tools encountered in scientific literatur e in this context need to be 
tested and adequately validated so that interpretation of results is not beset 
with ambiguity while interpreted by regulators.  Systems used by regulators 
cannot afford to be depend vulnerably on super specialist and interpreta ble 

 
 
148 
 
scientific processes and procedures are able to assess and predict and 
measure possible risk.  It is not advisable to employ procedures which are 
time consuming and expensive and use concepts and tools which are not yet 
validated.  Therefore, the Department is not in discomfort with the 
recommendations of GEAC with respect to Bt. Brinjal, in spite of its 
awareness of the report of Professor Andow. 
 
5.37 DSIR/CSIR were of the view that it is a good report.  However, further 
work needs to be carried out t o ensure that a balanced approach gets 
evolved in Indian context.  
 
5.38 DARE/ICAR were of the opinion that Professor David Andow report 
deals with the scope and adequacy of GEAC environmental risk assessment 
of Bt-brinjal and mentions the incomplete envir onmental risk assessment by 
the Expert Committee (EC-II) on the Bt-brinjal. The Andow report is a sharp 
critique on the EC-II of GEAC and the concerned firm.  
 
5.39 They further stated that the Department differ with the views 
expressed by Professor David Andow that the potential advantages of hybrid 
EE-1 Bt brinjal seem marginal and uncertain for most Indian farmers, and 
the environmental risks (including socioeconomic risks) to Indian farmers 
and consumers remain very uncertain. On the contrary, the recen t report 
(Policy Brief No. 34) issued by National Centre for Agricultural Economics 
and Policy Research (2010) of ICAR projected significant socioeconomic 
benefits of Bt brinjal cultivation by small and marginal vegetable farmers of 
India. Other environmen tal risks such as development of resistant insects 
have been considered and suitable resistant management strategies such as 
deployment of refugia will be kept in place. 
 
5.40 When the views of the Ministry of Environment and Forests were 
sought on the report of Prof. Andow they stated that as a follow -up to the 
moratorium on Bt brinjal, the Ministry has received several reports from 
both nation al and international experts on the merits and demerits of GM 
crops in general and Bt brinjal in particular. The  GEAC in consultation with 
eminent experts and scientists are examining the contents of the report.  
 

 
 
149 
 
5.41 GEAC also preferred an identical response in the matter and stated 
that as a follow -up to the moratorium on Bt. brinjal, the Ministry has 
received several reports from both national and international experts on the 
merits and demerits of GM crops in genera l and Bt. brinjal in particular. The 
GEAC in consultation with eminent experts and scientists are examining the 
contents of the report.  
  
5.42 In their written submission on the report of Prof. Andow the 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation submitted that the report of Prof. 
David Andow on Bt Brinjal is a scientific report that evaluates the scope and 
adequacy of Environmental Risk Assessment (ERA) for hybrid EE -1 Bt. 
Brinjal.  DAC also submitted that MoEF and GEAC were examining the report 
of Prof. A ndow alongwith other reports on the Subject.  Furthermore, they 
also conveyed that ICAR differed from the views of Prof. Andow.  
 
IAASTD REPORT 
5.43 The Committee were furnished with several studies and reports 
on the subject by various stakeholders.  The Committee would like to 
dwell upon a few of them which have significant contextual bearing 
on Indian agriculture sector.  
 
5.44 First and foremost th e Committee take note of International 
Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for 
Development (IAASTD) Report – Agriculture at a Crossroads.  The 
Report is a painstaking, indepth and accurate assessment of 
agricultural knowledge, scie nce and technology (AKST).  Compiled 
by 400 experts after working on the project for four years the Report 
contains several recommendations which are very germane to 
Indian agriculture sector.   
 
5.45 The Report has devoted an exclusive theme on biotechnol ogy 
with particular reference to modern biotechnology that includes 

 
 
150 
 
genetic engineering/transgenics.  While supporting the use of 
modern biotechnology to some extent in the pharma and human 
health sector, the Report has expressed its serious reservations 
about the application of modern biotechnology including transgenics 
in agriculture sector.  A major finding of the Report is that while 
modern biotechnologies used in containment have proved 
advantageous viz. industrial enzymes, they have yet to prove their  
efficacy, safety and sustainability outside containment such as 
genetically modified crops. Furthermore, the Report has expressed 
serious concerns about the adequacy of efficacy and safety testing 
or regulatory framework of testing GMOs; suitability of GM Os for 
addressing the needs of most farmers while not harming others, at 
least within some existing IPR and liability  framework; ability of 
modern biotechnology to make significant contributions to the 
resilience of small and subsistence agricultural syst ems, etc.  The 
Committee during their Study Visit in February – March, 2012 
extensively travelled in rural areas of Vidharbha to have a first hand 
assessment of the worst agrarian crisis affecting the region.  From 
what they saw during the Study Visit,  th ey are in concurrence with 
the findings of IAASTD Report.  They are also in agreement with the 
question raised in IAASTD Report as to whether detected benefits of 
GMOs will extend to most agro ecosystems or be sustained in the 
long run as resistances developed to herbicides and insecticides. 
 
5.46 A significant finding made in the Report is about modern 
technology creating both costs and benefits, depending upon the 
manner in which it has been incorporated into societies and eco -

 
 
151 
 
systems and whether there is  the will to share benefits as well as 
costs because sometimes benefits are at the expense of reducing 
biodiversity or access to traditional foods.  The Report has also 
found that neither costs nor benefits are currently perceived to be 
equally shared, wit h the poor tending to receive more of the costs 
than the benefits.  Extensive interactions of the Committee during 
their above mentioned Study Visit to Vidharbha  proved that this 
observation of experts in IAASTD Report has a sound basis.  Due to 
initial increase in production as a consequence  of reduction in yield 
loss, the simple farmers of the area went in a big way for cultivation 
of Bt. cotton.  However, because of very high input costs, yield loss 
due to development of resistance in the targeted pest s, the local 
agrarian economy has been totally shattered within a few years with 
great losses, mostly to the small and marginal farmers.  There have 
been 7992 farmers suicides in the region during 2006 to 2011.  In 
several of them, caused due to agrarian reasons, the indebtedness 
and a multitude of other problems caused by sowing of Bt. cotton 
have been a contributory factor.  Furthermore, due to the craze for 
cultivating Bt. cotton because of its perceived advantages, the 
traditional local cotton varieties have been almost wiped out.  Seeds 
of traditional varieties are available even to farmers des perate to 
return to their old agricultural practices.  The Committee during their 
Study Visit to Vidharbha have seen with their own eyes that while 
the seed companies have benefited from the transgenic Bt. cotton, 
the poor and hapless farmers have received  more of the costs than 
the benefits.  The situation is grim today inspite of the massive loan -

 
 
152 
 
waiver scheme of the Government in 2009 and several other 
financial packages for the indebted farmers.  
 
5.47 The Committee strongly feel that given the reach an d spread of 
outside containment applications of modern biotechnology viz. 
cultivation of GM Crops on commercial scale, containment of harm 
would be a very challenging task even for some of the most well 
equipped developed countries and simply impossible in  a country 
like India.  The Committee also fully concur with the assessment of 
the Report that the integration of biotechnology must be within an 
enabling environment supported by local research and education 
that empowers local communities.  Biotechnology  must work with 
the best production system for the local community for example 
agro systems of even the poorest societies have the potential 
through ecological agriculture and Integrated Post Management  to 
meet or significantly exceed yield produced by co nventional 
methods, reduce the demand for land conversion for agriculture, 
restore ecosystems services (particularly water), reduce the use of 
and need for synthetic fertilizers derived from fossil fuels, and the 
use of harsh insecticides and herbicides.   
 
5.48 The Report has also drawn attention towards the threat of IP 
and globalization to public plant breeding institutions in developing 
countries as privatization fuels transfer of knowledge away from 
commons.  There is a contraction both in crop diversity and numbers 
of local breed.  In many parts of the world , women play this role and 
thus a risk exists that privatization will lead to woman losing 
economic resources and social standing as their plant breeding 

 
 
153 
 
knowledge is appropriated, simultaneo usly the entire communities 
run the risk of losing their control over the food security. Based on 
their Study Visit to Vidharba the Committee are fully in agreement 
with these apprehensions of IAASTD Report and desire the 
Government to take immediate steps  to remedy the situation in the 
Country.  This Committee find this very true in the context of India 
also. 
 
5.49 The Report also states that since in private sector commercial 
drivers determine supply, therefore, the public sector engagement in 
biotechnology should be increasingly emphasised upon for R&D 
capacities or achieving some goals for which there is no market.   
 
5.50 The IAASTD Report, has therefore, very rightly concluded about  
the need for a systematic direction of AKST including a rigourous 
rethinking of biotechnology and specially modern biotechnology in 
the decades to come, effective long term environmental and health 
monitoring and surveillance programmes and training and education 
of farmers to identify emerging and comparative impacts on th e 
environment and human health and to take timely counter 
measures.  According to IAASTD Report no regional long term 
environmental and health monitoring programmes exist to date in 
the countries who are most concentrated with GM foods.  Hence long 
term data on environmental implications of GM crop production are 
at best deductive or simply missing and speculative.  
 
5.51 The Committee‟s interactions with the various 
ministries/departments/agencies of the Government who were 

 
 
154 
 
examined for and in connection w ith the subject have revealed that 
while there is awareness and appreciation of the various findings 
contained in IAASTD Report and a lot of preparatory action is 
available in documents, purposeful and definitive action towards 
adopting and implementing su stainable and environment friendly 
practices and technologies in agriculture and allied sectors which 
will conserve biodiversity and also ensure safety of human health 
and livestock health is unfortunately yet to be initiated in right 
measures. 
 
5.52 The Committee would like to remind the Government of India 
that they are a signatory to this path breaking effort and in the 
opinion of the Committee, the Government would do well if they 
adopt this Report as the way forward for development of agriculture 
and a llied sectors in India , in a sustainable and environmental 
friendly manner, and with no unwanted risks to biodiversity, human 
and livestock health, flora and fauna.  The Committee also desire to 
be apprised of the concrete action taken by the Government on  each 
of the findings contained in IAASTD Report during the four years 
after the release of the Report.  
 
 Report of Six Science Academies 
 
5.53 The Committee  also examined the report of the Six Science 
Academies on Bt. Brinjal.  This report had been prepared on the 
instructions of the then Minister of Environment and Forests (I/C) in 
order to assess the environmental and bio -safety aspects of Bt. 
brinjal.  The report got mired in controversies at the outset itself as 

 
 
155 
 
allegations of plagiarism were leveled about some of its content.  A 
revised report had to be, thereafter, brought out.  The report has 
given an emphatic clearance for commercial release of Bt. bri njal on 
the basis of „the overwhelming view (amongst members of 
academies) that the available evidence has shown, adequately and 
beyond reasonable doubt that Bt. brinjal is safe for human 
consumption and that its environmental effects are negligible‟.  
While doing so, inexplicably the six academies relied upon available 
data which had become suspect in view of other scientific reports 
prepared on the Subject.  Doubts had already been expressed about 
the environmental risk assessment performed in respect of Bt. 
brinjal, it was also being pointed out that chronic toxicity tests had 
not been performed.  Moreover, all the recommended tests and 
protocols had also not been followed.  Several stakeholders were of 
the opinion that Bt. brinjal being the first GM food  crop in the 
Country ought to have been put through a far more vigourous 
assessment and evaluation regime by the regulatory authorities in 
view of the human health dimensions as also the fact that India is 
the centre of origin of brinjal.  Due to very stro ng opposition to the 
commercial release of Bt. brinjal the then Minister of Environment 
and Forests (I/C) had seven consultations across the Country with 
stakeholders from all walks of life and after careful evaluation a 
moratorium on Bt. brinjal was place d.  The Committee find that 
inspite of these developments DARE/ICAR have fully endorsed the  
report of six science academies.  That too when two of their own 
events for cotton viz. BN Bt and Bt NHH44 which were generated 
through their own in house efforts and assessed in their own 

 
 
156 
 
network of institutions, have been embroiled in controversies.   As 
referred to in previously in this Report , ICAR is now setting a 
Committee of outside experts to investigate the entire matter 
pertaining to BN Bt and Bt NHH44.  D BT and DST have also 
inexplicably come in support of the report of six science academies 
ignoring several glaring lapses pointed out by various stakeholders 
in the evaluation and assessment of Bt brinjal.  The Department of 
Health Research without being ov ertly critical of the report have 
clearly advised the need for chronic toxicity and other associated 
tests, independently after exposure for sufficient period.  The 
Department of AYUSH who, inspite of their huge stake in the 
Subject,  had been kept out of loop by GEAC as mentioned previously 
in this Report, have also brought to the notice of the Committee the 
need for several further studies in the matter as brinjal is used in 
several medicinal preparations under the Indian System of Medicine.  
They have al so emphasized the need for having these studies being 
undertaken in Public Sector Scientific Institutions to avoid any 
conflict of interest.  
5.54 Similarly, CSIR have opined that the six academies have 
arrived to some recommendation which requires due del iberation.  
India has rich biodiversity and agroclimatic zones; detailed studies 
are required now to arrive at a policy decision.  The Committee note 
that Ministry of Environment and Forests as a follow -up to the 
moratorium on Bt. brinjal had received seve ral reports from both 
national and international experts on the merits and demerits of GM 
crops in general and Bt brinjal in particular and GEAC in consultation 

 
 
157 
 
with eminent experts and scientific is examining alongwith other 
reports, the contents of this report as well.     
5.55 From the sequence of events narrated above and the views and 
counter views expressed by various stakeholders, the report by the 
six science academies is a job hastily done. In view of the high 
expectations from these very respected bodies, the Country 
expected a well considered and more professional outcome on this 
highly sensitive matter rather than a cut and paste effort which 
invited ridicule and revision and avoidable criticism.   
5.56 The Committee would also like to say a word about the 
examination of the various reports on the merits and demerits of GM 
crops by GEAC in consultation with eminent experts and scientists.  
GEAC had approved the commercial release of Bt. brinjal on the basis 
of its own assessments as the apex regulatory body for the purpos e 
in the Country.  The same agency is now sitting on the judgment of 
its own decision and also of the various reports on the merits and 
demerits of GM crops in general and Bt. brinjal in particular.  In the 
opinion of the Committee, it is a clear case of c onflict of interest.  
They, therefore, recommend that evaluation of the various reports 
on this matter should be done by some other agency such as CSIR, 
since they not only have sufficient expertise in this regard but also 
have minimum conflict of interest  in the matter amongst the various 
public sector scientific institutions.  The Committee also feel that the 
examination of various reports has to be expedited and results 
conveyed to the them at the earliest so that a final view in the 
matter is facilitated without any further delay.       

 
 
158 
 
 Report of Prof. David A. Andow on Bt. brinjal 
5.57 The Committee note that the report of Prof. David A. Andow on 
Bt. brinjal is a scientific evaluation of the scope and adequacy of 
environmental risk assessment of transg enic EE-1 Bt. brinjal.  This 
report had been cited before the Committee by several stakeholders 
who are against transgenics in crops.  The report has criticized GEAC 
for setting too narrow a scope for environmental risk assessment of 
Bt. brinjal due to whi ch the assessment of Bt. brinjal by Expert 
Committee–II was not adequate.  Amongst the possible 
environmental risks that have not been adequately evaluated include 
risks to local varieties and wild relatives, risk to biological diversity 
and risk of resistance evolution in brinjal fruit and shoot borer.  
5.58 The Committee also note the views of various ministries and 
departments on this report.  Most of them have expressed their 
disagreement with the observations made in the report regarding 
the shortcomings in the parameters set out by GEAC for the Experts 
Committee-II to conduct environmental risk assessment of Bt. 
brinjal.  Some of them have even gone to the extent of justifying 
their views on the report on the ground that „if simple, reproducible, 
cost effective and interpretable scientific processes and procedures 
are able to assess and predict possible risks it is time consuming and 
expensive to use concepts and tools which are not validated and 
have no rational for the purpose‟.   It has also been put  forth before 
the Committee that „i t is true that regulation should flow from an 
ideal standpoint and may have to consider application of every 
known scientific concept, tool and technique for assuring that new 

 
 
159 
 
genetic modifications in crops are safe as en shrined in the said 
report.  However, decision support systems should also be careful to 
take into account that the suggested tools and concepts are 
pragmatic and is sure to lead to interpretable and unambiguous 
conclusions.‟ 
 
5.59 In the opinion of the Committee the above justifications 
betrays hint of a cavalier attitude towards this highly sensitive issue.  
Bt. brinjal, unlike Bt. cotton is a food crop and it would have been 
the first such endeavour in India of a technology on who se safety 
and sustainability the last word is yet to be heard.  Moreso, the 
contents of the report are still under examination as post 
moratorium follow-up.  In the considered opinion of the Committee 
since the matter pertains to as a vital issue as human health safety 
any amount of time and money spent on any number of studies and 
analysis to evaluate the product is perfectly justified.  And taking 
refuge behind global best practices and internationally laid down 
norms would not at all suffice.  The Govern ment also ought not 
forget the admission of one of the witness before the Committee 
that his having put one gene into a rice plant is affecting 600 other 
genes as well.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should come out of this stereotyped mindset and for the 
reason enumerated previously in this Chapter get all these reports 
evaluated and examined by any agency other than GEAC like CSIR, 
etc., strictly in national interest on the basis of sheer scientific 
merits.     
  

 
 
160 
 
CHAPTER - VI 
 
SYSTEM PREPAREDNESS 
 
6.1 As is evident from the preceding Chapters , transgenics in agriculture 
sector is regulated by GEAC which functions under the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests.  The policy matters pertaining to the subject are in 
the domain of Department of Agriculture & Cooperation under the Ministry of 
Agriculture while the Research and Development aspects are in the domain 
of Department of Agricultural Research and Education under the same 
Ministry.  Transgenics being a bio -technology driven phe nomenon, the 
Department of Biotechnology plays a crucial role as the promoter 
Department in these matters.  Research on the subject is also undertaken in 
some of the research institutions. 
6.2 Food, a basic necessity, has a vital bearing on human and livestock 
health, likewise the technologies and practices adopted for growing food 
have a profound impact on the environment, bio -diversity, bio-safety, flora 
and fauna, etc.  In this complex scenar io the Government and its various 
agencies which are entrusted with the regulation, induction, post release 
surveillance, impact assessment, course -correction, etc. have a crucial and 
decisive role to play.    
6.3 In case of this jurisdiction issue assumes  a lot more significance that 
transgenics in food crops as it is a comparatively new technology and there 
are diverse viewpoints about both, its pros as well as cons. 
6.4 The Committee, therefore, examined the Government of India 
(Allocation of Business) R ule, 1961 to find out whether other ministries/ 
departments/agencies had some responsibility or the other to oversee or 
assess the likely impact of the introduction of transgenics in agriculture 
sector in general and in food crops in particular. They also assessed the role 
of some of these ministries/departments/agencies during assessment and 
regulation stages, post release marketing and surveillance, monitoring cost 
and benefit analysis, consumer rights protection and a host of other issues.  
 

 
 
161 
 
(i) Department of Agriculture & Cooperation  
6.5 The Committee  in the first instance asked the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation about their direct as also collective responsibilities 
in so far as the application of science & technology including modern bio -
technology to agriculture sector in general and seed production, cultivation 
and relevant aspects in particular is concerned.  The Department replied that 
basing on the recommendations of the National Commission on Farmers 
under the chairmanship of Dr.M.S Swaminathan, Gov ernment of India 
approved the National Policy on Farmers, 2007 (NPF).  As per NPF, as far as 
application of science & technology including modern biotechnology to 
agriculture sector is concerned,  major respon sibilities vested with DAC are 
to protect and improve land, water, biodiversity and genetic resources, to 
develop support services  including provision for seeds, irrigation, power, 
machinery, fertilizers, implements and credit at affordable prices.  The p olicy 
also lays emphasis on paying explicit attention to sustainable rural 
livelihoods.     
6.6 NPF, 2007 specifies that efforts will be made to conserve as well as to 
develop bio-resources to ensure their sustainable use with equitable sharing 
of benefits.  Two major legislations – the Protection of Plant Varieties and 
Farmers‟ Rights  (PPV&FRA) Act, 2001 and the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 
– are in place to achieve some of these objectives. 
6.7 Further, NPF elaborates importance of science & technology as the key 
drivers of change in farm operations and outputs and application of   frontier 
technologies like biotechnology, ICT, renewable energy technologies, space 
applications and nano -technology for improving productivity in agriculture.  
The responsib ility of DAC also is to ensure that technologies that are 
developed by agricultural research systems, are available to farmers through 
training and demonstrations, etc. 
6.8 As regards the production of seeds, the mandate of DAC includes 
notification of seeds developed by the breeders and scientists with a view to 
facilitate its production and multiplication by seed producers, so that it is 
available to farmers at affordable p rices.  Through various schemes, DAC is 

 
 
162 
 
encouraging investment in infrastructure related to production and 
processing of quality seeds as per the National Seeds Plan.   
6.9 Asked further as to what extent are these responsibilities enshrined in 
the mandate of DAC as per Allocation of Business Rules 1961, they stated 
that Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 Part I, Para 5(a) gives the 
responsibility to DAC for “development of Agricultural Industries including 
machinery, fertilizer and seeds but excluding cott on, ginning and pressing 
with the limitation that in regard to the development of agricultural 
industries, including machinery and fertilizer, the function of DAC do not go 
further than the formulation of demands and fixation of targets”. 
6.10 About the po wers vested with the Department to facilitate the 
discharge of such responsibilities by them, they informed the Committee 
that the Department formulate various schemes and programmes for 
promotion and development of seed sector in the country. The Seeds Ac t, 
1966. Seeds Rules made there under and Seeds (Control) Order, 1983    
vest  powers with the DAC to regulate and control the quality of seeds, 
notify  new plant varieties and take steps for development of new plant 
varieties. The new plant varieties, ext ant varieties and farmers‟ varieties are 
registered under the provisions of the PPV&FR Act, 2001.  The PPV&FR 
Authority has been established in October 2005 to implement the provisions 
of the PPV&FR Act, 2001. 
6.11 The National Seeds Policy, 2002 lays down  guidelines on transgenic 
plant varieties and states that all genetically engineered crops/ varieties will 
be tested for environment and bio -safety before their commercial release as 
per the regulations and guidelines under the Environment (Protection) Act  
(EPA), 1986. Seeds of transgenic varieties for research purposes can be 
imported only through National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources(NBPGR).  
Before commercial release, transgenic crops/varieties are to be tested to 
determine their agronomic value for  at least two seasons under the ICAR 
coordinated trials along with environment and bio -safety trials as per EPA 
and these need to be evaluated by GEAC constituted by MoEF under EPA, 
1986.  
 

 
 
163 
 
(ii) Department of Food and Public Distribution 
6.12 The Department through a detailed Background Note informed the 
Committee that as per the allocations of Business Rules, 1961, the 
Department of Food & Public Distribution has the main function of 
procurement of foodgrains for Central Pool at the fixed Mini mum Support 
Price (MSP) of the Government through FCI and agencies of the State 
Governments, making arrangements for safe storage of foodgrains in 
FCI‟s/CWC‟s own/hired godowns and distribute the foodgrains through the 
Public Distribution System by involve ment of concerned State Governments 
to the most vulnerable segments of Indian population at affordable prices.  
The Department of Food & Public Distribution through Food Corporation of 
India, moves wheat and rice from procuring States to consuming States. The 
movement of foodgrains from procuring States to consuming States is 
meant for distribution to the targeted groups covered under Targeted Public 
Distribution System and Other Welfare Schemes.  Under the MSP operations, 
wheat, rice and coarsegrains are p rocured by FCI and State Governments 
and their agencies in surplus States which are then required to be moved to 
deficit / consuming States for distribution under PDS. There is no inter -State 
trade involved on commercial lines other than what is done for m eeting PDS 
requirements.  
6.13 The mechanism of quality control of foodgrains followed by 
Department of Food & Public Distribution is as follows. For the quality control 
of foodgrains, uniform specifications are formulated every year for Rabi and 
Kharif crops by inviting suggestions from every State/UT Governments in a 
Committee which meets under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Policy) 
in this Department with Food Secretaries of some procuring States and some 
consuming States represented on it, Directo r (CFTRI) and representative of 
Food Corporation of India‟s quality control wing.  These specifications must 
conform to the PFA standards fixed by Department of Health which are now 
governed under the FSS Act, 2006 being implemented by FSSAI.  This Act 
now governs all food safety measures including regulations of GM foods in 
India. They will notify necessary guidelines which will include GM foods. It is 
also incumbent upon FSSAI to create the capacities required for the propose.  

 
 
164 
 
The Department of Food & Pu blic Distribution will also follow all the 
guidelines formulated for GM foods by FSSAI.  
6.14 Although, under the Allocation of Business Rules, the Department of 
Food & Public Distribution is entrusted with the task of attending  
International Conferences pertaining to Food, and the Department has 
attended about 59 Conferences since 2006, but non e of these Conferences 
had any agenda items on any policy issues concerning  
transgenic/genetically modified foodgrains or other food stuffs, except that 
in six mee tings of the Market Conditions Committee of International Grains 
Council, they have been asking the member countries to report commercial 
production figures of any genetically modified food crops in which India‟s 
information has been nil regarding wheat an d rice.  Also in the 37 th Session 
of the International Sugar Organisation at Morocco in June, 2010, they had 
discussed the prospects of genetically modified crops of wheat and cane 
where again they had asked about commercial production figures in respect 
of these two crops if any.  They had also discussed the status of Research in 
respect of these two crops, but there was no discussion on any policy issues 
and no country position on the desirability etc. of genetically modified crops 
was asked from any country. Since none of the meetings at the international 
fora attended by the Department ever asked about the country position on 
any aspect of GM food crops, the Department has not been asked to 
formulate its position in this matter and so has no such stated position.  
6.15 As far as the views of Department of Food & Public Distribution 
regarding the transgenic/genetically modified foodgrains are concerned, the 
Department feels that its role will only start after a policy has been 
formulated by the country for  growing genetically modified crops in respect 
of foodgrains after having made an evaluation about the safety of these 
foodgrains for human consumption.  It is felt that there is already an 
established and proper regulatory mechanism for making such an eva luation 
by the competent committees working under the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests and Department of Bio -Technology assisted by Indian Council for 
Agricultural Research and Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) and 
recently created Food Safety St andards Authority of India.  The Department 
is of the view that “Rules for the Manufacture/Use/Import/Export and 

 
 
165 
 
Storage of Hazardous Micro-organisms, Genetically Engineered Organisms or 
Cells, 1989” being implemented by the Ministry of Environment and For ests 
are elaborate enough to deal with the process of evaluation of benefits or 
harms of genetically modified crops including foodgrains.  
6.16 Although the Department of Food & Public Distribution is not a part of 
the six main committees i.e., (i) Recombi nant DNA Advisory Committee 
(RDAC), (ii) Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM), (iii) 
Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee (GEAC), (iv) Institutional Biosafety 
Committees (IBSC), (v) State Biosafety Coordination Committees (SBCC), 
and (vi) District Level Committees (DLC), but the view of the Department is 
that it does not have to participate in the day to day working of these 
technical committees rather it will, at a later date, implement the quality or 
safety standards or specifications issued  by the FSSAI in respect of 
genetically modified foodgrains as and when the nation starts growing them 
and deal with its procurement, storage and distribution.  
6.17 With the promulgation of FSS Act, 2006, FSSAI has been empowered 
to regulate genetically m odified foods and accordingly the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests has published their notifications in the Gazette of 
India to that effect. FSSAI now intends to meet its regulatory obligations by 
implementing the safety assessment and approval process fo r genetically 
modified foods that leverages existing regulatory capacity within the 
Government of India within Department of Bio -Technology, Ministry of 
Environment & Forests and ICMR.  FSSAI will also establish the expert 
committee of genetically modified  foods which will oversee a public 
consultation process.  FSSAI will also issue guidelines that clearly describe 
the regulatory framework for genetically modified foods and provide details 
about the interim process for regulation of these foods. For this p urpose, 
they will also, if necessary adopt and implement the existing guidelines 
approved and issued by GEAC and RCGM. 
6.18 Based on their experience of the various international fora and views 
formed in the light of the obligations cast upon by the variou s treaties and 
agreements with foreign countries in force, the Department were asked 
about the action taken by them in order to apprise the Government about 
their concerns or otherwise so that they are factored in while taking a final 

 
 
166 
 
decision in the matte r of cultivation of GM/Transgenic food crops in the 
Country.  
6.19 In a detailed response it was stated that the Department do not have 
information about the general perception prevailing at the international fora 
regarding the cultivation, trade and commerce of genetically modified/ 
transgenic food crops and derived prod ucts because the Department have 
not attended any such Conferences having agenda items on any policy 
issues in this regard and so far the Department has not been asked to 
formulate its view on any of the policy issues for any international fora or 
any national level bodies.   However, the Department are aware of the fact 
that genetically modified foods have the potential to solve the hunger and 
mal-nutrition problems to some extent and can help protect and preserve 
the environment by increasing yield and re ducing reliance on chemical 
pesticides and  herbicides  but  the  Department  also  feel  that  genetically 
modified foods may pose various challenges in the following areas: 
(i) Food labelling 
(ii) Segregation & identify Preservation at procurement and 
storage points. 
(iii) Testing facilities of the Genetically Modified crops. 
(iv) Provision of separate storage infrastructure and handling 
practices. 
(v) Regulation of policies regarding Genetically Modified crops.  
 
6.20 The Genetically Modified foodgrains are required to be labelled as per 
the Government regulations and segregated from non Genetically Modified 
foodgrains right from the time of sowing in the  field of harvesting, 
procurement in the mandis and storage in th e godowns, in order to avoid 
contamination. Due care is required for providing labelling of the Genetically 
Modified crops at all stages, which will require special efforts to separately 
procure transport and store in a designated storage space.   Therefor e, 
before considering allowing genetically modified foodgrains crops, it is 
required to develop Standard Operating Procedures (SOP), testing facility 

 
 
167 
 
and exclusive storage and transportation facilities for such Genetically 
Modified foodgrains.  
6.21 As far as the Department of Food & Public Distribution is concerned, 
the main mandate of the Department is for procurement of specified quality 
foodgrains for central pool at fixed MSP through FCI and State Government 
agencies, making arrangements for safe stora ge and ensuring the quality 
intact and thereafter getting the foodgrains distributed to the vulnerable 
segments of population at fixed affordable prices through Public Distribution 
System.  These quality specifications were earlier as per the PFA Standards  
fixed by the Ministry of Health and now it is as per the Standards fixed by 
FSSAI under FSS Act, 2006.   This will also be in respect of Genetically 
Modified foods which also now fall under the purview of FSSAI for their 
regulation. We have no role to play  in respect of Genetically Modified crops 
as that will fall under the purview of Ministry of Agriculture as well as under 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests and Department of Bio -Technology.  
Our role will only start after a policy has been formulated  by the country for 
growing Genetically Modified crops in respect of foodgrains after having 
made an evaluation about the safety of these foodgrains for human 
consumption.   Once these crops come into existence and we get Genetically 
Modified foo dgrains, t hen the Department will have to ensure proper 
labelling, safe storage, etc. as prescribed by the FSSAI in this regard  The 
role of the Department of Food does not start before the aforesaid events 
have happened.   
6.22 As far as the desirability or safety of GM foods, since this is a highly 
technical matter and the Department does not have any expertise in this, we 
are not in a position to state whether the country should have Genetically 
Modified foods or not. However, if all the above stated technical 
bodies/authorities decide in future the desirability of Genetically Modified 
crops/foods, the Department shall have no objection to implementing any 
actions enjoined upon it in this regard for ensuring the safety and quality of 
foodgrains at all stages.  
6.23 Under  the  Government  of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961,  
 

 
 
168 
 
the Department are amongst other things responsible for the following:  
(i) Matters relating to the Food Corporation of India and the Central 
Warehousing Corporation. 
(ii) Purchase of foodstuffs for civil requirements and their disposal 
and also for military requirements of sugar, rice and wheat. 
(iii) Inter-State trade and commerce in respect of foodgrains and 
other foodstuffs including sugar. 
(iv) Trade and commerce in, and supply and distributi on of, 
foodgrains. 
(v) Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and 
distribution of sugar and foodstuffs other than foodgrains. 
(vi) Public Distribution System. 
6.24 As is evident a ll these responsibilities involve dealing in/with colossal 
amounts of foodgrains and foodstuffs.  Furthermore, their sister Department 
i.e. Department of Consumer Affairs administer „The Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986‟.  Moreover, conclusive evidence on the side/after effects of 
cultivation of genetically modified/ transgenic food  crops and the products 
derived from them is still awaited leading the Government to put on hold the 
field trials of a transgenic crop.  Furthermore, t he Committee have been 
given to understand by the Departments of Agriculture & Cooperation and 
Agricultural Research & Education and the Genetic Engineering Appraisal 
Committee that given the conditions prevailing in the Indian agricultural 
sector right from farm to the market, segregation of GM/transgenic  food  
crops  and  their  produce  and  the  non-GM  food crops and their produce is 
impossible. 
6.25 The Committee , therefore, sought the views of the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution from the point of view of „The Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986‟ and the issues concerning consumer rights, consumer 
interests, informed consumer choice and related aspects?  They were also 
asked as to whether they had taken up these matters with the Department 
of Consumer Affairs and/or any of the entities mentioned above to put forth 

 
 
169 
 
their point of view or have they suggested any course correction/ remedial 
measures to take care of the scenar io referred to above.  In response it was 
submitted that Department of Food and Public Distribution does not handle 
foodgrains produced from GM/transgenic food crops and as such has no view 
on the issue. 
6.26 When asked about the perception of the Departme nt about movement 
of foodgrains and foodstuffs between the GM free States and those which 
allow field trials/cultivation of GM/Transgenic crops and whether 
involvement/intervention of the Department to ensure any 
remedial/corrective measures in this matter was required it was again stated 
that Department of Food & Public Distribution do not handle foodgrains 
produced from GM/transgenic food crops. 
6.27 During the course of Oral Evidence of the representatives of 
Department of Food & Public Distribution on 4  March, 2011, the Committee 
gathered a distinct impression that for various reasons including that of 
jurisdiction, the Department were not adequately sensitised and aware of 
various issues that may crop up, once the question of genetically modified 
transgenic food crops is settled either way. The Committee, therefore, 
pointed out to the Department that since introduction of genetically modified 
transgenic food crops would be an irreversible process  their attitude of 
crossing the bridge when it comes is nei ther prudent nor advisable.   In 
response a representative of the Department stated:  
“we would like to submit that you rightly mentioned that in the 
past we had imported wheat. Of course, from the data available on the 
net and others, there has been no research on GM in the case of wheat 
crop. In any case, whatever imports are there, there has to be a 
system in place at the port for testing against the GM. Once India 
takes a decision in principle whether to allow the wheat with GM, the 
facility to test the samples at the port has to be developed. There are 
food safety officers under the Ministry of Health. They are responsible 
to draw the samples from the imported food items and subject those 
to various tests; it may be quarantine for pest or pathogens or fo r GM. 
Then only, they will be allowed. Once that is allowed, this Department 
can take over such imported consignments for further inward 

 
 
170 
 
movement and distribution. So, that testing facility has to be 
developed.”  
(iii) Department of Consumer Affairs 
6.28 As per the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules “Internal 
Trade” is a subject of Department of Consumer Affairs.  However, the 
subject of “Inter -State Trade and Commerce” in respect of food -grains and 
other foodstuffs including sugar is alloc ated to Department of Food and 
Public Distribution which is in the same Ministry.  Marketing of agricultural 
produce, setting up of rural marketing etc. are allocated to the Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation. 
6.29 The Committee were informed that  in view of the above, the role of 
Department of Consumer Affairs in internal trade in foodgrains and 
agricultural commodities is to work in coordination with these two 
departments.  The State Governments are mainly concerned with the 
subject. 
6.30 The Committee note that conclusive evidence on the side/after effects 
of cultivation of genetically modified/ transgenic foodcrops and the products 
derived from them is still awaited.  The Committee have also been given to 
understand by the Ministry of Agriculture (Departments of Agriculture & 
Cooperation and Agricultural Research & Education) and the Genetic 
Engineering Appraisal Committee that given the conditions prevailing in the 
Indian Agricultural Sector right from farm to the market, segregation of 
GM/transgenic  food crops  and  their  produce  and  the  non -GM  foodcrops 
and their produce is impossible.  They further note that  the Department of 
Consumer Affairs also administer „The Consumer Protection Act, 1986‟.  
6.31 Keeping the above scenario in view the Committee sought considered 
views of the Department of Consumer Affairs from the point of view of „The 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986‟ and the issues concerning consumer rights, 
consumer interests, informed consumer choice and related aspect.  In their 
written response the Department informed the Committee that under the 
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 one of the rights of the Consumer is the right 
to be informed about the quality, quantity, potency, purity, standard and 

 
 
171 
 
price of goods or services, as the case may be so as to protect the consumer 
against unfair trade practices. (Sec. 6 (b) of the Act) 
6.32 Though there is no specific mention about Genetically Modified Food 
Crops in the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, when a consumer buys any 
goods for a consider ation, he can file a complaint in the appropriate 
consumer forum if: 
Goods which will be hazardous to life and safety when used, are being 
offered for sale to the public,-- 
(a) in contravention of any standards relating to safety of such good 
as required t o be complied with, by or under any law for the 
time being in force; 
(b) if the trader could have known with due diligence that the goods 
so offered are unsafe to the public. (Sec. 2 (v) of the Act) 
6.33 According to the Department t he existing provisions of Consumer 
Protection Act are adequate to tackle harmful GM products which can be 
covered under “unethical trade practice” and penal action can be taken 
against the manufacturers if the matter is taken to the consumer court.  No 
separate specific provisio n or any amendment to Consumer Protection Act 
appears necessary at this stage.  However, in response to persistent queries 
of the Committee during the Oral Evidence on 22 October, 2011, Secretary 
of Department of Consumer Affairs admitted: 
“<ºÉBÉEä ¤ÉÉ®ä à Éå àÉé ¤ÉcÖiÉ +ÉÉìxÉäº]ãÉÉÒ ¤ÉiÉÉ>óÆMÉÉ ÉÊBÉE càÉ ãÉÉäMÉÉå xÉä <ºÉ iÉ®c ºÉä +ÉÉVÉ iÉBÉE BÉEÉä<Ç 
ÉÊ®BÉDàÉébä¶ÉxÉ xÉcÉÓ BÉEÉÒ cè* {É®ÆiÉÖ +É¤É VÉ¤É ªÉc ¤ÉÉiÉ ºÉÉÊàÉÉÊiÉ BÉEÉÒ àÉÉ{ÉEÇiÉ càÉ ãÉÉäMÉÉå BÉEä vªÉÉxÉ àÉå +ÉÉ MÉ<Ç cè iÉÉä càÉÉ®ä 
ÉÊ´É£ÉÉMÉ BÉEä ºÉÆªÉÖBÉDiÉ ºÉÉÊSÉ´É, {ÉÚEb ºÉä{ÉD]ÉÒ AÆb ÉÊºÉBÉDªÉÖÉÊ®]ÉÒ +ÉlÉÉÉÊ®]ÉÒ VÉÉä ºÉÉÊàÉÉÊiÉ BÉEä àÉèà¤É® cé, càÉ =xcå <Æº]ÅBÉD¶ÉxÉ 
nåMÉä ÉÊBÉE ªÉc <¶ªÉÖ ´Éc +ÉMÉãÉÉÒ àÉÉÒÉË]MÉ àÉå VÉ°ô® =~ÉªÉå ÉÊBÉE <ºÉBÉEä ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå ÉÊxÉªÉàÉ ¤ÉxÉÉxÉÉ ¤ÉcÖiÉ +ÉÉ´É¶ªÉBÉE cè , 
BÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉE càÉÉ®ä BÉEÆVªÉÚàÉºÉÇ BÉEä ÉÊciÉÉå BÉEä ÉÊãÉA ªÉä +ÉÉ´É¶ªÉBÉE ÉÊxÉªÉàÉ cé +ÉÉè® ªÉä ÉÊxÉªÉàÉ <ºÉ +ÉlÉÉÉÊ®]ÉÒ uÉ®É VÉãnÉÒ ºÉä 
VÉãnÉÒ ¤ÉxÉÉªÉä VÉÉxÉä SÉÉÉÊcA* VÉèºÉä cÉÒ ªÉä ÉÊxÉªÉàÉ ¤ÉxÉåMÉä, +É{ÉxÉä +ÉÉ{É ´Éä <ºÉàÉå ãÉÉMÉÚ cÉä VÉÉªÉåMÉä*  
nÚºÉ®ÉÒ ¤ÉÉiÉ +ÉÉ{ÉxÉä ABÉE ¤ÉcÖiÉ BªÉÉ{ÉBÉE àÉÖqÉ =~ÉªÉÉ cè ÉÊBÉE VÉcÉÆ ªÉä ºÉ£ÉÉÒ SÉÉÒVÉå ÉÊ¤ÉxÉÉ {ÉèBÉEäÉËVÉMÉ BÉEä ¤ÉäSÉÉÒ 
VÉÉiÉÉÒ cé, ´ÉcÉÆ ={É£ÉÉäBÉDiÉÉ+ÉÉäÆ BÉEä ÉÊciÉÉå BÉEÉÒ ®FÉÉ BÉEèºÉä BÉEÉÒ VÉÉªÉäMÉÉÒ* àÉé iÉÖ®ÆiÉ <ºÉ ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå BÉEÉä<Ç =kÉ®  xÉcÉÓ nä 
ºÉBÉEiÉÉ* ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ àÉé ªÉcÉÒ BÉEc ºÉBÉEiÉÉ cÚÆ ÉÊBÉE ={É£ÉÉäBÉDiÉÉ àÉÉàÉãÉÉå BÉEÉ ÉÊ´É£ÉÉMÉ <ºÉ ÉÊ´É­ÉªÉ àÉå ºÉÆ¤ÉÆÉÊvÉiÉ ÉÊ´É£ÉÉM ÉÉå +ÉÉè® 
®ÉVªÉ ºÉ®BÉEÉ®Éå ºÉä VÉ°ô® SÉSÉÉÇ BÉE®äMÉÉ +ÉÉè® càÉ BÉEÆºÉèxºÉºÉ ãÉÉBÉE® {ÉÉÉÊãÉºÉÉÒ <´ÉÉäã´É BÉE®xÉä BÉEÉÒ BÉEÉäÉÊ¶É¶É BÉE®åMÉä* ´ÉèºÉä 

 
 
172 
 
+ÉÉ{ÉxÉä VÉÉä àÉÖqÉ =~ÉªÉÉ cè, ´Éc ÉÊ¤ÉãBÉÖEãÉ ºÉcÉÒ cè* {É®ÆiÉÖ <ºÉ {É® ÉÊBÉEºÉ iÉ®c ºÉä BÉEÉàÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ VÉÉA +ÉÉè® ÉÊBÉEºÉ iÉ®c 
ºÉä OÉÉcBÉEÉå BÉEÉÒ ®FÉÉ cÉä, ÉÊVÉºÉºÉä ÉÊBÉE =xcå <ºÉ ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå àÉÉãÉÚàÉ cÉä ºÉBÉEä* BÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉE càÉÉ®ä OÉÉ cBÉE ºÉÆ®FÉhÉ +ÉÉÊvÉÉÊxÉªÉàÉ 
àÉå ®É<] ]Ú AVÉÚBÉEä¶ÉxÉ ¤ÉcÖiÉ àÉci´É{ÉÚhÉÇ ®É<] cè* VÉ¤É ªÉc ABÉE <iÉxÉÉ àÉci´É{ÉÚhÉÇ ÉÊxÉªÉàÉ cè iÉÉä ãÉÉäMÉÉå BÉEÉä ªÉc { ÉiÉÉ 
cÉäxÉÉ SÉÉÉÊcA ÉÊBÉE ´Éä VÉÉä JÉÉ ®cä cé, ´Éc VÉäxÉäÉÊ]BÉEãÉÉÒ àÉÉäÉÊb{ÉEÉ<b cè ªÉÉ {É®à{É®ÉMÉiÉ iÉ®ÉÒBÉEä ºÉä =i{ÉÉÉÊniÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ 
cÖ+ÉÉ JÉÉtÉÉxxÉ cè* +É¤É <ºÉBÉEä ÉÊãÉA BÉDªÉÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ VÉÉA* <ºÉBÉEä ÉÊãÉA càÉ ºÉÆ¤ÉÆÉÊvÉiÉ ÉÊ´É£ÉÉMÉÉå +ÉÉè® ®ÉVªÉ ºÉ®BÉEÉ®É å ºÉä 
ÉÊ´ÉSÉÉ®-ÉÊ´ÉÉÊxÉàÉªÉ BÉE®BÉEä VÉ°ô® BÉEÉä<Ç {ÉÉÉÊãÉºÉÉÒ ¤ÉxÉÉxÉä BÉEÉ |ÉªÉixÉ BÉE®åMÉä*”  
6.34 He further admitted: 
“àÉé ºÉÉÊàÉÉÊiÉ BÉEÉä ¤ÉiÉÉxÉÉ SÉÉciÉÉ cÚÆ ÉÊBÉE <ºÉ ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå +É£ÉÉÒ iÉBÉE BÉEÉä<Ç ÉÊ´ÉSÉÉ® -ÉÊ´ÉàÉ¶ÉÇ ªÉÉ SÉSÉÉÇ xÉcÉÓ cÖ<Ç cè, 
ªÉc ¤ÉÉiÉ ÉÊ¤ÉãBÉÖEãÉ ºÉcÉÒ cè* àÉé ºÉàÉZÉiÉÉ cÚÆ ÉÊBÉE <ºÉ ÉÊ´É­ÉªÉ àÉå +ÉÉ{É ÉÊ´É£ÉÉMÉ BÉEÉä BÉEàÉ ºÉä BÉEàÉ iÉÉÒxÉ àÉcÉÒxÉä BÉEÉ 
ºÉàÉªÉ nå iÉÉä càÉ ãÉÉäMÉ ºÉÉ®ÉÒ ®ÉVªÉ ºÉ®BÉEÉ®Éå +ÉÉè® ºÉÆ¤ÉÆÉÊvÉiÉ ÉÊ´É£ÉÉMÉÉå ºÉä SÉSÉÉÇ BÉE®BÉEä <ºÉ ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå VÉÉä £ÉÉÒ 
ºÉ´ÉÇºÉààÉÉÊiÉ ¤ÉxÉiÉÉÒ cè, =ºÉºÉä ºÉÉÊàÉÉÊiÉ BÉEÉä +É´ÉMÉiÉ BÉE®É nåMÉä*.........<ºÉBÉEÉ ãÉÉÒMÉãÉ |ÉEäàÉ´ÉBÉEÇ BÉEä ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå ÉÊ´É£ÉÉMÉ BÉEÉä 
àÉÉãÉÚàÉ xÉcÉÓ cè ÉÊBÉE +ÉMÉ® àÉÉxÉ ãÉÉÒÉÊVÉA ÉÊBÉE BÉEä®ãÉ xÉä BÉEcÉ cè ÉÊBÉE càÉ VÉÉÒAàÉ |ÉEÉÒ so how they have 
done it, whether they have passed some legislations or whether they have used 
some existing legislations?  If that is done, then whether it can be done in the 
other States also?  These are the issues, which have to be discussed with the 
State Governments.  Then, we will be able to arrive at some policy in this regard.” 
6.35 The witness also assured the Committee:   
“In India, there is a voluntary code for vegetarian products.  
There is a green dot for it.  So, it is not mandatory.  But, I appreciate 
your point that any food product, which is coming in the market, 
should contain some indication on it that it is GM free.  We will 
definitely work on it.   
I assure you that there is no effort to scuttle the safety issue.  
We definitely appreciate what you were saying.  If, a person does not 
want to consume GM food, then he has every right to be informe d that 
this food either has GM or it is free from GM content.  We will see that 
what can be done about it.  We will definitely work on it.  We are 
taking whatever suggestions and instructions are coming from you.  
We take them very seriously.”    
6.36 In India a typical scenario prevails presently, as several States have 
declared themselves as GM Free States while several others are not averse 

 
 
173 
 
to field trials/cultivation of GM/transgenic crops.   Asked as to how the 
Department perceived would the rights and interests of the consumers of GM 
free States be ensured and protected in such a situation, it was stated that 
the Department of Consumer Affairs will consult with all State Governments 
and other stake holders to develop policy in this regards in the best i nterest 
of consumers. 
6.37 As per the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961, the Department are also 
mandated with the task of regulation of packaged commodities. In view of 
the reports that commodities derived from transgenic food crops are coming 
into the C ountry and the fact that there are divergent opinions on 
transgenic/genetically modified food crops and the products derived from 
them, the Department were asked about the action taken under this 
mandate of theirs with regards to the food commodities/items  having 
transgenic origin.  
6.38 In a written submission it was stated that this Department deals with 
the packaged commodities.  The following mandatory declaration on 
packages are required under the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) 
Rules 2011. 
(a) Name & address of the manufacturer/Packer/Importer. 
(b) Common or generic named of the commodity. 
(c) Net content 
(d) Month and year of packing 
(e) The retail sale price of the package 
(f) Consumer care details. 
 
6.39 There is no stipulation regarding mandatory mention of any transgenic 
nature of food in the existing Rules.  It is understood that the labelling 
provisions under Food Safety and Standards act, 2006 provide for the same.  
This Department will coordinate with Ministry of Health and concerned 
authorities to ensure th at all relevant information is made available to 
consumers.  The Packaged Commodities Rules will be amended, if 
necessary, to make it mandatory for manufacturers to indicate whether the 
product is a GM product. 
6.40 The Department also enforce the Bureau o f Indian Standards Act 1986 
as a part of other responsibilities. Given the reports emanating from certain 

 
 
174 
 
sections that we are lacking in a well laid out regulatory and monitoring 
framework for the purpose were asked as to whether they have explored the 
likelihood of bringing these commodities under the BIS Act, 1986 for 
ensuring quality control and standardization.   The Department replied that 
BIS has set up technical committee „Biotechnology for Food and Agriculture‟ 
Sectional committee, FAD 23 under Foo d & Agriculture Division council in 
2006 for standardization in the field of food & Agriculture products derived 
from modern biotechnology.  The Committee is also involved in international  
standardization as an active member of the International Standards  
Organizations/TC 34/SC 16 “Horizontal methods for molecular biomarker 
analysis‟ Subcommittee.  The present Scope and Programme of work of FAD 
23 is given as below: 
 Scope of the Committee: 
“To develop standards, guidelines or recommendations, as 
appropriate, for food and agriculture products derived from modern 
biotechnology or traits introduced into food and other articles of 
human and animal consumptions, by modern biotechnology, on the 
basis of scientific evidence, risk and analysis and having regard, w here 
appropriate, to other legitimate factors relevant to the health of 
consumers, biosecurity, and the promotion of fair practices in the food 
and agricultural products trade:. 
6.41 The list of Indian Standards formulated by FAD 23 is as follows: 
(1) IS 15887:2010 Principles for the risk analysis of food derived 
from modern biotechnology 
(2) IS 1588:2010 Guideline for the conduct of food safety 
assessment of food derived from recombinant – DNA plants. 
(3) IS 15889:2010 Guidelines for the conduct of food safety 
assessment of foods produced using recombinant – DNA 
microorganisms 
(4) IS/ISO 15955:2010 Foodstuffs – Nucleic acid based methods 
of analysis of genetically modified organisms & derived products 

 
 
175 
 
– Information to be supplied and procedure for addition of 
methods to ISO 21569, ISO 21570 or ISO 21571 
(5) IS/ISO 21569:2005 Foodstuffs – Methods of analysis for 
detection of genetically modified organisms & derived products – 
Qualitative nucleic acid based methods 
(6) IS/ISO 21570:2005 Foodstuffs – Methods of analysis for the 
detection of genetically modified organisms & derived products – 
Qualitative nucleic acid based methods 
(7) IS/ISO 21571:2005 Foodstuffs – Methods of analysis for the 
detection of genetically modified organisms & derived products – 
Nucleic acid extraction 
(8) 8) IS/ISO 21572:2005 Foodstuffs – Methods of analysis for the 
detection of genetically modified organisms & derived products – 
Protein based methods 
(9) 9) IS/ISO 22276:2006 Foodstuffs – Methods of analysis for the 
detection of genetically modified organisms & derived p roducts – 
General requirements and definitions. 
6.42 It may be seen that BIS has formulated or adopted international 
standards in the field of Bio technology which are mostly test methods and 
Guidelines.  Moreover, these standards are voluntary in nature for producers 
to adopt. 
(iv) Department of AYUSH 
6.43 Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and 
Homoeopathy (AYUSH)  as per Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 is 
mandated with the formulation of policy issues for development and 
propagation of Indian Systems of Medicine. 
6.44 The Department have set -up National Medicinal Plants Board in 
November, 2000 for policy formulat ion coordination with 
Ministries/Departments ensuring sustained availability of medicinal plants 
and to coordinate all matters relating to their development and sustainable 
use.  The Department of AYUSH are also functioning for last 16 years. 

 
 
176 
 
6.45 Considering the sensitivity of GMO products, their possible effects on 
the medicinal properties of agriculture crops which have medicinal value and 
other medicinal plants and the controversy surrounding the subject the 
Department were asked about the action taken by them and the National 
Medicinal Plants Board as a part of the responsibilities entrusted to them in 
the matter over the years. 
6.46 When queried about the concerns being expressed by varioua quarters 
regarding the safety, etc. of Bt. Brinjal and other t ransgenic crops, the 
Secretary, Department of AYUSH informed the Committee during his Oral 
Evidence on 10 February, 2011: 
“Sir, you are absolutely correct in what you are saying, and we 
agree fully with what you are saying. Your apprehensions are what we 
also have. That is why we are seeking the Committee‟s support that at 
least, in future, for the other plants, we must come on to all 
committees at the initial stage itself so that when the research is 
carried on, all these issues including impact on human h ealth, 
including impact on medicinal values, all of these, the departments‟ in-
charge of that must know so that whatever corrective measures are 
required can be taken at the beginning itself, not at the end which is 
why we are seeking the Committee‟s suppo rt. In the last slide I have 
mentioned that we wish to come on to these committees. We would 
now be taking up with the departments. We would request for your 
support.” 
6.47 Elaborating further he stated: 
“Sir, could I just add to this? The number of medicinal plants in 
the country is now estimated at roughly 7,200. Out of these, 960 are 
traded; out of these, almost 180 are traded in high volume which 
means more than a 100 tonnes per year. The task is gigantic. That is 
why there is need for care at eve ry stage. If people just pick up a 
plant and take it up for research without looking at this aspect, with 
such a large variety of plants, 7,000 plus, it is not very easy for 
someone who is not involved in it to keep track and he may not even 
be concerned w ith that aspect. Once again, we need your support for 
coming on to these committees.” 

 
 
177 
 
6.48 It was stated that the Department of AYUSH had last year, vide its 
letter dated 1 June, 2010 from the Secretary, AYUSH to the Secretary, 
Ministry of Environment & Fo rests conveyed their concerns that genetically 
modified Brinjal (Bt. Brinjal) may have implications on AYUSH sector.  This 
Department had also requested that permission for open trials or commercial 
cultivation of Bt. Brinjal or other medicinal plants shou ld not be given until a 
detailed analysis of their impact on Indian Systems of Medicines is done by a 
Group of Experts.  A copy of the letter had been endorsed to the Secretary, 
Department of Bio -technology. Further, the Department of AYUSH had 
requested M inistry of Environment and Forests to co -opt Chief Executive 
Officer, National Medicinal Plants Board, Adviser (Ayurveda), Department of 
AYUSH and Director General, Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine 
(CCRUM) in GEAC or at least give them a hear ing about the concerns of the 
Department of AYUSH.   
6.49 Chairman, GEAC, MoEF sent a D.O. No. 13/7/2007 -CS.III dated 
25.8.2010 for seeking the comments on the background document prepared 
by MoEF/GEAC on Bt. Brinjal.  In the letter it was mentioned that G EAC has 
examined the document received during public consultation and a 
background paper highlighting the suggestion for additional studies to 
address the concerns that have emerged from public consultation vis -à-vis 
data available from the studies that ha ve been completed by technology 
providers have been prepared.  The comments of Department of AYUSH 
were sent through a D.O. dated 22.9.2010.  As the said background 
document itself had focus on safety study and concerns on introduction of 
Bt. Brinjal, this  Department suggested for detailed and comprehensive 
safety studies to address the concerns. It was also stated that the plants 
material are highly sensitive to phyto -chemical/agro-climatic/environmental 
factors.  
6.50 It was further stated that since the Department of AYUSH would be 
impacted in a major way in connection with genetic modification of the 
plants/crops having medicinal value, it would be essential that the 
representatives of this Department are associated at all stages of the 
approval process regarding genetic modification.  The Department is 
presently not associated or represented in the Committees giving approval 

 
 
178 
 
for genetic modification of various crops including medicinal plants.  
Therefore, Department of AYUSH have taken up the matter with  the Ministry 
of Environment & Forests and Department of Biotechnology so that 
Department of AYUSH get represented on various committees set up in 
connection with the approval process for genetic modification.  
6.51 MoEF vide their D.O. letter dated 7 th February, 2011 informed that 
GEAC have decided to constitute an Expert Committee to review the safety 
of Bt. Brinjal based on the outcome of public consultations.  The Chief 
Executive Officer, National Medicinal Plants Board; Adviser (Ayurveda), 
Department of AYUSH and Director General, Central Council of Research in 
Unani Medicine have been included as a Member of the Expert Committee.  
Further, they informed that so far no transgenic medicinal plants have been 
developed and none are under field trials.  The  research being conducted is 
of a preliminary nature where the research institutions are developing 
transformation protocols for integration of the new gene.  As the whole 
process will take several years, the request for co -opting representatives of 
AYUSH/Unani and National Medicinal Plants Board to the GEAC will be 
considered at the appropriate stage.   
6.52 The Committee were also keen to know as to how co-opting of 
AYUSH/Unani and NMPB on GEAC serve the requisite purpose years later 
when researches are completed and the stand taken by the Department on 
the instant communication of Ministry of Environment and Forests.  They 
were informed that  the Departm ent of AYUSH is of the view that there is a 
need for its involvement at the research stage itself, so that the impact on 
medicinal properties of the GM crops is specifically studied from the very 
beginning itself.  A number of Committees involved in the ap proval process 
for GM crops have been constituted under the relevant Rules, such as (1) 
Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM); (2) Institutional 
Biosafety Committees (IBSC); (3) Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee 
(4) State Biotechnology Co -ordination Committee (SBCC) and (5)District 
Level Committee (DLC) under “The Rules for the Manufacture 
Use/Import/Export and Storage of Hazardous Micro Organism/Genetically 
Engineered Organisms or Cells, 1989” framed under Environment 
(Protection) Act 1986.  The Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India 

 
 
179 
 
(BRAI) Bill, 2010 is also under active consideration by the Department of 
Biotechnology.  Now Department of AYUSH have taken up the matter with 
the Ministry of Environment & Forests and Department of Biotech nology so 
that Department of AYUSH get represented on various committees set up in 
connection with the approval process for genetic modification.  Further, the 
Department of AYUSH would pursue the matter with both Ministry of 
Environment & Forests and Depa rtment of Bio -technology to get due 
representation in these Committees.  
6.53 Noting from the same communication of the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests that in the meantime CEO, NMPB, Advisor (Ayurveda), 
Department of AYUSH and Director General, Centra l Council for Research in 
Unani Medicine have been included in the Expert Committee to review the 
safety of Bt. Brinjal.  Some background documents have been circulated to 
them.  And their comments on the background note have also been sent to 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests. But no meeting of the said Expert 
Committee has been held so far , the Commi ttee sought a detailed 
clarification on the entire matter.  They were apprised by Department of 
AYUSH that the Ministry of Environment & Forests vide th eir O.M. F.No. C -
12013/4/2011/CS.III dated 28.02.2011 have now informed as follows: 
 “Subsequent to the moratorium on Bt. Brinjal Event EE-1, on February 
9, 2010, the Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee initiated the 
exercise of reviewing the outcome o f the public consultation.  Review of 
the 530 page document took some time. Subsequently a background 
paper highlighting the additional studies recommended by scientists/ 
experts to address the concerns that have emerged from the public 
consultations as we ll as studies that have been completed so far was 
prepared and circulated to 18 scientists and experts  including 
Department of AYUSH/Unani and NMPB.  As the matter is of a highly 
technical in nature, it was felt that adequate time should be given to the 
experts. Comments from some experts have now been received.  
Further all experts being very senior members, there was some time 
constraints in scheduling the meeting on a convenient date. It is now 
proposed to hold the meeting of the Expert Committee during April 
2011.”    

 
 
180 
 
6.54 From the documents submitted to them, the Committee also learnt 
that the Department of AYUSH came to know only on 7.2.2011 that CEO, 
NMPB; Adviser (Ayurveda) and DG, CCRUM have been included as the 
members of the expert committee, constituted by GEAC to review the safety 
of Bt. Brinjal.  This slip was attributed by GEAC to oversight.  
6.55 On the aspect of the effect on the exports of medicines prepared under 
various Systems of Indian Systems in case  they are extracted/ prepared 
from Genetically Modified Agricultural Crops, medicinal plants and other 
Genetically Modified commodities.  The Department informed the Committee 
that Only after the comparative analysis of chemical composition and 
bioactivity of genetically modified medicinal plants and conventionally 
cultivated medicinal plants the effect of medicinal values in Genetically 
Modified produce may be ascertained.  In Indian systems of medicine, 
medicinal plants are largely used for preparation of  medicine because of 
their medicinal values.  Ministry of Environment and Forests & Department 
of Bio -Technology have informed that so far no genetically modified 
medicinal plants are under field trials.  As no field trial of genetically 
modified medicinal plants has been undertaken, it is difficult to comment on 
the medicinal values of genetically modified medicinal plants.  Therefore, the 
effect on the exports of medicines prepared under various Indian system of 
medicine in case they are extracted/prepare d from genetically modified 
medicinal plants may not be properly estimated in the absence of actual 
data.  
6.56 The National Medicinal Plants Board is also entrusted with the 
development of protocols for cultivation and quality control and for 
encouraging the protection of Patent Rights and IPR.  About the efforts made 
by NMPB with a view to development of protocols for cultivation and quality 
control and for encouraging the protection of Patent Rights and IPR in the 
context of and with a view to monitor an d regulate the transgenic research 
and development in food crops/medicinal plants, etc. during all these years, 
the Committee were told that the National Medicinal Plants Board has 
finalized agro-techniques of 82 medicinal plants and first volume of “Agro -
techniques of Selected Medicinal Plants” covering 50 medicinal plants has 
already been published. 

 
 
181 
 
6.57 The quality of AYUSH products is critically dependant upon the quality 
of raw material used for their manufacturing.  For the purpose of ensuring 
the qua lity of the medicinal plants, the National Medicinal Plants Board, 
Department of AYUSH has developed Good Agricultural Practices for 
Medicinal Plants and Guidelines on Good Field Collection Practices for Indian 
medicinal plants. 
6.58 Through Quality Counci l of India the NMPB has also finalized the 
“Voluntary Certification Scheme for Medicinal Plants Produce” based on Good 
Agricultural and Good Collection Practices to enhance confidence in the 
quality of India‟s medicinal plant produce and make available goo d quality 
raw material to the AYUSH industry. 
6.59 India has unique repositories of Traditional Knowledge (TK), associated 
with medicinal plants.  The TK is very important for bio -prospecting and 
development of new drugs.  TK needs to be preserved for perp etuity and 
posterity.  In due appreciation of the needs for preservation of TK, the NMPB 
has supported a project of National Innovation Foundation to “develop 
database of less common medicinal plants by way of compilation of 
associated traditional knowledg e”.  The project would encourage the 
protection of Patent Rights and IPR.  
6.60 In response to all questions passed by the Committee regarding 
human health the Department of AYUSH passed on the responsibility to 
respond on the Department of Health Research. 
6.61 When asked as to whether this implied that the knowledge and 
expertise available within the various Indian Systems of Medicine is not 
comprehensive enough to analyse the effects of GM Crops/commodities on 
human health though almost all medicines are  derived from plants.  It was 
stated that in response to the questions related to human health research, 
Department of Health Research was requested to submit response because 
the subject matter comes under the purview of that Department and they 
have been associated with the approval process with reference to genetically 
modified crops as the representative of Indian Council of Medical Research 
(ICMR) is member of Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) 
and Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee ( GEAC). The intention behind 

 
 
182 
 
requesting Department of Health Research to respond these questions was 
to provide appropriate and accurate inputs to the Committee.  As far as 
knowledge and expertise available with the various Indian Systems of 
Medicines for a nalyzing the effects of Genetically Modified Crops/Edible 
Commodities on human health are concerned, they have the competence in 
conceptual perspective; however, there is need to develop the infrastructure 
and competence in terms of experience and practical skill.  
(v) Department of Commerce 
6.62 As per the Government of India (allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, 
the Department of Commerce is entrusted with the responsibility of the 
policy matter relating to International Trade in goods and services including 
agreements with other countries/various International Trade Body, but 
excluding agreements relating to wheat, sugar, jute & cotton. 
6.63 The Committee, therefore, sought details of the countries importing 
food grains and commodities derived/produ ced from food crops during each 
of the last ten years from India.   The data for country wise exports in last 
ten years is given in Annexure - V. 
6.64 Based on the inputs received from traders and exporters, analysis of 
international market trends, consumer  preferences, the Department were 
asked by the Committee about the international trading and exports 
potential of genetically modified agricultural produce including food grains 
and commodities derived/produced from food crops.  The Department 
informed the Committee that genetically modified crops are not cultivated in 
India in a big way.  Presently only Bt cotton is commercialized in India.  
Around 90% of the cotton grown is Bt cotton and only 10% of the area 
grows organic cotton.  GEAC has approved the tr ials of transgenic mustard, 
corn, brinjal and tomato which are under various stages of testing and tri als 
in the country. 
6.65 The major exporters of GM crops/products which include soya bean, 
rapeseeds, wheat, maize etc. are USA, Argentina and Brazil.  Wh ereas, the 
major importers include China (mostly for feed soya for edible oil), 
Indonesia, Philippiness, Cambodia. The EU in general has a strict regime for 

 
 
183 
 
not permitting import of genetically modified crops.  The global trade in GM 
food and food products is estimated to be around USD 4 billion. 
6.66 Since the Department , amongst other things, are responsible for 
International Commodity Agreements (other than relating to wheat, sugar, 
jute and Cotton) , they were asked that based on the ir experience of the 
existing legal provisions of various bilateral or multilateral International 
Commodity Agreements what would be the prospects of international trading 
and exports of genetically modified food crops and commodities 
derived/produced from such food crops.    
6.67 It was stated that the Department of Commerce favours a stable and 
long term export policy for the exports of agricultural produce.  The surplus 
available after accounting for domestic requirement, food security issues , 
etc. should be allowed to be exported out of the country.  To the extent that 
Genetically Modified food grains are found safe, commercially viable, and are 
in compliance with domestic and International policies on the subject and 
remunerative to the farmers and enhances yields/produ ctivity of the crops, 
international trade in such products can take place.  This will also depend 
upon international acceptance to the Genetically Modified food and food 
products.  Speaking on this aspect Director of the National Institute of Plant 
Genome Research informed the Committee during the Oral Evidence held on 
28 September, 2010: 
“Finally, I come to trade. I have noted that one also. It is true 
that there are some sensitive points. I agree to this thing. Today, if we 
have the basmati transgenic, our trade with Europe would be affected. 
Therefore, we should be careful at it. The academy has also 
recommended that there should be a strategic planning and some 
prioritisation of research where the GM technology needs to be 
applied. It need not be applied blindly everywhere. So, there should be 
a group for that.” 
6.68 In accordance with the Government of India (Allocation of Business) 
Rules, 1961, the Department are also responsible for production, distribution 
(for domestic consumption and exports) and development of plantation 
crops, tea, coffee, rubber, spices, tobac co and cashew.  From this point of 

 
 
184 
 
view, the Department were asked as to whether they have pondered over 
the prospects of exports as also international acceptance of some of the 
above mentioned crops or their produce in case they are genetically 
modified. They replied that there is no such proposal of international trade in 
GM Food Crops.  Rubber Board of India has received permission from the 
GEAC to take up field trials in 0.5 ha each in the research farms of RRII in 
Kerala and Maharashtra.  However, Rubber Research Institute of India has 
not done any field trials with genetically modified rubber so far. 
 
6.69 There are no other proposals for genetic modification of plantation 
crops used for human consumption.  It is felt that there may be no real 
demand for such GM crops when the emphasis is on organic production.  
 
6.70 As per the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 
the Department are also mandated with the task of development and 
expansion of export production in relation to all commodities, products, 
manufacturers, semi-manufacturers including agriculture produce within the 
meaning of the Agriculture Produce (Grading and Marketing) Act, 1937.  
Querried as to whether the Department have a well laid roadmap to be 
followed to ensure  that quality and standards wise , these products are 
totally in sync with  and in conformity with the requirements of the 
international markets and our exports continue to maintain an upward trend, 
it was stated that this Department has many agencies/EPCs  functioning 
under its aegis for the development of infrastructure and market abroad for 
various indigenous products including agriculture.   
 
6.71 The Department, in consultation with other Ministries/Departments, 
lay down the policies/guidelines for the exporters for regulating the export of 
the commodities in sync with the requirement of International Trade.  Th e 
Department are regularly monitoring any untoward development reported by 
our Mission abroad and the same are brought to the notice of all agenc ies 
involved in export promotion.  They, in turn, sensitise their stakeholders on 
these developments and suggest corrective measures/compliance etc. 
 

 
 
185 
 
(vi) Department of Health Research 
6.72 On the vital aspect of safety, Secretary, Department of Health 
Research and Director -General, Indian Council for Medical Research 
informed the Committee during his Oral Evidence on 18 January, 2011: 
“So far the apprehensions have actually been from two angles. 
As far as the biologists and the agricultural people are concerned, it is 
the bio-diversity. That is the issue that they can address whether it is 
going to have a negative impact on the other cr ops or the similar 
crops. But from the medical angle, the apprehension is in terms of any 
unknown changes. First is the allergy which they could not find, but 
then they said that they should have carried out another test, the IGE 
Test. The second is on the  terms of any systemic damages in the 
body. Now in the 14 days and in the 90 days test reports which were 
produced from the INTOX that does not tell of any effect on any 
system. But the long term, as I said, those two reports from abroad 
published in 2008 and 2009, they tell that if the long term exposure is 
there then there is a mild hepatic and renal derangement. Also, there 
is also a litter size of the second generation and third generation 
becomes less. I think, in my view, to lay the apprehensions to r est, 
the best way is to test it. I have seen the debate. It has been one 
argument versus another argument, one finding a fault with another‟s 
data. I suggested last year also and we have also started doing those 
experiments in our centre at FDRTC in Hydera bad. We advise our 
scientists also saying that they may go ahead with their research but 
we should have our own independent investigation which are not 
funded by the company but our own funds. So, we have begun those 
experiments already. After this controversy the people failed to resolve 
them. I feel that in the long run the Department of Health Research 
has to lay the standards as far as health is concerned. In my view we 
cannot depend on somebody prescribing from saying you go ahead 
with this and do not go ahead with that. So, we should have our own 
standard manuals, though the Department of Bio-technology and ICMR 
long back published the guidelines. But I think that we should have our 
own data generated from India also and that it will take little more 
time but it ought not to be an indefinite delay, both ways, if the 

 
 
186 
 
interest of the farmers have to be protected and the agriculture sector 
has to be protected. Food security is an issue and we cannot ignore. In 
the terms of a conservative nature if we keep on blocking a progress, 
that is impossible. But we must prove it. We have taken steps already 
and we have moved.” 
6.73 Queried about the existence of any post-release surveillance in view of 
media reports about Bt. cotton causing skin problems to those in contact, he 
admitted: 
“We have not really looked at that data. That data sporadically 
poured in. There is no documentation of the entire population being 
exposed to that. I think, that surveillance has to be put in place. But 
so far these are just sporadic reports. Based on that it is impossible to 
draw a conclusion. I have looked at those reports. We have discussed 
them in our meetings.” 
6.74 On the question of the probability of Gene Transfer and the need for 
cooperation between various agencies mandated with different 
responsibilities in the system he clarified: 
“Then about the introduction of the gene in our crops, whether it 
will disturb the eco system around and whether the same will get 
transferred to other plants and animals, can it get incorporated into 
the animal genes, etc., people have not found any evidence so far. 
People have tried those experiments but we cannot say that it does 
not happen and it cannot happen. I am not the person to say it. Or as 
a scientist, I am not supposed to say so. From bacteria to plants, 
genes can go.  Agro bacterium is one species through which the genes 
can go to the plants. Otherwise, going back into the bacteria has not 
been seen so far. But we should not ignore something happening in 
biology.  We take your suggesti on that we must do that.   But the 
point which I was going to make as one of my submissions is that in a 
country where food security will be an issue in future, we are 
considering it seriously. There, ICMR, ICAR and may be the 
Department of Health Research  and the Department of Agriculture, 
Education and Research and the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
have to create a group actually.  There should be a statutory 

 
 
187 
 
committee formed by these Departments.  As regards the animal side, 
they have to do researc h from their side and already, people are 
testing on avian species and others.  That data should be seen by each 
other and jointly investigated because in India, it will be experimental 
so far.  Nothing is natural and whatever reports are there, they are 
from abroad. But we must analyse them jointly.  When we look at the 
problem more and more, we feel the need of a joint committee 
because GM crops and other things are going to be there for a long 
time. There is a felt need and there is a strong feeling by s ome people 
that to meet food security, we should do that.” 
6.75 About the regulatory mechanism and evaluation and assessment 
procedures, the witness informed the Committee:  
“My immediate reaction is that we have thought of this subject.  
We have discussed  about it.  There should be regulations and there 
should be regulatory control. I have another opinion which we 
discussed in those Committees.  I am conveying that when we say any 
testing, it should be independent.  So far, we trust on the companies 
themselves sponsoring their toxicology testing, their this evaluation 
and that evaluation.  Our own institutions have their own 
responsibilities that we should take up our own testing mechanisms 
and we should have our own testing.  For the surveillance later on,  it 
should be a regulatory control and preferably through the Government 
which we can control. That was the view point.” 
6.76 On the question of reliability of data being assessed and evaluated for 
approval of transgenic agricultural crops, he stated: 
“Our institutions in Hyderabad, the NIN and the Food Toxicology 
Research Centre, work on the food and drug toxicology from the 
human safety point of view.  When this entire thing was building up, 
they were only given the responsibility to look at the data w ork which 
was generated from somewhere else.  We have not set up any 
protocol for testing the products of company A or company B because 
the companies in India get it tested from a number of accredited 
institutions. Drug Controller General accept them for the drugs.  Now 
from food point of view, they went to one of the INTOX companies in 

 
 
188 
 
Pune.  So, they had generated the data. --------- Initially we were 
given only the responsibility of only to look at what has been done 
elsewhere.  As experts, we are member s of the Committee on RCGM 
and the Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee.  Actually, during the 
last one-and-a-half years when this debate started building up, then 
we instructed our own institution in Hyderabad. We said that we 
should have our own dat a.  We should start testing of our own, 
whether somebody asks or somebody does not ask us.  This is a 
question for a public good.  We have to generate data.  They have 
started working on that. They have started working on the animal 
which is also shown her e.   There are a number of things like bt. 
maize, bt. brinjal.  They have started testing of their own. We have 
taken up these initiatives as a scientific body.  The ICMR collects the 
data which I again head as the Director General.  Then, the 
Government will take a view.  So, creating other forum, we propose to 
do it with the ICAR and DHR because it should be a joint -one looking 
at the animal data so that the country gets one opinion which is well -
debated.  We will get back to you. We are already working o n it.  We 
would not fail the country‟s confidence. We will do that.” 
6.77 When the Committee broached the matter of adequacy or otherwise of 
the tests being conducted to evaluate safety of these products, he stated:  
“When I have been saying that it is „my  view‟, it is not my 
personal view.  These are the views of the Department because I 
would not have any identity till I would be in the Chair.  Secondly, 
when I am thinking about the minimum exposure, I totally agree with 
you.  We must totally go on the hi gher side. That suggestion of yours 
is appropriate. At least 90 per cent of the average life span of the 
animal should be exposed and this applies for whichever species we 
test. Rats are the normal animals which are tested as recommended 
by the international guidelines.  But we can go for the rabbits and try 
others also because in a developing area, we should be overdoing it 
and not less of it. I totally agree with your point of view.” 
6.78 The Committee also sought the views of Secretary, Department of 
Health Research and Director-General, Indian Council of Medical Research on 

 
 
189 
 
the reported violations of protocols during the evaluation and assessment 
done by the regulatory mechanism.  He initially stated:         
“Sir regarding the violation of the protocols, we do not have data 
to comment on the issue.” 
6.79 When told that the Committee could not agree with this explanation 
that he did not have data on violation of the protocols as he happened to be 
the member of these two Committees which were meant for ensuring all 
these things and that even if he had not been informed he could have raised 
this issue on the basis of media reports in the Committee itself. The witness 
further stated: 
“I think we will get back to you with this type of detail. Offhand,  
I cannot answer this.  I apologize. I do not have that data.  I was 
talking about the present testing of the bt. brinjal.” 
6.80 The witness was, thereafter, directed to furnish a detailed report in the 
matter to the Committee within 15 days.  This Report was, however, not 
submitted.  
(vii) National Biodiversity Authority 
6.81 The aims and objectives of National Biodiversity Authority which 
administers the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 are as follows: 
• Reaffirming the sovereign rights over its biological resources of India 
• To prevent misappropriation of bioresources and/or associated 
knowledge. 
• To protect biodiversity in general in an holistic manner 
• To regulate use of biological resources 
• To ensure sustainable utilization and equitable benefit sharing 
• To provide legal recognition and support to the bioresources and 
associated traditional knowledge. 
6.82 To achieve its mandate NBA as per Sub ‐ Section 1, 2, 3 & 4 of Section 
18 of Biological Diversity Act, 2002 is vested with powers to:‐ 
 Advise the Government of India on matters relating to conservation 
of biodiversity, sustainable use of its components and equitable 
sharing of benefits arising out of utilization of biological resources. 

 
 
190 
 
 Regulate activities and issue guidelines for access to biological 
resources and for fair and equitable benefit sharing in accordance 
with the sections 3, 4 and 6 of the Biological Dive rsity Act, 2002. 
Certain individuals/ nationals/organizations require prior approval of 
NBA for obtaining biological resources and/or associated knowledge 
for use. 
 Take necessary measures to oppose the grant of intellectual 
property rights in any country o utside India on any biological 
resource obtained from India or knowledge associated with such 
biological resource derived from India. 
 Advise the State Governments in the selection of areas of 
biodiversity importance to be notified as heritage sites and sug gest 
measures for their management.  
 NBA and SBB provide guidance and technical support to Biodiversity 
Management Committees (BMC) for preparing People's Biodiversity 
Registers (PBR). 
 Perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 
6.83 The Regulatory powers of the Authority are as follows: 
 National Biodiversity Authority regulates the activities referred to 
under sections  3, 4  and 6 of the Act as under: 
 Any natural/legal person other than from Indian territory as defined 
under section 3(2) should necessarily obtain prior approval for 
accessing the biological resources and /or  associated knowledge 
thereto obtained in India for research or for commercial utilization or 
for bio-survey and bio-utilization. 
 Likewise results of research relating to any biological resource 
occurring or obtained from India should not be transferred to certain 
persons without approval of  the NBA for monetary consideration or 
otherwise to any person who is not a natural/legal person of India 
(Section 4). 

 
 
191 
 
 Applications for Intellectual Property Rights by whatever name called 
in or outside India for any invention based on any research or 
information on a biological  resource obtained from India by any 
person should necessarily go with the approval of NBA (section 6). 
 NBA while granting approval for the said purposes will impose 
benefit sharing fee  or royalty or both or impose conditions 
including the sharing of financial  benefits ari sing out of the 
commercial utilization (Sec.6 r/w Sec.19 & 21). 
 NBA is empowered to issue guidelines for access to biological 
resources and for fair and equitable benefit sharing by virtue of the 
sections 3,4 and 6. 
 NBA may advise the Central Government on  matters relating to the 
conservation of biodiversity, sustainable use of its components and 
equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of 
biological resources. 
 NBA may advise the State Governments in the selection of areas of 
biodiversity importance to be notified under sub -section (1) of 
section 37 of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 as heritage sites and 
measures for management of such heritage sites. 
 NBA shall perform such other functions as may be necessary to 
carry out the provisions of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002. 
 NBA may, on behalf of the Central Government, take any measures 
necessary to oppose the grant of intellectual property rights in 
any country outside India on any biological resources obtained from 
India or knowledge associated with such biological resource which is 
derived from India (Sec.18(4)). 
6.84 The Authority is also vested with Quasijudicial Powers which are as 
follows:  
By virtue of section 50 (4) of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 the 
NBA is vested with quasi-judicial powers (vide section 50 (5)) to 
adjudicate any dispute arises between the State Biodiversity 

 
 
192 
 
Boards once Central Government refer such disputes to the NBA. For 
this the NBA shall have the same powers as are vested  in a  civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
6.85 Constitution of the NBA is as under: 
(i)  a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent person having adequate 
knowledge and experience in the conservation and sustainable 
use of biological diversity and in matters relating t o equitable 
sharing of benefits, to be appointed by the Central Government; 
(ii)  three ex officio members to be appointed by the Central 
Government, one representing the Ministry dealing with Tribal 
Affairs and two representing the Ministry dealing with 
Environment and Forests of whom one shall be the Additional 
Director General of Forests or the Director General of Forests; 
(iii)  Seven ex officio members to be appointed by the Central 
Government to  represent respectively the Ministries of the 
Central Government dealing with– 
(a) Agricultural Research and Education; 
(b) Biotechnology; 
(c) Ocean Development; 
(d) Agriculture and Cooperation; 
(e) Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy; 
(f) Science and Technology; 
(g) Scientific and Industrial Research; 
(h) five non -official members to  be appointed from amongst 
specialists and scientists having special knowledge of, or 
experience in, matters relating to conservation of biological 
diversity, sustainable use of biological resources and 
equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of 
biological resources, representatives of industry, 
conservers, creators and knowledge -holders of biological 
resources. 

 
 
193 
 
6.86 About the infrastructure and manpower at the disposal of the Authority 
the Committee were informed that the Office of NBA is now located in a 
rented accommodation at M/s TICEL BioPark, a Government of Tamil Nadu 
undertaking. Total area hired is 8600 sq.ft. (super built area). Action has 
been initiated to obtain land for construction of own building to house the 
office of the NBA fro m Government of Tamil Nadu for which requisition has 
been made for allotment of 5 acres of land. 
6.87 Furthermore, the staff position as on date is as follows: 
Name of the post Sanctioned 
strength 
Men-in-position Vacancy 
 
Chairman 1 1 - 
 
Secretary 1 1 - 
 
PS to Chairperson 1 1 - 
 
PS to Member Secretary 1 1 - 
 
Administrative Officer 1 1 - 
 
Accounts Officer 1 1 - 
 
Technical Officer 
- IPR …..1 
- Benefit sharing..1 
 
2 1 1 
Advisor (Law) 1 1 - 
 
Office/Computer Assists 2 2 - 
 
Technical Assistants 2 2 - 
 
Stenographer “C” 1 1 - 
 
Stenographer “D” 
 
1 - 1 
Peon 1 
(1 post 
surrendered & 2 
to be filled by 
outsourcing ) 
 
1 - 
 
Total 16 14 2 
 
 
6.88 The qualification for the post of Technical Officer (IPR) is under 
revision and hence the post has not been filled up. Efforts to fill up the post 
of Stenographer D through deputation are not fruitful in spite of several 

 
 
194 
 
attempts and now action is being ta ken to fill up the post through direct 
recruitment. 
6.89 About the adequacy of the manpower the authority informed the 
Committee that there is shortage of personnel in NBA with requisite 
technical and scientific knowledge to meet the growing work load. The  posts 
sanctioned to NBA are solitary posts and hence persons recruited against 
such posts do not have promotional opportunities due to lack of promotion 
policy in NBA. To avoid trained personnel leaving NBA for want of 
promotional opportunities, a consult ant viz. National Productivity Council 
under Ministry of Commerce, Government of India has been engaged for job 
study, devising the promotion policy, appropriate incentive scheme and 
suggesting creation of additional posts. The work is in progress. 
6.90 Section 8(4)(a) of Biological Diversity Act stipulates as follows: 
A  Chairperson, who shall be an eminent person having 
adequate knowledge and experience in the conservation and 
sustainable use of biological diversity and in matters relating to 
equitable sharing of benefits, to be appointed by the Central 
Government 
6.91 The following have been appointed as Chairpersons since the 
establishment of the Authority. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Chairman Tenure 
 
1 Dr.Balakrishna Pisupati From 12th August 2011 onwards 
2 Shri M.F. Farooqui, IAS 11th Nov 2010 to 11th Aug 2011 
 
3 Dr. P.L. Gautam 31st Dec 2008 to 3rd Nov 2010 
4 Shri P.R.Mohanty, IFS 01st Oct 2008 to 31st Dec 2008 
 
5 Shri G.K. Prasad, IFS 20th May 2008 to 30th Sep 2008 
 
6 Dr.S.Kannaiyan 20th May 2005 to 19th May 2008 
 
7 Shri Viswanath Anand, IAS 01st Oct 2003 to 14th July 2004 
The Sl. No.1,3 and 6 were appointed as regular/full time Chairman. The rest held the 
charge of Chairman additionally. 
6.92 Queried as to whether Section 8 (4)(a) was adhered to while finalizing 
each of these appointments, it was replied that the Section 8(4) (a) was 

 
 
195 
 
adhered to in finalizing the appointments. There were no deviations from 
Section 8(4) (a) while finalizing the appointments of Chairmen. 
6.93 The Committee also found that Section 13(1) of the Act stipulates as 
follows: 
13(1). The National Biodiversity Authority may constitute a committee 
to deal with agrobiodiversity. 
Explanation – For the purposes of this sub -section, “agro-biodiversity” 
means biological diversity of agriculture related species and their wild 
relatives. 
6.94 Asked as to on how many occasions has the committee to deal with 
agro-biodiversity constituted by the Authority in terms of Section 13 of the 
Act since the establishment of the Authority, it was stated that NBA has 
constituted an expert committee to deal with agro -biodiversity matters in 
December 2005. Further the committee has been re -constituted on 27th 
October, 2009 and the term was extended. 
6.95 About the composition of the said committee and its tenure on each 
occasion, it was stated that in 2005, the first committee was constituted 
with a chairperson and 15 members. (3 years)and in 2009, the committee 
was re -constituted with a chairperson and 18 members. (Renewed after 
every 6 months) 
6.96 Asked further about the number of times the said committee met 
during each of its term, it was stated that during the first and second term 
the committee has met one time each.  
The Section 18(1) of the Biological Diversity Act states as follows: 
18(1) It shall be the duty of the National Biodiversity Authority to 
regulate activities referred to in sections 3, 4 and 6 and by 
regulations issue guidelines for access to biological resources and 
for fair and equitable benefit sharing. 
6.97  When asked to furnish copies of guidelines issues in terms of obligation 
laid down on the Authority in Se ction 18(1), the Authority informed the 
Committee that the guidelines are under finalization. In this connection, a 
draft template on ABS was prepared by the Expert committee and discussed 

 
 
196 
 
at length in the Authority meeting and it was decided that it needs further 
fine tuning and improvement. The Authority desired that after fine tuning 
and improvement the same may be placed in the NBA website for inviting 
comments from different quarters. It was also decided to hold a special 
workshop inviting stakeholders, institutions concerned to discuss about draft 
ABS guidelines including template for finalization. It is taking considerable 
time as it is a new subject area and there are no previous templates that 
exist in our country to decide the appropriateness of benefit sharing when 
bioresources/genetic resources form a part of the product. 
6.98 As of now the access applications are being processed and benefit 
sharing components are determined on a case -by-case basis under the 
broad framework of the Biological Diversity Rules, 2004. 
(vii) Food Safety and Standards Authority of India  
 
6.99 The Committee were informed that i n India multiple regulations for 
food have been enacted at different points of time. There are different laws 
which deal with food products and standards. Some of these are Prevention 
of Food Adulteration Act, 1954; Fruit Products Order, 1955; Meat Food 
Products Order, 1973; Vegetable Oil Produ cts (Control) Order, 1947; Edible 
Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1947; Solvent Extracted Oil, De -oiled 
Meal and Edible Flour (Control) Order,1967; Milk and Milk Products 
Order,1992; and various provisions of the Essential Commodities Act, 195 6.   
Multiplicity of laws creates confusion in the minds of consumers, traders, 
manufacturers and investors and prevents a coordinated approach to food 
safety issues.  A number of committees, including the Standing Committee 
of Parliament on Agriculture in their Twelfth ( Fourteenth Lok Sabha) Report 
presented to the Parliemnt on 20  April 2005, have emphasized the need for 
a single regulatory body and an integrated food law. The Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006 consolidates eight laws governing the food sector and 
established the Food Safety and Standards Authority (FSSA) to regulate the 
sector. The Act was passed in 2006 and the Food Safety and Standards 
Authority established in 2008.   
6.100  The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (the Act) has 12 chapters 
containing 101 sections and two schedules. The Act incorporates the salient 

 
 
197 
 
provisions of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954, and is based on 
international best practice in the application of science to food safety issues. 
This Act with its three tier structure (an apex Food Safety and Standards 
Authority, a Central Advisory Committee and various Scientific Panels and 
Committees) is expected to lay more emphasis on science based and 
transparency decisions in both standard setting and implementation. The 
new law recognizes the fact that hazards to food can arise from any link in 
the food supply chain and a risk based approach is required to minimi ze the 
hazards and ensure public safety. 
6.101  Objectives of the Integrated Food Law are to: 
 Consolidate the laws relating to food and establish a single 
reference point for all matters relating to food safety and 
standards, by moving from multi-level, multi-departmental control 
to a single line of command. 
 Establish the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) as an apex regulatory authority for laying down science 
based standards for articles of food. 
 Regulate manufacture, storage, distribution and sale and import of 
articles of food to ensure availability of safe and wholesome food 
for human consumption. 
 Pool infrastructure, manpower and testing facilities for better 
standard fixation and enforcement through their proper 
redeployment and consideration. 
New provisions of FSS Act  
 Covering Functional Foods, supplements, Nutraceuticals  
 Issue of Licenses within 2 months of application. 
 Provision of Improvement Notice by Designated Officers  
 Prosecution, should be within 1 year of offence.  
 Special Courts for summary trials  
 Compensation to Victims (for any case of Injury/ Grievous injury/ 
Death)  
 Rewards to informers (informing about the violators – adulteration 
etc.) by State Govt.  

 
 
198 
 
 One composite license for unit(s) falling in one area   
 Encouraging Self regulation and adherence to specified food safety 
management systems.  
 No License for petty food business operators; only registration is 
mandatory  
 Central licensing from Authority for high risk items.  
 Food Safety Officer with a wider mandate wi ll replace food 
Inspector. 
 Decriminalization of law and expeditious disposal of cases  
 Financial penalties for less serious cases. 
 Right to contest laboratory results by opting to send sample to 
accredited laboratory. 
6.102 About the mandate, role and responsibility and the powers of the 
Authority the Committee were informed that Food Authority has the 
mandate of laying down science based standards for articles of food and to 
regulate their manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure 
availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption. The 
responsibilities are as follows: 
(a) Developing the standards and guidelines in relation to articles of 
food and specifying an appropriate system for enforcing various 
standards notified under this Act; 
(b)  fixation of the limits for use of food additives, crop 
contaminants, pesticide residues, residues of veterinary drugs, 
heavy metals, processing aids, myco -toxins, antibiotics and 
pharmacological active substances and irradiation of food; 
(c)  notifying the mechanisms and guidelines for accreditation of 
certification bodies engaged in certification of food safety 
management systems for food businesses; 
(d)  developing the procedure and the enforcement of quality control 
in relation to any article of food imported into India; 
(e)  developing the procedure and guidelines for accreditation of 
laboratories and notification of the accredited laboratories; 

 
 
199 
 
(f)  notifying the method of sampling, analysis and exchange of 
information among enforcement authorities; 
(g)  conduct survey of enforcement and administration of this Act in 
the country; 
(h)  lay down food labelling standards including claims on health, 
nutrition, special dietary uses and food category systems for 
foods; and 
(i)  the manner in which and the procedure subject to which risk 
analysis, risk assessment, risk communication and risk 
management shall be undertaken. 
(j)  provide scientific advice and technical support to the Central 
Government and the State Governments in matters of fram ing 
the policy and rules in areas which have a direct or indirect 
bearing on food safety and nutrition; 
(k)  search, collect, collate, analyse and summarise relevant scientific 
and technical data particularly relating to – 
(i) food consumption and the exposure of individuals to risks 
related   to the consumption of food; 
(ii) incidence and prevalence of biological risk; 
(iii) contaminants in food; 
(iv) residues of various contaminants; 
(v) identification of emerging risks; and 
(vi) introduction of rapid alert system; 
(l)  promote, co -ordinate and issue guidelines for the development 
of risk assessment methodologies and monitor and conduct and 
forward messages on the health and nutritional risks of food to 
the Central Government, State Governments and Commissioners 
of Food Safety; 
(m)  provide scientific and technical advice and assistance to the 
Central Government and the State Governments in 

 
 
200 
 
implementation of crisis management procedures with regard to 
food safety and to draw up a general plan for crisis  management 
and work in close co -operation with the crisis unit set up by the 
Central Government in this regard; 
(n)  establish a system of network of organisations with the aim to 
facilitate a scientific co-operation framework by the co-ordination 
of activities, the exchange of information, the development and 
implementation of joint projects, the exchange of expertise and 
best practices in the fields within the Food Authority‟s 
responsibility; 
(o)  provide scientific and technical assistance to the Centra l 
Government and the State Governments for improving co -
operation with international organisations; 
(p)  take all such steps to ensure that the public, consumers, 
interested parties and all levels of panchayats receive rapid, 
reliable, objective and compre hensive information through 
appropriate methods and means; 
(q)  provide, whether within or outside their area, training 
programmes in food safety and standards for persons who are or 
intend to become involved in food businesses, whether as food 
business operators or employees or otherwise; 
(r)  undertake any other task assigned to it by the Central 
Government to carry out the objects of this Act; 
(s)  contribute to the development of international technical 
standards for food, sanitary and phyto-sanitary standards; 
(t)  contribute, where relevant and appropriate to the development 
of agreement on recognition of the equivalence of specific food 
related measures; 
 (u)  promote co-ordination of work on food standards undertaken by 
international governmental and nongovernmental organisations; 

 
 
201 
 
(v)  promote consistency between international technical standards 
and domestic food standards while ensuring that the level of 
protection adopted in the country is not reduced; and 
(w)  promote general awareness as to food safety and food 
standards. 
 
6.103  When asked about the adequacy of infrastructure, manpower, 
facilities, etc. available with the Authority vis-a-vis task at hand and the 
steps being taken to remove shortfalls,  if any along with their time-lines the 
Authority replied that The  Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 seeks to 
replace the multiple food laws, standard setting bodies and enforcement 
agencies prevalent in the country with one integrated food law. Hitherto, 
food was being regulated in the countr y through various agencies under 
different Ministries/Departments. The States/UTs are responsible for 
implementation of Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, while there are 
other central agencies under various Acts and Orders viz., the Fruit Products  
Order, 1955, the Meat Food Products Order,1973, the Milk and Milk Products 
Order, 1992, the Vegetable Oil Products (Control) Order, 1947, the Edible 
Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998, the Solvent Extracted Oil, De oiled 
Meal, and Edible Flour (Contr ol) Order,1967 and any other order issued 
under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 for licensing of manufactures. 
The food regulatory mechanism had several bottlenecks in implementation 
as follows: 
(a) Multiplicity of food laws, standard setting and enfor cement 
agencies for different sectors of food  
(b) Varied Quality/Safety standards and poor harmonization 
(c) Thin spread of manpower, poor laboratories infrastructure and 
other resources  
(d) Standards rigid and non -responsive to scientific advancements 
and modern technologies 
(e) Poor information dissemination to consumers. 
6.104  The key  features  of  the  Food  Safety  and Standards Act, 2006 to  
 

 
 
202 
 
address the challenges in food safety are: 
(a) Movement from multi -level and multi -department control to a 
single line of command 
(b) FSSAI as a single reference point for all matters relating to Food 
Safety and Standards, Regulations and Enforcement 
(c) Unified licensing system and provision for registration of small 
food business operators 
(d) Achieve high degree of consume r confidence in quality and  
safety of food 
(e) Effective, transparent and accountable regulatory framework 
(f) Emphasis on gradual shift from regulatory regime to self 
compliance 
(g) Adequate information dissemination on food to enable consumer 
to make informed choices.  
(h) Mechanism for speedy disposal of cases and provision for graded 
penalties based on gravity of offense 
(i) Food laboratories accredited by NABL or other suitable agency. 
(j) Focus on food safety throughout the entire food chain. 
(k) Preventive approach based on food safety system rather than 
end product approach. 
(l) Emphasis on training and capacity building of all stakeholders 
(m) Consistency between domestic and international food standards 
without reducing safeguards to public health and consumer 
protection 
6.105  The following activities have been done so far toward the 
implementation of FSS Act, 2006:  
(a) Food Authority/ Central Advisory Committee, 8 Scientific Panels, 
and Scientific Committee established. 
(b) Integration of Staff under section 90 from various 
Ministries/Departments 
(c) Gap analysis study of  50 State Food Testing Laboratories  
completed 
(d) Food Import regulation mechanism started at major ports of 
entries. 

 
 
203 
 
(e)  Regular interactions with State/ UTs to ensure preparation 
toward implementation 
(f) Awareness Generation, Training of State regulators (more than 
400 personnel trained including trainers),  
(g) More than 20 National consultations/ Regional Conferences 
including one International workshop conducted 
(h)  Framework for accreditation of the food laboratories, 
Certification/Inspection bodies to audit compliance to food safety 
system, Food safety Plan.  
(i) Rules for various provisions under FSS Act, 2006 notified on 5-5-
2011. 
(j) Regulations for various provisions under FSS Act, 2006 are 
under approval and likely to be notified shortly 
 
6.106  Although, the Act was notified on 24 th August, 2006, the Food Safety 
and Standards Authority of India was notified only on 5 th September, 2008. 
The Authority could start functioning from January/ February, 2009 with the 
transfer of staff fr om various Ministries/ Departments and the appointment 
of a full time Chief Executive Officer.  
 
6.107  The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 will come into force three 
months after the notification of the Rules, i.e. from 5 th August, 2011. The 
next 5 years are therefore, very crucial as several new activities and 
initiatives will take off, for which adequate infrastructure, including increased 
manpower, is absolutely essential for successful enforcement of the Act. The 
enforcement of the Act is through the State Government machinery and 
State Governments need to be appropriately and quickly strengthened to 
ensure effective enforcement. In the first three years of its existence, the 
FSSAI has been allotted Rs.8.00cr in 2008 -09, Rs.21.00cr. in 2009 -10 and 
Rs. 32.37 cr ore in 2010 -11 mainly for salaries and miscellaneous 
administrative expenses. This level of fund allotment cannot obviously meet 
the requirements of  FSSAI in the subsequent years and will be grossly 
inadequate for ca rrying out its mandate.  Therefore, FSSAI requires 
substantial funding for the next 5 years both for Central level and State level 
infrastructure and manpower. 
 

 
 
204 
 
6.108  The following was submitted by the Authority about the problems to 
be addressed:   
(a) Inadequate infrastructure, manpower and other resources at the 
Central and State levels for enforcement of the FSS Act. 
(b) Inadequate laboratory infrastructure at Central and State levels for 
testing of food articles. 
(c) Lack of awareness of consumers and other stakeholders about food 
safety issues. 
(d) Existing licensing mechanism under multiple agencies which needs 
to be replaced with a unified licensing/ registration mechanism 
under the FSS Act. 
(e) Lack of any integrated food safety surveillance system, including 
surveillance of imported food. 
(f) Need for establishment of e - governance system from panchayat 
level upwards for food safety matters. 
(g) Absence of any national level state of the art institution for carrying 
out research on food science and risk assessment. 
(h) Lack of trained personnel and absence of any central training 
institute to cater to the requirements of FSSAI for implementation 
of the FSS Act.   
6.109  About the steps proposed to Address the above Problems, it was 
submitted that the following activities are proposed for addressing the above 
issues: 
A.    At Central level 
(a) Strengthening of FSSAI‟s headquarters 
 Staffing with adequate number of appropriately qualified 
personnel 
 Construction of new office building for FSSAI headquarter 
 Construction of residential accommodation for FSSAI staff 
(b) Development of science based standards  
 Recruiting personnel with qualifications and expertise in 
relevant field 

 
 
205 
 
 Establishment of a National Food Science and Risk 
Assessment Centre 
(c) Food testing facilities 
 Upgradation of existing Central Food Laboratory at Kolkata 
and establishment of new CFL at Mumbai. 
 Establishment of  testing facilities for genetically modified 
food. 
(d) Surveillance mechanism 
 Development of a food safety surveillance framework and 
establishing a mec hanism for surveillance, both active and 
passive, which will be implemented through a competent 
agency selected through a competitive process. 
 Safety of imported food for which adequate number of 
personnel, and infrastructure for new offices are required. 
(e) Enforcement of the Act 
 Staff requirement for central licensing 
 Awareness generation and educational programmes 
 Communication through media 
 Development of training material and special courses in 
association with professional institutions and universities 
 Establishment of National Food Safety Training Institute 
(NFSTI) 
 Training of stakeholders at NFSTI 
(f) Reward scheme for information on adulterated/ unsafe food 
(g) Establishment of a national helpline 
B. At State level 
(a) Strengthening of district level food safety office 
 Construction of building 
 Provision of office equipment, vehicle etc. 
(b) Food testing facilities 

 
 
206 
 
 Upgradation of  62 public food laboratories  
 Upgradation of 10 public food laboratories to referral 
laboratories 
 Providing one mobile food laboratory each to every State 
and U.T. 
 Providing one food laboratory each to 150 districts. 
(c) Establishment of emergency response centre in each State 
(d) Training programmes by the States/ UTs 
(e) Information, education and communication activities of the State 
Governments 
(f) E- governance from panchayat level upwards 
 Existing networks of other Ministries will be utilised.  
6.110  When queried about the ongoing initiatives the following information 
was submitted to the Committee:  
(a) 355 posts have been sanctioned for FSSAI in September, 2010, 
most of the Service Rules have been approved by the 
Government and Recruitment Rules are being finalised for filling 
up the posts. Besides the Authority has further made a tentative 
assessment of  manpower requirement for catering to various 
responsibilities assigned to the Authority as per FSS Act, 2006 
over next plan period for its effective and smooth 
implementation.  
(b) Gap analysis of 50 food testing laboratories has been carried 
out. 
(c)  Imported f ood clearance process has been taken over at 5 
ports, 4 airports and ICDs at Delhi and operationalisation of 
activities at 7 additional ports planned for 2011-12.  
(d)  FSSAI Regional Offices have been established in Delhi and 
Mumbai. 
(e)  Process of standard setting for some new items as, for example 
probiotics, food for special purpose and nutritional uses, 
alcoholic drinks, trans fatty acids, GM food labelling, caffeinated 
beverages etc. have been initiated. 

 
 
207 
 
(f) Training programmes have been organised for Food Safet y 
Commissioners, Food Safety Officers (ToT), Designated Officers 
and Authorized Officers (for imported food safety). Several 
States have conducted further training programmes for their 
Food Safety Officers.  
(g) For awareness generation, print advertisements o n food safety, 
feature programme on Doordarshan, Kalyani and radio jingles on 
AIR have already been initiated. Pamphlets, brochures etc. on 
FSSAI have been widely distributed. FSSAI also has a very 
informative website which is daily updated. 
(h) Advisories have been issued by FSSAI whenever warranted, as 
for example in the case of melamine in imported milk, possibility 
of radioactive contamination in imported foods from Japan, 
antibiotics in honey etc. 
(i) FSSAI has established linkages with relevant institutes for  
development of training material or conducting studies/ surveys 
or advising FSSAI in technical matters. Such institutes are IIPA, 
IGNOU, NIN, IIMB, EIC, NISG, APEDA, NDDB, QCI, IVRI and 
CFTRI. 
6.111  As regards timelines for the purpose it was stated that  the activities 
of FSSAI are ongoing. However,  the first 5 years after the Act comes into 
force are the most crucial years as the success of the Act and the fulfilment 
of its mandate will totally depend on the availability of funds for initiating all 
the a ctivities included in the scheme. Therefore, budget requirement has 
been projected for the first 5 years, which coincides with the Twelfth Five 
Year Plan period. 
 
6.112  Asked to spell out the quantum of fund required for the activities 
proposed the following estimates were furnished to the Committee:  
Broad Head of Activity/ Initiative Fund Required in 12 th Plan 
Period(Rs.in crore) 
Central Level  State/UT level  
Strengthening of Food Safety Infrastructure both at 
Central and State level 
630.00  410.00  

 
 
208 
 
Note: Financial outlay of Rs. 2,530 crore required by State/UT Governments in terms of only salary of 
manpower for Enforcement System during the 12th Five Year Plan is not included in the above.  
Regulating and Monitoring of Imported food 
As per Clause 16 of the Act: 
 (1) „it shall be the duty of the Food Authority to regulate and 
monitor the manufacture, processing, distribution, sale and import of 
food so as to ensure safe and wholesome food.    
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (1), the Food 
Authority may by regulations specify - 
(a) The standards and guidelines in relation to articles of food 
and specifying an appropriate system for enforcing various 
standards notified under this Act 
(b) the limits for use of food additives, crop contaminants, 
pesticide residues, residues of veterinary drugs, heavy 
metals, processing aids, myco -toxinz, antibiotics and 
pharmacological active substances and irradiation of food; 
(c) the mechanisms and guidelines for accreditation of 
certification bodies engaged in certification of food safety 
management systems for food businesses; 
(d) the procedure and the enforcement of quality control in 
relation to any article of food imported into India; 
(e) the procedure and guidelines for accreditation of 
laboratories and notification of the accredited laboratories; 
(f) the method of sampling, analysis and exchange of 
information among enforcement authorities; 
Strengthening of Food Laboratory Infrastructure 
(Including Up -gradation of 72 Public Labs, Mobile Labs, 
Food Lab at each District, National Food Science & Risk 
Assessment Centre and Up-gradation of CFLs 
195.00  1021.00  
Training & Capacity Building of Stakeholders including 
National Food Safety Training Institute 
15.00  30.00  
E-Governance system for Food Safety from Panchayat 
upwards and Food Safety Surveillance 
506.00  50.00  
Communication, Awareness & Educational Programmes 900.00  350.00  
New Building for FSSAI Headquarter & Housing facility 
for staff 
450.00  -  
SUB- TOTAL  2696.00  1861.00  
GRAND TOTAL  4557.00  

 
 
209 
 
(g) conduct survey of enforcement and administration of this 
Act in the Country; 
(h) food labeling standards including  claims on health, 
nutrition, special dietary uses and food category systems 
for foods; and  
(i) the manner in which and the procedure subject to which 
risk analysis, risk assessment, risk communication and risk 
management shall be undertaken.  
6.113  As reportedly food products/commodities derived from transgenic 
sources are being sold in the Country, the Committee desired to know about 
the action taken by the Authority with a view to regulate the distribution, 
sale and import of such items.  In response they were informed that a t 
present all matters pertaining to GM Organisms including GM food is 
regulated by Genetic Engineering Approval Committee of the Ministry of 
Environment & Forest in the Country.  
6.114  Asked further if the Authority by means of a specified regulation 
defined limits for use of food additives, crops contaminants, pesticide 
residues, residues of veterinary drugs, heavy metals, processing aids, myco -
toxinz, antibiotics and pharmacological active substances and irradiation of 
food, it was submitted that the draft Food Safety and Standards Regulations, 
2010 were published vide Notification dated 20 -10-2010 for inviting public 
comments. Based on the comments received, the Regulations are under 
process of finalization.  
(1) The use of food additives and their limits and irradiation of foods 
are covered under Food Safety and Standards (Food Products 
standards and Food Additive) Regulations, 2011.  
(2) The definitions and limits etc. of heavy metals, crop 
contaminants, myco -toxinz, pesticide residues and residue of 
veterinary drugs, antibiotics are covered under separate regulation 
namely Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins and 
Residues) Regulations, 2011.  
(3) The labelling of Irradiated Foods is given under Food Safety and 
Standards (Packaging and Labelling) Regulations, 2011.  
6.115  It was further submitted that t he above Regulations are in line with 
existing Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 which will be repealed 

 
 
210 
 
after the new regulations are notified shortly. The Chapter on Processing 
Aids has not been prescribed presently and this will be considered by 
Scientific Panel on Food Additives, Flavouring, Processing Aids and Material 
in Contact with Food before the dra ft Regulations in this regard are 
published for public comments.  
6.116  About the Authority having specified mechanisms and guidelines for 
accreditation of certification bodies engaged in certification of food safety 
management systems for food businesses, the Committee were told that the 
number and capabilities of regulatory agencies in the states, municipalities 
and panchayats are currently inadequate and it will take some time for 
building up a strong cadre of food safety officers across the country. Keeping 
in view the emphasis placed by the Act on self compliance, it is necessary for 
the Food Authority to put in place detailed guidance documents on food 
safety requirements to be followed by food business operators. This will 
enable FBOs to assess thems elves against these requirements and retain 
evidence of their due diligence in this regard.   
6.117  The Act specifies that the primary responsibility for safety is on the 
food business operators and for this, implementation of appropriate food 
safety mana gement systems is essential for which the FBO can be held 
accountable. The FSSAI as a part of its regulations has developed reference 
documents which prescribe and provide levels of safety and provide 
guidelines and norms which can at the same time, be eva luated.  FBOs are 
required to comply with these requirements with whatever resources 
available and gradually achieve acceptable levels of safety.  In a sector 
which is characterised by complex technology, unorganised operations and 
large number of small pl ayers, only a flexible system of self compliance, to 
be periodically audited by the regulator, will be feasible. The degree of 
compliance can then be checked by periodic regulatory inspection. It will 
also incentivise better safety practices in industry, t hereby reducing the 
need for frequent inspections. 
6.118  The following draft documents have been developed to support the 
framework through competent implementation agency:  
 Requirements for certification bodies / Inspection Bodies  

 
 
211 
 
 Procedure for Recognition of Certification / Inspection Bodies by 
FSSAI and application form  
 India HACCP standards requirements 
 Agreement to be signed between recognized CBs/IBs and FSSAI 
 Agreement between FSSAI and NABCB 
 Certification criteria for Food S afety Professional along with 
competence requirements. 
 Certification Process of Food Safety Professionals 
6.119  To a query of the Committee as  to whether the  procedure and the 
enforcement of quality control in relation to any article of food imported into  
India in general and of commodities/food products derived from transgenic 
sources has been specified by the Authority, it was stated that the following 
Framework for Safety of Imported Food has been laid down by FSSAI:  
 Demand for imported food items has increased considerably in India 
coinciding with the impressive economic growth achieved by the 
Country and concurrent changes in the import regulations since last 
few years. Imports into India are permitted to be made through 255 
entry points. These includ e 82 customs ports, 32 customs airports, 
132 land customs stations and 9 foreign post offices/sub -foreign 
post offices. According to Directorate General of Commercial 
Intelligence & Statistics (DGCI&S), Ministry of Commerce, data 
India imported more than 76 lakh MTs of food items during 2007-08 
and 2008-09.  
 Under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, the Food Authority 
has also the mandate of ensuring safety of food items imported into 
the country.  
 Port Health Officers (PHOs) of Directorate General of Health 
Services (DGHS) who were performing the duty of taking samples of 
imported food items under section 6 of PFA Act and getting tested in 
Central Food Laboratories (CFLs) or PFA labs in States had 
withdrawn from the services related imported food safety at some of 
the ports.   
 Keeping in view the mandate under FSS Act and based on the 
discussion & deliberations, it was realized that the FSSAI should get 

 
 
212 
 
into the process of imported food clearance through appointment of 
Authorised Officers in pursuance o f section 47(5) of FSS Act, 2006 
and take over the functions of PHOs where services had been 
withdrawn by DGHS.  
 The FSSAI has operationalized the Food Import Clearance Process 
since August -September, 2010 in a phased manner through 
appointment of Authorized Officers in terms of section 47(5) of the 
FSS Act, 2006, at Chennai, Kolkata, Haldia, Mumbai and JNPT 
seaports, Chennai International Airport, Mumbai International 
Airport, Kolkata International Airport, Indira Gandhi International 
Airport, New Delhi, C ONCOR-ICD Tug hlakabad, CWC -ICD 
Patparganj, ICD Faridabad/Ballabhgarh, ICD Dadri and ICD Loni in 
the NCR region.  
 The functions of the FSSAI‟s Authorized Officer inter alia include the 
existing functions of the Port Health Officer under the PFA Act, 1954 
with respect to imported food clearance process, in co -ordination 
with the Customs authorities.  
 Adequate numbers of NABL accredited laboratories have been 
authorized at these locations for analysis of samples of imported 
food items.  
 MIS system to put impor t activities online has already been 
developed and pilot run has been started at Chennai w.e.f. 1 st June, 
2011.  
 Draft Food Import Regulations have also been developed. 
 Total 29,756 Samples (till 31 st May, 2011) tested so far out which 
152 were non-conforming. 
6.120  The FSSAI will also develop data base for risk based food clearance 
system in due course. 
6.121  With regard to the import of foods derived from transgenic sources, 
the relevant provisions of Section 22 of Food Safety & Standards Act, 2006, 
which mandates Food Safety & Standards Authority (FSSAI) to regulate 
genetically modified food, have not been notified by the Government. 
However, on 7th April 2006, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry through 
Director General of Foreign Trade  (DGFT) has notified new regulation for 

 
 
213 
 
import of GM products by amending Schedule - I (Imports) of the ITC (HS) 
Classifications of Export and Import Items, 2004-09 under the Foreign Trade 
Policy (2004-09) to be effective from 1st April 2006. As a result of the new 
import policy, (i) all  applications for import of GMOs/LMOs for research, bulk 
import of GM food, feed, raw or processed or any ingredient of food, food 
additives or any food produc t that contains GM materials will require prior 
approval by GEAC; (ii) At the time of import, all consignments containing 
products which have been subjected to genetic modification will carry a 
declaration stating that the product is „Genetically Modified‟ . (iii) In case 
such a consignment does not carry this  declaration and is later found to 
contain genetically modified material, the  importer is liable to penal action 
under the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992. 
6.122  About the Authority having laid down the procedure and issued 
guidelines for accreditation of laboratories and notified accredited 
laboratories, the Committee were informed that under sections 16(2) and 43 
of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, the Food Authori ty is mandated 
to lay down the procedure and guidelines for accreditation of laboratories 
and notification of the accredited laboratories.  FSSAI may notify 
laboratories and research institutions accredited by NABL or any other 
accreditation agency. 
6.123 Food testing laboratories (under Central and State Govt.) are 
currently either deficient in equipments and infrastructure or lack adequately 
trained technical staff.  It will take some time for building up a strong cadre 
of food analysts and food microbiol ogists across the country.  Keeping in 
view the emphasis placed by the Act on the role of the food analyst and the 
standard of food testing laboratories, it is imperative for the Food Authority 
to put in place a reliable laboratory upgradation and accredit ation system.  
This will enable harmonisation of standards across the country with 
reliability, enabling food safety surveillance and monitoring, by incentivising 
laboratories both in the public and private sector to upgrade their technical 
skills, testing arrangements and infrastructure. 
6.124   Authority has undertaken a gap study of Central and State Food 
Testing Laboratories so as to formulate a strategy to operate them at 
acceptable levels of reliability and competence.  The study has indicated the 

 
 
214 
 
urgent need to upgrade infrastructure, strengthen staffing and training 
inputs and put in place more reliable laboratory management and operation 
procedures.  Currently there are also no reliable mechanisms to evaluate 
and benchmark the performance of the lab oratories through periodic inter 
laboratory comparisons.  The food testing system should promote good 
laboratory management techniques, improvement in test competencies and 
encouragement of best practices in food testing. 
6.125   FSSAI has adopted the foll owing framework for upgradation of food 
testing laboratories in the Country: 
1. An entry level/Preliminary standard is being  laid down for existing 
food testing laboratories in the public (Centre and State 
Government) sector which will be given a period o f one year to 
come up to acceptable levels of food testing to meet the 
requirements of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. Till then 
they will continue to perform the current functions so that there is 
no disruption of testing services.   
2. Guidance documents, operational protocols and reporting formats 
to be adhered to by food testing laboratories are being prepared.  
Food testing laboratories would also be required to report 
essential information regarding food hazards to the Food Safety 
and Standards A uthority without violating confidentiality 
requirements.  Food testing laboratories in the public sector will 
be given a period of 3 years for achieving NABL levels of 
reliability. 
3. Since FSSAI has taken over testing of food samples at selected 
ports of entry, it is necessary to put in place an effective system 
for sample testing by expanding the number of laboratories 
capable of undertaking such testing at high levels of reliability.  
The existing list of laboratories which are competent to test 
imported food will be expanded to make food testing at ports of 
entry more efficient and effective. Private laboratories would need 
to achieve and retain NABL level for them to perform these 
functions.  

 
 
215 
 
4. FSSAI is in the process of laying down the procedure for 
accreditation of referral laboratories.  Referral labs will have to 
adhere to the specified NABL standards suitably modified and 
accepted by FSSAI. The requirements of referral laboratories will 
be expanded to include capacity building, hand holding, traini ng 
etc.  in addition to those which are laid down in the NABL 
standards.  A mechanism for evaluating and benchmarking the 
competence of laboratories in these areas will also be laid down. 
5. Upgradation of State Food Testing Laboratories to NABL standards 
will be taken up on the basis of gap studies carried out, in 
association with the State Governments. States can also 
undertake projects to upgrade their labs to approved referral 
standards.  
6. The minimum requirements of food testing to be performed by 
laboratories will be developed by FSSAI and notified.  Since 
upgradation of food testing laboratories in the States will require 
considerable investment, additional staffing and training, it is 
necessary for capable organisations to be entrusted the task of 
coordination and turnkey delivery as Programme Implementing 
Agencies.  Programme Implementing Agencies will be identified 
through an open competition.   The deliverables from 
implementing agencies are being finalised and competent 
consultants will be assoc iated with the exercise to support the 
Programme Implementing Agencies.  The resources required for 
laboratory upgradation would be accessed from the schemes of 
the Government of India and also from the budget of Food 
Authority. 
7. Since the Food Business Operator will be now required under the 
FSSAI Licensing Regulations to undertake larger and more 
frequent number of sample testing to demonstrate due diligence 
of Good  Manufacturing Practices, a large number of laboratories 
both in the public and private sectors are required to be notified 
for food testing. 

 
 
216 
 
8. A Steering Committee under the chairmanship of Chairperson, 
FSSAI will be constituted in FSSAI to oversee the implementation 
of the Food Testing Laboratory Upgradation Strategy. 
6.126   The gap studi es have clearly established the need for supporting 
Government Laboratories in their upgradation efforts. On their own they 
may not be able to coordinate and execute the complex steps involved in 
procurement of equipments, training, staffing, putting in pl ace protocols and 
inter laboratory comparisons. Resources also would need to be mobilised. 
FSSAI will coordinate with the State Governments to help in the upgradation 
of these food testing laboratories in a defined time frame. 
6.127   When asked as to whether the Authority has worked out some 
system of sampling, analysis and exchange of information among 
enforcement authorities and the efficacy of the system put in place for the 
purpose it was submitted to the Committee that a fter the notification of th e 
Food Safety and Standards Rules, 2011, the procedure for undertaking 
samples and the methods of testing will undergo a change.  Rules 2.4.2 (7) 
of FSSA Rules provide details of the new procedure for sampling.  Under the 
new procedure for sampling, instea d of 3 samples, 4 samples will now be 
taken and the Food Business Operator will be given an opportunity to send 
one of the samples to an accredited laboratory for testing, in addition to the 
public laboratory to which the sample is sent.  In case there is difference in 
the results of the two labs, prosecution can only be launched if a referral 
laboratory confirms the presence of the contaminant and the violation of 
law. 
6.128   FSSAI has carried out a detailed review of the current methods of 
sampling pract ices being followed by the regulatory personnel in various 
parts of the country.  The general finding is that a large number of cases 
which have been filed in Courts have been contested on account of the faulty 
sampling procedures and testing protocols.  T his is mainly due to the lack of 
adherence to laid down procedures, inability of public laboratories to carry 
out food testing at the required levels of reliability and convince the Courts 
of the violation of law.  Under the FSS Act 2006, FSSAI is mandated  to 
accredit laboratories both in the public and private sector with the required 
capabilities for food testing.  FSSAI has already enrolled the services of 

 
 
217 
 
competent laboratories of NABL standards for doing testing of imported food 
products.  The accredit ation system for laboratories is also being finalised 
which will enable a much larger number of laboratories which will achieve 
NABL standards to enter the area of food testing. 
6.129   Separately, FSSAI also proposes to set up an expert committee to go 
into the current sampling practices and testing protocols to ensure that 
prosecution is carried out only on the basis of reliable sampling methodology 
and scientific testing protocols. 
6.130   About the regulations issued by the Authority in context of food 
safety and standards including claims of health, nutrition, special dietary 
uses and food categories systems for food including commodities/products 
derived from transgenic sources, the Committee, were informed that t he 
draft Food Safety and Standards Auth ority of India Regulations, 2010 have 
been notified in the Gazette of India (the Gazette No. 2 -15015/30/2010-
FSSAI) on 20 th October, 2010 inviting comments till 20 th November, 2010. 
The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India Regulations, 2010 have 
been sent for approval of the Central Government before final notification by 
the Food Authority. 
6.131   The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India is in the process of 
formulation of Draft Regulation on Foods for Special Nutritional or Dietary 
Uses, labelling claims & food categories systems of food additives.  However, 
the commodities/products derived from transgenic sources is not under the 
purview of Food Authority.  These draft Regulations is being considered by 
the Scientific Panels of the Food Authority. These draft regulations will then 
be considered by the Scientific Committee, Food Authority and  sent for 
Gazette Notification after the previous approval of Central Government. 
6.132   The Committee also desired to know the procedure laid down by the 
Authority subject to which risk analysis, risk assessment, risk 
communication and risk management sh all be undertaken in general and in 
the context of food commodities/products in transgenic sources in particular 
they were told that FSSAI has a significant role to play in ensuring a safe 
food supply by maintaining robust evidence based processes for deve loping 
food standards and responding to food safety issues which enables 

 
 
218 
 
consumers to make informed choices and maintain public confidence in 
safety of foods.  
6.133  FSSAI‟s general framework for risk analysis incorporating the key 
components of risk asse ssment, risk management and risk communication 
provides a systematic and disciplined approach. This framework provides 
with information and evidence required for effective decision making to 
support the development of standards, manage emerging issues and to 
provide consumers with adequate information leading to effective food 
safety outcomes and improvement in public health. This overarching general 
framework for risk analysis is further supplemented by the risk analysis 
policy and procedures of individual  scientific panels to deal with specific 
issues in their areas of concern.  
6.134  The Act stipulates that the Food Authority shall also - 
(a)  provide scientific advice and technical support to the Central 
Government and the State Governments in matter of framing 
the policy and rules in areas which have a direct or indirect 
bearing on food safety and nutrition; 
(b) search, collect, collate, analyse and summarise relevant 
scientific and technical data particularly relating to - 
(i) food consumption and the exposure of individuals to risks 
related to the consumption of food; 
(ii) contaminants in food; 
(iii) residues of various contaminants; 
 (iv) identification of emerging risks 
6.135  About the the activities of the Authority undertaken with a view to 
search, collect, collate, analyse and summaries relevant scientific and 
technical data as per their mandate in general and with particular reference 
to commodities/food product derived from transgenic origins it was stated 
that The Food Safety and Standard Authority of India (FSSAI) has been 
established with mandate of laying down science based standards for articles 
of food and to regulate their manuf acture, storage, distribution, sale and 
import, to ensure availability of safe and wholesome food for human 
consumption. Under Section  16 (3) (b) & (e) of the Food Safety and 
Standards Act,2006, the Food Authority shall search, collate, analyse and 

 
 
219 
 
summarise relevant scientific and technical data particularly relating to 
identification of emerging risks, incidence and prevalence of biological risk, 
introduction of a rapid alert system etc and establish a system of network of 
organizations with the aim to f acilitate a scientific co -operation framework 
by the co -ordination of activities, the exchange of information, the 
development and implementation of joint projects, the exchange of expertise 
and best practices in the fields within the Food Authority‟s responsibility. The 
Authority is also expected to track food safety trends and advise the 
Government suitably.  
6.136  Thus establishment of a network of organizations with the aim of 
facilitating scientific co -operation and research  & development on identified 
food safety issues by the co-ordination of such research activities is a critical 
mandate of the Authority. The Food Authority has to put in place a reliable 
system of identifying food safety threats and to undertake the necessar y 
research on these issues in a focussed manner. The objective is to formulate 
an appropriate scientific remedy in -line with the Act that will be 
comprehensive, science based and implementable in Indian conditions.  
6.137  The FSSAI has floated an Expressi on of interest inviting proposals 
from experienced agencies to develop and implement a scheme for 
undertaking (I) Research & Development, (II) establishment of Food Safety 
Centres and (III) Centers of Excellence in India.   
6.138  Amongst others, FSSAI is currently Woking with the following 
institutions on different issues related to Food Safety: 
 Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) 
Testing of imported food, scientific issues related to novel food 
products and neutraceuticals. 
Indian Institute of Toxicological Research, Lucknow.  
Issues related to Food Toxicology and food standards.  
6.139  FSSAI  since inception is making efforts to establish interface and 
working relationships with its various stakeholders at all levels as man dated 
under section 16(3) (c), 16(3) (g), 16(3) (n) and 29(3) of FSS Act 2006. The 
basic aim of Food Safety and Standards Act 2006 is to make food safety a 

 
 
220 
 
national movement.  The shift is to be achieved from controls to self 
regulation, self compliance an d motivation through focused communication 
and participation. The involvement and participation of all the stake holders 
is to be ensured by making consumers, industry and all other stake holders 
partner in the food safety.  
6.140  The biggest stake holder is consumer himself.  He is the one who 
takes the final decision on what to eat, and this establishes the requirement 
of food safety.  Nutrition, health and hygiene are other considerations for 
stake holders.   
6.141  The Committee  note that research and development and 
extension services in agriculture sector in the Government  domain 
is the responsibility of National Agricultural Research System headed 
by Department of Agricultural Research and Education/Indian 
Council of Agricult ural Research.  The policy matters rest with 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation.  The Department of 
Biotechnology in the Ministry of Science and Technology are the 
promoter Department of biotechnology including 
transgenics/genetical engineering in a gricultural crops.  Genetic 
Engineering Appraisal Committee under Ministry of Environment and 
Forests is the apex regulator which has the authority to accord 
approval for environmental/commercial release of a transgenic 
agricultural crops.  Some laboratori es under institutions like 
Department of Science and Technology, Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research/Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 
also undertake research and development activity in the field.   
6.142  Apart from these R&D, regulatory and promotional structures, 
any agricultural produce as it moves upwards with value addition in 
the food chain, moves into oversight, monitoring, evaluation and 

 
 
221 
 
assessment and regulatory domains of several other agencies of the 
Government for ass essment of its safety , quality, etc.   This system 
of concurrent and continuous oversight is essential since food is a 
basic necessity of the mankind.  Furthermore, the methods and 
technologies adopted for producing the food also have a profound 
and lasting impact, both positive and negative, not only on human 
and livestock health but also on environment, bio -diversity, bio -
safety and sustainability.  In this connection the Committee note 
that the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 
(as modified from time to time) have laid down clear cut instructions 
for all ministries/departments of the Government about what all is  
their individual role and responsibility in the scheme of governance.   
The Committee analysed and evaluated the performa nce of some of 
the ministries/departments /agencies in the context of what was 
expected of them with regard to the introduction of transgenics 
agricultural crops more specifically food crops in India and matters 
incidental to it.  The Committee note that th e Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation is the nodal Department for agriculture 
and cooperation.  The National Policy on Farmers, 2007 which is 
based on the recommendation of the National Commission of 
Farmers is to be implemented under its aegis.  Und er the NPF 2007, 
DAC is vested with the task of protecting and improving land, water, 
biodiversity and genetic resources, developing support services 
including provision for seeds, irrigation, power, machinery, 
fertilizers, implements and credit at afforda ble prices.  The Policy 
also lays emphasis on paying explicit attention to sustainable rural 
livelihoods.  NPF 2007 also specifies that efforts shall be made to 

 
 
222 
 
conserve as well as to develop bio -resources to ensure their 
sustainable use with equitable sha ring of benefits.  The Committee 
note that the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers‟ Right Act, 
2001 and Biological Diversity Act, 2002 have been enacted to 
achieve some of these objectives.   
6.143  The Committee further note that NPF 2007 elaborates  
importance of science and technology as the key drivers of change in 
farm operations and outputs and application of frontier technologies 
viz. Biotechnology, ICT, renewable energy technologies, space 
applications and n ano technology for improving productivity in 
agriculture.  All this, however, has to be don e with extreme caution 
and without compromising on bio -diversity, environment, human 
and livestock health.  
6.144  In view of the Committee, Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation has not dis charged its mandated responsibility in a 
professional manner, in so far as , the introduction of transgenic 
agricultural crops in India as a policy matter is concerned.  At that 
point of time it was a technology that was being applied in hardly a 
few countr ies whose agricultural practices, farmers profile, 
populations dependence on agriculture and allied sectors was totally 
different from the situation obtaining in India.  Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation failed to appreciate the fact that India 
has 70% population surviving on agriculture and allied activities 
against 2% or so farming community in USA, Canada, etc.  It also 
failed to appreciate the huge difference in size of land holdings in 
India where 70% of farmers are small and marginal ones with  

 
 
223 
 
average land holding of about 1.25 acre against hundreds of 
hectares of land owned by individual farmers in USA.  The huge 
differences in farmers‟ incomes, level s of mechanization, availability 
of irrigation facilities, etc. were also not properly analyse d.  The 
ineffectiveness of PPV &FRA Authority and National Biodiversity 
Authority which are virtually non -existence even now was also 
ignored.    
6.145  Another aspect on which Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation failed miserably was the cost of seed and other inputs 
that the introduction of transgenics in agricultural craps would 
entail.  The cost benefit analysis was clearly in favour of industry 
and not the farmers.  Resultantly, Bt. cotton seed was sold at a 
whopping Rs. 2200 per kg. when local see d cost hardly a fraction of 
it. The difference was so outrageously high that a judicial 
intervention was required to force the company in question to lower 
the price of seed.  Even now at Rs. 1 500 per kg. or so the cost of 
seed in the opinion of the Commit tee is still very high considering 
that for a majority of farmers in India for whom even a single rupee 
matters in these several distressful years of agrarian crisis this 
amount is a tall order.  The decline in yield after initial two three 
years of increa se due to reduction in yield loss caused by pests 
caused additional distress to the farmers.  Furthermore, the 
exorbitantly high input costs, as one of the witnesses, who has been 
closely monitoring Vidharbha region for years together, apprised the 
Committee that from an average Rs. 8000 to Rs. 12000 per acre 
investment in cultivating traditional varieties of cotton the farmer 

 
 
224 
 
had to invest a massive Rs. 48000 to Rs. 54000 per acre for Bt. 
cotton cultivation.  Thus the input cost escalated almost five times  
the yield did not increase in commensurate measures and even fell 
after the initial years.  Bt. cotton has also not been a sustainable 
agriculture technology.  The Committee have been informed by 
farmers that it uses massive quantities of water and other outputs.  
Though farmers in Gujarat, where availability of water is better than 
Vidharbha, were benefitted to some extent, in Vidharbha, however, 
Bt. cotton has only contributed towards agrarian crisis.  The better 
productivity of Bt. cotton also has not stood the test of time as in the 
latest estimates productivity figures have gone considerably down.  
In fact , Secretary of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
admitted before the Committee that several traditional varieties of 
cotton grown in Brazil h ad three times more yield than Bt. cotton 
yield in India and Brazil was not encouraging cultivation of Bt. 
cotton now.  A team of Government was going to Brazil to study 
these developments for being gainfully utilized in India.   
6.146  Another very important question that needs to be answered 
by DAC is about the approval for commercialization of Bt. cotton in 
India. Bt. cotton is a cash crop which in no way would have 
contributed to the food security of the Country.  The lacs and lacs of  
hectares of land that have got diverted to Bt. cotton cultivation 
because of misconception about its potential have obviously reduced 
the area of cultivation of several food crops during all these years 
thus jeopardizing the Country‟s food security to tha t extent.  That 
the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation did not discharge its 

 
 
225 
 
responsibility in terms of NPF 2007 even when commercialisation of 
Bt. brinjal was approved is apparent from the fact that brinjal 
though a staple food in many States of th e Country has never been 
in short supply inspite of losses caused by pests, etc..  Its cultivation 
is restricted to very small patches of farmers‟ fields and in the cost 
benefit terms brinjal was not going to make any noticeable 
difference in the fortunes of the vast majority of cultivators in the 
Country.  DAC also failed to appreciate that both in case of cotton 
and brinjal the Country has countless number of traditional varieties.  
Most of them have been wiped out in their natural form in case of Bt. 
cotton, and had the monatorium not been placed on the 
commercialisation of Bt. brinjal , the same fate  would have been 
fallen on the traditional bri njal varieties.  The Committee feel that 
this is a very serious matter and , therefore, recommend that an 
indepth probe may be carried out to track the decision making 
involved in commercial release of Bt. cotton right from the initial 
stage.  It has  to be found out how Bt. cotton became priority when 
the avowed goal for introduction of transgenics in agricultural crops 
was with a view to ensure and maintain food security. 
Department of Food and Public Distribution 
6.147  The Committee also examined the role of Department of Food 
and Public Distribution in this regard.  This Department procure 
colossal amounts of food grains for the central pool, stores them and 
then distributes the foodgrains through the Public Distribution 
System at affordable prices. The Department also represent the 
Government of India at various international fora on food related 

 
 
226 
 
matters.  The C ommittee during their interaction with the 
representatives of the Department of Food and Pubic Distribution 
ironically found that there was a total lack of appreciation of their 
own role with regard to procurement, handling, storage and 
distribution of food derived from transgenic food crops as and when 
the eventuality arose.  The stock reply to some of the major queries 
of the Committee was that the Department do not handle foodgrains 
produced from GM/transgenic crops. Subsequently, however, they 
admitted to Genetically Modified Crops posing challenges in the 
fields of food labeling, segregation and identification, preservation 
and procurement and storage points, testing facilities of the 
Genetically Modified Crops; provision of separate storage 
infrastructure and handling practices; and regulation of policies 
regarding such crops .  The Department also admitted that they 
would devise standard operating procedures and other ways and 
means to address the issue of foodgrains derived from GM crops 
plants once F SSAI and other concerned agencies issue their 
guidelines in the matter.  The Committee gathered a clear 
impression that the Department was not at all geared up to face the 
challenges that will be posed by transgenic food crops in the 
eventuality of labelin g, segregation of GM and Non -GM food  crops, 
movement of foodgrains between GM and Non -GM States, etc. 
becoming a reality in near future.  
Department of Consumer Affairs 
6.148  The examination of Department of Consumer Affairs which 
are the guardian of consumer rights in the Country also revealed the 

 
 
227 
 
same status of unawareness and unpreparedness in so far as 
handling of transgenic food crops and related aspects are concerned. 
The Committee found it indeed surprising that the Department which 
administer the C onsumer Protection Act, 1986 and which are 
intimately involved in the issues concerning consumer rights, 
consumer interest, informed consumer choice, etc. have not taken 
any proactive steps inspite of the controversies surrounding 
transgenic crops.  While justifying their inaction before the 
Committee they took refuge behind the Clause in the Consumer 
Protection Act which puts the onus for filing a complaint in an 
appropriate form on the consumer.  The Department were also 
blissfully unaware of the reports that commodities derived from 
transgenic food crops were coming into the Country, unchecked and 
uncontrolled and tried to wash their hands in the matter by stating 
that there is no stipulation regarding mandatory mention of any 
transgenic food in the exist ing rules.  On a persistent query of the 
Committee they volunteered only to the extent of amending, if 
necessary, the packaged commodities rules to make it mandatory for 
the manufacturer to indicate whether the product is a GM product.  
The Committee also found that the Bureau of Indian Standards 
which is a body under the Department has set up a technical 
Committee by the name of Biotechnology for Food and Agriculture 
Sectional Committee for standardization in the field of food and 
agriculture products deri ved from modern biotechnology.  Nine 
Indian standards have been formulated by the said Committee, 
however, these standards which are mostly test methods and 
guidelines are voluntary in nature for the producers to adopt.  As has 

 
 
228 
 
been mentioned elsewhere in this Report copious amounts of cotton 
seed oil has been produced in the Country from Bt. cotton seeds 
during last decade since Bt. cotton cultivation started in India.  The 
Committee would like to have the considered views of the 
Department on this issue from the point of view of Consumer 
Protection Act, consumer rights, informed consumer choice, etc. 
without any delay.   
Department of AYUSH 
6.149  As is common knowledge, several food crops have substantial 
medicinal value and they are extensively used in the Indian System 
of Medicines viz. Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha.  Agricultural food crops 
are also used in Naturopathy and Homeopathy.  The Committee, 
therefore, examined the Department of AYUSH which are mandated 
with the formulation of policy issues for deve lopment and 
propagation of India System of Medicines. It came as a huge 
surprise to the Committee when the principal witness admitted 
during the his oral evidence before the Committee on 10 February, 
2011 that the Department became aware of the various imp lications 
of transgenic food crops on the Indian System of Medicines only 
after they received the questionnaire of the Committee for eliciting 
written information from the Department.  The Committee also note 
that the Department of AYUSH had on 1 June, 201 0 through a 
communication to the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and 
Forests conveyed their concerns that Bt. brinjal may have 
implications on AYUSH sector.  They had also asked them not to 
permit open trial or commercialization of Bt. brinjal or any ot her 

 
 
229 
 
medicinal plant until detailed analysis of their impact on India 
System of Medicines is done as plant materials are highly sensitive 
to phytochemical/agroclimatic/environmental factor. The 
Department of AYUSH had in view of all these developments 
requested Ministry of Environment and Forests to co -opt Chief 
Executive Office of National Medicines Plant Board, Adviser, 
Ayruveda, Director General, Central Council for Research in Unani 
Medicines in GEAC.  Interestingly, the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests through their letter dated 7 February, 2011 informed the 
Department of AYUSH that so far „no transgenic medicinal plant have 
been developed and none are under field trials.  The research being 
conducted is of a preliminary nature, where the research ins titutions 
are developed a transformations protocol for integration of all the 
new genes as the whole process will take several years the request 
for inclusion of AYUSH/Unani and National Medicinal Plants Board to 
GEAC will be considered at the appropriate stage.‟   
6.150  The Committee while appreciating the candid admission of 
the Department of AYUSH before them would like to convey their 
unhappiness over the Department‟s failure to bring all these matters 
viz. their advice on Bt. brinjal not being heeded by Ministry of 
Environment and Forests, their representation in GEAC being 
staggered to subsequent years, etc. to the appropriate authorities 
meant to sort out such inter -ministerial issues.  The Committee 
further desire a detailed explanation from GEAC as to what action 
they had taken on the serious reservations expressed by Department 
of AYUSH in regard to commercialisation of Bt. brinjal and other 

 
 
230 
 
plants having medicinal properties.  The Committee also desire a 
detailed explanation from Ministry of Environment and Forests on 
their refusal to co -opt the representatives of Department of AYUSH 
on GEAC right away when Bt. brinjal had been approved for 
commercial release and several other crops having medicinal 
properties are already being assessed for approval by RCGM/GEAC.        
6.151 The Department of Commerce are entrusted with the 
responsibility of attending to policy matters relating to internation al 
trade in goods and services including agreements with other 
countries/various international trade body but excluding 
agreements relating to wheat, sugar, jute and cotton.  The 
Committee note India exported agricultural products worth            
Rs. 89523 crore during the year 2009 -10.  From the data submitted 
by the Government to Committee it is observed that exports of 
agricultural products have shown a continuously rising trend in the 
last decade.  A major chunk of our exports have been of rice mostly 
basmati.  EU is one of the important importers algonwith several 
Middle East countries.  The Department of Commerce admitted 
before the Committee that exports of transgenic crops will depend 
upon international acceptance to transgenic food and food product s.  
The Department also stated that there may be no real demand for 
GM crops when the emphasis is on organic production.  It needs to 
be pointed out that the Department of Commerce are also a member 
of GEAC.  From the inputs provided by the Department, the  
Committee feel that cultivation of genetically modified food crops 
will have a debilitating effect on the export of agricultural products.  

 
 
231 
 
EU already has a strict regime for not permitting import of 
genetically modified crops.  With the awareness about the safety and 
other concerns about transgenic crops taking centre stage now, 
there is a strong possibility of several other countries following suit.  
The volume of global trade in GM food and food products being of 
the order of a paltry US dollar 4 billio n speaks volumes about the 
acceptability of GM products.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
feel that the negative impact of genetically modified crops on the 
country‟s agricultural exports is another important aspect that needs 
to be factored in while ta king a decision in regard to introduction of 
genetically modified crops.  The Committee desire the considered 
views of the Government in the matter.  
National Biodiversity Authority of India         
6.152  The National Biodiversity Authority of India  (NBA) 
administers the Biological Diversity Act, 2002.  The Committee note 
the aims and objectives of NBA are reaffirming the sovereign rights 
over its biological resources of India; preventing misappropriation of 
bio-resources and or associated knowledge; prote cting biodiversity 
in general in a holistic manner; regulating use of biological 
resources; ensuring sustainable utilization and equitable benefit 
sharing; providing legal recognition and support to the bio-resources 
and associated traditional knowledge.  Amongst the various powers 
conferred on NBA to achieve the above -mentioned aims and 
objectives,  NBA is vested with the power to advise the Government 
on matters relating to conservation of biodiversity, sustainable use 
of its components and equitable shar ing of benefit arising out of 

 
 
232 
 
utilization of biological resources.  Being a highly specialized 
scientific body which has quasi -judicial powers, the Chairperson of 
NBA as per the Act shall be an eminent person having adequate 
knowledge and expertise in the conservation and sustainable use of 
biological diversity and in matters relating to equitable sharing of 
benefits.  The Authority had its first Chairman appointed on 1 
October, 2003.  The present Chairman who is an eminent geneticist 
is the seventh Chairma n of the Authority.  It is indeed a matter of 
regret that out of these seven Chairmen of this very important body 
only three were regular/full time Chairmen.  Of the remaining four, 
two were from Indian Administrative Service and the other two from 
Indian Forest Service , who all held the charge of the Chairman 
additionally.  To what extent the authority would have been able to 
achieve its hallowed aims and objectives during last nine years plus 
of its existence with such a pathetic situation at the helm of its 
affairs is a moot point. 
6.153  The Committee regret to note further that NBA which has 
been mandated with the responsibility of safeguarding the 
biodiversity of one of the richest country in terms of biodiversity, 
functions from a rented accommodation  in Chennai.  As regards the 
manpower at its disposal the less said the better.  Leaving aside the 
administrative components, personal staff, etc. apart from the 
Chairman, there is only one technical officer in position and lone 
advisor for legal matters. In all, this high sounding Authority has a 
total sanctioned strength of 16 with 14 positions occupied as on 
date.  From the manpower and wherewithal at the disposal of NBA, 

 
 
233 
 
the Committee can very well gauge out the seriousness of the 
Government towards thi s very important responsibility of theirs.  
The Committee wonder , as to how NBA with such rudimentary 
existence would be able to ensure India‟s interest in the context of 
Nagoya Protocol on access and benefit sharing.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend t hat with most of the international 
conventions and protocols increasingly revolving around biodiversity 
and related matters it is but imperative that the National 
Biodiversity Authority should be sufficiently strengthened with 
scientific, technical and legal human resource of best quality so that 
the Country‟s rich biodiversity is adequately safeguarded.  The 
Committee, as an alternative, would also like the Government to 
explore the possibility of amalgamating the mandate of NBA with the 
proposed Bio-Safety Authority when it comes into being so that the 
multiplicity of authorities and the resultant working at cross 
purposes is avoided.  The Committee would like to have a definite 
roadmap in this regard from the Government within three months of 
presentation of this Report to the Parliament.      
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) 
6.154  With a view to regulate food multiple regulations have been 
enacted in India from time to time.  The Committee, therefore, in 
their Twelfth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) which was presented to 
the Parliament on 20 April, 2005 had laid stress on the need for a 
single regulatory body and an integrated food law to obviate the 
confusion and problems create by the multiplicity of laws.  The 
Committee note that the Food Safety and Standards Act was enacted 

 
 
234 
 
on 24 August, 2006.  However, the mechanism to enforce it was 
badly delayed and the Authority came into being only on 5 
September, 2008.  Due to teething troubles the Authority could start 
functioning only from January, February, 2009.   The Committee are 
surprised to note that FSSAI which has been given an omnibus 
mandate in food sector regulation has been allocated sums of           
Rs. 8.00 crore, Rs. 21.00 crore and Rs. 32.37 crore respec tively in 
the first three fiscals of their existence viz. 2008-09, 2009 -10 and 
2010-11.  The FSS Act, 2006 has come into force w.e.f. 5 August, 
2011 and the Authority is functioning without any worthwhile 
infrastructure and manpower at the Central and Stat e levels to 
enforce the Act which is a very worrying situation.  All work 
pertaining to strengthening of FSSAI Headquarters; development of 
science based standards; food testing facilities; surveillance 
mechanism both Central and State levels are being bad ly delayed 
because of paucity of funds. The Food Safety and Standards 
Regulations which were published way back on 20 November, 2010 
for inviting public comments are yet to be finalized.  The data base 
for the Risk based food clearance system is still bein g developed.  
Food Testing Laboratories network is in shambles, accredition 
procedure for referral labs is not yet devised.     
6.155  In the opinion of the Committee the Government should 
realize the magnitude of the task to be performed by FSSAI.  Apart 
from regulating local food and food products, the Authority has to 
ensure food safety of food items imported into the Country.  Imparts 
in India are permitted through 255 entry points.  These include 82 

 
 
235 
 
custom ports, 32 customs airports, 132 land customs s tations and 9 
foreign port offices, sub foreign post offices.  During 2007 -08 and 
2008-09 76 lakh metric tonnes of food items were imported into the 
Country. For the Committee the most worrying aspect in the matter 
is the admission of the representative of  Directorate General of 
Foreign Trade before the Committee during Oral -Evidence that there 
was absolutely no monitoring of the food items being imported into 
the Country.   
6.156  The Committee had asked the Authority to spell out their 
requirements of fin ances for the projected activities.  The Authority 
have projected a requirement of Rs. 4557.00 crore for the entire 
Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The Committee exhort the Government to 
allocate the requisite funds to the Authority on priority basis , as 
unless t he edifice is built , it will not be possible for it to function 
optimally, a possibility the Country can ill afford in the food sector.     
 
  

 
 
236 
 
CHAPTER - VII 
 
OTHER MAJOR ISSUES 
 
7.1 Under Article 246 of Constitution of India the following is laid down in 
List-II i.e. the State List under the Seventh Schedule as the 14th entry: 
 
Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, 
protection against pest and prevention of plant diseases 
 
7.2 Several States are as yet undecided about transgenics crops or have 
denied permission for field trials of GM/transgenic food crops and other 
plants/crops.  The Governments of Bihar and Rajasthan have in fact 
withdrawn permission for ongoing trials. When asked to clarify the position 
in the matter the Ministry of Environment and Forests informed the 
Committee that as per Clause 4 (4) under Rules 1989, the GEAC is the apex 
authority responsible for approval of proposals relating to GM crops into the 
environment including experimental field trials.  As per Clause 4 (5 & 6) 
under Rules 1989, the role of the State Government through the  State 
Biotechnology Coordination Committee (SBCC‟s) and District Level 
Committees is to  monitor the compliance of the safety g uidelines and 
conditions stipulated by the GEAC during the field trials. It  also has  powers 
to inspect, investigate and take punitive action in case or violations of 
statutory provisions.  Therefore, prior approval of the State Government is 
not necessar y. However, as the State Governments are involved in the 
monitoring of the field trials, GEAC taking into consideration the objections 
raised by some of the State Governments, has directed the applicant to 
obtain no objection from the respective States whe re the trials are proposed 
to be conducted.  
 
7.3 As regards the views of the State Government/Union Territory 
regarding the GM crop field trials, details are as follows: 
 
Bt cotton: There has been no request from the nine cotton 
growing states (Punjab, Ha ryana, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu) to 
revoke the approval granted for Bt cotton cultivation. 

 
 
237 
 
 
 Bt brinjal event EE-1: The State Governments of Andhra 
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Bihar, We st Bengal, Orissa, 
Uttarakhand and Madhya Pradesh have expressed apprehensions on 
the safety of Bt brinjal and have called for extreme caution as Bt 
brinjal is the first GM food crop to be introduced in the country.   The 
Governments of Kerala and Uttarakhand have informed that they  have 
taken a decision to prohibit environmental release of all GM seeds and 
keep the State totally GM free.   
  
Field Trials: State Governments of Bihar, Kerala and Madhya 
Pradesh have informed that GM crop field trials will not be allowed in 
the State. 
  
7.4 Queried further as to how many of the States have agreed for these 
activities, the Ministry stated that field trials have been allowed in the States 
of Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, 
Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan.  
 
7.5 Queried further about the undecided ones, the Ministry stated that 
only Himachal Pradesh has informed that they will take a view on Bt brinjal 
after all trials have been completed and after the Government of India has 
decided.  
 
7.6 During the course of  the Committee‟s examination media reports 
appeared about Government of Bihar expressing their disapproval of field 
trials being conducted in Bihar.  The Ministry of Environment and Forests 
and GEAC were asked to submit a factual report in the matter to th e 
Committee. GEAC was also asked to submit alongwith its report in the 
matter all relevant correspondence, reports and submissions of all 
concerned.  In response it was stated that in due compliance with the 
regulatory procedure under Rules 1989, this Mini stry vide letter of even 
number dated December 24, 2010 had accorded approval to M/s. Monsanto 
India Ltd for conduct of BRL -II t with two transgenic corn hybrids namely 
Hishell & 900M Gold containing stacked cry2Ab2, cry1A.105 (Event MON 
89034) & CP4EPSPS (Event NK603) genes at five locations during Rabi 2010 
and nine locations during Kharif 2011 at the following locations subject to 

 
 
238 
 
stringent  safety  norms.  As  per  Rules 1989,  prior  approval  of  the State 
Government is not necessary for allowing GM crop field trials.   
 
S.No Locations (Rabi 2011) Kharif 2011 
1.  Begusarai / Samastipur, 
Bihar; 
Begusarai Bihar; 
2.  Bhagalpur Bihar; Bhagalpur Bihar;  
3.  TNAU Coimbatore; TNAU Coimbatore;  
4.  UAS Dharwad;  UAS Dharwad;  
 
5.  ANGRAU Karimnagar;  ANGRAU Karimnagar;  
 
6.  - BHU Varanasi,  
 
7.  - MPUAT Udaipur;  
 
8.  - AAU Vadodara  
 
9.  - DWSR Jabalpur  
 
 
 7.7 During Rabi, the field trials were initiated only in Samastipur in Bihar 
and University of Agriculture Science, Dharwad in Karnataka. No trials have 
been initiated during Kharif 2011 as the applicant has been directed  to 
obtain „No Objection‟ from the respective State Governments before 
initiating the trials. 
  
7.8 The Chief Minister, Bihar informed the Minister for Environment and 
Forests (IC) on 5.3.2011 that he i s opposed to the transgenic maize field 
trials in Bihar and permission given in this regard should be withdrawn.  
 
7.9 On the basis of the request received from the Chief Minister, Bihar and 
decision taken in the GEAC meeting held on 09.03.2011, M/s. Monsanto was 
directed to terminate the BRL -II trials with transgenic maize in Bihar on 
10.3.2011.  Copy of the communication  was sent to Chief Secretary, 
Secretary (Agriculture), Secretary (Environment), Commissioner 
(Agriculture) of the State Government of Bihar as well as to Director 
(Research) and Director (Extension) of the State Agriculture University at 
Samastipur.  A sep arate communication was also sent to Secretary 
(Agriculture) along with a copy to Chief Secretary and Commissioner 
(Agriculture) informing them of the GEAC decision and direction issued to 
M/s. Monsanto.     

 
 
239 
 
 
7.10 Subsequently in the communication dated Ma rch 14, 2011, the Chief 
Minister of Bihar has raised the following points regarding the approval 
granted to M/s. Monsanto: 
  
(i) The approval letter issued by the GEAC to M/s. Monsanto to 
conduct BRL -II trials on 24.12.2010 which was marked to 
various officials of the State Government has not been received 
by the respective departments; 
(ii) M/s. Monsanto has informed the State Government of the trials 
only on 24.2.2011 even though the sowing was done on 
21.2.2011.Therefore, it needs to be investigated whether the 
isolation distance and safeguards were followed or not. 
(iii) The farm at Regional Station of IARI at Pusa, Samastipur does 
not have the one km isolation distance from all the four 
directions. 
(iv) The trial was hurriedly uprooted in an unscientific manner and 
without the presence of any representative from the State 
Department of Agriculture. 
 
7.11 The matter was examined and the following facts of the case were 
communicated to the Government of Bihar: 
 
(i) The approval letter dated 24.12.2010 has been issued through 
Speed Post to all the respective State Government Departments 
where trials were to be conducted. Scanned copy of the approval 
letter was also sent by e-mail to the State Government wherever 
email addresses were easily accessible. Email sent to Chief 
Secretary, Principal Secretary of the State Government of Bihar 
is placed on file. GEAC has also been following up with the State 
Governments to actively participate in the monitoring and 
evaluation of GM crops by appointing a nodal person who could 
interface with t he GEAC and RCGM. However, in spite of follow 
up, we have not received any response. 
 
(ii) The GEAC had accorded approval for conduct of BRL -II trials at 
five locations during Rabi 2011 and nine locations during Kharif 
2011. However, the applicant was able to initiate the trial at only 
two locations, namely, Begusarai in Samastipur, Bihar within the 
IARI Regional Research Station on 24.2.2011 and UAS, 
Dharwad, Karnataka within the State Agriculture University on 
6.1.2011. 
 
(iii) As per the conditions stipula ted in the approval letter, the 
applicant is required to inform the GEAC/State Government 

 
 
240 
 
details of BRL -II trials which include locations, area, site plans, 
protocols, name of the lead scientists responsible for all aspects 
of the trials within 15 days of  issue of the clearance letter. The 
applicant has not complied with this requirement.  
 
(iv) As per the GEAC approval, BRL -II maize trials were to be 
conducted and monitored under the direct supervision of 
Director, Directorate of Maize.   This aspect has been complied 
with. 
 
(v) As per the Indian Minimum Seed Certification Standards, the 
isolation distance for hybrid maize is maximum 300 m and for 
open pollinated varieties, the maximum distance is 1 km. The 
BRL-II trials were conducted with transgenic hybrid maize and 
therefore 300 m isolation distance is adequate. It may be further 
noted that the GEAC in its meeting held on 10.6.2009 had 
extensively deliberated on three protocols for conduct of field 
trials with transgenic maize. The GEAC had opted for the most 
stringent protocol (Protocol -III) which requires 300 m isolation 
distance plus sowing of 10-13 rows of African tall maize covering 
a distance of 6-7.8 m all around the experimental plot area.  The 
protocols submitted by the applicant to Director, Directorate of 
Maize is in line with the protocol prescribed by the GEAC.  
 
(vi) As regards terminating the BRL -II trials, the applicant has 
informed vide their letter dated 14 th March 2011, that the trial 
site was already ploughed by the local IARI research personnel 
when their representative visited the site on March 11, 2011 at 
6.30 AM without any notice to the company or their involvement. 
However, the communication dated 14 th March 2011 received 
from the Chief Minister indicates that the trial was hurriedly 
uprooted in an unscientific manner and without the presence of 
any State Department of Agriculture representative. 
 
(vii) The  Director,  Indian Agriculture Research Institute vi de 
communication dated March 24, 2011 has submitted full details 
of the harvest and termination report in respect of GM maize 
trials within the IARI Regional Research Station at Samastipur, 
 
As of now there are no GM crop trials in Bihar. 
 
7.12 GEAC, howev er, did not submit the correspondence, reports and 
submissions of all concerned which were sought by the Committee. 
 

 
 
241 
 
7.13 As in the case of Bihar several reports about field trials, etc. have 
come in the context of Rajasthan, Karantaka, etc.   There is, therefore, a 
view that rather than presenting a fait accompli to the State Governments 
and other stakeholders including the farmers and consumers, the entire 
process ought to have been worked out in reverse by evolving a consultative 
mode based on the requirements of the various agro -climatic zones, public 
opinion, ethical issues, etc.  
 
7.14 The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation are the apex body for 
agriculture and cooperation at the Central Governmen t level to coordinate 
with, amongst others, the State Governments.  The Committee, therefore, 
sought their considered views about what could have been an ideal approach 
towards development of GM/Transgenic food crops on the one hand and 
their propagation o n the other hand so that the States and other 
stakeholders were kept in loop from the beginning as per the Constitutional 
scheme of things and other requirements.   
 
7.15 In response they stated that efforts are being made in India since the 
early eighties to develop transgenic crops in public research institutions. The 
Government of India has been very supportive of the efforts to develop 
transgenic crops and has invested liberally in this sector through the 
Department of Bio -technology, Department of Scie nce and Technology and 
ICAR.  
 
7.16 The development of bio -technology in agriculture in India has been 
fairly encouraging. Bt. Cotton has been successfully commercialized in India. 
The spectacular improvement in cotton acreage and production is evident by 
the success of Bt. Cotton. The area under Bt. Cotton increased from 29000 
ha. in 2002, to 9.34 million ha (anticipated)  in kharif -2010.  The area and 
production increase due to Bt. Cotton from  2002 onwards is at Annexures 
VI & VII.  The average yield increased from 309 kg. per ha. in 2001 -02 to 
560 kg. per ha. in 2007-08, turning India from an importer to a net exporter 
of cotton. This success story would not have been possible if the nine States 
namely Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu had not participated in 
promotion of Bt. Cotton.  The Department is of the view that the  application 

 
 
242 
 
of biotechnology in agriculture should be in line with the NPF with aim to 
improve productivity and net income of farmers. Since agriculture is a State 
Subject and States are major stakeholders, hence involving them and 
seeking their opinion would be appropriate. However, DAC is of the view that 
there is a  need to make the public aware of the benefits of biotechnology, 
provided it is implemented / applied after indepth scientific analysis of 
associated risks.    
 
7.17 With the applicant now be ing directed by GEAC to obtain no objection 
from State Government a mechanism has been put in place to integrate 
public opinion and concerns of States in the decision making process, even 
though it is not mandatory under the Rules 1989.  However, this aspe ct has 
been addressed in the new Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India Bill 
where it is mandatory for the authority to consult the public. 
 
7.18 The Committee take note of the fact that under the 
constitutional scheme of things agriculture is a State Subject.  
Article 246 of Constitution of India explicitly assigns „agriculture, 
including agricultural education and research, protection against 
pest and prevention of plant diseases to the States of the Union.  In  
such a situation, there is no scope for any misinterpretation of role 
and responsibility of the State Governments with matters concerning 
or having a bearing on agriculture.  In case of field trials of 
transgenics crops the Committee find that a peculiar situation 
obtains.  For a thing as crucial as fie ld trials till recently the State 
Governments were not even consulted.  The Ministry of Environment 
and Forests ha ve without any appreciation of the constitutional 
positions defended their decision on the sp ecious plea that as 
monitoring during the field trials is the responsibility of SBCCs and 
DLCs which are entities of State Governments prior approval of State 

 
 
243 
 
is not necessary. The Committee are not at all convinced by the 
flawed logic extended by Ministry  of Environment and Forests.  In 
view of the diverse opinions about transgenic crops and 
controversies surrounding their induction a mandatory consultation 
process with the State Governments culminating into seeking their 
permission for field trials, in th e opinion of the Committee should 
have been inbuilt in the regulatory mechanism.  This was 
inexplicably not done by Ministry of Environment and Forests leading 
to several States being compelled to voice their objections to the 
apparently flawed procedure being followed in a matter, which is in 
the domain of the State Governments.  The Committee note that the 
Ministry have, thereafter, taken remedial action and from last year 
onwards the applicant is required to obtain a no objection certificate 
from the Sta te where the trial is proposed to be conducted.  The 
Committee also recommend that since States have a major role in 
agriculture sector and most of the responsibility at field level 
devolves on them , the Government should apportion appropriate 
responsibilities on the States in the Biosafety Law recommended by 
the Committee. This will not only be in consonance with the 
Constitution and the Government will be saved the embarrassment 
of a Bihar type incident , but would be a practical and pragmatic 
approach to deal with various developments in the agriculture sector 
where at the ground level the Central Government at best has a 
peripheral role.  
 
7.19 Coming to the position obtaining in various States in regard to 
transgenics crops and field trials Andhra Prades h, Chattishgarh, 

 
 
244 
 
Karnataka, Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa, Uttarakhand, and Madhya 
Pradesh have expressed their reservations about Bt. brinjal.  Kerala 
and Uttarakhand have in fact decided to prohibit environmental 
release of all GM seeds to keep the State to tally GM free.  Bihar, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan have also disallowed field 
trials in the State.  Himachal Pradesh will take a view on Bt. brinjal 
once all trials are completed and Government of India ha ve taken a 
decision in the matter.  
 
7.20 The Committee also note that Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, 
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Punjab and Haryana have 
allowed field trials.  
 
7.21 Considering the flaws and shortcomings noticed by the 
Committee in the functioning of the regulatory mechanism meant for 
the purpose, the lack of preparedness of various agencies who 
should ideally be involved in various oversight and both , pre and 
post commercialization surveillance responsibilities in the context of 
transgenic crops, the still unclear ramifications of transgenic crops 
on bio -diversity, environment, human and livestock health and 
sustainability, the Committee desire in cons onance with their 
recommendation in a previous Chapter that for the time being all 
research and development activities on transgenic crops should be 
carried out only in containment, the ongoing field trials in all States 
should be discontinued forthwith.  
 
(ii) Regulation and Labelling 
 
7.22 The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2004 enjoins upon the Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India  the responsibility of matters like 

 
 
245 
 
safety regulation, labeling and related aspects of all food items covered 
under the Act genetically modified ones not excluded. 
 
(a) Regulation  
 
7.23 Section 22 of the FSSAI  Act stipulates that „no person shall 
manufacture, distribute, sell or import any novel food, genetically modified 
articles of food, irradiated food, organic foods, foods for special dietary uses, 
functional foods, nu traceuticals, health supplements, proprietary foods and 
such other articles of food which the Central Government may notify in this 
behalf‟. During the last few years cultivation of transgenic cott on has 
increased manifold.  As of now transgenic cotton is cultivated on about 9 
million hectares in the Country.  This was about 29000 hectares in 2002.  
Today almost 90% cotton cultivated in India is transgenic.  The cotton seed 
oil production as per inf ormation available from industry sources has also 
gone up from about 400000 metric tonne in 2002 to 1210000 metric tonne 
in 2011.   The Committee, therefore, also desired to know if the Authority 
had  received any request for manufacture, distribution and sale of 
cottonseed oil during last five years and what action had it taken on each of 
such requests.  In response FSSAI stated in a written submission to the 
Committee that no such request have been received by FSSAI so far since at 
present all matters per taining to GM Organisms including GM food is 
regulated in the Country by Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee of the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests.  
 
7.24 The transgenic food crops and other products derived from them are 
being accorded high priority by the regulatory agencies the world over.  The 
Committee, therefore, were keen to know as to what extent does the role of 
the Authority differs or is in conformity with similar entities functioning in the 
Countries where products/commodities derived from transgenic food crops 
are in existence or are being manufactured or are being introduced for 
human consumption. 
 
7.25 In response they were informed that FSSAI has carried out a detailed 
review of GM Food regulations of other countries which has been 
summarised in the form of a resource document (Annexure- VIII).  The 
resource document contains details of regulation of GM  food in India and 

 
 
246 
 
other countries, similarities and differences in regulation of GM foods from 
other countries, regulatory options and way forward for India.  The Authority 
also informed the Committee that Section 22 of FSS Act, 2006 which 
mandates Food Safety and Standards Authority of India to regulate GM Food 
in the country, has not been notified by the Government.  
  
7.26 Clarifying further in the  matter the Chairman of the Authority stated 
during the Oral Evidence held on 14 July, 2011: 
 
“As you correctly mentioned, section 22 has a very clear 
provision that genetically modified food comes within the purview of 
the FSSAI.  So, when the Government notified all the sections 
including section 22 but deleted genetically modified portion from 
FSSAI, we had actually contacted the Government and had a series of 
discussions with them.  We were proceeding on the assumption that 
we might have to regulate genetically modified food. So, we 
commissioned a study on what were the current regulatory practices in 
various countries of the world, what was the current practice in India, 
and what were the options available in India for genetically modified 
food.  By the time we finished the study and looked at various options 
on how to regulate we were informed t hat the Government was 
considering an alternative regulatory pattern for genetically modified 
food so that FSSAI might not be responsible for genetically modified 
food.  So, that was apparently the reason they deleted it from section 
22.  We were in effect  told not to proceed with regulating them 
because the Government wanted to give it to the Bio -technology 
Regulatory Authority of India.  They would be regulating the 
genetically modified food.” 
7.27 About the reasons behind this rethink on the part of the Government 
Chairman, FSSAI informed the Committee during the Oral Evidence: 
“Sir, you will be aware that the Environment Ministry and the 
GEAC are in charge of genetic regulations along with the Department 
of Biotechnology.  They have got G EAC which consid ers cases 
according to the Environmental Protection Act of which we are not a 
part.  When BRAI draft was being prepared, several options were 

 
 
247 
 
being considered as to how to how to regulate GM food.  One option 
that was considered was that regulation of GM f ood should be with 
FSSAI and field trials should be with the BRAI.  So, they tried to split it 
into two parts.  Processed food will come to us whereas cultivation and 
environment related impact assessment will be with the other agency.  
When this draft came to us we started discussing the possibilities.  We 
found the very objective of the Act itself was to have a single window 
clearance for biotechnology.  The conclusion was if we have three 
regulatory authorities looking at biotechnology; one for process, one 
for raw and one for something else, there will be a conflict.  They may 
clear a particular product for cultivation, say corn or some other thing 
when it is converted into food I may appoint another committee to do 
safety assessment and find what they have cleared is wrong.  That will 
create a very difficult situation for the regulatory system in a country.  
So, we had suggested, let us not split this responsibility and have it at 
one place.   In fact, we offered that if they want us to do we can do it 
also.  After consultations the conclusion was a separate Regulatory 
Authority under BRAI, which was recommended by  Dr. Swaminathan, 
will be the most appropriate solution.  That is the way the draft has 
emerged and I now understand that it is coming to the Parliament.  
So, we did not have any choice in the matter. 
7.28 He further added: 
“As currently the draft is emerging, GM food regulation has 
completely gone out of the purview of the FSS AI.  It is now with the 
BRAI and the Environment Ministry.  They will  undertake the 
applications, process it, do the safety assessment, clear it and then 
say that it is coming into the market.  Once they take a decision we 
take it as approved food like any other food.  We do not apply our 
mind.  We look at only the labellin g part which is now within our 
purview.  Labelling of GM food is the only issue which we will consider.  
We will not consider the safety assessment again because already an 
Authority has cleared it.  Once they give the approval, the meaning of 
that approval is that this food is as safe as normal food.  So, we will 
take it as normal food and will apply labelling provisions to that 
particular food.  Labelling of GM food is a highly technical issue, as you 

 
 
248 
 
have pointed out.  We are now in the process of doing it.  We are 
actually taking it forward.  In effect, the GM regulation has gone out of 
the purview of the Authority by the change. 
You may ask whether it is a feasible proposition, whether there 
will be a conflict now.  One of the reasons why apparently it was 
decided to have a separate Authority was, evaluation of GM food is a 
highly technical area.  If you look at the copies of the surveys which 
we have circulated, every country has got a different method of doing 
it.  Different types of agencies are doing  it.  There is no consensus 
internationally.  Even in the Codex Alimentarius, actually India has 
been last week elected President of it, there is no consensus even on 
the labelling of GM food.  USA allows it free.  European Union is very -
very rigorous on i t.  So, we have to choose our own path now.  For 
that it is better that one -point decision is taken regarding safety 
instead of two -three regulatory authorities considering it.  From that 
point of view, there is a logic in having a separate Authority looki ng at 
the entire food safety so that if the stamp of that Authority is there 
that it is safe for eating, then everybody will be agreeable to it.” 
7.29 Elaborating further on this aspect the Authority stated that u nder the 
FSSAI Act, it is expected to carry  out a risk analysis and scientific review of 
the hazards involved, risk management options available and after detailed 
consultations with stakeholders draft the regulation. Department of 
Biotechnology ha ve moved Biotechnology Regulatory Authority Bill, 2010. 
The mandate of the Bill is “to promote the safe use of modern biotechnology 
by enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of regulatory procedures and 
provide for establishment of Biotechnology Regulato ry Authority of India to 
regulate the research, transport, import, manufacture and use of organisms 
and products of modern biotechnology and for the matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto”. This overlaps with the existing mandate of 
FSSAI. Therefore, to have a single point of regulation for GM foods necessary 
provisions have been made in the draft BRAI Bill, removing FSSAI from the 
regulation of GM foods. However, labeling of GM foods would be within the 
mandate of FSSAI. FSSAI has initiated work  towards bringing regulation on 
GM food labelling after consulting concerned stakeholders. 
 

 
 
249 
 
7.30 From the resource document submitted by FSSAI it is observed that 
after the promulgation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 and the 
establishment of FSSAI, the Ministry of Environment and Forests published a 
Notification [SO 1519(E)] in Gazette of India on 23 August, 2007 that 
exempts the occupier of the processed food stuffs, ingredient in food stuffs 
and additives including processing aids derived from Liv ing Modified 
Organisms where the end product is not a Living Modified Organism from  
Rule 11 of the Rules for Manufacture, Use, Import, Export and Storage of 
Hazardous Micro Organisms, Genetically Engineered Organisms or Cells, 
1989.  Rule 11 reads as follows: 
 
“Food stuffs, ingredients in food stuffs and additives including 
processing aids containing of consisting of genetically engineered 
organisms or cells, shall not be produced, sold, imported or used 
except with the approval of the Genetic Engineering Approval 
Committee.” 
  
7.31 It is further observed that, since FSSAI was yet to publish the relevant 
rules when Rule 11 was rescinded, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
requested GEAC to continue to regulate GM food stuffs under rules, 1989 as 
an interim measure.  The Ministry of Environment and Forests have issued 
six notifications, thereafter, to keep SO 1519 (E) in abeyance, five of them 
conveying extensions of six months each and the last one conveying 
extension of one year upto 30 September, 20 11.  With the issue of these six 
notifications, the question of jurisdiction of FSSAI has as discussed 
previously in this Report, remained unresolved till date.   
 
7.32 When the version of MoEF was sought on this vexed issue they stated 
that The MoEF has notified the „Rules for Manufacture Use, Import, Export 
and Storage of Hazardous Microorganisms / Genetically Engineered 
Organisms or Cells, (Rules 1989)‟ under the Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986.   
 
7.33 Rule 11 of Rule 1989 pertaining to  GM food and food products derived 
there from mandate “Food stuffs, ingredients in food stuffs and additives 
including processing aids containing or consisting of genetically engineered 
organisms or cells, shall not be produced, sold, imported or used except with 

 
 
250 
 
the approval of the Genetic Engineering Approval Committee (GEAC)”.   A 
decision to amend Rule 11 to exclude processed food from the purview of 
GEAC was taken by MoEF / GEAC on the following grounds:  
 
1. Only Living Modified Organisms (LMOs) have the  property to 
propagate and pose a risk to the environment.  There is no risk to 
the environment from processed food.  Accordingly, in the National 
Environmental Policy, 2006 the mandate of MoEF is to regulate 
only LMOs.  
 
2. The Task Force on recombinant pharma under Dr. R. A. Mashelkar, 
former DG, CSIR constituted by this Ministry and the Task Force on 
Agriculture Biotechnology under Prof. M. S. Swaminathan have 
recommended that the GEAC should be involved only in the 
regulation of Living Modified Organisms (LMOs) to avoid regulatory 
overlaps. 
 
3. The Food Safety and Standard Act, 2006 has been notified by the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.  The Food Safety and 
Standard Act, 2006 has a special provision for dealing with GM 
food and food products. The ne w food safety regulation would 
address health concerns/ risks in line with the Codex guidelines.  
 
4. Processed food is exempted from the provisions of the Cartagena 
Biosafety Protocol to which India is a signatory. 
 
7.34 In view of the above, the MoEF had is sued a Gazette Notification 
number SO 1519(E) dated 23.08.2007 exempting GM processed food, 
ingredients, additives and processing aids from the purview of Rule 11 of the 
Rules, 1989 provided the end product is not a Living Modified Organisms 
(LMOs). 
   
7.35 Subsequently, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoH&FW) 
vide their communication dated 26.12.2007 requested this Ministry to 
continue regulation of GM processed food for some more time till the Food 
and Standards Authority is able to look into the matter in a scientific manner 
and come out with a notification.  The above matter was discussed in the 
GEAC meeting held on 11.1.2008 wherein the Committee advised that the 
issue may be resolved through an inter -ministerial consultation.  An inter -
ministerial meeting was held on 31.1.2008 wherein it was agreed that the 
Gazette Notification No. S. O. 1519 (E) dated 23.08.2007 issued by the 

 
 
251 
 
MoEF would be kept in abeyance for six months or until further notification 
of MoH&FW regarding regulation of GM proc essed food by the Food Safety 
and Standard Authority, whichever is earlier.  
 
7.36 In view of the above decision, the MoEF had issued a Gazette 
Notification No. S.O. 411(E) dated 3.3.2008 keeping in abeyance the earlier 
Notification issued by this Ministry  exempting processed food from the 
purview of Rules, 1989 every six months. The said notification is valid upto 
30.9.2011.  
 
7.37 The Food Safety & Standards Authority has now decided to delegate 
the powers pertaining to GM food to the Biotechnology Regula tory Authority 
of India as and when it is put in place.  Until that period, the GEAC will be 
required to continue regulating the GM foods. 
 
7.38 With a view to assess the ground reality while this game of musical 
chairs is going on for years together, the Committee sought the views of 
Department of Commerce on the reports about GM food products coming 
into India.  They were informed that the import guidelines for the genetically 
modified products issued by the Directorate General of Foreign Trade very 
clearly stipulate that imports will be allowed only with the approval of  
GEAC.  During the course of their Oral Evidence on 15 March, 2011 when the 
Committee desired to know as to whether there had been any instances 
which have come to the notice of the Department or DGFT about non -
adherence of these guidelines by some importers, the representative of 
DGFO stated: 
 
“The provision says that the approval  of GEAC is required. No, 
we have not heard of any cases where this was not followed. No such 
case has come to our notice. So, we strictly go by that.”  
7.39  Queried further as to what is the surveillance mechanism to check 
that the imports of such produc ts are in conformity with the  stipulated 
guidelines, she admitted: 
“To be honest, Sir, there are no checks.” 

 
 
252 
 
7.40  Asked further as to whether it could be safe ly surmised that no cases 
of violation have been reported only due to the absence of a surveillan ce 
mechanism, she admitted: 
  “Sir.”   
(b) Labelling 
 
7.41 The Food Safety and Standards Act , 2006 (Section 23)  enjoins upon 
the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India to notify labeling and 
related aspects of all items covered under the Act.  However, FSSAI 
informed the Committee that for various reasons they have not been able to 
notify the provisions of th e Act pertaining to labeling of food products 
derived from transgenic food crops and their produce.   
 
7.42 Elaborating on this, Chairman, FSSAI stated during his oral Evidence 
on 14 July, 2011: 
 
“Sir, as I mentioned, the labelling continues to be our mandate.  
We have not shifted that responsibility.  Labelling is still with the 
FSSAI. We have to do that job.  In respect to GM food labelling, about 
five years ago the Ministry of Health developed a draft Notification for 
labelling.  They made GM labelling mandatory and they notified it for 
public consultation.  Then, the amount of input which came on that 
from both sides was very large and very conflicting.  As you said in the 
beginning, one group of people were saying it is the right  of the 
consumer to know whether it is genetically modified or not.  We want 
to look at it.  On the other side, the industry said the problems 
involved in implementing it in a country of this size will be so huge 
that you will have a law which is not implemented.   
So, after three years of consultation, the Health Ministry took a 
decision that it is premature to go forward with that notification.  At 
that time, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)  was 
being set up.  So, they took a decision.   Since, the Food Authority is 
going to be set up now, we will pass on this problem to the Food 
Authority.   

 
 
253 
 
Recently, some of the consumers went to the Supreme Court of 
India and the Supreme Court had called me and asked me why am I 
not notifying it? You have got this notification lying for five years.  So, 
we had to tell them that for five years it was with the Government and 
now Government thinks that it is not appropriate because of whole 
range of issues like no testing facilities, the cost involved and  the 
details.  If, we do not have the laboratories to test, then what is the 
point of doing it now? For testing, if you have to send it to Germany, 
then there is no point in having a law because you are testing in 
Germany.  You build up the capacity; each test costs about Rs. 
75,000.  So, those issues were on the back of Government‟s mind 
when they took a decision not to move forward.”   
7.43 Asked as to whether  the Authority have  worked out some regulations 
under this Section for the food commodities/prod ucts derived from 
transgenic sources and in view of the report s that such commodities/food 
products are coming into the Country for sale, have the Authority 
initiated/contemplated measures to ensure that the such commodities/food 
products do not breach the stipulations laid down in Section 23 of the Act or 
the regulations/guidelines issued thereunder it was stated that FSSAI have 
carried out an initial review of the national GM food labelling regulations in 
various countries, impact of various international  agreements and a few 
research studies conducted on the subject in India. The matter has also 
been discussed before Scientific Panel and Committee of FSSAI.  FSSAI will 
forward its recommendations on GM food labelling to the Ministry after 
considering the recommendations of the Scientific Panel & Committee.  
 
7.44 The Committee, therefore, desired to know from the Department of 
Consumer  Affairs about the measures initiated by them individually or in 
consultation with FSSAI/Ministry of Health with a view to  ensure that the 
rights and interests of consumers are protected and they are able to make 
an informed choice of food products they are consuming.  In a written 
submission it was stated that the Department will coordinate with the 
Ministry of Bio -technology and Ministry of Health to ensure that no harmful 
GM products are allowed in Indian markets. 
 

 
 
254 
 
7.45 When queried about their take on labeling of GM/transgenic seeds, 
food crops and commodities derived from them, the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests stat ed that labeling of GM seeds or food or food products 
derived from them is to provide information required to address market  and 
consumer preference. The labeling of GM/transgenic seeds, food crops and 
commodities derived from them do not fall under the p urview of the 
Ministry.  However, for sale of GM seeds (in case of Bt cotton) GEAC has 
prescribed labeling conditions related to (a) packing, (b) labeling, (c) 
physical and genetic description of the seeds, (d) information on sowing 
pattern in packets in a ddition to complying with the requirements for 
regulating the quality of certain seeds for sale in accordance with Seed Act 
1966 and Seed Control Order, 1983 and subsequent amendments 
implemented by Ministry of Agriculture.   
 
7.46 MoEF further informed th e Committee that a ccording to Food Safety 
and Standards Act, 2006, no person shall manufacture, distribute, sell or 
expose for sale or despatch or deliver to any agent or broker for the purpose 
of sale, any packaged food products (including genetically mod ified or 
engineered food or food containing such ingredients) which are not marked 
and labelled in the manner as may be specified by regulations. The 
regulations for labelling of GM Foods are being formulated by Food Safety 
and Standards Authority. Globall y different countries follow voluntary or 
mandatory labeling system for products derived from GM crops. In some 
countries, the threshold levels of adventitious presence of GM ingredients in 
non-GM products have also been notified and are usually in the ran ge of 0.9 
to 5 percent depending upon the stage of processing and the state of final 
product.   
 
7.47 When the views of GEAC were sought by the Committee on labeling of 
GM/transgenic seeds, food crops and commodities derived from them it 
reiterated the position taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests i.e. 
its nodal Ministry and stated that labelin g of GM seeds or food or food 
products derived from them is to provide information required to address 
market  and consumer preference.   The labeling of GM/transgenic seeds, 
food crops and commodities derived from them do not fall under the purview 
of GEAC.  The regulations for labelling of GM Foods are being formulated by 

 
 
255 
 
Food Safety and Standards Authority.  
 
7.48 When the question of lab eling of GM/transgenic seeds, food crops and 
commodities derived from them was put by the Committee to the 
Department of Biotechnology they also reiterated the position taken by MoEF 
and GEAC almost to the last word.   
 
7.49 Queried on labeling of GM/trans genic seeds, food crops and 
commodities derived from them, the Department of Science and Technology 
informed the Committee that they believe that labelling of GM seeds or food 
or food products derived from them is essential.  It needs to provide 
proactively information required and inform consumers for them to make 
informed choices at this stage of development of GM food technology.  The 
Department feel that India should position a suitable and robust labelling as 
well as surveillance and monitoring systems for ensuring the bio safety and 
environmental safety of GM crops and food products. 
 
7.50 In a Background Note submitted to the Committee on the subjec t the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution stated that even though 
Genetically Modified food have the potential to solve many of the world‟s 
hunger and malnutrition problems and help in the protection of environment 
by increasing yield and reducing r eliance upon chemical and herbicide but it 
also poses challenges in the following areas : 
  
(i) Food labelling. 
(ii) Segregation & Identity Preservation (IP) at procurement and 
storage point. 
(iii) Testing facilities of the genetically Modified crops. 
(iv) Provision of separate storage infrastructure and handling 
practices. 
(v) Regulation of policies regarding Genetically Modified crops. 
 
7.51 Genetically Modified foodgrains are, therefore, required to be labelled 
as per the Government regulations and segregated from non -genetically 
modified foodgrains right from the time from sowing in the field to 
harvesting, procurement in the mandis and stor age in the godowns, in order 
to avoid contamination.  Due care is required for providing labelling of the 

 
 
256 
 
GM Crops at all stages, and it should be kept in designated storage space.  It 
is, therefore, suggested that before considering allowing Genetically Modified 
food crops, it is required to develop Standard Operating Procedure (SOP), 
testing facilities and exclusive storage and transport facilities.  
  
7.52 When asked to give their views on labeling of GM/transgenic seeds, 
food crops and commodities deriv ed from them the CSIR submitted to the 
Committee in a written reply that they favoured labelling of GM foods as 
consumers would have a choice.   
 
7.53 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation i.e. the nodal 
Department of this Subject when asked about their views on labeling of 
GM/transgenic seeds, food crops and commodities derived from them stated 
that notified kinds/varieties is covered under the Seeds Act, 1966 for Quality 
Regulations whereas Seeds (Control) Order, 1983 regulates t he production 
as well as distribution of seeds. Under the Seeds Act, 1966 and the Seeds 
Rules, 1968 when the variety is notified, such variety sold in the market 
should be labeled as prescribed under section 6(a) of the Seeds Act. If any 
person contravenes any provision of the Seeds Act 1966, the Seed Inspector 
notified under Section 13 of the Act is empowered to prosecute him with 
punishment of fine  which may extend to Rs.500 for the first offence and if it 
is repeated, the fine may be extended to Rs.1000 /- or imprisonment for six 
months or both.  The Government of India have prescribed 
standards/procedure for Bt. Cotton Seeds under the Seeds Act/ Rules.   
Labeling of GM seeds, food or food products derived from them is to provide 
information required to address market and consumer preference. The policy 
relating to labeling of GM/transgenic food crops and commodities derived 
from them do not fall under the purview of the DAC.  However, for sale of 
GM seeds (in case of Bt Cotton) the GEAC has prescribed label ing conditions 
related to a) packing, b) labeling, c) physical and genetic description of the 
seeds, d) information on sowing pattern in packets, in addition to complying 
with the requirements for regulating the quality of certain seeds for sale in 
accordance with the Seeds Act 1966 and Seeds (Control Order), 1983 which 
are implemented and regulated by DAC.   
 
7.54 With the intention of arriving at the bottom of this vexed issue, the 
Committee sought the views of ICAR on labelling of GM/transgenic seeds, 

 
 
257 
 
food crops and commodities derived from them.  The Council informed the 
Committee that according to international agreements such as Cartagena 
Protocol on Bio-safety, labeling of GM foods is voluntary. No doubt, labeling 
provides a choice to the consumer. Ho wever, the nature of agriculture 
practiced, socio -economic status of farmers, mode of marketing fruits, 
vegetables and other agricultural produce in the country make labeling 
impractical. Moreover, it will further add to the cost of the GM food crops or 
products thereof. Further, the GM crops are tested for compositional analysis 
and experiments have shown no difference (substantially equivalent) 
between GM and non-GM crops. 
 
7.55 During her Oral Evidence on 19 October, 2010 when Director, Centre 
for Scienc e and Environment was asked about her views on labelling she 
stated: 
“Then, the issue, Mr. Chairman, which I have been raising, is the 
issue of food labeling.  I certainly want my right of choice to eat GM 
food or not GM food.  You, as a Government may decide that GM crops 
are important but that does not mean that you can take away my right 
to decide.  Now, we have been asking for this.  We have found it very 
difficult to get a labeling regime.  I have to tell you, Mr. Chairman, 
that at CSE we have a laboratory to test, as you know, contaminants.  
We have recently tested, as you know, antibiotics and honey.  We also 
tested pesticides in colas some years ago.  We also wanted to test GM 
in imported food.  We do not have the capacity.  I am quite persistent.  
I am quite a difficult person.  In spite of my knocking the doors on 
every Government laboratory, nobody could test GM in imported oil for 
us because the capacity to test it is very poor in India.  So, the 
question that I have is this.  If you cannot test and if you cannot 
assure me that I have the right to choose, then do y ou have the right 
to introduce the technology?  If you do not have the laboratory 
systems which can actually let any citizen go out and say: “Test this 
brinjal for me.  I want to know whether it has GM or not.”  If you 
cannot do it, then does the Governmen t have the right to introduce a 
new technology, which is clearly a technology on which the jury is still 
out?  It is not a technology which can be equated with hybrids.  It is 

 
 
258 
 
not a technology which can be simply said: “Oh, it is all about modern 
production and modern technologies.”  It is not.  It is a clear 
technology where different genes are being inserted, and there are 
health risks, there are environmental risks.  So, I think, that is a very 
important issue.” 
 7.56   Justifying her stand she stated further: 
“Now the question that I have as a consumer and as a public 
advocate is this.  Why should I trust Indian science any more if I 
cannot trust the integrity and the independence of the scientists?  GM 
crops cannot be introduced in isolation of a policy  which promotes 
public science for public good.  You cannot tell me that, please have 
GM crops because it good for you.  But, on the other hand, everything 
that the Government is doing today is to compromise the integrity of 
publicly funded science and public institutions.   
I am certainly saying that this entire effort to create Public -
Private Partnerships in which you get companies more and more into 
the scientific establishments will create less and less credibility for 
crops like GM.  It is something that must be understood that consumer 
confidence is absolutely critical and that cannot be built unless you 
have integrity of public scientific establishments.”   
7.57 Making a strong case for a strong liability regime she added: 
“There is another big issue.  I think and I hope your Committee 
will take a look at both the regulatory framework as well as the liability 
regime which is needed for GM crops.  What Bhopal teaches us very 
clearly is that India has a very weak liability regi me.  You have just 
gone through a nuclear Bill.  That is also a high risk technology.  GM is 
similarly about high risk technologies, on which we do not know the 
future impact.  That is why, across the world there is concern that any 
such introduction of te chnology needs a strong liability regime.  It 
needs corporate liability to be established.  It needs the price of that 
liability to be paid.  What was the issue on nuclear?  The issue on 
nuclear was that if you have a liability regime which reflects the cost of 
risk then the technology would not be competitive.  That is why, 

 
 
259 
 
Parliament was asked and you did come up with a very compromised 
solution to actually reduce the cost of that risk.  The same question 
has to be asked when it comes to GM.  The same que stion has to be 
asked in terms of the regulatory framework that you will arrive upon.  
The Government is coming up with a Biotechnology Regulatory 
Authority.  I hope that your Committee will take a look at that and will 
make sure that that authority speaks  on behalf of consumer interests, 
speaks on behalf of farmer interests.  The issue of GM technology is 
not a silver bullet to get rid of hunger.  I think, that is an issue, which, 
I hope, this Committee will take a look at it and will do it very 
carefully.” 
7.58 Dr. Sagari R. Ramdas, Director, Anthra during her Oral Evidence on 28 
October, 2010 while dwelling upon the issue of Bt. cotton seed oil that has 
gone into the food chain stated: 
“There is no system of labelling in this country.  So, the cotton 
seed oil, whether it is a GM oil or non -GM oil, we have absolutely no 
way of assessing that. 
So, we cannot identify the source and we cannot trace the 
source to its being either Bt. or non -Bt. Secondly, our systems of 
monitoring – this is what I tried to bring out in my presentation – is 
that usually when a person is suffering from a problem and when he 
goes to the doctor, our health facilities and our health systems are not 
able to deal with it because this is something very new. Automatically 
the doctor will not inquire whether he has consumed this oil.  Today, 
we are not looking for the association between the allergy and the Bt. 
Toxin, if we begin to institute our mechanisms of our scientific 
research to look for it, probably we will find a problem.  Wh en we do 
not have a system to locate the problem or to follow it up, naturally 
we do not have any documented evidence.”   
7.59 The handling of the twin issues of regulation and labeling of 
transgenic food products by the Government speaks volumes about 
their casual attitude towards such sensitive and important matters. 
As per Rule 11 of Rules 89, the food stuffs, ingredients in food stuffs 

 
 
260 
 
and additives including processing aids containing or consisting of 
GMOs could not be produced, sold, imported or used without the 
approval of GEAC. However, MoEF on 23 August, 2007 exempted all 
these categories from Rule 11 if the end product was not an LMO.  
This according to the Government was done as only Living Modified 
Organism have property to propagate and pose ris k to environment; 
the Task Force on recombinant pharma under Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, 
former DG, CSIR and the Task Force on Agriculture Biotechnology 
under Prof. M.S. Swaminathan, have recommended that GEAC should 
be involved only in the regulat ion of LMOs to a void regulatory 
overlap; FSSAI Act had a special provision for dealing with GM food 
and food products and to address health concerns/risks in line with 
codex guidelines.    
  
7.60 Section 22, the above mentioned special provision in the FS S 
Act stipulates that no person shall manufacture, sell or import any 
novel food, genetically modified articles of food, irradiated food, 
organic food, foods for special dietary uses, functional foods, 
nutraceuticals, health supplements, proprietary foods and such other 
articles of food which the Central Government may notify in this 
behalf. Surprisingly, however, the GM foods were not included when 
Section 22 was notified by the Government.  The Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare instead asked GEAC to co ntinue regulating GM 
foods under Rule 11 of Rules 1989 by keeping the notification of 23 
August, 2007 in abeyance for six months or until the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare notified regulation of GM processed food 
by FSSAI whichever was earlier.  Th e Committee were able to track 

 
 
261 
 
five extensions of six months and a sixth one of one year upto 
September, 2011 but still the FSSAI regulation for GM processed 
food is nowhere in sight though so many years have gone by.  
Resultantly, there is no check on GM processed food and other items 
coming from outside the Country or being produced here viz. cotton 
seed oil produced from Bt. cotton in the Country.  To compound this 
inaction further , now the Government seems to entrust this 
responsibility to the proposed BRAI.  The Committee wonder when 
actually the regulation of GM food and products thereof will 
commence when BRAI itself is nowhere in sight.  In the opinion of 
the Committee this dilly dallying and delay in bringing GM food and 
products, thereof, is not a simple act of oversight or a genuine 
inability to do the needful and needs to be thoroughly investigated 
and responsibility for this callous neglect of health safety be fixed at 
the earliest.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the results 
of the investigation and the action taken in pursuance thereof.  
  
7.61 The Committee would also like to be apprised about what all 
action has been taken by the Government with regard to post 
marketing surveillance, health safety, food and feed safety of the 
cotton seed oil and other products like cotton cake extracted from Bt. 
cotton and whether the manufactures of the cotton seed oil  and 
cotton cake derived from Bt. cotton have complied with all relevant 
laws and regulations laid down for production and marketing  of 
products derived from transgenic materials.   
 
7.62 A similar dithering by the Government is observed by the 
Committee on the issue of labeling of GM foods and products thereof.  

 
 
262 
 
Section 23 of FSS Act requires FSSAI to notify labeling and related 
aspects of all items covered under the Act.  However, it has not been 
able to do so inspite of being in existence for years now.  The 
Committee understand that FSSAI is presently working upon the 
procedure of labeling for GM foods and products thereof within it s 
system and would be forwarding its recommendation to the Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare.  
 
7.63 In this context the Committee have considered the various 
opinions proffered to them by various ministries/departments of the 
Government, scientists and experts, both within the system and 
outside, NGOs and civil society, general public regarding labeling of 
genetically modified crops, food and products, thereof.  Inspite of the 
various reasons cited by ICAR and some other 
ministries/departments the Commit tee are in agreement with the 
majority opinion that the consumer has the supreme right to make 
an informed choice.  They, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should immediately issue regulation for making 
labelling of genetically modified products inc luding food crops, food 
and food products so as to ensure that the consumer is able to make 
an informed choice in the important matter of what she/he wants to 
consume.  When China, which is more populous a country and which  
also produces transgenic products can make labeling of such 
products mandatory the Committee find no hitch in labeling being 
made mandatory in India.      
(iii) Food Production Scenario 
 
7.64 The growth in agriculture sector during the Eleventh Plan was of the 
order of 3.5 per cent.  In the Tenth Plan it was 2.3 per cent.  During the 

 
 
263 
 
Ninth Plan it was 2.4 per cent.  The Approach Paper to the Twelfth Plan pegs 
this growth around 4 per cent for t he Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012 -2017).  
Transgenic in food crops is being offered as the much needed solution for 
food security of the Country.  In this context the representative of Centre for 
Science and Environment informed the Committee during her Oral  Evidence 
on 19 October, 2010:  
 
“So, I think, it is important when somebody says that to you, 
please ask them for more details about which crops are stagnating and 
indeed why that is the GM is the only answer. When it came to brinjal, 
for instance, why were they introducing BT in brinjal, which is a fairly 
high productivity crop already?  Now, is that going to be important for 
food security in this country?  I think it is important for us to evaluate 
that question.  The second question that everybody is asking is that in 
India, “Is it a simple matter of not having food or is it criminal matter 
of not being able to provide food to hungry people?”  That is the 
question that the entire world is  asking: “Where there are food stocks 
and rotting food stocks, and we have hungry people.” So, the question 
is not a simple mathematics of looking at a linier line that connects 
food production and population.  The question is to look at whatever 
food production, how do you get it to people.  When you start looking 
at how do you get it to people, you start looking at policies, which 
have been designed to first grow the food  and then get it to someone 
else.  In fact, today there is more and more understand that if you 
want to feed people in India, you have to make sure that everybody 
can grow their own food.  If you start talking about growing your own 
food and getting more self -reliant in States having local production, 
improving productivity, then GM is not the answer. 
 So, to me, it becomes such a simplistic thing to hear from the 
Indian policy makers – so much population; we will go out of food. We 
are not out of food today, but we have a very large number of hungry 
people. That is one point. 
 As far as Bt. cotton in concerned, there is no doubt in my mind. I 
think that productivity has increased, yields have increased.  I hope 
you will ask people to give you more data on this. When we have 

 
 
264 
 
taken  a look at where productivity have increased,  they have 
increased in irrigated areas and not in unirrigated areas. They hav e 
increased because you have been able to do other inputs that are 
needed as well.  So, it is  a very high input yield increase.  In fact, the 
BT cotton only proves my last point, Mr. Chairman.” 
7.65 On this very aspect Prof. R.N. Basu, Former Vice -chancellor of Krishi 
Vishwa Vidyalaya informed the Committee durin g his Oral Evidence on 22 
December, 2010: 
“I will add just one point. High population is inevitable and it will 
increase to 1.5 billion by 2015. But high input farming is equally bad. 
In the last y ear, the fertilizer subsidy was Rs. 1.2 lakh crore. Now we 
are importing 40 per cent of the urea, 97 per cent of phosphate and 
100 per cent of muriate potash. Intensive farming means high input 
farming. We are short of inputs and we will be depending on 
transnational corporations if we accept GM seeds and another logic is 
that we should not go in for high input farming because our soil will be 
spoiled and the cost of inputs will go up.” 
 
7.66 His colleague Prof. T.K. Bose, Former Director, B idhan Chandra Krishi 
Vishwa Vidyalaya supplementing him stated: 
“The population will increase but there are definite ways by 
which this can be tackled. Integrated farming will give double income 
and double benefits to our farmers. There are thousands of evidences. 
You might have heard of land shaping. That is the only technology left. 
In West Bengal, low lying areas are there. In arid areas, land shaping 
will save water for the farmers and they can also go for multi cropping. 
In GM, multi cropping is a taboo there. In a multi cropping field, you 
cannot use such things. Lastly, there are definite ways for small and 
marginal farmers which are based on diversity of crops.” 
 
7.67  Dr. Sujatha Byravan, former Director, Council for Responsible 
Genetics, USA and Senior Fellow, C entre for Development of Finance, 
Institute for Financial Management and Research speaking on the aspect of  

 
 
265 
 
the food security informed the Committee during the Oral Evidence on 11 
November, 2010: 
“The other point is with regard to food security and how we can 
feed the millions of our people.  Being able to have food depends on 
many factors other than just the amount of food that is there.  Access 
to food and livelihood including capacity to store it  efficiently are the 
points on which we really need to focus on to see that there is enough 
food available.”  
 
 7.68  Elucidating on the aspect of food security and related matters – Dr. S. 
Nagarajan stated during his Oral Evidence on 15 July, 2010: 
 
“Food security, as you rightly said, has to be our major concern 
looking into the large size of the population and the affordability .  First 
I place before you  sir that a major part of Central and Eastern India 
still has not got the benefit of better agriculture. Therefore, if we make 
available better seed, better marketing, if we can make the MSP 
available to all the States, make the Fertiliser Policy a little more 
friendly, we will be able to increase the food production substantially. 
As a scientist in agricu lture, I am not afraid about food security 
because we have the technology available to increase foodgrain 
production and can meet the demand for the next 20 years. So, we 
have to, therefore, not go in a hurry as though our food security is in 
danger when the issue of transgenic comes to our mind. We can look 
into the consequences. We should not be too much worried cornered 
as though tomorrow we will go hungry. 
So far as food price is concerned, access to food will come only 
when we are able to make food ava ilable and affordable.  If the input 
price increases, naturally the price of the commodity is likely to 
increase. So we have to have a technology which is farmer -oriented 
and, therefore, even if we develop transgenic crops  the seed cost 
should be affordable.  Transgenic root stocks  will enhance our 
horticulture production and biosafety is not a major issue here.  If we 
park the technology on hybrid, then it is likely that the price  of 

 
 
266 
 
transgenic seed will be high and the price of the produce will also 
increase.  So, as a policy, at least the State funded system should look 
at variety-based concept rather than a hybrid system. We can make 
hybrid provided, the Institute is able to given non exclusive rights of 
both the male and female lines.  
 
The nu tritional value of food is of great concern. I think large 
part of my countrymen suffering due to inadequacy of nutritive food.  
Our food is primarily starch -based and it is not having the type of 
minerals, vitamins and nutrition that is required. So, emph asis on 
vegetables will be a welcome step.  Nuclear of hybrid vegetables have 
been developed by ICAR /SAU system and if vegetable access can be 
given along with the mid-day meal, it will go a long in making vitamins 
and minerals available to the school going children.  We have to give a 
lot of emphasis on vegetables to make sure that the wholesome food 
is available to our people. 
 
 
On food export, there are a lot of countries in Europe and 
America where transgenic food  is not welcome .  So, if we have to 
develop transgenic variety in rice, we may have to be very careful that 
our Basmati trade is not affected because Saudi Arabia and Europe will 
stay our Basmati rice if there is any transgenic rice contamination.  
Crops where our trade int erest are involved like coffee and Basmati 
rice, we have to examine t hem carefully because when it comes to 
trade, many nations are not very keen to take transgenic food . 
Therefore, when it comes to transgenic technology, we may focus on 
Rubber, Jute and other industrial crops.”  
 
7.69 To make an objective assessment of the food production and food 
security scenario in the Country and also of future requirements in the light 
of the increase in population, the Committee sought ten years data from 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation on seven different parameters.  
 
 

 
 
267 
 
7.70 The following information was furnished by the Department in this 
regard:   
Year-wise production of food grains, cereals and pulses 
           
(Million 
Tonnes) 
Crop 2000-
2001 
2001-
2002 
2002-
2003 
2003-
2004 
2004-
2005 
2005-
2006 
2006-
2007 
2007-
2008 
2008-
2009 
2009-
2010 
2010- 
2011* 
    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Rice 84.98  93.34  71.82  88.53  83.13  91.79  93.35  96.69  99.18  89.09  94.11  
Wheat 69.68  72.77  65.76  72.15  68.64  69.35  75.81  78.57  80.68  80.80  84.27  
Jowar 7.53  7.56  7.01  6.68  7.24  7.63  7.15  7.93  7.24  6.70  6.75  
Bajra  6.76  8.28  4.72  12.11  7.93  7.68  8.42  9.97  8.89  6.51  9.21  
Maize 12.04  13.16  11.15  14.98  14.18  14.71  15.10  18.96  19.73  16.72  20.23  
Ragi 2.73  2.37  1.32  1.97  2.43  2.35  1.44  2.15  2.04  1.89  2.17  
Small 
Millets 0.59  0.58  0.46  0.56  0.48  0.47  0.48  0.55  0.44  0.38  0.37  
Barley 1.43  1.42  1.41  1.30  1.20  1.22  1.33  1.20  1.69  1.35  1.48  
Coarse 
Cereals 31.08  33.37  26.07  37.60  33.46  34.06  33.92  40.76  40.03  33.55  40.21  
Cereals 185.74  199.48  163.65  198.28  185.23  195.20  203.08  216.02  219.90  203.45  218.59  
Tur 2.25  2.26  2.19  2.36  2.35  2.74  2.31  3.08  2.27  2.46  3.15  
Gram 3.85  5.47  4.24  5.72  5.47  5.60  6.33  5.75  7.06  7.48  7.38  
Urad 1.29  1.50  1.47  1.47  1.33  1.25  1.44  1.46  1.17  1.23  1.82  
Moong 1.03  1.11  0.87  1.71  1.06  0.95  1.12  1.52  1.04  0.69  1.37  
Other 
Kharif 
Pulses 
0.64  0.73  0.32  1.18  0.61  0.54  0.71  0.95  0.80  0.51  1.27  
Other Rabi 
Pulses 2.01  2.30  2.04  2.47  2.31  2.31  2.29  2.00  2.23  2.29  2.30  
Total 
Pulses 11.07  13.37  11.13  14.91  13.13  13.39  14.20  14.76  14.57  14.66  17.29  
Total 
Foodgrains 196.81  212.85  174.77  213.19  198.36  208.60  217.28  230.78  234.47  218.11  235.88  
As per third Advance Estimates released on 6.4.2011 
Source – E & S. DAC  
 
Production statistics for fruits and Vegetables 
     P= Production (in 000‟MT) 
Year Fruits          Vegetables 
 P P 
2001-02 43001 88622 
2002-03 45203 84815 
2003-04 45942 88334 
2004-05 50867 101246 
2005-06 55356 111399 
2006-07 59563 114993 
2007-08 65587 128449 
2008-09 68466 129077 
2009-10 71516 133738 
2010-11(*P) 75853 137632 
 Source: Indian Horticulture Production at a glance (2001-02 to 2009-10) 
 
 
 

 
 
268 
 
 
Estimated Population of the Country during 2000-01 to 2010-11) 
 
                                   (In millions) 
S.No Year 
 
Total Populations 
1. 2000-01. 1020 
2. 2001-02 1029 
3. 2002-03 1035 
4. 2003-04 1042 
5. 2004-05 1050 
6. 2005-06 1095 
7. 2006-07 1110 
8. 2007-08 1125 
9. 2008-09 1140 
10. 2009-10 1156 
11. 2010-11 1210 
  Source – Horticulture Division. DAC Based on 2001 Census website. 
 
 
 
 
 
Per Capita Requirement (Demand) of Food grains for 2011-12 
(As per Demand Projected by Working Group of Planning Commission for 11th Five Year Plan) 
 
           (Million Tonnes) 
Crop Total Projected 
Demand for 2011-12  
Per Capita Requirement/Demand 
for the year 2011-12* (Kgs.) 
Rice 98.79 82.20 
Wheat 77.36 64.37 
Coarse Cereals 38.19 31.78 
 Pulses 19.91 16.57 
 Foodgrains 234.26 194.92 
      Note: Year-wise per capita requirement not available 
      Source -E&S DAC  
  

 
 
269 
 
 
PER CAPITA NET AVAILABILITY OF FOODGRAINS IN INDIA 
    
(Kgs Per 
Year) 
 
( AS ON 
16.03.2011) 
YEAR RICE WHEAT OTHER CEREALS GRAM PULSES FOOD- 
      CEREALS       GRAINS 
2001 69.5 49.6 20.5 141.0 2.9 10.9 151.9 
2002 83.5 60.8 23.1 167.4 3.9 12.9 180.4 
2003 66.2 65.8 17.1 149.1 3.1 10.6 159.7 
2004 71.3 59.2 25.3 155.8 4.1 13.1 168.9 
2005 64.7 56.3 21.7 142.7 3.9 11.5 154.2 
2006 72.3 56.3 22.1 150.7 3.9 11.8 162.5 
2007 70.8 57.6 20.3 148.7 4.3 12.9 161.6 
2008 64.0 53.0 19.7 143.9 3.9 15.3 159.2 
2009 68.8 56.5 23.3 148.6 4.7 13.5 162.1 
2010(P) 67.4 61.3 19.8 148.5 4.9 11.6 160.1 
NOTE- 
The net availability of foodgrains is estimated to be Gross Production (-) seed, feed & wastage, (-) 
exports (+) imports, 
 
(+/-) change in stocks. 
     
 
The net availability of foodgrains divided by the population estimates for a particular year indicate 
per capita availability 
 
of foodgrains in terms of kg/year.  Net availability, thus worked out further divided by the number 
of days in a year I.e., 
 
365 days gives us net availability of foodgrains in terms of grams / day. 
          
 
Figures in respect of per capita net availability given above are not strictly representative of actual 
level of consumption 
 
in the country especially as they do not take in to account any change in stocks in possession of 
traders, producers 
 
and consumers. 
              
 
For calculation of per capita net availability the figures of net imports from 1981 to 1994 are based 
on imports and 
 
exports on Government of India account only.  Net imports from 1995 onwards are the total 
exports and imports 
 
(on Government as well as private accounts) 
            
 
Cereals includes rice, wheat and other cereals 
    
 
Pulses includes all kharif and rabi pulses 
 
     Source – E & S DAC 
 
 
PER CAPITA NET AVAILABILITY OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
(GRAMS/DAY) 
 
YEARS FRUITS VEGETABLES TOTAL 
2000-01 116 252 368 
2001-02 114 236 350 
2002-03 120 225 345 
2003-04 121 232 353 
2004-05 133 264 397 
2005-06 139 279 417 
2006-07 147 284 431 
2007-08 160 313 473 
2008-09 165 316 475 
2009-10 169 317 486 
Source – National Horticulture Board.  
  

 
 
270 
 
Details of minimum buffer norms fixed and the actual stock position 
of wheat and rice in the Central Pool since 1.4.2001 
 
AS ON W H E A T R I C E T O T A L 
Actual 
stock 
Minimum 
buffer 
norms 
Actual stock Minimum 
buffer norms 
Actual stock Minimum 
buffer norms 
1.04.2001 215.04 40 231.91 118 446.95 158 
1.07.2001 389.2 143 227.51 100 616.71 243 
1.10.2001 368.26 116 214.52 65 582.78 181 
1.01.2002 324.15 84 256.17 84 580.32 168 
1.04.2002 260.39 40 249.12 118 509.51 158 
1.07.2002 410.74 143 219.37 100 630.11 243 
1.10.2002 356.37 116 157.7 65 514.07 181 
1.01.2003 288.3 84 193.72 84 482.02 168 
1.04.2003 156.45 40 171.57 118 328.02 158 
1.7.2003 241.94 143 109.74 100 351.68 243 
1.10.2003 184.27 116 52.41 65 236.68 181 
1.01.2004 126.87 84 117.27 84 244.14 168 
1.04.2004 69.31 40 130.69 118 200 158 
1.07.2004 191.52 143 107.63 100 299.15 243 
1.10.2004 142.23 116 60.92 65 203.15 181 
1.01.2005 89.31 84 127.63 84 216.94 168 
1.04.2005* 40.66 40 133.41 122 174.07 162 
1.07.2005 144.54 171 100.71 98 245.25 269 
1.10.2005 102.9 110 48.49 52 151.39 162 
1.01.2006 61.88 82 126.41 118 188.29 200 
1.04 .2006 20.09 40 136.75 122 156.84 162 
1.07.2006 82.07 171 111.43 98 193.5 269 
1.10.2006 64.12 110 59.7 52 123.82 162 
1.01.2007 54.28 82 119.77 118 174.05 200 
1.04.2007 47.03 40 131.72 122 178.75 162 
1.07.2007 129.26 171 109.77 98 239.03 269 
1.10.2007 101.21 110 54.89 52 156.1 162 
1.01.2008 77.12 82 114.75 118 191.87 200 
1.04.2008 58.03 40 138.35 122 196.38 162 
1.07.2008 # 249.12 201 112.49 98 361.61 299 
1.10.2008 220.25 140 78.63 52 298.88 192 
1.01.2009 # 182.12 112 175.76 138 357.88 250 
1.04.2009 134.29 70 216.04 142 350.33 212 
1.07.2009 329.22 201 196.16 118 525.38 319 
1.10.2009 
284.57 140 
 
153.49 72 438.06 212 
1.01.2010 230.92 112 243.53 138 474.45 250 
1.04.2010 161.25 70 267.13 142 428.38 212 
1.07.2010 335.84 201 242.66 118 578.5 319 
1.10.2010 277.77 140 184.44 72 462.21 212 
1.01.2011 215.40 112 255.80 138 471.2 250 
1.04.2011 153.64 70 288.20 142 441.84 212 
1.07.2011 371.49 201 268.57 118 640.06 319 
* New Buffer Norms w.e.f. April, 2005  
    #Includes Food Security Reserve of 30 lakh tons of wheat from 1.7.2008 onwards and 20 lakh tons of rice from 
1.1.2009 onwards.   
 Source Department of Food & Public Distribution.  

 
 
271 
 
POST HARVEST CROP LOSSES 
Estimated harvest and post harvest losses in India during 2005-07 
Crop / commodity Losses 
estimated, % 
(i) Cereals                
1. Paddy 5.2 
2. Wheat 6.0 
3. Maize 4.1 
4. Bajra 4.8 
5. Sorghum 3.9 
(ii) Pulses  
1. Pigeon Pea 5.4 
2. Chick Pea  4.3 
3. Black Gram 6.1 
4. Green Gram 5.5 
(iii) Oilseeds  
1. Mustard 8.9 
2. Cottonseed 2.8 
3. Soybean 6.2 
4. Safflower 3.7 
5. Sunflower 4.5 
6. Groundnut 10.1 
(iv)  Fruits  
1. Apple 12.3 
2. Banana 6.6 
3. Citrus 6.3 
4. Grapes 8.3 
5. Guava 18 
6. Mango 12.7 
7. Papaya 7.4 
8. Sapota 5.8 
(iv) Vegetables  
1. Cabbage 6.9 
2. Cauliflower 6.8 
3. Green Pea 10.3 
4. Mushroom 12.5 
5. Onion 7.5 
6. Potato 9 
7. Tomato 12.4 
8. Tapioca 9.8 
                                   (Source ICAR) 
 

 
 
272 
 
Statement Showing Import of Agricultural Products From 2000 -2001 to 2009-10 
    Qty. „000‟ tones, Value: Rs. In crores.          
         
              
Item 
            
2001-
2002     
     2002   -
2003 
     2003   -
2004 
        2004   -
2005 
2005 - 
2006 
      
2006-
2007   
      
2007-
08   2008-09 2009-10 
1 4 5 6 7 8 9 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
    Qty.   Value 
   
Qty.   Value. 
   
Qty.   Value 
   
Qty.   Value Qty. Value Qty. Value    Qty.   Value.    Qty.   Value.    Qty.   Value. 
Vegetable Oils 
fixed edible 4322 6465 4365 8780 5290 11683 1 11077 4175 8716 4269 9540 4903 10301 6719 15837 7969 26484 
Pulses 2218 3160 1993 2737 1723 2285 1339 1778 1608 2347 2271 3892 2835 5375 2474 6246 3448 9673 
Wood & Wood 
Products   2584   1946   3269   3995   4066   4684   5455   6041   7461 
Sugar 26 33 41 33 74 63 933 976 559 652 1 3 1 6 386 583 2424 5961 
Cashew Nuts 162 431 403 1236 443 1372 480 1805 544 2090 586 1821 592 1715 614 2672 692 3050 
Fruits & Nuts    757   642   802   1101   1377   1913   1858   2373   2871 
Spices 86 504 121 586 124 564 107 594 107 678 119 739 145 974 123 1076 150 1419 
Cotton raw & 
waste 387 2054 234 1238 253 1570 21 1136 98 688 81 663 136 912 212 1690 172 1241 
Tea 10 67 24 125 11 65 33 147 19 108 23 127 20 131 25 197 34 275 
Wheat 1 1     0 0         6080 5850 1793 2658 0 0 160 231 
Cereal 
Preparation 35 82 52 117 33 87 45 112 42 126 38 133 44 162 30 170 40 190 
Oil Seeds   1   11   14 4751 28   47   104   149   130   183 
Jute, raw 80 96 143 135 112 94 32 32 48 72 83 115 136 148 52 71 63 149 
Milk & Cream 1 8 1 10 12 90 2 13 2 14 3 29 2 29 3 38 8 78 
Other cereals 5 4 1 1 2 2 7 7 27 29 8 12 10 19 21 45 34 76 
Vegetable & 
Animal fats 1 10 1 12 2 13 192 13 1 14 1 11 1 12 1 12 1 23 
Rice 0 0 1 1 1 0         0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 
(excl. 
Cashewnuts)                                     
Total 
agricultural 
imports   16257   17609   21973   22812   21026   29638   29906   37183   59368 
                                      
Contry's total 
Imports   245200   297206   359108   501065   630527   840506   1012312   1374436   1356469 
                                      
% Share in total 
Import   7   6   6   5   3   4   3   3   4 
Source:   
DGCI&S 
                  

 
 
273 
 
 Statement Showing Export of Agricultural Products From 2001-2002 to 2009-10 
Qty. '000'tonnes, Value: Rs. in crores. 
 
   Item 
           
2001-
2002    
           
2002-
2003    
          
2003-
2004    
     
2004-
2005   2005-2006 
   
2006-
07   2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
                                                                                                       
1 4 5 6 7 8 9 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
    Qty. 
   
Value   Qty. 
   
Value.   Qty. 
   
Value.   Qty. 
   
Value. 
  
Qty. 
   
Value.   Qty. 
   
Value. 
  
Qty. 
   
Value. 
  
Qty. 
   
Value. 
  
Qty.    Value. 
Rice 
Basmati 667 1843 709 2058 771 1993 1163 2824 1161 3030 1046 2793 1182 4335 1556 9477 2016 10839 
Oil Meals 2782 2263 1776 1487 3250 3348 3603 3178 6970 4826 6437 5504 6691 7954 6743 10269 4689 7850 
Meat  & 
Preparations - 1193   1377   1714   1905   2648   3314   3734   5371   6285 
Spices 239 1497 277 1655 267 1544 365 1883 403 2218 483 3158 620 4176 674 6338 681 6161 
Tobacco 
unmfgd.     84 582 100 734 121 801 136 940 144 1028 158 1251 174 1430 208 2766 231 3621 
Other 
Cereals 145 116 106 91 604 398 1178 794 659 513 730 599 3228 2979 4000 3921 2904 3005 
Tea 180 1719 183 1652 178 1637 183 1840 158 1632 186 1970 199 2022 207 2689 209 2943 
Fresh Veg  - 575   643   954   863   911   1547   1473   2454   2904 
Cashew 98 1789 129 2053 100 1700 118 2477 124 2563 123 2491 111 2210 126 2901 122 2802 
Fresh Fruits - 417   447   784   862   1101   1414   1447   1945   2269 
Castor oil 214 626 178 610 162 656 272 1078 253 934 295 1090 282 1275 357 2129 398 2178 
Misc. 
Processed 
Items  - 724   910   1059   908   979   1125   1337   2077   2137 
Coffee 176 1095 185 994 188 1086 168 1069 178 1577 214 1969 178 1868 174 2256 177 2033 
Sesame & 
Niger Seed 241 610 154 451 207 754 194 773 224 794 263 1006 336 1714 211 1558 222 1520 
Ground nut 113 251 68 178 176 544 177 547 185 501 251 798 268 1042 298 1239 340 1425 
Processed 
Fruit Juice - 513   574   344   369   600   711   769   1099   1156 
Guargum 
Meal 118 403 112 487 121 508 131 689 187 1042 189 1126 208 1111 259 1339 216 1133 
Dairy and 
Poultry 
Products - 356 - 359   415 - 741   1112   811   1328   1544   915 
Processed 
Veg - 199   257   291   362   473   650   606   711   752 
Tobacco 
mfgd. 13 226   289   295   315   302   434   498   695   724 
Rice (other 
than 
Basmati) 1541 1331 4259 3773 2641 2175 3615 3945 3905 4144 3702 4243 5314 7396 932 1687 139 415 
Pulses 162 369 148 345 154 329 271 603 445 1103 251 773 164 527 136 540 100 407 

 
 
274 
 
Floriculture 
Products   127   181   250   223   305   653   338   369   294 
Fruits/Veg 
seeds 5 62 9 98 5 54 7 66 10 90 8 122 10 143 9 120 9 145 
Sugar 1456 1728 1662 1769 1201 1217 109 150 317 557 1643 3127 4641 5404 3332 4449 44 110 
Shellac 6 73 6 90 11 180 9 165 10 161 8 147 8 124 6 104 4 71 
Cashewnut 
Shell Liquid 2 5 6 9 4 5 5 12 4 7 8 15 15 25 11 30 11 28 
Molasses 221 54 208 45 99 19 8 6 72 27 327 133 863 250 172 83 31 20 
Wheat 2649 1330 3671 1760 4093 2391 2009 1460 746 557 47 35 0 0 1 1 0 0 
                                      
                     

 
 
275 
 
   Item 
           
2001-
2002    
           
2002-
2003    
          
2003-
2004    
    
2004-
2005   
2005-
2006    2006-07   2007-08 
2008-
09 2009-10 
                                                                             
1 4 5 6 
 
8 9 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
    Qty. 
   
Value.   Qty. 
   
Value.   Qty. 
   
Value.   Qty. 
   
Value.   Qty.    Value. 
  
Qty.    Value.   Qty. 
   
Value. 
  
Qty. 
   
Value.   Qty.    Value. 
 Marine 
products 468 5898 528 6928 409 6106 484 6469 461 6356 612 8001 488 6855 465 7066 721 9891 
 Cotton Raw 
incl.waste 8 43 12 50 180 942 87 423 596 2792 1162 6108 1417 8000 458 2866 1360 9543 
 Jute 
Hessain 51 186   349   410   427   489   376   464   416   308 
Paper/Wood 
products   1524   1950   2363   3237   4431   4915   4937   5442   5639 
                                      
Total 
Agricultural 
Exports  - 29729   
3465
4   37267   41603   49803   62411   77770   85952   89523 
                                      
Country's 
total Exports - 209018   255137   293367   375340   454800   571779   640172   840755   845125 
                                      
% Share in 
total Export   14   14   13   11   11   11   12   10   11 
                   Source : DGCI&S  Report 
 
 
Fruits and Vegetables imported as well as exported during each of ten years 
 
(Qty. in 000 MT) 
 
Year Import Export 
2000-01 145 624 
2001-02 866 789 
2002-03 889 934 
2003-04 744 1291 
2004-05 687 1296 
2005-06 850 1481 
2006-07 1444 2003 
2007-08 1805 1725 
2008-09 1297 2646 
2009-10 1778 2560 
             Source – National Horticulture Mission. 

 
 
276 
 
 
7.71  A major argument extended in favour of transgenic food 
crops by DAC before the Committee is their potential to ensure 
Country‟s food security in coming years due to increase in 
population.  The Committee, therefore, analysed the food 
production and ava ilability scenario during last decade  
alongwith population trends.  The foodgrains production during 
the last decade has more than kept pace with the growth in 
population.  The total foodgrains production rose from 197 odd 
million tonnes in 2000 -2001 to 24 1 million tonnes in 2010 -11.  
The production of fruits has gone up steeply from 430 lakh tones 
to 759 lakh tones during this decade.  Similarly, the production 
of vegetables has also shown a significant rise from 886.22 lakh 
tones to 1376.32 lakh tones.  T hroughout this decade barring a 
year or so India has been a net exporter of food grains and 
vegetables. The rise in food grains and fruits and vegetable 
production has continued inspite of two major droughts during 
this decade.  The toil of the farmer and the significant 
contribution of the agricultural scientists have ensured that food 
security is not a problem.  In the opinion of the Committee the 
problem today is in no measure comparable to the ship to mo uth 
situation of early sixties as today we are only faced with a 

 
 
277 
 
serious deceleration in availability of food.  Inspite of sufficient 
production and more than double the amount of buffer norms 
food stocks with the Government there is a huge disparity in 
availability of food.  A large  
 
majority does not h ave access to food due to extreme poverty 
while colossal amounts of food grains, fruits and vegetables are 
being lost during post harvest storage.  As Secretary, 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation confessed before the 
Committee that a saving of 10% in  post harvest crops losses 
would mean 23 million tones of extra food grains. Primarily 
faulty procurement policy, mismanagement of stocks, lack of 
adequate and proper storage, hoarding and lopsided 
distribution, massive leakages in the  public distribution delivery 
system, etc. are more responsible for the present worrisome 
situation.  If these shortcomings and problems are attend ed to 
alongwith liberal financial assistance to agriculture and allied 
sectors, proactive measures are initiated to arrest the 
decreasing trend in cultivable area and farmer friendly and 
sustainable agricultural practices are put in use, there would not 
be any compelling need for adopting technologies which are yet 
to be proven totally safe for biodiversity, environment, human 

 
 
278 
 
and livestock health and which will encourage monoculture, an 
option best avoided.  The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend the Government to come up with a fresh road map 
for ensuring food security in coming years without jeopardizing 
the vast bio-diversity of the Country and compromising with the 
safety of human health and livestock health.           
(iv) Violation of BD Act 
7.72 Section 3 of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 stipulates a follows: 
 
(1) No person referred to in sub -section (2) shall, without 
previous approval of the National Biodiversity Authority, obtain 
any biological resource occurring in India or knowledge associated 
thereto for research or for commercial utilization or for bio -survey 
and bio-utilisation. 
 
(2)  The persons who shall be req uired to take the approval of 
the National Biodiversity Authority under sub -section (1) are the 
following, namely:- 
 
(a) a person who is not a citizen of India; 
(b) a citizen of India, who is a non -resident as defined in 
clause (30) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961; 
(c) a body corporate, association or organization – 
(i)  not incorporated or registered in India; or 
(ii) incorporated or registered in India under any law for 
the time being in force which has any non -Indian 
participation in its share capital or management. 
 

 
 
279 
 
7.73 The following details were furnished by the Authority about cases 
of violation  of  Section 3,  year-wise,  since  the  enactment  of the Act, 
action  
taken in each such case and its present status: 
 
Year 
 
Reported 
 
Violation 
 
Issue Action 
taken 
 
2006 1 
 
Clandestine transfer of jatropha 
germplasm from Indira Gandhi 
Agricultural University, Raipur to a 
multinational company 
 
Sub judice 
 
2010 1 
 
Alleged misappropriation of local 
brinjal 
varieties by M/s. Mahyco and others. 
 
Under 
investigation 
 
2011 3 
 
1. Alleged illegal transportation of 
Ongole Bull to Brazil. 
2. Alleged export of Rabbit & Rat 
antigen by M/s. Imgenex India, Orissa 
to Foreign nations. 
3. Alleged export of embryos of Gir 
breed Cows from Bhavnagar, Gujarat. 
Under 
investigation 
 
 
7.74 On the basis of a media report about continued inaction of the 
Authority in respect of case number 2 mentioned above, the Committee 
sought a detailed status note from NBA.  In response the Authority 
informed that the article referred to deals with alleged violations of the 
provisions of the BD Act by M/s. Mahyco an Indian seed company. The 
factual note cum status of the cases is as under:- 
 
Bt Brinjal Case 
The National Biodiversity Authority received a complaint 
from Environment Support Group (ESG) alleging biopiracy by 
Monsanto and its collaborators in the development of Bt brinjal. 
Based on this, the  Authority with the help of Karnataka State 
Biodiversity Board began investigating this allegation. Information 
and inputs from tho se institutions and agencies involved in the 

 
 
280 
 
development of the said Bt brinjal material were procured and 
legal assessment of this information is being undertaken 
considering the elements and extent of violation of the provisions 
of the Biological Diversi ty Act. Between August and October 2011 
more information was sought from the agencies involved in the 
development of this material. Subsequently, M/s. Monsanto 
Holding Pvt. Ltd., submitted an application for accessing Onion 
material developed by Indian Ins titute of Horticulture Research, 
ICAR, Bangalore. This application is still to be cleared. 
 
7.75  With a view to control unauthorized access to our precious 
biological resources or knowledge associated therewith , Section 
3 of Biodiversity Act, 2002 stipula tes that certain categories of 
persons shall not obtain any biological resources occurring in 
India or knowledge associated thereto for research or for 
commercial utilization or fo r bio-survey and bio -utilisation 
without prior approval of National Biodiver sity Authority.  These 
categories include a person who is not a citizen of Indian; a 
citizen of India, who is a non -resident and a body corporate, 
association or organization not incorporated or registered in 
India; or incorporated or registered in India u nder any law for 
the time being in force, which has any non -Indian participation 
in its share capital or management.  In this connection a report 
appeared in media about one particular case of 2010 pertaining 
to alleged misappropriation of local brinjal va rieties by M/s 

 
 
281 
 
Mahyco and others.  Allegations about continued inaction of the 
Authority in respect of this case were also reported in the media.  
The Committee sought a detailed explanation from the National 
Biodiversity Authority in the matter.  Accordin g to NBA on the 
basis of a complaint alleging biopiracy by Monsanto and its 
corporate in development of Bt. brinjal, the Authority had began 
investigating the matter with the help of Karnataka State 
Biodiversity Board.   Information and inputs from the 
institutions and agencies involved in the development of said Bt. 
brinjal material were procured and legal assessment of the same 
is being undertaken considering the elements and extent of 
violation of the provisions of Biological Diversity Act.  Between 
August and October, 2011 further information was sought from 
the agencies involved in the development of this material.  NBA 
also informed the Committee that a subsequent application of 
M/s Monsanto Holding Private Limited for accessing onion 
material developed by Indian Institute of Horticulture Research, 
ICAR, Bengaluru is still to be cleared.  
7.76 The Committee are not at all convinced by the dilatory 
response of NBA on this sensitive issue.  The matter is very 
simple as to whether the Company in question has obtained any 
local biological resource for and in connection with development 

 
 
282 
 
of Bt. brinjal without prior approval of NBA and violated Section 
3 of Biological Diversity Act, 2002.  Taking so long in coming to a 
conclusion on this simple issue shows the NBA in a very poor 
light.  It would also be worth mentioning here that during this 
period Cha irman, GEAC was simultaneously also holding the 
charge of Chairman, NBA from 11 November, 2010 to 11 August, 
2011.  The Committee not only desire a thorough inquiry in the 
matter of continued paralysis in decision making on a case of 
this dimension but als o recommend that the NBA should decide 
upon this case without any further delay.             

 
 
283 
 
CHAPTER – VIII 
TRANSGENICS IN FOOD CROPS 
 
8.1 In view of the controversy surrounding transgenics in food crops 
the Committee desired to know about the likely effec ts/ramifications of 
genetic modification of various food crops in so far as the aspects of 
bio-diversity, bio -safety, environment, human health and health of 
livestock and animals are concerned. Different 
ministries/departments/organisations within the Gov ernment had 
different and often contradictory views in the matter.  Varied opinions 
were also expressed on the Subject by several other stakeholders. 
 
8.2 The Department of Science and Technology informed them in 
writing that they shared the global concern about the need for rigorous 
scientific studies of safety aspects prior to introduction of GM food 
crops.  Therefore, the Department maintains that all aspects of 
biosafety, biodiversity, human and live stock health risk  should be 
addressed and assessed by following globally debated and consensus 
science based biosafety assessment guidelines evolved from time to 
time by various international agencies and conventions prior to the 
introduction of such GM food crops.   They further stated that based on 
the transgenic crops introduced, it is our view that case by case 
regulatory processes and procedures have to be stringently followed.  It 
is also our view that current regulatory procedures and protocols in 
India are adequate to address food and environmental safety issues.  As 
the experience grows with different types of GM crops, the regulatory 
science also evolves globally for assessment and management of even 
smallest of the risk.  Currently in India, all GM crops are evalu ated for 
safety and efficacy as per the protocols and procedures prescribed 
under the Rules 1989 of Environment Protection Act 1986 and relevant 

 
 
284 
 
biosafety guidelines notified from time to time.  The biosafety guidelines 
adopted by RCGM/ GEAC are based on i nternationally recognized 
procedures for the comprehensive safety assessment of GM crops. No 
approval should be granted to the GM crops unless there has been a 
thorough analysis of its effects on the environment, biodiversity, 
biosafety, human health, and health of livestock and animals is proven 
to be safe.  Safety and efficacy is evaluated by science based 
experimentation and analysis on case -by-case basis and therefore, 
cannot be generalized as these are product specific.  The Department 
considers that the products based on GM food crops should meet three 
criteria namely bio safety to the consumers, desired socio - economic 
benefits to farmers and bio safety to maintain the biodiversity of eco -
system of the Country. 
 
8.3 The Secretary, Department of Science and Technology while 
elaborating on this aspect stated during his Oral Evidence on 17 June, 
2011: 
   
“we need a very sound appraisal mechanism based on 
science and I believe, approval can be a policy issue, but appraisal 
is a very scientific issue as far as this particular technology is 
concerned.  Therefore, Ministries like us have to work closely with 
the Ministry of Agriculture in this specific case and ensure that the 
appraisal process does not err in either side, either in favour or 
against.  Precautionary principle in this particular technology is 
essential and that is done across the world.  When we  talk of the 
precautionary principle, it is necessary to quantify and measure 
the risk associated with these kinds of products.  That is why the 
Science comes as a very necessary input into this process.  In 
this, of course, I would be frank with you, if I  understand the 
technology more from the general perspective rather than 

 
 
285 
 
somebody who is having hands on in this area.  There are two 
divided views in the world.  There are those who believe that risk 
must be eliminated to the level of zero; the risk must be 
determined, quantified and should be eliminated to zero and there 
are those who believe that it can only be minimized and to bring it 
to zero will be very difficult.  But we must have sound appraisal 
and then post-introduction, we must have very strong surveillance 
method to ensure that even a trace of evidence to the contrary, 
we must be in a position to go back and retract.  That is a kind of 
system that the people across the world have.”    
8.4 On this crucial aspect, the view of the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests was that in case of modern agricultural biotechnology, the 
benefits as well as risks would vary from crop to crop, region to region 
and technology to technology depending on  the gene -environment 
interaction, host-environment interaction and gene-host interaction (the 
level of protein expression).  Safety and efficacy, therefore, cannot be 
generalized and needs to be evaluated by science based 
experimentation and analysis on case-by-case basis.  Currently in India, 
all GM crops are evalua ted for safety and efficacy as per the protocols 
and procedures prescribed under the Rules 1989 of Environment 
Protection Act 1986 and relevant biosafety guidelines notified from time 
to time.  This includes generation and documentation of relevant 
biosafety information/data and its elaborate analysis to ensure food, 
feed and environmental safety in accordance with the  biosafety 
guidelines adopted by RCGM/ GEAC.  The environmental safety 
assessment includes studies on pollen escape out - crossing, 
aggressiveness and weediness, effect of the gene on non -target 
organisms, presence of the protein in soil and its effect on soil micro -
flora, confirmation of the absence of Terminator Gene and baseline 
susceptibility studies.  The food and feed safety assessment st udies 

 
 
286 
 
include allergenicity and toxicological studies  dietary exposure and 
substantial equivalence using test protocols such as: protein thermal 
stability, pepsin digestibility, molecular characterization, compositional 
assessment, acute oral toxicity (mic e or rat), 90 -day sub -chronic rat 
feeding, and livestock feeding (case by case basis).  
  
8.5 The regulatory authorities are aware of the issues concerning the 
release of GMOs and therefore a strict regime of tests/ studies is being 
carried out for granting approval to the GM crop.  No approval would be 
granted to the GM crops unless there has been a thorough analysis of 
its effects on the environment, biodiversity, biosafety, human health, 
and health of livestock and animals  and it is proven to be s afe.  The 
Ministry consider that the products which are biosafe and have desired 
socio- economic benefits to farmers and consumers are to be supported 
for environmental release/cultivation.   
 
8.6 Contrary to this , Dr. Vandana Shiva, Director, Research 
Foundation for Science, Technology and Ecology  during her Oral 
Evidence before the Committee on 28 October, 2010 while speaking 
about various aspects of Bt. cotton including circumstances leading to 
its introduction in the Country, pricing of seeds, monopoly,  etc. 
informed the Committee:  
“Hon‟ble MPs, the tragedy is Bt cotton entered our country 
illegally. We have a Genetical Engineering Approval Committee 
under the Ministry of Environment and this Committee has under 
the Environment Protection Act, created r ules for the control of 
Genetically Modified crops. In 1998, Monsanto joined up with 
Mahyco and introduced Bt cotton. They did it through a letter of 
intent with the Department of Bio -technology which is not the 
regulatory body. So, our Research F oundation for Science, 

 
 
287 
 
Technology and Ecology brought a case to the Supreme Court to 
say that this was an absolutely illegal set of trials.  Because of 
that case, approvals were delayed till April, 2002.  The interesting 
thing is just before that a Nav Bharat -151 s eed in Gujarat was 
found to have Bt traits in it.  Dr. Desai who was the owner of the 
company Nav Bharat said I have done Genetic Engineering, I have 
taken the seeds from Monsanto Mahyco and if these traits are 
there, it has come through contamination.  At  that point, the 
Ministry of Environment filed a case against Nav Bharat and said 
Bt is very dangerous. What it does to the soil, we do not know; 
what it does to the other plants, we do not know.  The entire crop 
of Gujarat was ordered to be destroyed and within a month when 
Monsanto Mahyco had to get the approval suddenly Bt was 
declared safe.  In the years since these early Bt trial s started and 
because of our case, the commercialisation could not begin in 
2002.  But Monsanto Mahyco already started to sel l hybrid seeds, 
and hybrid cotton had a number of impacts on cultivation.  In 
India, we have always grown  cotton as a mixed crop.  
Traditionally, you had cotton and you would grow Jowar with it 
and then you would grow Tur Dal with it.  You might grow some  
chillies with it.  So a farmer had food and a farmer also had a 
cash crop.  With the introduction of hybrid seeds, the farmer now 
had two new problems.  The first ,  he had to buy the seed every 
year, and the second, these seeds were grown only as 
monoculture.  So farmer stopped growing food and because 
hybrid cotton into which the Bt trait was later introduced requires 
irrigation, farmers also got into debt for irrigation facilities.  That 
started the debt cycle and in 1998, we saw the first farmer suicide 
in the district of Warangal in Andhra Pradesh.  A small  farmer 
who had shifted from mixed crop to hybrid cotton and got into 

 
 
288 
 
debt for it.  The suicides in the data shows that the suicides 
increased after 2002 when the Bt cotton was introduced.  All the 
data shows that suicides have increased after 2002 when the Bt 
cotton was introduced. Records of the National Crime Records 
Bureau are 200,000 farm suicides have taken place in India. Most 
of them in the cotton belt. Because there was an attempt by  the 
companies  to make it look like that it has nothing to do with the 
Bt cotton,  we did a primary survey and found that in Vid harbha, 
84 per cent of the suicides were directly linked to debt created by 
the cultivation of Bt cotton. The cotton seed used to only cost 
Rs..5 or Rs.6 as long as the seed was produced by a public sector. 
The public sector research station is based in Vid harbha. The 
cotton research institute is one of the most eminent institutions in 
the world. Till Monsanto and Mahyco entered t he market, most of 
the varieties used to be public varieties, very affordable and most 
of them open pollinated so the farmers could save seed.  
After 1998, you do not see cotton research institute 
releasing varieties for the Deccan; they are releasing some  
varieties for north of India but not for the Deccan at all. From 
Rs.5 the seed cost jumped with GMOs to Rs.3,600 a kg. Of this, 
Rs.2,400 was royalty payment and most of the Indian cotton 
companies are now licensed to Monsanto and each company has 
to make an initial payment of Rs.50 lakh to get license to use the 
Bt gene. They cannot have anything to do with any other 
company. They cannot have any technical arrangement with any 
other company.” 
8.7 Expressing his serious concerns about the introduction of 
transgenics in agricultural crops Shri Aniruddha Ramchandra Murkute, 

 
 
289 
 
President, Bhartiya Kisan Sangh stated during his Oral Evidence on 10 
February, 2011:  
“Mr. Chairman, Sir, I am the President of Bharatiya Kisan 
Sangh. We have branches all over India and a ll our branches are 
registered. 
We feel that ours is a big country and Genetically Modified 
Seeds will bring a hazard in this country. Our sovereignty, our 
right to seed and our right to water are essential. Our grains are 
rotting in godowns. Under this si tuation, why should we go for 
Genetically Modified Seeds when experiments are not done 
properly? We do not know the good or bad sciences of it and if we 
go for Genetically Modified Seeds, we will have to take the 
responsibility. 
Now there are 7 lakh villag es, 5,000 blocks and nearly 600 
districts in our country and the persons living there are actually 
vacating the villages because they are not in a position to earn 
anything there. Initially they used to have their own seed with 
them. If they are deprived of their seed, wherefrom will they bring 
certified seeds? If something goes wrong somewhere, we have to 
take responsibility and it will be very difficult for only a 3 -member 
committee to control everything. Our right to go to any court 
against this committe e is also taken out of us. Therefore we are 
against it. We are not against any development as such. If the 
Government wants to go in for development, no doubt they 
should go for it.” 
8.8 He further added: 
“ºÉ®, àÉä®É ªÉc BÉEcxÉÉ cè ÉÊBÉE VÉÉä MÉÉÆ´ÉÉå BÉEä càÉÉ®ä {ÉEÉàÉÇºÉÇ cé, ´Éä +É{ÉxÉä cÉä¶É MÉÆ´ÉÉ ¤Éè~ä cé* <ºÉBÉEä 
BÉEÉ®hÉ cÉÒ <iÉxÉÉÒ +ÉÉiàÉciªÉÉAÆ ¤ÉfÃ ®cÉÒ cè* càÉÉ®ä ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉÉå BÉEÉ VÉÉä ÉÊ´É¶´ÉÉºÉ cè ´Éc ÉÊcãÉ MÉªÉÉ cè* VÉèºÉä 

 
 
290 
 
¤ÉÆMÉÉãÉ àÉå +ÉBÉEÉãÉ  {É½É, ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ BÉE£ÉÉÒ ÉÊBÉEºÉÉÒ ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉ xÉä +ÉÉiàÉciªÉÉ xÉcÉÓ BÉEÉÒ* ÉÊ´Én£ÉÇ àÉå ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉÉå xÉä 
+ÉÉiàÉciªÉÉAÆ BÉEÉÓ, àÉcÉ®É­]Å àÉå ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉÉå xÉä +ÉÉiàÉciªÉÉAÆ BÉEÉÓ* +É¤É AàÉ.{ÉÉÒ. àÉå cÉä ®cÉÒ cé* <ºÉBÉEÉ BÉEÉ®hÉ 
ªÉcÉÒ cè ÉÊBÉE càÉ +ÉÉVÉ iÉBÉE MÉÉÆ´É BÉEä ãÉÉäMÉÉå àÉå ÉÊ´É¶´ÉÉºÉ BÉEÉ ÉÊxÉàÉÉÇhÉ xÉcÉÓ BÉE® {ÉÉA* <ºÉÉÊãÉA {ÉcãÉÉ càÉÉ®É 
BÉEÉàÉ ªÉc cè ÉÊBÉE ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉÉå BÉEÉÒ ÉËVÉnMÉÉÒ BÉEä ÉÊãÉA VÉÉä +ÉÉ´É¶ªÉBÉE SÉÉÒVÉå cé, ´Éä iÉÉä =xcå ÉÊàÉãÉ ®cÉÒ cé, ãÉäÉÊB ÉExÉ 
=xÉàÉå +ÉÉiàÉ-ÉÊ´É¶´ÉÉºÉ {ÉènÉ BÉE®å* ÉÊcxnÖºiÉÉxÉ àÉå <iÉxÉÉ +ÉxÉÉVÉ {É½É cè ÉÊBÉE =xcå xÉcÉÓ ÉÊàÉãÉÉ, iÉÉä £ÉÉÒ BÉE£ÉÉÒ 
£ÉÉÒ =xcÉåxÉä +ÉÉiàÉciªÉÉ xÉcÉÓ BÉEÉÒ* +ÉÉVÉ ¤É½ä {ÉèàÉÉxÉä {É® +ÉÉiàÉciªÉÉ cÉä ®cÉÒ cé* <ºÉBÉEÉ BÉEÉ®hÉ cÉÒ ªÉc cè 
ÉÊBÉE =xÉBÉEÉ ÉÊ´É¶´ÉÉºÉ càÉ ãÉÉäMÉÉå {É® xÉcÉÓ ®cÉ cè*  
¤ÉÉÒVÉ ÉÊxÉàÉÉÇhÉ BÉE®xÉÉ iÉÉä +ÉÉ´É¶ªÉBÉE cè, ´Éc càÉ BÉE®iÉä cé* {ÉcãÉä c®äBÉE BÉEÉ¶iÉBÉEÉ® BÉEä {ÉÉºÉ +É{ÉxÉÉ 
¤ÉÉÒVÉ ®ciÉÉ lÉÉ* BÉE£ÉÉÒ {ÉcãÉÉ ¤ÉÉÒVÉ {ÉEäãªÉÉä® cÉäiÉÉ lÉÉ, iÉÉä ´Éc ºÉèÉËBÉEb µÉEÉì{É ãÉäBÉE® ÉÊxÉBÉEãÉiÉÉ lÉÉ, ãÉäÉÊBÉEx É 
iÉ¤É =ºÉBÉEÉ +É{ÉxÉÉ JÉÖn BÉEÉ ¤ÉÉÒVÉ ®ciÉÉ lÉÉ* càÉ ¤ÉSÉ{ÉxÉ àÉå näJÉiÉä lÉä ÉÊBÉE VÉ¤É ¤ÉÉÒVÉ cÉäiÉÉ lÉÉ, iÉÉä PÉ® 
BÉEÉ ¤ÉÉÒVÉ ÉÊxÉBÉEÉãÉ BÉE® BÉEcÉÓ >ó{É® ®JÉ näiÉä lÉä* =ºÉ ºÉàÉªÉ nÉä |ÉBÉEÉ® BÉEÉ ¤ÉÉÒVÉ ®ciÉÉ lÉÉ* {ÉcãÉä |ÉBÉEÉ® 
BÉEÉ ¤ÉÉÒVÉ ãÉMÉÉ ÉÊnªÉÉ, ªÉÉÊn  BÉE£ÉÉÒ ´Éc {ÉEäãÉ cÉä MÉªÉÉ, iÉÉä nÚºÉ®ä |ÉBÉEÉ® BÉEÉ ¤ÉÉÒVÉ ãÉMÉÉBÉE® µÉEÉì{É ãÉä ãÉÉÒ 
VÉÉiÉÉÒ lÉÉÒ, ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ ´Éä nÉäxÉÉå ¤ÉÉÒVÉ PÉ® BÉEä cÉÒ cÉäiÉä lÉä*  
+ÉÉVÉ VÉèxÉä]ÉÒBÉEãÉÉÒ àÉÉìbÉÒ{ÉEÉ<b ºÉÉÒb +ÉÉ ®cä cé, iÉÉä =ºÉBÉEä PÉ® BÉEÉ iÉÉä ´Éc ¤ÉÉÒVÉ xÉc ÉÓ cÉäiÉÉ cè* 
<ºÉ |ÉBÉEÉ® näJÉå, iÉÉä ¤ÉÉÒVÉ BÉEä àÉÉàÉãÉä àÉå ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉ BÉEÉÒ VÉÉä º´ÉiÉÆjÉiÉÉ lÉÉÒ, ´ÉcÉÒ SÉãÉÉÒ MÉ<Ç* <ºÉÉÊãÉA càÉ 
BÉEciÉä cé ÉÊBÉE càÉÉ®É ®É­]Å iÉÉä º´ÉiÉÆjÉ cè, ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ càÉÉ®ä MÉÉÆ´ÉÉå BÉEä ºÉ¤É ãÉÉäMÉ MÉÖãÉÉàÉ cÉäiÉä VÉÉ ®cä cé* { ÉcãÉä 
AäºÉÉ lÉÉ ÉÊBÉE càÉÉ®ä ªÉcÉÆ MÉÉÆ´É MÉÖãÉÉàÉ xÉcÉÓ lÉä* ¤ÉÉn àÉå VÉ¤É nÚºÉ®É ®ÉVÉ +ÉÉªÉÉ, iÉÉä BÉEàÉ ºÉä BÉEàÉ º´ÉiÉÆjÉiÉÉ 
SÉãÉÉÒ MÉ<Ç, ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ MÉÉÆ´É MÉÖãÉÉàÉ xÉcÉÓ lÉä* +ÉÉVÉ ÉÎºlÉÉÊiÉ ªÉc cè ÉÊBÉE càÉ º´ÉiÉÆjÉ cé, ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ càÉÉ®ä MÉÉÆ´É BÉE ä 
MÉÉÆ´É MÉÖãÉÉàÉ cÉäiÉä VÉÉ ®cä cé, BÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉE càÉÉ®ä {ÉÉºÉ càÉÉ®É ¤ÉÉÒVÉ xÉcÉÓ cè, càÉÉ®É {ÉÉxÉÉÒ xÉcÉÓ cè, càÉÉ®ä VÉÉxÉ´É® 
xÉcÉÓ cé +ÉÉè® càÉÉ®ÉÒ VÉÉä +ÉÉìMÉæÉÊxÉBÉE {ÉEÉÉÍàÉMÉ cè, ´Éc xÉcÉÓ cè*  
8.9 Another representative of the Organisation while elab orating 
further stated: 
“We have got the report that nowhere the GM crops are 
high yielding.   Many people are now talking about food security, 
population, getting more food grains and that GM seeds will help 
us in these regard.  But till date nobody has c laimed that GM 

 
 
291 
 
seeds are high yielding.  This is the major question.  It is a false 
propaganda that food security will be achieved by GM technology. 
Secondly, as per the latest survey of January 2010 in 
America it is found that 6.9 billion dollar was the e conomic benefit 
to the farmers over the previous year in the Mid -West States and 
they also found that around 4.3 billion dollars came from non -BT 
corn.  This is the latest survey from the USA.  So, it is a false 
claim that we will grow more food by GM seeds.  It has been there 
in agriculture since 1990s in America but nobody claims that this 
is high yielding. 
When we raise the question of food security, there is a basic 
question of seeds.  Again, to fulfil the question of food security, at 
least, four to five components are there because we are confusing 
the green revolution by saying that only seeds can do the 
performance.  But it is not true.  Unless we have a better 
productive soil, unless we have good water, unless the pollination 
rate is more and unless  good Sun shine is there, we cannot 
produce more food.  This is a common science.  So, we need 
productive soil as well and these will be deteriorated by the GM 
seeds.  The GM technology is a permanent perennial irreversible 
source of poison to these things .  We are against chemical 
agriculture and we are for organic agriculture.  It is not 
permanent, there is scope for change.  But every scientist accepts 
that this is irreversible.  
As far as food security is concerned, we cannot take this 
technology and it  is a confusing statement by some companies 
that GM seeds are high yielding.  Food security is our main 
concern, so at least the scientists or the technocrats of our 
country should go in for these four major components, that is, 

 
 
292 
 
high productive seed, bette r soil, good water, Sun shine and 
pollination rate.  Many scientists are saying that our productivity 
has been stagnated and many of them are concerned about the 
low pollination rate in the cropping system in agriculture.  So, we 
have to look at those chapters also. 
As far as health and ecology are concerned, everything has 
been researched throughout the world.  I am coming to only the 
economy of the farmers.  The farmers of our country are small 
farmers.  Once their produce goes to the market and if somebo dy 
says that it is poisonous then it will not fetch more money.  Our 
people are cultured and ethical.  People buy the products which 
come directly from the villages without chemicals.  I have seen 
this in many States people would buy products which are fre e of 
pesticides.   
The GM seeds will be costly, one has to pay more price for 
the seeds and it may cost ten times more than the present cost of 
seed.  When the produce will go to the market labelled as GM 
food, people will not purchase that and again it wi ll be hampering 
the economy of the farmers.   
Moreover, the GM technology seeds will be patented.  If at 
any point of time the company which is producing the GM seeds is 
not able to supply the seeds, what will the farmers do?  There will 
be no control over  the price.  It will put more burden on the 
farmers.  So, all these aspects have to be considered by the 
scientists, technocrats, businessmen, etc. of our Country.” 
 8.10 Since genetical modification as well as transgenics is  modern 
biotechnology based phenomenon, the Committee sought the views of 
the MoEF on the genetically modified/transgenic food crops from that 

 
 
293 
 
angle.  In response it was stated that agricultural biotechnology has the 
potential for ensuring food security, d ecrease pressure on land use, 
increase crop yields and reduce use of water and agrochemicals in 
agriculture. However, there are concerns about the potential risks 
associated with their use to human health, environment and biological 
diversity. The Ministry are   guided by the statement made by the Prime 
Minister at the Indian Science Congress on January 3, 2010 at 
Thiruvananthapuram wherein he has categorically stated that “ we 
should pursue all possible leads that biotechnology provides that might 
increase our food security as we go through climate related stress  
subject to the condition that the question of safety is given full 
weightage, with appropriate regulatory control based on strictly 
scientific criteria ”.  Accordingly, we are following a policy of c ase by 
case event based approval in case of Genetically Modified foods or food 
crops.  In view of the various concerns, introduction of any new GM 
food /food crop is preceded by a careful analysis of risks and evaluation 
of long term benefits for which extensive rules and guidelines have been 
framed by the Ministry for evaluating environmental and health safety 
impacts of genetically modified organisms.  Evaluation of the safety of 
GE crops and regulatory approval process takes place right from the 
research stage. This includes generation and documentation of relevant 
biosafety information/data and its elaborate analysis to ensure food, 
feed and environmental safety. The  development of GM crops at the 
laboratory stage, confined multi -location trials for gen eration of 
biosafety data known as biosafety research trials – I and biosafety  
research trials-II (BRL-I  and BRL-II) require prior approval of the RCGM 
and the GEAC set up under the Rules, 1989.  The compliance of the 
regulatory procedures during GM crop  field trials is monitored by the 
Monitoring Committees set up by the RCGM/GEAC. The GEAC takes into 
consideration the findings of the biosafety and agronomic studies as 

 
 
294 
 
well as recommendations of the RCGM and MEC before according 
approval for environmenta l release. Only those transgenic crops which 
are found to be safe for human consumption as well as the environment 
are recommended for environmental release.   
8.11 Elaborating further on this aspect and drawing a comparison of 
the situation  obtaining in USA, EU, etc. and in India Dr. Sagari R. 
Ramdas, Director, Anthra informed the Committee during her Oral 
Evidence on 28 October, 2010: 
“The issue with the USA is that in USA they have no base 
line data and subsequent close monitoring.  So, there are no 
systems of keeping track as to the impact of feeding either the Bt 
or the non -Bt.  This is the basic, primary problem with the 
information coming out of USA.  USA has taken a position that 
they are not going to monitor.  So, today, if we go in and try to 
get the public research institution data as to what is the impact, 
primarily it is Bt -corn, Bt -soya and Bt -rapeseed which are the 
three major items, there is no evidence and no data because they 
do not keep the records. 
To bring to your notice a very interesti ng development in 
2009, that the USA EPA has recently instituted a public research 
grant for US scientists to research on the impact of food allergies, 
particularly they are investigating food allergies from animals 
which are being fed, GMOs.  They are inv estigating and looking at 
GMOs food in general because USA is a country with one of the 
highest incidences of allergies.  So, this is a very recent 
development.  Public research grants have actually been 
announced because of a concern.   Hopefully, in the coming years 
we should be able to get some kind of more detailed evidence. 

 
 
295 
 
Coming to the question of European Union, the information 
is extremely different and it varies country to country.  For 
instance, we do have reports from Germany of the impact of 
feeding Bt-corn on swine, pig.  We do have some information of 
feeding of Bt -maize, particularly on cattle but the big difference 
and the reason of non -comparability between the Indian situation 
and what happens in the West is, their system of production is the 
industrial system and we have mixed crop livestock grazing 
systems.  Nowhere else in the world, Sir, are animals grazed on 
harvested crops.  In all the industrial systems in EU, USA and 
Australia, it is the grain – either Bt-corn grain or Bt -soya grain – 
which is directly fed to the animals.  Sometimes it is crushed and 
sometimes it is processed and fed.  The unique situation of India 
is that our animals graze on the harvested crops.  If Bt -brinjal is 
not consumed by the humans but it is usually fed to the cows or 
buffalos. In that situation, it is a completely new situation which 
demands new protocol of testing.  But I will pass on to you two or 
three cases from Germany where Bt -corn was fed to swine, which 
is pig and Bt-corn fed to cattle.  Similar situation in India, which is 
grazing on harvested crops, is so unique to our country, because 
we are still at the extensive system of livestock rearing that we 
cannot find similar evidence from either USA or from Europe.” 
8.12 Ms. Aruna Rodrigues, lead petiti oner of the PIL on GM field trials 
in the Supreme Court of India while highlighting the irretrievability 
factor of GM crops during her Oral Evidence on 28 October, 2010 
stated: 
 “Furthermore, it is very clear, that unlike a drug, however 
dangerous or fatal like thalidomide that impacted generations with 
birth deformities, which can be recalled, GMOs once released into 

 
 
296 
 
the environment, on the other hand, cannot be recovered. 
Therefore, the impacts of genetic contamination are irreversible. 
At least one Biote ch Company has claimed Force Majeure or 'Act 
of God' as insurance cover for this very reason! The loss of India's 
even now, rich genetic stock of non GM seeds and genetic wealth 
in wild species like brinjal, rice and other crops would get 
contaminated by G M crops with incalculable impacts of far -
reaching consequences. It would change the molecular structure 
of our food for all times. Therefore, there are substantial reasons 
for caution and the application of the precautionary principle. 
There is certainly n o need to hurry and rush the introduction of 
any GM crop into our agricultural system.” 
8.13 Clarifying their stand before the Committee on this crucial aspect 
the Department of Agriculture and Co -operation stated on this issue 
that a s per recommendations of the “Task Force on Applications of 
Agricultural Biotechnology”, also commonly referred to as the Dr. M.S. 
Swaminathan Report, biotechnology provides an opportunity to convert 
bio-resources into economic wealth. This has to be done in a manner 
that there is no adverse impact either on the environment or on human 
or animal health. The guiding principle for following a national 
agricultural biotechnology policy should be the economic well being of 
farm families, food security of the na tion, health security of the 
consumer, protection of the environment and the security of our 
national and international trade in farm commodities.  
 
8.14 As per the National Policy on Farmers (NPF), 2007 with regard to 
Genetically Modified (GM) Crops, there is a need to assess the risks and 
benefits associated with GM crops in a credible and transparent manner. 
Priority would be given for genetic modification to incorporate genes 
which can help impart resistance to drought, salinity and other stresses. 

 
 
297 
 
Water-use efficiency as well as improvement of both nutritive and 
processing quality would also be accorded priority in the research 
agenda. Training and awareness in agronomic management procedures 
in respect of GM crop varieties would be introduced. 
 
8.15 The transgenic crops have potential to improve crop production 
and productivity even in adverse situation. But before commercialization 
of GM crops, their bio -safety, environmental safety and other safety 
measures should be examined on a case by case basis.  As per 
information available, significant research, efforts have already been 
made by Indian Organizations in both public and private sector. The 
ICAR, Department of Biotechnology(DBT), Public and Private sectors are 
involved in bio-safety, environmental safety and other safety measures 
on Bt. cotton in the following areas: 
 
(i) Biosafety Studies with Bt Cotton 
 
Environmental Safety Studies  
 
1. Out-crossing studies for PCR & Aggressiveness and 
Individual Plant analysis. 
2. Study to generate data on the stability of Cry1Ac gene 
required for seed production for Bt cotton Expressing 
cry 1 Ac gene ( Mon 531 event). 
3. Pollen – flow study of Bt cotton 
4. Transgenic cotton expressing the Bacillus 
Thuringiensis Endotoxin: Effects on soil micro -flora & 
non – target soil Organisms with special reference to 
earthworms. 
5. Expression levels of Cry1Ac insect control protein 
found in Bt cotton hybrids  

 
 
298 
 
6. Studies on susceptibility of Helicoverpa Armigera 
(Hubner) to Cry1Ac protein  
7. Studies on susceptibility of Helicoverpa Armigera and 
other Lepidoterans to Bacillus thuringiensis proteins  
 
(ii) Food and Feed Studies 
8.  Assessment of the allergenicity of Indian Bt cotton 
seed proteins relative to conventional seed proteins 
9.  Allergenicity potential of cottonseed meal from Indian 
Hybrid cotton and non – transgenic Indian hybrid 
cotton in a Guinea pig model 
10.  90 day goat feeding study 
11.  Segregation of Bt gene in breeding program 
12.  Anaylsis of Expressed Proteins in Fibre Fractions from 
Insect – Protected and Glyphosate - Tolerant Cotton 
Varieties. 
13.  Aerobic Soil Degradation of Bacillus thuringiensis  
14. Dietary toxicity study with Parasitic Hymenoptera  
15. Evaluation of the Dietary Effect(s) of Purified B.t.k. 
Endotoxin Proteins on Honey Bee Larvae and Adults.  
16. Dietary toxicity study with Ladybird Beetles  
17. Dietary toxicity with Green Lacewing Larvae  
18. Effect of Bacillus thuringiensis insecticidal Protein Cry 
1A(b), Cry1Ac, Cry2A, Cry3A on Folsomia candida 
and Xenylla grisea . 
19. Dietary toxicity study with MON46003 Meal in the 
Northern Bobwhite. 
20. Evaluation of processed cotton seed meal from insect 
protected cotton as  a feed for atfish 
21. One month feeding study wit h MON 46001 and MON 
46002 in Sprague Dawley Rats       

 
 
299 
 
22. Similarity in the chemical composition of Bt protected 
and control cotton seed of four cotton hybrids 
23. Quantitative estimation of B.t.k. HD73 Cry1Ac protein 
degradation in model mammalian digestive fluids 
24.  Acute oral toxicity of Bacillus thuringiensis  
25.  Effect of feeding Bt cottonseed on feed intake, milk 
production and composition in lactating water 
buffaloes 
26. Effect of feeding Bt cottonseed produced from Bt 
cotton on feed intake, milk production and 
composition in lactating cows in India 
27. Comparison of chicken performance when fed with 
diets containing Bt cotton, parental non – Bt line or 
commercial cotton  
28. Evaluation of raw cottonseed meal derived from Bt 
cottonseed as a feed ingredient for Indian catfish, 
Magur  
 
(iii) Others  
 
29.  Levels of Cry 1Ac Insect control protein found in Bt 
cotton hybrids. 
30.  Detection of Bt protein Cry1Ac in field -grown 
transgenic cot ton in different plant tissues and 
growth stages . 
31. Molecular characterisation of Mahyco Bt cotton 
hybrids MECH-12,  MECH-162, MECH-164  
32. Confirmation of the absence of „terminator gene‟ i.e., 
a patented  embryogenesis deactivation system in 
Mahyco Bt cotton hybrids  
33. Insect resistance studies on other plant pests  

 
 
300 
 
 
(iv) Agronomic 
 
34. Performance of Bt and non –Bt cotton hybrids at 376 
locations in large scale field trials in Central and 
South India  
35. Research field trials of Bt cotton hybrids at 14 
locations in South and Central Zone  
36. Analysis of socio -economic impact of Bt Technology 
on Indian cotton farmers  
  (Source – Biotech Consortium India Limited) 
 
8.16   Prof. G. Padmanabhan, Professor Emeritus, Department of 
Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru while presenting a 
risk=benefit analysis of Genetically Modified Crops stated during his 
Oral Evidence on 28 October, 2010: 
 
“I would give two examples which I have tried t o mention in 
my talk – Bt for example, at some point of time, resistance would 
develop. Already people in Gujarat are talking, in some areas, ball 
worm or pink worm is not responding. Monsanto or Mahyco is 
saying to shift, from Bollguard I go to Bollguard II. That means, 
from one gene, you go to two genes. If resistance should happen, 
it would happen. All our research with pest -resistant GM crops in 
my opinion should have only two genes at least. We should not 
release any variety, other than Bt Brinjal, with a single Bt. gene.  
The other example I want to give is the herbicide tolerance.  
Do we need herbicide tolerance in this country? Because you want 
to remove the weeds and there is so much of labour available in 
this country; manually we can remove. All that I am trying to tel l 
is assessment should be case by case basis. We may not need 

 
 
301 
 
herbicide tolerant variety but we would need a pest -resistant 
variety. We need a variety that would improve nutrition. Should 
we blindly go for herbicide resistant crop?  Most of the contentions 
issues are with herbicide Resistant GM Crops.  Experts should 
really look at whether it is needed for this country.” 
8.17 With regards to the apprehension s in several qurters  about the 
safety of Genetically Modified crops he stated: 
“All I am trying to te ll is, scientific facts are exaggerated. If 
there is a five percent difference, it is magnified as being very 
toxic.  That is where statistics come into play. In fact, if you 
understand the science you would know the correct position.  The 
other point made  out is that the tests are not adequately done 
with 20 soil organisms but you should do it with 200.  You have 
done it for 90 days (feeding trials), you should do it for 180 or for 
a very long time. That is where the judgement has to take place.  
That is why, I said, 90 days in a rodent is equivalent to ten years 
in man‟s life. How long do we do this?  I respect all those who 
oppose. Whatever argument I give, they are not going to buy it. I 
know that also. They will not accept because they are convinced 
that GM is not acceptable. I also accept that there is an element 
of risk in this. My contention is, the advantages weigh far above 
the perceived risks. That is why, we should go for GM. Especially 
in the area of nutrition, abiotic stress, etc. where genes ca n be 
obtained from another plant.  Dr. Asis Datta has demonstrated 
this in potato. But my point is, by blocking Bt Brinjal, we are 
blocking the entire chain. People are asking – what is so great 
about Brinjal and why should we worry about it?  We should ha ve 
stopped it (Bt. Brinjal research) ten years ago. We did not do it. 
Now, if we stop it, the entire chain is blocked. There are at least 

 
 
302 
 
20 crops which Indian scientists are doing.  The hon. Member has 
raised this issue and I respect all those who oppose.   My only 
contention is, the benefits are much higher than the risks. I would 
not say, it is risk-free. There are certain risks.” 
8.18 The contention of ICAR was that while conventional methods of 
crop improvement have served the needs till date, challenge s of 
ensuring food and nutritional security of burgeoning population with 
limited land and water resources in recent past have necessitated new 
and non -conventional approaches. In addition, the adverse effects of 
global climate change impose new limitation s on crop production. Some 
of the limitations of conventional breeding are:  
 
(i) lack of germplasm resources resistant to some of the major 
pests and pathogens of important crops,  
(ii) the new plant types evolved for higher productivity are 
more vulnerable to pests and diseases,  
(iii) problems in sourcing genes from wild relatives, 
(iv) lack of nutritional qualities in major cereals crops,  
(v) conventional plant breeding being based on phenotypic 
selection, and  
(vi) plant-environment interactions affect the selection process. 
Advances in modern biology, especially biotechnology, offer 
many advantages over traditional techniques of plant 
breeding for bringing improvement in food crops. In addition 
to the enhanced levels of food production, the human 
society can realize the benefits of nutritional security, low 
production costs, conservation of biodiversity, enhanced 
input use efficiency for sustainable agriculture and 
environment, improvement of economic and social benefits 
and the alleviation of poverty. 

 
 
303 
 
 
8.19 All crops that are developed through conventional breeding 
methods are also genetically modified as at least recombination of 
genetic material of two genomes is involved in such hybridization 
process. However, conventional breeding involves the same crop 
species as source of  genes for various agronomic traits. In case of 
genetic modification/ transgenics developed through modern 
biotechnology, genes are transferred across species barrier as it has 
been witnessed in several GM crops being cultivated in different 
countries worl d over; Bt cotton under cultivation in India has been 
developed with a gene from a bacterium for resistance to boll worm. 
 
8.20 ICAR was also of the view that the modern tools of biotechnology 
should be adopted to improve productivity as well as production of our 
staple food crops, particularly pulses and oilseeds for resistance to 
insect/pests, major cereal and horticultural crops for tolerance to abiotic 
and biotic stress factors, and for nutritional enhancement with phyto -
nutrients through the process of bio -fortification in crops such as rice, 
wheat, maize, potato, mustard and groundnut. Saving post -harvest 
losses is another important object ive that could be possible through 
biotechnological intervention.  
 
8.21 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation throughout 
maintained their stand regarding the production and productivity 
advantages of Bt. cotton and GM crops.  However, Secretary of  
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation while appearing before the 
Committee on 9 May, 2012 in a different context stated in regard to 
transgenic agricultural crops: 
“àÉcÉänªÉ, +ÉÉ{ÉxÉä ¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ BÉEÉì]xÉ +ÉÉè® ¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ ÉË¥ÉVÉãÉ BÉEä ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå BÉEcÉ* càÉ = ºÉBÉEä ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå <BÉD´ÉãÉÉÒ 
ÉËSÉÉÊiÉiÉ cé BÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉE 92 |ÉÉÊiÉ¶ÉiÉ AÉÊ®ªÉÉ ¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ BÉEÉì]xÉ BÉEÉ cÉä MÉªÉÉ cè* càÉ ãÉÉäMÉÉå xÉä ¶ÉÉävÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ iÉÉä {É iÉÉ 
SÉãÉÉ, =nÉc®hÉ BÉEä ÉÊãÉA ¥ÉÉVÉÉÒVÉ àÉå VªÉÉnÉ ¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ <ºiÉäàÉÉãÉ xÉcÉÓ BÉE®iÉä cé ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ càÉºÉ ä BÉE®ÉÒ¤É iÉÉÒxÉ MÉÖxÉÉ 

 
 
304 
 
=xÉBÉEÉÒ |ÉÉäbÉÎBÉD]ÉÊ´É]ÉÒ cè* <ºÉBÉEÉä {ÉiÉÉ BÉE®xÉä BÉEä ÉÊãÉA càÉxÉä +É{ÉxÉÉÒ ]ÉÒàÉ £ÉäVÉÉÒ ÉÊBÉE BÉDªÉÉ BÉEÉ®hÉ cè* càÉå  
{ÉiÉÉ SÉãÉÉ ÉÊBÉE =xcÉåxÉä +É{ÉxÉä {ãÉÉÆ] +ÉÉBÉEÉÔ]äBÉDSÉ® BÉEÉä, +É{ÉxÉä ´Éä®ÉªÉ]ÉÒWÉ BÉEÉä <ºÉ iÉ®c ºÉä  ÉÊ´ÉBÉEÉÊºÉiÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ 
cè ÉÊBÉE =xÉBÉEÉÒ |ÉÉäbÉÎBÉD]ÉÊ´É]ÉÒ càÉºÉä iÉÉÒxÉ MÉÖxÉÉ VªÉÉnÉ cè* càÉ +É£ÉÉÒ ´ÉcÉÒ BÉEÉäÉÊ¶É¶É BÉE® ®cä cé ÉÊBÉE càÉÉ®ÉÒ 
ÉÊVÉiÉxÉÉÒ £ÉÉÒ +ÉSUÉÒ ´Éä®ÉªÉ]ÉÒWÉ cé, =xcå càÉ ºÉÉÒ+ÉÉ<ÇºÉÉÒ+ÉÉ® xÉÉMÉ{ÉÖ® BÉEä àÉÉvªÉàÉ ºÉä ÉÊ´ÉBÉEÉÊºÉiÉ  BÉE®å* cÉãÉ cÉÒ 
àÉå càÉxÉä +ÉÉè® càÉÉ®ÉÒ {ÉnÉÉÊvÉBÉEÉÉÊ®ªÉÉå xÉä ¤Éè~BÉE BÉE® BÉEä iÉªÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ cè ÉÊBÉE =ºÉä càÉ ¤ÉfÃÉ´ÉÉ nå +ÉÉè® vÉÉÒ®ä -vÉÉÒ®ä 
càÉÉ®ä ´Éä®É]ÉÒWÉ àÉå ¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ +ÉÉA iÉÉä ~ÉÒBÉE cè +ÉÉè® xÉcÉÓ +ÉÉA iÉÉä £ÉÉÒ ~ÉÒBÉE cè BÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉE £ÉÉ®iÉ´É­ÉÇ ABÉE àÉÉjÉ nä¶É 
cè ÉÊVÉºÉàÉå <iÉxÉä ¤É½ä {ÉèàÉÉxÉä {É® ¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ BÉEÉì]xÉ ªÉÚWÉ cÉä ®cÉ cè* càÉ +ÉÉ{ÉºÉä {ÉÚhÉÇiÉ& ºÉcàÉiÉ cé +ÉÉè® +ÉMÉãÉä 
nÉä-iÉÉÒxÉ ºÉÉãÉÉå àÉå ABÉE àÉèÉÊºÉ´É bÅÉ<´É BÉE® BÉEä, càÉå SÉÉÉÊcA ÉÊBÉE càÉÉ®ÉÒ VÉÉä ¤Éè]® ´Éä®ÉªÉ]ÉÒWÉ cé, =ºÉ BÉEÉÒ 
{ãÉÉÆ] +ÉÉBÉEÉÔ]äBÉDSÉ® SÉåVÉ BÉE®å, =ºÉBÉEÉÒ <ãb BÉEèºÉä ¤ÉfÃä, =ºÉä näJÉ BÉE® càÉ BÉE® ºÉBÉEiÉä cé* VÉ°ô®iÉ {É½ä iÉÉä 
¥ÉÉVÉÉÒãÉ ªÉÉ +ÉxªÉ nä¶É àÉå +ÉMÉ® BÉEÉä<Ç +ÉSUÉÒ ´Éä®ÉªÉ]ÉÒ ={ÉãÉ¤vÉ cè, =ºÉä £ÉÉÒ ãÉÉ BÉE® ABÉDºÉ{ÉäÉÊ®àÉå] BÉE® 
ºÉBÉEiÉä cé* ªÉcÉÒ ºÉ¤É BÉE®xÉä BÉEä ÉÊãÉA càÉ ãÉÉäMÉ BÉEÉäÉÊ¶É¶É BÉE® ®cä cé*” 
 
8.22 When told that it would be a gigantic task to revive the traditional 
cotton varieties from gene bank and may take years together he 
admitted: 
   
“I agree.  We have to start on it today itself.”  
8.23  When he was told that though the Government had belatedly 
realized this fact, but it was still not too late, the witness further 
admitted: 
 
“Yes, Sir.  It is not too late.  We can take care of varieti es 
which will produce the same amount of cotton and not necessarily 
depend on Bt cotton.” 
 
8.24 In this regard, the Department of Science and Technology were of 
the view that  recombinant DNA technology is one of the breakthrough 
technologies like that of nuclear energy, super computers, etc. Such 
breakthrough technologies have revolutionary potential to bring out 

 
 
305 
 
paradigm shifts in the existing systems. Policies and governance 
systems need to be created to ensure that the benefits are achieved 
and environmental and safety concerns associated are addressed 
effectively. The scientific community and policy makers all over the 
world including India during the last two decades have in vested 
resources in the advancement of basic biological sciences and 
development of new technology tools for Genetic Modification of crops 
with view to increase food supply and avoid food losses on account of 
attack by pests etc. The perspective of the Dep artment of Science & 
Technology has been to promote and develop R&D capacity in the 
frontier areas of science & technology including recombinant 
technologies and techniques for genetic modification of crops at 
research levels.  While supporting research in  these areas, the 
Department ensures adequate precautionary measures enshrined in 
international conventions, protocols and systems. The Department of 
Science & Technology has been consulting the concerned Departments 
with domain knowledge and allocation of  mandates and agrees with the 
views of sister departments while supporting work relating to research 
on GM crops. 
 
8.25 The view of the Department on the subject is that the GM crops 
offer potentials to increase the crop yield per hectare significantly and  
therefore such technologies would be required or even become critical 
for ensuring food security of countries like India in the years to come.  
India would need recourses to these advanced technologies. However, 
the Department is committed to the precauti onary principle in the 
introduction of GM crops into the eco system in the country and 
maintains that rigorous scientific assessments and critical review of 
safety aspects are necessary as a part of appraisal process prior to 
approvals for introduction in agricultural practice.  This view of the 

 
 
306 
 
Department on genetically modified/transgenic food crops is also 
generally aligned to those of the Department of Biotechnology and 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research under the Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research. 
 
8.26 On the aspect of transgenics in food crops, DARE/ICAR were of 
the view that genetically modified or transgenic crops by nature are 
eco-friendly, sustainable and protective to environment and 
biodiversity. The most important features of GM crops are:  
 
(i) increasing crop productivity, and thus contribute to national 
food, feed and fibre security,  
(ii) lowering production costs,  
(iii) conserving biodiversity as a land -saving technology capable 
of higher productivity on a per unit land basis,  
(iv) efficiently utilizing the external inputs such as fertilizers and 
water,  
(v) increasing stability of production to lessen suffering during 
famines due to abiotic and biotic stresses,  
(vi) improvement of economic and social benefits and the 
alleviation of poverty, and  
(vii) safer human and animal health through reduction of 
chemical inputs in agriculture and also ensuring safer soil, 
water and foods. 
 
8.27 Moreover, there is a comprehensive regulatory mechanism in 
operation in the country under the aegis of Department of 
Biotechnology and Ministry of Environment and  Forest for the bio -
safety on GM crops and products thereof in so far as the aspects of 
biodiversity, bio -safety, environment, human health, and health of 
livestock and animals are concerned. Further, recent scientific analysis 

 
 
307 
 
by experts on GM maize, oilseed rape, and soybean with two main GM 
traits, herbicide tolerance and insect resistance grow n for ten years in 
field has shown that cultivation of GM crops for a decade has caused no 
damage to the environment (Sanvido et al 2007).   
 
8.28   Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti, Trustee, Kheti Virasat Mission while 
enumerating several negative impacts of Bt. cotton cultivation stated 
during her Oral Evidence on 28 October, 2010: 
“+É£ÉÉÒ càÉ ºÉÉ¤É®àÉiÉÉÒ +ÉÉgÉàÉ ºÉä ®ÉVÉPÉÉ] iÉBÉE 71 ÉÊnxÉ BÉEÉÒ ªÉÉjÉÉ ãÉäBÉE® ÉÊxÉBÉEãÉä cé* càÉxÉä =ºÉä 
MÉÉÆvÉÉÒ VÉªÉxiÉÉÒ BÉEä ÉÊnxÉ ¶ÉÖ°ô ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ lÉÉ +ÉÉè® càÉ ÉÊnºÉà¤É® 11 BÉE Éä ®ÉVÉPÉÉ] {ÉcÖÆSÉåMÉä* àÉÖqÉ ªÉc cè ÉÊBÉE JÉäiÉÉÒ 
àÉå BÉDªÉÉ ºÉÆBÉE] cè* àÉMÉ® VÉÉÒAàÉ ¤ÉÉÒVÉ BÉEÉÒ ¤ÉÉiÉ £ÉÉÒ ¤ÉÉ®-¤ÉÉ® +ÉÉ ®cÉÒ cè* MÉÖVÉ®ÉiÉ àÉå càÉ ºÉÉè®É­]Å BÉEä AÉÊ®ªÉÉ 
àÉå MÉA lÉä +ÉÉè® àÉvªÉ |Énä¶É àÉå ZÉÉ¤ÉÖ+ÉÉ, <ÆnÉè®, nä´ÉÉºÉ BÉEä <ãÉÉBÉEä àÉå  MÉA lÉä* ÉÊ´Én£ÉÇ àÉå +ÉBÉEÉäãÉÉ, ¤ÉÖãÉbÉxÉÉ,  
are the parts which grow Bt cotton in Maharashtra.  BÉExÉÉÇ]BÉE àÉå cÉ´Éä®ÉÒ, vÉÉ®´ÉÉ½ £ÉÉÒ 
BÉEÉì]xÉ OÉÉä<ÆMÉ AÉÊ®ªÉÉWÉ cé* +É£ÉÉÒ càÉÉ®ÉÒ ªÉÉjÉÉ iÉÉÊàÉãÉxÉÉbÖ {ÉcÖÆSÉÉÒ cè VÉÉä ºÉäãÉàÉ BÉEÉ AÉÊ®ªÉÉ cè* àÉé +ÉÉ VÉ 
<vÉ® +ÉÉ MÉ<Ç cÚÆ* càÉ näJÉiÉä cé ÉÊBÉE MÉÖVÉ®ÉiÉ àÉå ºÉÉè®É­]Å BÉEä ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉ ªÉc BÉEc ®cä cé ÉÊBÉE {Éèº]ÉÒºÉÉ<bÂºÉ BÉEä 
xÉà¤É® +ÉÉì{ÉE º|ÉäWÉ ÉÊ{ÉE® ºÉä ¤ÉfÃiÉä VÉÉ ®cä cé* ´Éä BÉEc ®cä cé ÉÊBÉE today the average number of 
sprays on Bt cotton is 12 t o 15 times whereas about 6 -7 years ago, they 
brought it down to 2 to 3 sprays in the initial years of Bt cotton entry. =ºÉàÉå àÉé 
{ÉºÉºÉÇxÉãÉÉÒ ªÉc ¤ÉÉiÉ VÉÉä½ ®cÉÒ cÚÆ ÉÊBÉE <ºÉ nä¶É àÉå ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉÉå BÉEÉä {Éèº]ÉÒºÉÉ<b ÉÊU½BÉExÉä BÉEÉÒ VÉ°ô®iÉ xÉcÉÓ cè, 
´Éc BÉEÉèx{ÉEÉÒbéºÉ +ÉÉè® ÉÊbÉÎº{ÉÉÊãÉxÉ ÉÊBÉEºÉÉÒ xÉä xÉcÉÓ ÉÊnãÉÉªÉÉ* ãÉä] xÉÉ<xÉ]ÉÒWÉ BÉEÉ ABÉE VÉàÉÉxÉÉ AäºÉÉ cÉäiÉÉ lÉÉ  
when farmers out of tremendous fear inside them, whether they see a pest 
on the crop or not. àÉé MÉÖÆ]Ú® ºÉä +ÉÉiÉÉÒ cÚÆ +ÉÉè® ´ÉcÉÆ BÉEä ¤ÉÉ®ä àÉå ¤ÉiÉÉ ºÉBÉEiÉÉÒ cÚÆ* ´Éä c® nÚºÉ®ä, iÉÉÒºÉ®ä 
ÉÊnxÉ +É{ÉxÉÉ {Éèº]ÉÒºÉÉ<b º|ÉäªÉ® ãÉäBÉE® ÉÊxÉBÉEãÉ VÉÉiÉä lÉä* If At all something positive has to be 
said about Bt cotton, I think the aggressive marketing around  Bt cotton 
helped farmers thin k around Bt cotton as a way of disciplining their 
pesticides usage. But the thing is that today pesticide usage is going up in 
places like Gujarat.  càÉå MÉÖVÉ®ÉiÉ ºÉä ªÉc ¤ÉÉiÉ £ÉÉÒ {ÉiÉÉ ãÉMÉÉÒ ÉÊBÉE ´Éä näJÉ ®cä cé ÉÊBÉE VÉÉxÉ´É®Éä, 
JÉÉºÉBÉE® ¶ÉÉÒ{É àÉå ÉÊàÉºÉBÉEè®äVÉäºÉ VÉÉä ¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ BÉEÉì]xÉ BÉEä >ó{É® SÉfÃiÉä cé, VÉÉxÉ´É® àÉ® MÉA, ªÉc =xÉBÉEÉ +ÉxÉÖ£É´É 

 
 
308 
 
xÉcÉÓ cè, àÉMÉ® ´Éä ¤ÉiÉÉ ®cä cé ÉÊBÉE ÉÊàÉºÉBÉEè®äVÉ ¤ÉcÖiÉ cÉä ®cä cé, ®ÉÒ|ÉÉäbÉÎBÉD]´É cèãlÉ <à{ÉèBÉD]ÂºÉ näJÉ ®cä cé* 
càÉxÉä ZÉÉ¤ÉÖ+ÉÉ àÉå näJÉÉ ÉÊBÉE  ¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ BÉEÉì]xÉ +ÉÉxÉä BÉEä ¤ÉÉn fertilizer use has gone up by 150 to 
200 percent.  c® VÉMÉc ªÉc ¤ÉÉiÉ VÉ°ô® +ÉÉ<Ç cè ÉÊBÉE +ÉÉVÉ BÉEä ÉÊnxÉ àÉÉÉÌBÉE] àÉå ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉÉå BÉEÉä +ÉÉè® 
BÉEÉä<Ç S´ÉÉ<ºÉ xÉcÉÓ cè, xÉÉxÉ-¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ BÉEÉì]xÉ ºÉÉÒbÂºÉ ºÉ{ãÉÉ<Ç BÉE®xÉä ´ÉÉãÉä BÉEÉä<Ç xÉcÉÓ ®cä cé* xÉÉxÉ -¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ BÉEÉì]xÉ 
ºÉÉÒbÂºÉ <ºÉºÉä {ÉcãÉä 120 OÉÉàÉ VÉÉä ®è{ÉDªÉÚVÉ BÉEä ÉÊãÉA ÉÊnªÉÉ VÉÉiÉÉ lÉÉ ,  for planting around Bt 
cotton field, 25 percent or five rows of non -Bt cotton, +É£ÉÉÒ ´Éc ÉÊ®BÉEàÉébä¶ÉxÉ £ÉÉÒ 
<ÆÉÊbªÉÉ BÉEä ®èMÉÖãÉä]ºÉÇ xÉä ¤ÉnãÉ nÉÒ cé* ´Éä BÉEc ®cä cé ÉÊBÉE +ÉÉ{É iÉÖ+É® bÉãÉ ºÉBÉEiÉä cé, xÉÉxÉ -¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ bÉãÉxÉä BÉEÉÒ 
VÉ°ô®iÉ xÉcÉÓ cè* BÉEÉÒ½ä àÉå ®èÉÊºÉº]éºÉ BÉEÆ]ÅÉäãÉ BÉE®xÉä BÉEä ÉÊãÉA iÉÖ+É® BÉEä ®ÉäWÉ ãÉMÉÉ ºÉBÉEiÉä cé* +É¤É ´Éc xÉÉxÉ -
¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ £ÉÉÒ ={É ãÉ¤vÉ xÉcÉÓ cè*  There are no choices left for farmers. This is the 
important thing that came out.  +ÉMÉ® +ÉÉÆBÉE½Éå BÉEä àÉÉvªÉàÉ ºÉä ¤ÉiÉÉxÉÉ {É½ä, ¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ BÉEÉì]xÉ +ÉÉxÉä 
ºÉä {ÉcãÉä ÉÊ´Én£ÉÇ àÉå, 1997 ºÉä 2002 iÉBÉE, average number of annual suicides ÉÊVÉiÉxÉÉÒ cÉäiÉÉÒ 
lÉÉÒ, seven years after Bt cotton came in, there has been an increase of 60 
percent in the average annual number of suicides of farmers in Maharashtra 
as per the National Crime Bureau records. This is the data shared by Mr. P. 
Sainath. It ob viously shows, even if we can’t make a cause and affect 
relationship ÉÊBÉE ¤ÉÉÒ]ÉÒ BÉEÉì]xÉ BÉEÉÒ ´ÉVÉc ºÉä cÉÒ ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉÉå àÉå +ÉÉiàÉciªÉÉ cÉä ®cÉÒ cè,  it at least 
proves that Bt cotton has not been a solution. After it had come, suicides 
have increased in numbers. That much it clearly shows in terms of data.” 
 
8.29  Dr. G.V. Ramajanyelu, Director, Centre for Sustainable 
Agriculture expressing his concerns over the issues like pricing and 
monopoly of transgenic seeds informed the Committee during this Ora l 
Evidence on 15 November, 2010: 
“When Bt. Brinjal discussion was going on, the company 
already started booking seed at Rs.50000 a kilo. You can imagine 
to what extent the prices will go up. That is a major issue and this 
has to come in.  One more issue which has happened is, people 

 
 
309 
 
say that there is a large -scale spread of Bt cotton, and that since 
it is good people are adopting it. But what actually happened is 
that the public sector has withdrawn all the varieties of cotton in 
the count ry. In the last three years, not even one kilogram of 
seed is sold by any of the public sector institutions in the country. 
No CICR, no agricultural university in the country, no Seed 
Corporation, has sold even one kilogram of cotton seed. They 
have withdrawn from the market.  
There is another major discussion going on that if the public 
sector does GM, it will be good. CICR has released GM Bt cotton 
two years back. This year they have withdrawn from the market 
because it is already contaminated. A new vari ety Bikaneri Narma 
was released this year. They have not sold even ten grams of the 
seed. That is the situation.  So, expecting that the public sector 
will come and do something is also wrong.  In that situation, 
giving away all rights to the companies and  having no powers to 
regulate them is going to be a serious a problem.  
There are four court cases filed on Andhra Pradesh 
Government today saying you cannot regulate us, you cannot 
regulate our prices, you cannot regulate our royalties, you cannot 
ask us to pay compensations. That is the reason why the Andhra 
Pradesh Government is repeatedly making requests to the Centre 
that the new Seed Bill should have these clauses in the Bill.  
This is not the experience only in India. This is the 
experience the world over. Many independent studies showed that 
there is problem with GM crops. In India we have not yet seen 
these reports because no independent research has been done. All 
the reports which are coming in are the reports only from the 
company.”  

 
 
310 
 
8.30  About the stand of the Department/ICAR before the competent  
authority with regard to introduction/field trials/cultivation of GM/ 
transgenic crops in the Country, it was stated that ICAR/ DARE have 
been supporting the development of GM crops, and research is bei ng 
carried out in its various institutes over the past several years on 
development of transgenic crops. ICAR has always been keen to use 
science based technology for crop improvement.  Since the GM 
technology has given advantage to the farmers and growers  across the 
world, ICAR always feels that GM technology and products , thereof, 
should be made available to the farmers in India.  Only Bt Cotton is 
currently being cultivated in the country. In 2002 -03, Bt cotton with 
resistance to boll worm was introduced  in the country by the private 
sector. Currently, Bt cotton is grown in over 8.00 million hectares out of 
9.00 million hectares and farmers have got immensely benefited as the 
productivity and production increased two fold in the last about 7 -8 
years.  The  area under cultivation of Bt cotton in the country has 
increased from 20,000 hectares in 2002 to more than 8.0 million 
hectares in 2010.  In 2010, India produced 31 million bales of cotton 
and now occupies second position in terms of global cotton product ion. 
According to ICAR survey in 2002, profit of Bt cotton to farmers ranges 
approximately between Rs . 4000 to Rs. 8000 per hectare.  Bt cotton 
farmers have not only gained from increased production but have also 
saved significantly towards the cost of pesticides. 
8.31 However, when the question of increase in production was put by 
the Committee to Director, National Institute of Plant Genome Research 
during his Oral Evidence on 28 September, 2010, he stated: 
“The question of livelihood is very important. Misguided 
people would, of course, suffer. Therefore, we said that there 
should be contact with the people. Let me also tell you that for Bt 
cotton, the advantage of protection of the yield will come only if 

 
 
311 
 
there is infestation. If in a particular year there is no infestation, 
the farmer who has used Bt seed will not get any advantage 
because there are no harmful effects. So, there is no protection. 
Therefore, we have to tell this thing and communicate at the block 
and extension levels all these things because continuous 
communication with the people must be there. One should know 
what advantage means. What is the advantage? It is protection of 
the yield. It is not increase. Anybody who is saying that Bt gene 
will increase the yield is wrong. It is only to protect the loss of the 
yield. If in a particular year there is no infestation, then, of 
course, that advantage will not accrue to this particular farmer 
and he will not be in an advantageous situation. So, th is is very 
important. That is where the Government intervention is required  
along with the industry. The Government is supporting the public -
private partnership. It is a good concept. We see that there are 
some benefits of it. Therefore, we cannot nip it in the bud. But, at 
the same time, as has been written in the academic report, I say 
that this is so important an issue that it cannot be left to the 
private industry alone.” 
8.32 As regards the extent to which their stand has been accepted by 
the competen t authority while deciding upon each  of these cases, it 
was stated that GM Crop development in different crops by ICAR has 
been positively accepted by various committees of the Ministry of 
Science & Technology (RCGM of DBT) and Ministry of Environment & 
Forest (GEAC) for the conduct of event selection trials and biosafety 
research level (BRL -1 and BRL -2) trials. To take up such studies in 
research laboratories at different ICAR‟s institutes, an Institute 
Biosafety Committee first gives permission as per Government of India 
guidelines, with Director of the respective Institute as Chairman of such 
a Committee.  

 
 
312 
 
 
8.33 The  details  of  projects  being  undertaken by various 
constituents of ICAR is given in the Table below: 
 
S.No Crops Year Institute Traits 
1.  Brinjal  2006 NRCPB,  IARI, New Delhi Insect resistance 
2.  Castor 2006 Directorate of Oilseeds Research, 
Hyderabad 
Insect resistance 
3.  Potato 2006 Central Potato Research Institute, 
Shimla 
Fungal resistance 
4.  Rice 2006 IARI, New Delhi  Insect resistance 
5.  Tomato 2006 IARI, New Delhi Virus resistance 
6.  Potato 2009 Central Potato Research Institute, 
Shimla 
Tuber sweetening 
7.  Sorghum 2009 National Research Centre for Sorghum, 
Hyderabad 
Insect resistance 
8.  Watermelon 2010 Indian Institute of Horticultural 
Research 
Virus resistance 
9.  Tomato 2010 Indian Institute of Horticultural 
Research 
Virus resistance 
10.  Tomato 2010 IIVR, Varanasi Insect resistance 
11.  Tomato 2010 NRCPB, New Delhi Fruit ripening 
12.  Papaya 2010 Indian Institute of Horticulture Research Virus resistance 
13.  Sugarcane 2010 Sugarcane Breeding Institute Insect resistance 
14.  Sorghum 2010 Central Research Institute for Dryland 
Agriculture 
Abiotic stress 
tolerance 
 
15.  Groundnut 2010 University of Agricultural Sciences, 
Bangalore 
Abiotic stress 
tolerance 
16.  Mustard 2010 NRCPB, New Delhi Abiotic stress 
tolerance 
 
8.34 The field trials and biosafety testing are in progress with respect 
to above -mentioned events as accepted and approved by RCGM  and 
GEAC.  
 
8.35 The view of Department of Biotechnology on the aspects of bio -
diversity, bio-safety, environment, human health and health of livestock 
and animals was that the level of risk ramifications of genetic 
modification of various food crops in terms of safety to human, animals, 
environment and biodiversity varies with the nature of genes, traits and 
crops. Therefore, such a question is addressed by following globally 
debated and consensus science based biosafety assessment guidelines 
evolved from time to time by various international agencies, 

 
 
313 
 
conventions and fora. Based on the transgenic crops introduced, it is 
our view that case by case regulatory processes and procedures have to 
be stringently followed.  It may also be noted that with any technology, 
a total certainty of cause and consequences can be assured . It is our 
view that current regulatory procedures and protocols in India are 
robust enough to address food and environmental safety issues. As the 
experience grows with different types of GM crops, the regulatory 
science also evolves globally for assessm ent and management of even 
smallest of the risk.  
 
8.36 Reiterating the views of MoEF and DARE/ICAR, the Department 
stated that currently in India, all GM crops are evaluated for safety and 
efficacy as per the protocols and procedures prescribed under the Rules 
1989 of Environment Protection Act 1986 and relevant biosafety 
guidelines notified from time to time.  The biosafety guidelines adopted 
by RCGM/ GEAC are based on internationally recognized procedures for 
the comprehensive safety assessment of GM crops, including those from 
the European Union, FAO/WHO, CODEX alimentari us, and Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and Development .  The GEAC guidelines 
require a comprehensive safety testing to be conducted for a GM crop 
including toxicity assessment, al lergenicity assessment, dietary 
exposure and substantial equivalence using test protocols such as: 
protein thermal stability, pepsin digestibility, molecular characterization, 
compositional assessment, acute oral toxicity (mice or rat), 90-day sub-
chronic rat feeding, and livestock feeding (case by case basis). In 
addition, there are crop specific requirements for collection of data for 
confined field trials.  The regulatory authorities are aware of the issues 
concerning the release of GMOs and therefore a strict regime of tests/ 
studies is being carried out for granting approval to the GM crop.  No 
approval would be granted to the GM crops unless there has been a 
thorough analysis of its effects on the environment, biodiversity, 

 
 
314 
 
biosafety, human health, and  health of livestock and animals is proven 
to be safe.  Safety and efficacy is evaluated by science based 
experimentation and analysis on case -by-case basis and therefore, 
cannot be generalized as these are product specific.  The Department 
consider that t he products which are biosafe and have desired socio - 
economic benefits to farmers and consumers are to be supported for 
environmental release/cultivation. 
 
8.37 However, when the matter of substantial equivalence was put 
before Director, National Institute of Plant Genome Research during his 
Oral Evidence on 28 September, 2010 he clarified: 
  
 “On equivalence, I may tell you, as you said rightly that 
there are lobbies and they use different words to convince. I may 
tell you that when we do breeding  and two genomes come 
together, thousands and thousands of changes take place. When 
a single gene is put, then also it affects the activity of other genes 
and therefore, if I start to go in molecular sense, certainly they 
will not be equivalent. So, equiva lence has to be checked at the 
level of overall utility of the product and the tests for the other 
human needs for that particular product. So, if mango is sweet, 
this other mango should also be sweet and people should like it 
and therefore, equivalence sh ould be established in those terms 
and in terms of general protein content and like that. I can tell 
you that at molecular level there will be differences. People are 
not talking of it today, but tomorrow they will start to talk of it 
also. 
We  know that t hese changes are there. I have put one 
gene into a rice plant. I have reported in my research also that 
there are 600 other genes which are getting affected because of 

 
 
315 
 
this. But the overall trait of the plant is that the plant develops 
tolerance. It is abl e to grow in water -deficit conditions a little bit. 
So, that trait is used for the equivalence or comparison to the 
control.” 
  
8.38 It was further stated by the Department of Biotechnology that 
recombinant DNA technology is one of the breakthrough technol ogy like 
that of electricity, steam engine, nuclear energy, internet and others. 
Such breakthrough technologies have revolutionary potential because 
they often lead to major changes in the existing paradigms. Profit 
policies and governance systems have to be created to ensure that the 
benefit is achieved and at the same time potential concerns are 
effectively addressed. The scientific community and policy makers 
during the last two decades invested time and money in the 
advancement of basic biological scien ces and tools of development to a 
point that it is expected that breakthroughs in applications and product 
development for social-economic benefits are possible.  
 
8.39 It was further stated that t he perspective of the Department of 
Biotechnology in the last two decades has been to promote and develop 
R&D capacity in the field and deploy recombinant DNA technology for 
application in health care, agriculture, animal husbandry, environmental 
protection and bio -industrial development with adequate precaution ary 
measures enshrined in international conventions, protocols and 
systems. In agriculture, the technology has been the preferred option 
with demonstrated effects on growth, yield and tolerance to pests and 
diseases, drought, salinity, etc. and where there is no natural resistance 
or variability in a given crop species the existing management practices 
are of limited value for optimal performance of agriculture crops. The 
Department is also monitoring closely the global development and 

 
 
316 
 
experience in transge nic crops and foods as well as evolving scientific 
basis of regulations and legal frameworks so that learning from the 
experience are suitably incorporated in policies and programmes. In 
addition, the Department also support non -GM technologies such as 
tissue culture propagation, molecular marker assisted crop breeding , 
etc.  The overall goal is to ensure responsible use of technologies for the 
benefit of farmers and consumers ensuring safety for consumption and 
to the environment. The areas of applications are focused on  the use of 
modern biotechnology tools in agriculture that will reduce not only the 
damage due to  pests and diseases  but also ensure environment 
protection from adverse effects of pesticides/insecticides, reduce 
cultivation costs of agriculture produce,  develop crops with tolerance to 
drought and salinity, herbicide tolerance, virus resistance, improved 
product quality, improved nitrogen use efficiency, enhanced yield, 
quality and nutritional status, etc. It will make agriculture more efficient 
and competitive to meet the challenges of hunger, poverty, malnutrition 
and food security. Accordingly, the Department promotes R&D in public 
sector institutions, case-by-case for application of genetic engineering in 
various crops of national impor tance and at the same time provides 
support and facilitates safety assessment of these crops as per the 
prevailing regulatory system. The Department implemented National 
Biotechnology Development Strategy (2007-till date) wherein the policy 
goal is to ensu re that research and application in biotechnology is 
guided by a process of decision making that safeguards human health 
and meets environmental observance of the highest ethical standards.  
A scientific, rigorous, efficient, predictable and consistent reg ulatory 
regime for biosafety evaluation and release of protocols is essential for 
achieving this objective.  
 

 
 
317 
 
8.40 Querried further by the Committee as to what role did the 
Department perceive for themselves in so far as research into the 
effects of Genetically Modified/transgenic Crops/edible commodities on 
bio-diversity, bio -safety, environment, human health, flora a nd fauna 
are concerned the Department of Biotechnology stated that they 
support R&D activities for development of GM crops with desired 
characteristics.  Approval is granted for R&D activities only after a 
thorough scientific peer review including need and  relevance to Indian 
agriculture alongwith potential implications of new technology on 
biodiversity, biosafety, environment, human health, flora and fauna.  
Each proposal also requires the permission of Institutional Biosafety 
Committees (IBSCs) set up in each of the university/ institutions / 
private sector for implementing the projects.  Special projects are also 
commissioned for generating biosafety data in some crops to generate 
scientific information on food and environmental safety aspects. The 
country has best scientists and experts with proven track record in the 
respective subject areas of risk assessment and technology 
development. A National Bioresource Development Board is also 
operational in the Department for inventorization, documentation and 
mapping of bioresources with a view to promote conservation, 
propagation and bioprospecting utilizing modern biotechnological tools 
and techniques. 
 
8.41 Querried about their specific role and responsibility in cases where 
the import, research, development , field trials, introduction for 
cultivation purposes of a genetically modified/transgenic food crop is 
involved, DBT stated that u nder Rules 1989 notified under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 for the purpose of  the 
manufacture, use, import, expor t & storage of hazardous 
microorganisms, genetically engineered organisms or cells, the Review 

 
 
318 
 
Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) shall function in the 
Department of Biotechnology (DBT). Under Rules 1989 of Environment 
Protection Act 1986 (EPA 1986) the Terms of Reference (TOR) of RCGM 
include the following: 
 
(i) Monitor the safety related aspects in respect of ongoing 
recombinant DNA (r-DNA) projects and activities involving 
Genetically Engineered (GE) organisms/ hazardous 
microorganisms.  
(ii) Review all ong oing projects including high risk category 
and confined field experiments to ensure that adequate 
precautions and containment conditions are complied with 
as per the Guidelines and Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) issued by DBT from time to time.   
(iii) Lay down procedures restricting or prohibiting production, 
sale, importation and use of such GE organisms or 
products thereof for research and applications as 
mentioned in the Schedule of Rules, 1989. 
(iv) Issue the clearance letters/permits for import or exchange  
of genes, DNA fragments, vectors, plasmids, cosmids, 
etiologic agents and transgenic organisms or 
germplasm(s) including transformed calli, seeds, plants 
and plant parts for research use only. It will also take note 
of all such commercially available agen ts which are 
acquired from commercial sources through Institutional 
Biosafety Committee (IBSC).  
(v) Act as a regulatory body for receiving and reviewing the 
applications to conduct confined field trials (such as event 
selection trials, Biosafety Research Leve l I trials (BRL I), 
pollen flow studies or any other trial involving GE 

 
 
319 
 
organisms) and recommend appropriate studies to be 
conducted for data generation for biosafety assessment as 
per Clause IV , as per the decision of the Genetic 
Engineering Appraisal Co mmittee (GEAC) or its 
authorization. 
(vi) Constitute sub groups/sub committees to visit periodically 
the experimental sites where r-DNA projects and activities 
involving GE organisms/ hazardous microorganisms are 
being pursued to ensure that adequate safety mea sures 
have been taken as per the guidelines and compliance of 
SOPs. 
 
8.42 It may be noted that the introduction of genetically modified / 
transgenic food crop into environment for cultivation is not under the 
purview of RCGM or the Department of Biotechnology.  Approval for 
environmental release of all genetically engineered cro ps is under the 
purview of the GEAC constituted by Ministry of Environment & Forests 
under Rules 1989 of Environment Protection Act 1986. The approvals 
for confined field trials are also being given by GEAC.  RCGM currently 
reviews R&D projects and facilit ates scientific risk assessment of 
applications for field trials/environmental release of GM crops. The   
inputs and recommendations case -by-case are forwarded to GEAC for 
consideration and approvals. 
8.43 Therefore, role and responsibility of the Department in this aspect 
is limited to facilitating RCGM activities and compliance as per TOR of 
RCGM enshrined in Rules 1989 of EPA Act. The Department has no role 
either in decision making process or recommendat ions of RCGM as it is 
an independent regulatory committee under the EPA act.   

 
 
320 
 
8.44 CSIR, however, counselled caution in the matter .  T o a pointed 
querry of the Committee about the likely effects/ramifications of genetic 
modification of various food crops in so far as the aspects of bio -
diversity, bio-safety, environment, human health and health of livestock 
and animals are concerned, the Council stressed that adequate scientific 
impact assessment of use of GM technology on biosafety, environment, 
human health and health of livestock and animals is needed.  Marker 
assisted molecular breeding is to be encouraged. 
8.45 Elaborating on this aspect the Secretary, Department of  Scientific 
and Industrial Research and Director -General, Council for Scientific and 
Industrial Research stated during his Oral Evidence on 10 June, 2011: 
“I am very glad that this Committee is looking at such an 
important aspect of cultivation of genetically modified food crops, 
its prospects and effects. CSIR has been involved in agro based R 
& D since its inception – whether it was development of 
pesticides, development of tractors and contribution to Green 
revolution. CSIR has been a major player in developing these 
technologies. Subsequently, CSIR has four laboratories – Center 
for Cellular & Molecular Biology, Central Institute of Medicinal and 
Aromatic Plant, Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology 
and Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, which are involved in 
plant-based research in various activities.  Any new technology, 
when it comes, it comes with its positive as well as negative 
effect. However, technology is a context specific; its application is 
decided context -wise and country -wise. India has used the cell 
phone technology very successfully much better than even Europe 
or any part of the world. When a new technology like genomic 
technology comes, we have our own strategy. I have been 
responsible for leading that strategy from 1990s in this country. It 

 
 
321 
 
was different from the strategy taken by America or other 
countries. With that background, I would like to set, as a scientist, 
my view and the view and approach CSIR has taken on this 
problem. There is no question about it that GM is very important. 
New technology adaptation to improve food productivity is an 
important component. However, there are many new methods 
coming. We have been fo cusing ourselves on what we call 
Molecular Breeding. That means, this country has huge diversity 
of plants and variations. You screen this diversity to see what 
change the nature has made, and select those for further 
propagation through modern technology.  This is what we call 
Marker Assisted Molecular Breeding and it is what person like Dr. 
Ramesh Sonti extraordinarily demonstrated - how it can be done. 
The second technology is what we call Transfer of Genes. 
This again is done through screening and techno logy. The success 
of BT Cotton has tempted everybody to get into large -scale BT 
technology application into edible food. 
Our perception is that for non -edible items Bt. application 
has been very successful. We need to see for ten more years as to 
how resistance gets developed and how things happen. For food 
items, when there is so much of food shortage, we have to take 
multiple approaches. We have to worry about finding the right 
seed for the right soil through using genomics technology. We 
have to find bio-fertilizers which will improve productivity without 
spoiling the soil. We have to create intercrop technology so that 
we can do multiple production in the same soil without spoiling 
the soil. We have to do the next technology of gene transfer 
called molecular assisted technology so that we do not put in a 
non-edible gene into an edible item. This is the choice we have 

 
 
322 
 
drawn in the Eleventh Plan and we are doing for the Twelfth Plan 
the way CSIR is propagating. For Ashwagandha 146 strains have 
been screened and from this the best screened strain was given to 
farmers in six States, which has increased their productivity as 
well as value of the plant. Therefore, improving productivity is an 
issue that needs to be addressed using the very modern 
technology. However, case to case it has to be built. It cannot be 
just that because you were successful with Bt. Cotton, you should 
apply Bt. to everything else.  That is the view of the Department.”   
8.46 He further added: 
“CSIR has been the leader in patent in Ind ia. We have 
understood how the Bt. patent will affect the Indian farmer. So, a 
strategy was taken to design a new gene which is Bt. equivalent 
with modifications necessary to create a transgenic Bt. Cotton at 
the National Botanical Research Institute of CS IR.  Then, this 
technology was transferred. I will give you the principle. The 
biggest problem was monopoly. CSIR has been responsible for 
generic drug and we have developed so many technologies and 
gave licenses non-generic to multiple people. This is the  principle 
in our head. We gave Bt. Cotton to a consortium of Indian private 
companies so that they can take it to field trial and develop the 
product. The toxicity and allergicity have been tested and this is 
presently under trial with Indian companies. W e cannot afford our 
farmers to be subjected to any monopoly of technology and its 
outcome over decades to come. My perception is that when you 
bring in any such technology, it should be built into a concept like 
a generic drug. It should be multiple licens ing and no monopoly. 
This is I think what the Government can do. The possibility exists. 
We are working on it. That is why in a new technology called 

 
 
323 
 
Apomixis farmers themselves can retain the best seeds and 
propagate themselves. However, this is also a ge ne transfer 
technology from a good strain you bring in from another food 
edible item and then you propagate it. Normally when you 
propagate it, you lose the value. Normally it becomes weaker and 
weaker. But, this technology permits you to propagate absolut ely 
safe. So, for cotton or for a non -edible item using approaches to 
genes that will be expressed only in insects and not in humans is 
okay. But, when it comes to edible items, one needs to be more 
careful and needs to do more tests, more toxicity and all ergicity 
tests and go through the process very carefully.” 
8.47 Based on these inputs received from CSIR ,  the Committee asked 
ICAR about their views on molecular breeding.  ICA R informed the 
Committee that molecular breeding and transgenic development are two 
independent but parallel approaches of crop improvement which are 
applied based on availability of the source of the gene for the target 
trait. Molecular breeding can be used only if the genes for targeted 
traits are available within the gene pool of that crop species. But in case 
of non availability of the desired gene in the gene pool of a crop species 
the transgenic is the only option to introduce the foreign gene. In both 
the approaches the recipient variety/ hybrid or GM crops are genetically 
modified. The molecular breeding or conventional crosses involves 
transfer of a chunk of genetic material from the donor source which is 
also a modification of the endogenous genetic make-up.  
8.48 DSIR/CSIR views were also sought about the extent to which they 
felt that the Country‟s health care and health research system, National 
Agricultural Research System, Agriculture Sector, farming community, 
Regulatory System as also the Department themselves, ready to 
enforce effective surveillance and monitoring of the fall out of cultivation 

 
 
324 
 
of GM/transgenic Crops/commodities on bio -diversity, bio -safety, 
environment, human health, flora and fauna, both in long term as well 
as short term perspective.  In response they stated that there is need to 
further strengthe n inter department collaborative research.  Nodal 
responsibility could be taken either by ICAR and/or DBT.  Asked further 
that if the extant system was not geared to meet such challenges what 
were their suggestions to ensure that the constraints/short comi ngs are 
removed before introduction of GM/transgenic crops/commodities.  
CSIR informed the Committee that they were in agreement.  In order to 
bridge the gaps, we need to have a large number of collaborative 
projects which  will help in creating necessary s cientific evidence and 
appropriate national perspective. 
8.49 Asked about their views on the other technological options 
available for ensuring that the food security of the Country is ensured in 
the short as well as long run, ICAR stated that there are fe w other 
approaches besides the transgenic and molecular breeding approaches 
for crop improvement to ensure food security. For example, collection of 
trait-specific germplasm based on recent GIS tools, selection and 
utilization of the diverse plant genetic resources (PGR)with enhanced 
potential of yield and nutrition or any other specific needs to ensure 
food security. PGR can be utilized through system biological approach 
for identification of its potentials in ensuring food security and its 
promotion.  
8.50 As regards their assessment of genetically modified/transgenic 
food crops, it was stated that DSIR/CSIR appreciate the advances in 
modern biotechnology, genetic modification, transgenics , etc.  The 
Department also support initiatives such as Bt. cotton w hich do not 
involve consumption by humans.  At present the Country has limited 
expertise in the field.  Further, the GM crops are context driven.   

 
 
325 
 
8.51 Clarifying further during his Oral Evidence on 10 June, 2 011 
Secretary, DSIR and DG, CSIR stated:  
“This is where I say that the context of the country is 
important. In America or Europe, every food item that you pick up 
from super-store is plastic -covered, labelled, etc. It is impossible 
in this country, that is, for a nation of this dimension. Therefore, it 
becomes more of a responsibility of the Government before 
releasing to be sure about it. One cannot subject people to risk. 
The issue is not the risk of people also. The issues are, are you 
risking bio -diversity and are you risking soil bacteria to b ecome 
antibiotic resistance? Those are more serious issues. You are not 
talking about this generation of people who will eat the brinjal, 
but you are talking about the next generation of children who will 
live on this earth. Therefore, we have no choice. I n 1950s and 
1960s, when we have had famine, we had to put pesticides and 
we put so much of pesticides that its effects we cannot get out of 
even today. We also had to put DDT. We overdrew water in 
Punjab, Haryana, and Northern parts of India for green revo lution 
to give hungry people food, and the water table has gone down 
there.  There the water table has gone down. We have over -
irrigated in some places as a result, you have to go down much 
deeper to get drinking water and there you get fluorine. So, ev ery 
decision of the Government, however positive or good intention it 
has, can have a consequence. That is why a wise body like this 
has to sit down, debate and discuss. We need to get everybody‟s 
point of view. That is why I said that it is important that  we 
debate this issue, look at this issue longer, before we take any 
disruptive decision very quickly.” 

 
 
326 
 
8.52 Expressing similar concerns Shri K. Nageswara Rao, Vice -
Chairman of  All India Kisan Sabha (Windsor Place) , another farmers‟ 
organization with subs tantial membership , stated during his Oral 
Evidence on 19 October, 2010: 
“When we think about cultivation of GM food crops, 
prospects and effects, I think, we have to discuss it from four 
aspects.  One is food security; second is health, hygiene of the 
people and environment; third is exorbitant exploitation by 
multinational companies, particularly, Monsanto Company; and 
fourth is livelihood security.  We have to think over it from all 
these aspects. 
Of course, biotechnology is very much useful for the 
development of agriculture at high yielding level, hybrid level. It 
has contributed enormously. But when it comes to genetically 
modified crops, as far as my knowledge goes, productivity has not 
been enhanced by the use of genetically modified crops. It is a 
fact.  I have got this fact from the ICAR, and I would like to quote   
one paragraph from it.  It says: “Biotechnology holds great 
promise for increasing production and productivity in India but 
eradication of hunger through GM crops is proved to be false. In 
food cereals like rice, wheat and grain, yield is controlled by not a 
single gene but by a group of gene.  In spite of huge success in 
crop molecular biology and genomics genes for high yield or high 
protein percentage have not yet been discovered.  By inserting a 
single BT g ene, yield cannot be enhanced; only the Lepidopteran 
pests can be controlled for a limited time.  Biotechnology can 
speed up conventional breeding programmes and may offer 
solutions in boosting agricultural production.”  I took these  facts 
from the professors of the ICAR.” 

 
 
327 
 
8.53 Corroborating this view -point Ms. Sunita Narain, Director, Centre 
for Science and Environment stating during her Oral Evidence on 19 
October, 2010: 
“We are not against GM crops per se, but we are very 
concerned that India is not as yet ready and does not have the 
regulatory systems to manage the risks of new technologies which 
GM crops pose.  That is what we have raised also when it came to 
BT brinjal.  When it came to BT brinjal, we made the point very 
clear to the Union Environment Minister, who was at that stage 
considering its introduction into the country, that it was important 
to recognise that the BT brinjal would be the first vegetable crop 
perhaps in the whole world to be introduced.  Brinjal is something 
that we use in our homes.  We use it regularly.  The question we 
had for him, and we have for this Committee, is whether we are 
absolutely confident that the science on GM crops is both well 
understood and can be trusted.  That was an issue that we raised 
at the time of BT brinjal and I think that is a very key issue that 
this Committee must take cognisance of.  When it came to BT 
brinjal, it was very clear that the science which was needed to 
establish the chronic toxicity of eating brinjal over long time was 
really not done.  If you look at the data which was the basis of the 
decision making, most of the research was done on acute toxicity, 
not on chronic toxicity.  Chronic toxicity is what im pacts our body 
over long time.  That has really been our concern when it comes 
to pesticides, when it comes to other toxins that these are not 
about ingesting something which will kill you today; it is about 
long-term impacts on our bodies, and we need to understand 
that. “  
8.54  Dwelling upon the regulatory mechanism she added: 

 
 
328 
 
“This really raises a second very fundamental issue in my 
respect because it is not just about brinjal, it is about GM crops, 
and your Committee is looking at GM crops.  When you a re 
looking at GM crops, to me, the biggest issue your Committee has 
to look at is whether we have the ability to conduct scientific 
research and regulate this technology.  When I look at the 
scientific systems today, they are extremely poor.  We have 
completely compromised public science in the name of Private -
Public Partnerships (PPPs).  Today, most Indian public science has 
been starved of funds.  There is very little independence that 
Indian science has today.  Most Indian scientific institutions are 
being asked to go to companies and get money to pay for science.  
I hope that this Committee will take a look at the new 
memorandum that has been signed by the Rajasthan Government 
with Monsanto which makes it very clear that all agricultural 
universities and  public seed corporations will now have a 
partnership with Monsanto and other agri -business companies.  
These companies will determine the research that is done in the 
universities.  These companies will pay for the research.  The 
universities will do fiel d trials of seeds that have been promoted 
by companies.”   
8.55 Justifying her stand, she stated further: 
“Now the question that I have as a consumer and as a 
public advocate is this.  Why should I trust Indian science any 
more if I cannot trust the integr ity and the independence of the 
scientists?  GM crops cannot be introduced in isolation of a policy 
which promotes public science for public good.  You cannot tell me 
that, please have GM crops because it good for you.  But, on the 
other hand, everything t hat the Government is doing today is to 

 
 
329 
 
compromise the integrity of publicly funded science and public 
institutions.   
I am certainly saying that this entire effort to create Public -
Private Partnerships in which you get companies more and more 
into the sci entific establishments will create less and less 
credibility for crops like GM.  It is something that must be 
understood that consumer confidence is absolutely critical and 
that cannot be built unless you have integrity of public scientific 
establishments.” 
8.56 Making a strong case for a comprehensive liability regime she 
added:   
“There is another big issue.  I think and I hope your 
Committee will take a look at both the regulatory framework as 
well as the liability regime which is needed for GM crops.  W hat 
Bhopal teaches us very clearly is that India has a very weak 
liability regime.  You have just gone through a nuclear Bill.  That 
is also a high risk technology.  GM is similarly about high risk 
technologies, on which we do not know the future impact.  That is 
why, across the world there is concern that any such introduction 
of technology needs a strong liability regime.  It needs corporate 
liability to be established.  It needs the price of that liability to be 
paid.  What was the issue on nuclear?  The  issue on nuclear was 
that if you have a liability regime which reflects the cost of risk 
then the technology would not be competitive.  That is why, 
Parliament was asked and you did come up with a very 
compromised solution to actually reduce the cost of that risk.  The 
same question has to be asked when it comes to GM.  The same 
question has to be asked in terms of the regulatory framework 
that you will arrive upon.  The Government is coming up with a 

 
 
330 
 
Biotechnology Regulatory Authority.  I hope that your C ommittee 
will take a look at that and will make sure that that authority 
speaks on behalf of consumer interests, speaks on behalf of 
farmer interests.  The issue of GM technology is not a silver bullet 
to get rid of hunger.  I think, that is an issue, whic h, I hope, this 
Committee will take a look at it and will do it very carefully.” 
8.57 The Committee, therefore, sought feedback from ICAR on the 
points brought to their notice by CSIR  and several other stakeholders  
viz. only products not consumed by humans be developed, India‟s 
limited experience in the field, transgenic crops being context driven, 
antibiotic marker free genes only should be favoured, etc.  In response 
they were informed that DARE/ICAR considers GM crops are vital for 
ensuring food and nutritional security of the country. GM crops are an 
integral part of eco -friendly, sustainable agriculture for not only 
enhancing crop yields manifold but also for promoting environmental 
protection, conservation of biodive rsity, effective pest and disease 
management, nutrient use efficiency, amelioration of nutrient and 
vitamin deficiencies, protecting human and animal health, etc.   GM 
crops are context driven, and according to ICAR, GM crops are produced 
only when alternat ive technologies fail to supplement a particular trait 
(for example, insect resistance in cotton) and the GM crop production 
has clear advantages over the conventional breeding methods. No 
doubt, development of marker free transgenics is an attractive 
alternative but not essential.  
8.58 On the question of introduction/field trials/cultivation of 
GM/transgenic crops in the Country, CSIR informed the Committee as 
follows:  
(i) Bt-cotton development work was supported and also 
 conducted at CSIR/NBRI. 

 
 
331 
 
(ii) Regarding Bt-brinjal: DG‟s nominee to GEAC in the area of 
agricultural biotechnology e laborately explained the steps 
needed to be followed while clearing a GM food crop for 
cultivation. Also, it was emphasized that time was needed for 
a national consensus to emerge on the issue. 
(iii) Regarding the right of individual State Governments to ban 
field trials of transgenic crops within state boundaries: The 
department has argued that State Governments should have 
the right to ban field trials of transgenic crops, if they wish to 
do so.  The GEAC agreed. 
8.59 Apart from this the Committee also sought the views of 
Department of Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, 
Siddha and Homoeopathy  (AYUSH) on the effects of the genetically 
modified crops on the medicinal values of food crops as also on the 
medicinal values of other crops (food and non -food) which may be 
affected by the introduction/cultivation of Genetically modified crops in 
the surroundin gs. They were also asked about their stand before the 
competent authority with regard to introduction/field trials/cultivation of 
GM crops with medicinal value in the Country.  
8.60 In response they stated that the Department of AYUSH had in 
June, 2010 conveyed its concerns to Secretary, MoEF that genetically 
modified Brinjal (Bt. Brinjal) may have implications on AYUSH sector.  
The Department had also requested that open trials or permission for 
commercial cultivation of Bt. Brinjal or other medicinal plants should not 
be given until a detailed analysis of their impact on Indian System of 
Medicines is done by a Group of Experts.  A copy of the letter had been 
endorsed to the Secretary, Department of Bio -technology.  The 
Department had also requested Ministry of Environment and Forests to 
co-opt Chief Executive Officer, the National Medicinal Plants Board, 

 
 
332 
 
Adviser (Ayurveda), Department of AYUSH and Director General, 
Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM) in GEAC or at 
least give them a hearin g about the concerns of the Department of 
AYUSH. 
8.61 About the likely effects/ramifications of genetic modification of 
various medicinal plants/crops in so far as their medicinal value is 
concerned, the Department submitted that the Ministry of Environment 
& Forests has informed that so far no transgenic medicinal plant has 
been developed and none are under field trial.  Research being 
conducted on eucalyptus, brahmi, amla, ashwagandha, ginger and 
anntmool is preliminary in nature.  The Departmen t of AYUSH is of the 
view that the chemical profile and bioactivity of genetically modified 
medicinal plants should be compared with the conventionally 
produced/cultivated medicinal plants to know the alteration in the 
medicinal values of these plants. 
8.62 The Department of Commerce, which is represented on the GEAC 
was also asked by the Committee about their stand before the 
competent authority/agencies with regard to introduction/field 
trials/cultivation of GM crops keeping in view the effect of such cro ps 
may have on the international trading and exports of genetically 
modified food grains and commodities derived/produced from food 
crops,. They stated that presently only B t. cotton is commercialized in 
India.  Around 90% of the cotton grown is B t. cotton and only 10% of 
the area grows organic cotton.  GEAC has approved the trials of 
transgenic mustard, corn, brinjal and tomato which are under various 
stages of testing and trials in the country.   They further admitted that 
the role of this Department is ve ry limited in view of the technicalities 
involved in the process.  Asked further about the issues they would like 
to bring to the notice on the subject, the Department stated that 

 
 
333 
 
Genetically Modified Organisms are not allowed in National Programme 
for Org anic Production.  There is no doubt over the incompatibility of 
the GMOs with organic agricultural principles as it causes negative and 
irreversible environment impacts through release of organisms which 
have never existed in nature and which could not be recalled. In view of 
the danger, for the biosphere and in particular the economic and 
environmental risks it poses to the organic produce, the above said risk 
can be prevented  if the following steps are considered during the 
cultivation of GMO crops in India: 
(i) Field identified for GMO crops should be restricted to only 
certain areas which could prevent the contamination of 
GMOs with crops of the same species or varieties grown 
conventionally or organically nearby. 
(ii) Surveillance and monitoring of the GMO tri als and 
cultivation is required to be strengthened as presently it is 
not monitored efficiently resulting in contamination to non -
BT grown field among the same species. 
8.63 Some of the other stakeholders, however, differed from these 
views about transgenics in agricultural crops.  Shri Samit Aich, 
Executive Director, Greenpeace India Limited while deposing before the 
Committee on 19 October, 2010 stated:  
“Greenpeace‟s vision is an earth which can nurture life in all 
its diversity. At the core of our view of the world is what we call 
equitable sustainability. This debate about genetically  modified 
crops strikes at the heart of the matter of equitable sustainability. 
It represents what is flawed in our current agricultural paradigm, 
be it of high input usage, corporate control, destruction of 
farmland and farmers‟ livelihood.  

 
 
334 
 
In the genetically modified crop debate, we are also seeing 
the wrong assumption that GM foods can feed th e world. The fact 
of the matter is that genetically modified crops are a threat to our 
biodiversity, they are a threat to our agriculture, they are a threat 
to our farm labour, they are a threat to our citizens‟ health, and 
they are of course a threat to c onsumers‟ choice. Genetically 
modified crops are a false solution to climate change and are 
actually coming in the way of actual solutions. 
The world over many countries, both developed and 
developing, have banned GM crops at the policy level: countries 
like France, Italy, Austria and countries like Thailand and Vietnam. 
In India, we seriously need to deliberate on this issue. We also 
need to ascertain the current genetically modified regulatory 
system in the country as it is inherently flawed. It fails to see the 
importance of the precautionary principle, the issues of 
irreversibility and the issue of transparency in decision-making.” 
8.64 The Committee also sought the viewpoint of Industry in the 
matter.  A representative of Federation of Indian Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry (FICCI) told the Committee during Oral 
Evidence on 22 December, 2010: 
“The approval process, which I think we put  into place as a 
country was done after a reasonable bit of thought and also 
looking at what are best practices in other parts of the world.  A 
little bit area of concern is the consumer.  At the end of the day if 
you introduce a GM product, the key is tha t the Indian consumer, 
which is also you and us when you go out of this room, is always 
worried about GMO and there are enough people to create bigger 
fears.  That is the reason why science exists.  I and you will never 
know whether this product is safe or  not safe.  It is really that a 

 
 
335 
 
scientist and a scientific method has to go to test it and we have 
to make sure that the methodology and all the safeguards are 
defined by us and they come back with a right result to us.  So, 
my feeling is that the system i s perfect.  It needs better clarity 
and elaboration to the rest of the consumer segment and the 
others that this is the system.  If anyone says that you want to 
extend testing from three months to six months, we can always 
do that because the ultimate aim is also to make sure that our 
consumers are satisfied.  So, my general feeling is that it is a 
good robust system. 
The second part which you have really mentioned about 
what is the impact on farmers in terms of smaller farms and 
monopolies.  GM is not the heritage of the Western world.  We 
have allowed it to be the heritage of the Western world because 
we have not had our own country and our scientists develop GM.  
Today, ICAR has been working on GM for a long time and I am 
sure they will come up with the b reakthrough products even in 
the GM category.  It will only be that the western companies will 
be monopolising the GM seed by itself.  We have probably one of 
the best brain parts when it comes to biotechnology.  Pharma -
biotechnology in this country is doi ng absolutely well and there is 
no reason why agri -biotechnology will also not do well if they are 
given encouragement to develop. 
The other point is about pricing.  I have been in the agri -
business for a long time.  The farmer will only pay the price for a 
seed if he finds it makes him much more money than using any 
conventional seed.  No multinational or seed company can take 
more money from him in that sense.  The GM seed is no different 
from any other hybrid seed.  Today if you have to have a hybrid 

 
 
336 
 
seed for sunflower and a Gm seed for sunflower, the seeds are 
absolutely the same and the pricing will be only on the extra yield 
or the extra benefit which the farmer is getting.  It is not easy to 
even convince the Indian farmers to buy a new seed.  If you see 
the percentage of hybrid seeds used in India, it is very-very small.  
So, the difficulty that the small or marginal farmer faces is that he 
has the money to buy hybrid seed.  That will be something which 
we as both Government and private players need t o make sure 
how do we make these kinds of seeds more affordable to the 
farmers, once we have found them to be good for them, through 
different schemes.  We have so many other kinds of farmer 
schemes which we are currently running.  So, that should be not 
only for GM but also hybrid seeds in my view. 
One more element which I wanted to take time on is the 
consumer.  I think the biggest challenge that we have not yet 
crossed is the consumer.  The consumer needs to know, because 
he wants to know, what he is buy ing does it contain any GM 
ingredient.  That is one big item which even if tomorrow all of us 
agree that GM crops should be allowed, some consumers may not 
be ready to buy them.   So, with this would come in the 
requirement of labelling and the requirement  of accountability of 
the manufacturers to make sure that if they are introducing any 
product which has a GM ingredient, it must be labelled 
prominently and the consumer has to be given a choice. 
8.65 Adding further, another representative stated: 
“Just supplementing what Shri Sachid has been saying.  If 
you look into the Note, European Union has a regulation 
1830/2003 concerning the traceability and labelling of genetically 
modified organisms.  These countries have put in a very strong 

 
 
337 
 
regulatory framework  in order to give ample choice to the 
consumer whether to go in for a GM or a conventional product 
through a mechanism of labelling.  Probably these are some of the 
elements that the new framework could adopt in India.  There is 
also very strong need for t raceability of these products, which 
company seeds are being used.  If traceability and labelling 
aspects are taken care probably the consumer will have more 
choices whether to go for GM or non-GM products.” 
8.65A   Shri M. Prabhakar Rao, Chairman and Mana ging Director, 
Nuziveedu Seeds Pvt. Ltd. While emphasising the need for transparency 
in the functioning of the regulatory mechanism stated during his oral 
evidence on 10 November, 2010: 
“The first and foremost issue with regard to GM 
technologies, be it in the food crops or be it in the industrial crops 
or in whatever other crops, is the bio -safety evaluation. he bio-
safety evaluation procedure has been laid down under the 
Environment Protection Act and there are several Committees 
which are formed as pe r EPA.  But there is a need for bringing 
about consistency and total transparency.  These Committees are 
formed, they function and ultimately they give approval. The 
whole process has to be completely transparent and also very 
consistent. It cannot be subj ected to frequent changes and it 
cannot be kept in a non -transparent way.  This is very important 
which has to be achieved. By keeping all the data and all the trials 
open to the public, the unfound fears of anybody will not be there 
which can create difficulties as happened in the case of Bt. Brinjal.  
This is one view which I have with all experience in the 
background of seed industry. “ 

 
 
338 
 
8.65B  Further, clarifying on the monopolistic tendencies in the 
transgenic seeds industry, he stated: 
“With regard to the operational issues as I have mentioned 
just now, most of the GM traits are loss preventing mechanisms.  
They are not yield enhancing mechanism.  Since it is a loss 
preventing mechanisms, the balance between the breeding 
companies which are mostly domestic seed companies and the GM 
technology providers in terms of technology licensing agreements 
that balance has to be ensured by a competent authority. At 
present, either in the present Seed Act or in the newly proposed 
Seed Bill, there is no provision for a regulatory commission or a 
regulatory authority to whom either farmers or the licensee seed 
companies or anybody can go and make an appeal.  So only the 
civil courts are the available option as of now and civil courts 
already are over -burdened with so many litigations.  It becomes 
very difficult for getting any appropriate remedy on specific issues 
which are highly technical, highly complex like the GM Crops.  
Therefore, if the regulatory commission is formed at least in the 
Seed Bill whi ch is now under consideration, then probably the 
balance can be achieved with regard to the interest of the 
farmers, with regard to the interest of the seed companies which 
are breeding companies and with regard to the interest of the 
technology developing companies.  So, all the stakeholders should 
get appropriate justice and that can be only done by a competent 
commission that can be formed under the proposed Seed Bill.  So, 
this aspect I feel will be very important and will go a long way in 
serving millions of farmers as well as the industry.  I think both 
sides will be happy with such a commission if this idea becomes 
operative. Then, I would like to quote here the example of the 
USA.  USA is the first country in the world to adopt GM crops. In 

 
 
339 
 
the mid nineties, the GM traits were approved in the USA. Today, 
in respect of crops like Soyabean, maize etc more than 85 -90 per 
cent of the area is under GM hybrids and varieties.        
In that country, of late, in the last one year, the farmers 
have started making the issue about the high seed prices more 
particularly because the GM technology is coming into the seed 
industry. The US Government has now launched the anti -trust 
investigation which is now widely reported in the media. This is an 
indication that India has to take preventive steps now, even 
before the farmers like in the US go to the court, the Government 
itself probably can look into the matter and start the anti trust 
kind of investigation. We have, what is known as the Competition 
Commission in our country so that such bodies can do 
investigation into the way the system is now operating, whether it 
can be corrected or how it can bring in some improvements to 
bring in more competition and more transparent practices which 
will help in bringing comp etitive prices in the market, availability 
of better hybrids, availability of more choices to the farmers.” 
8.66 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee by some of 
the stakeholders that the movement of genes from Genetically 
Modified/transgenic Crops into conventional crops or related species in 
the world (outcrossing), as well as the mixing of crops derived from 
conventional seeds with those grown using Genetically 
Modified/transgenic seeds may have an indirect effect on food safety 
and food security. 
8.67 The Committee, therefore, sought the views of the GEAC in this 
regard.  They also sought to know that in case GEAC concurred with the 
above view what steps/actions had been taken by it for positive 
interventions in the matter.  

 
 
340 
 
8.68 In a written submission GEAC informed the Committee that Gene 
flow (often used synonymously with the term “out crossing” or “cross 
pollination”) is a natural biological process that occurs in most crop 
species.  Pollen -mediated gene flow is a term used to descr ibe the 
movement of plant genes from one plant to another via pollen.  The 
rate of pollen -mediated gene flow depends on biotic and biotic factors 
such as plant biology, pollen biology/volume, plant phenotype, overlap 
of flowering times, proximity of the po llen source, ambient conditions 
such as temperature, humidity, etc., therefore, the impacts of the gene 
flow to conventional crops or related species needs to be assessed on a 
case-by-case basis.  The regulatory authorities are aware of the issues 
concerning the release of GMOs and ,therefore, a strict regime of tests/ 
studies is being carried out for granting approval to the GM crop.  No 
approval would be granted to the GM crops unless there has been a 
thorough analysis of its effects on the environment, b iodiversity, 
biosafety, human health, and health of livestock and animals is proven 
to be safe.  As the impact on human health or environmental aspects 
are examined in depth through biosafety assessment of the transgene 
before it is allowed for release, it  is unlikely that pollen flow to 
conventional crops or mixing  of crops derived from conventional seeds 
with those grown using GM seeds may have adverse effect on food 
safety and food security.  Further, post release surveillance which is a 
part of the regu latory requirements for GM crops will also provide for 
mid course corrections, if necessary.  
8.69 The Ministry of Environment and Forests shared the views of 
GEAC.  And so did the Department of Biotechnology.  
8.70 On this very aspect ICAR informed the Committee that out 
crossing is a natural phenomenon that occurs normally within a species. 
Transfer of genes across species is a very rare occurrence. The 

 
 
341 
 
horizontal flow of transgenes is also negligible as several stu dies have 
shown. Transfer of a transgene, the protein product of which is 
determined to be biosafe, will not cause any adverse consequences in 
terms of food safety and food security. Moreover, transgenics are 
developed with well known characterized genes ( known to be safe); 
thus, even if gene flow takes place, it would not affect other crops or 
the environment in any way. So far, no toxic effect on human or animal 
health has been reported due to the transfer of one or two genes. 
Further, mixing of transgeni c seeds with conventional seeds may not 
cause a threat to the biodiversity and food security. Thus the benefits of 
GM crops outweigh the concerns of GM -gene flow into the environment.  
The regulatory approvals are provided to GM crops on case -to-case 
basis depending upon the gene, crop species, trait and geographical 
distribution of the crop. In cases such as herbicide tolerant GM crops, 
wherein transgene flows to a weed and which develops tolerance to a 
herbicide, suitable steps such as replacement of the herbicide or 
development of a transgenic event tolerant to the novel herbicide can 
be undertaken. 
8.71 Similarly Department of Science and Technology submitted before 
the Committee that the question concerns the possibility for gene flow 
from GM to conventional crops.  Food safety and security concerns as a 
result of such gene flows should be assessed based on specific product 
and generalization is difficult at this stage of scientific understanding 
based on global experience so far.  The Department holds the view that 
the positive interventions in specific cases in the matter are better 
addressed by agencies like DBT, ICAR and MoEF rather than DST at this 
stage of development of GM technologies in the country. 
8.72 Elaborating on this aspect the Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation informed the Committee that the outcrossing and its 

 
 
342 
 
adverse impact, if any, from GMO to conventional crops are evaluated 
prior to approval by GEAC. Once a GM crop has been evaluated from 
environmental and health point of view, it is considered as safe as a 
conventional crop. The monitoring of GM trials should be strictly 
adhered to as prescribed by the regulatory mechanism.   
8.73 In a background note submitted to the Committee , NBA while 
dwelling up on the aspect of escape of genes stated that o ne of the 
important fears of ecologists and conservation specialists is the 
uncontrolled and/or unintended escape of transgenes (genes that are 
introduced) into non -target varieties and species. Such escape can 
happen through transfer of  pollen, contamination from transformed 
seed and horizontal transfer. Careful assessment of these mechanisms 
of escape needs to be done in order to arrive at a logical conclusion, 
based on science, to determine the safety of modified crops. Scientific 
evidence exist both for and against pollen –mediated escape of 
transgenes and the ability of the passive transformation to create 
ecological imbalances in native breeds and land races. Accidental mixing 
of transforming seed with non -transformed seed in the fie lds, storage 
areas and during packaging is also an important means to enhance risk 
of mix-up of transformed and non -transformed seeds. Proper handling 
and storage, especially in the hands of farmers will be critical to ensure 
such escapes do not happen. Th is is more a logistical and awareness 
problem in India. Research on horizontal gene transfer is still emerging 
in order to provide concrete examples that could be irrefutable with 
regard to potential dangers of such escapes and introgression into non -
transformed crops.  
8.74 However, subsequently in response to a query of the Committee 
expressing its inability to profer advice on this complex issue the 
National Biodiversity Authority informed the Committee that the 

 
 
343 
 
mandate of the Authority is to facilitate conservation, sustainable use 
and access to biological resources. It also regulates issues related to 
exchange of biological material and sharing of benefits arising from their 
use. Besides, the Authority performs an advisory role on issues related 
to cons ervation, sustainable use, access to biological resources and 
benefit sharing. Given these mandates the role of the Authority with 
regard to GMOs relate to providing advice, as appropriate and upon 
request, to Central Government on the issues of impact of GMOs of 
biodiversity. 
8.75 When this question was put to the D epartment of Health 
Research, they stated that these issues essentially relate to agriculture 
and are being addressed by scientists in ICAR. We are aware that 
outcrossing would vary from crop to crop. With reference to Brinjal it is 
self pollinating but deliberate cross pollination h as been done with 
varying results. The Bt Gene and its product the Cry protein has been 
established to be safe through animal studies and history of safe human 
use elsewhere in the world for almost 8 years. Therefore safety will not 
be an issue even if it were to move into other species. For other events 
(other genes) which may come up in future , case to case risk 
assessment must  be carried out. GM seeds do have a bearing on the 
food safety and security as a major aim of the GM crops is to promote 
yield of crops. 
8.76 When querried in the matter, CSIR informed the Committee they 
generally are in agreement that the movement of genes from 
Genetically Modified/transgenic Crops into conventional crops or related 
species in the world (outcrossing), as well as t he mixing of crops 
derived from conventional seeds with those grown using Genetically 
Modified/transgenic seeds may have an indirect effect on food safety 
and food security  & believe that extensive research must be carried out 

 
 
344 
 
to evolve methodologies whic h would insulate the conventional crops 
from adverse impact of GM crops. 
8.77 About the steps/actions have the Department/CSIR taken for 
positive interventions in the matter they stated that CSIR is working in 
the area and in the XIIth Plan, more research in the area is envisaged.  
However, DSIR/CSIR does not have where -with-all for field trials of 
crops.  ICAR is more suitable for field trials.  
8.78 As CSIR had opined that extensive research must be carried out 
to evolve methodologies which would insulate the conventional crops 
from adverse impacts of GM/transgenic crops the Committee sought the 
views of DARE/ICAR in this regard based on their own research and 
experience and  measures, if any, they would like to suggest to insulate 
conventional crops from adverse effects of GM/Transgenic crops.  
8.79 ICAR informed the Committee that extensive research has been 
carried out at laboratory scale in different scientific institutions to evolve 
and refine methodologies that would prevent any adverse effect of GM 
crops on the non -GM crops. Moreover, DARE/ICAR is of the view that 
GM crops that are thoroughly evaluated and deregulated by a regulatory 
system following the intern ationally accepted guidelines will not cause 
any adverse impacts either to conventional crops or to the environment 
in general. Further, recent scientific analysis by experts on GM maize, 
rape seed oil, and soybean with two main GM traits, herbicide tolerance 
and insect resistance grown for ten years in field has shown that 
cultivation of GM crops for a decade has caused no damage to the 
environment (Sanvido et al 2007). It was further stated that no adverse 
effects of GM crops have so far been notice d socially or observed 
scientifically.  To the best of knowledge of the Department, since the 
commercialization of the first transgenic crop, there have been no 
adverse reports regarding human, animal or environmental safety.  

 
 
345 
 
8.80 The Committee, however, got a totally divergent feedback in this 
regard from a representative of Greenpeace India Ltd. during the Oral 
Evidence on 19 October, 2010.  On being asked about the reported 
increase in incidence of cancer in USA after introduction of GM crops, he 
stated: 
“This particular issue of what is happening in US has been 
one of the major points of discussion in almost all forums on GM 
food.  It is a fact that starting from 1996, people in the US have 
been consuming GM crops.  But there are two points which we 
need to look at.  There has not been any direct consumption of 
GM food in US.  All the four crops which are being cultivated in US 
are either used as oil like corn or it goes to cattle feed.  Corn is 
not consumed directly. It is used as oil or it goes to cattle  feed.  
Similar is the case with canola and soya.  Soya is being consumed 
as soya oil and not as soya directly.  So, the chances of protein 
being present in that is reduced.  There could be problems even 
with these products from the GM crops. But the probl em with US 
is that there is no baseline data. To understand what is happening 
right now there and to compare the situation, you need to have 
baseline data.  That is something which I think the industry had 
effectively stopped from happening in US.  I am af raid that the 
same thing is happening in India also. If you go ahead with GM 
food crops at that point of time, there is no baseline data five or 
six  years down the line to say that things have changed and that 
there have been impacts.  That is one of the major concerns. 
While one could speculate that there are issues in US because of 
GM food consumption, the chances of doing a study has been 
killed by not having baseline data.” 

 
 
346 
 
8.81 The Government have justified the introduction of GM crops in 
India on the ground that they are being cultivated and consumed in USA 
for several years without any adverse reports on human health, etc..  
When a clarification was sought on this aspect, a representative of 
Greenpeace India Ltd. informed the Committee during the Oral Evidence 
on 19 October, 2010.   
8.82 The Vidharabha region of Maharashtra is reeling under one of the 
severest agrarian crisis for several years now.  Some of the 
stakeholders attribute the agrarian crisis among other reasons to the 
farmers of the region  taking to cultivation of Bt. cotton in a big way 
during last decade or so.  The Committee, therefore, undertook a Study 
Visit to Vidharbha region in March, 2012.  The Committee visited 
Maregaon Village in Yavatmal District on 2 March, 2012. This District 
had witnessed the maximum number of farmer suicides totalling 1874 
for the period 2006 to 2011. Maregaon has a population of 569. The 
male population is 278 and that of females is 291. The village has 185 
people engaged in agriculture. Farmers owning land between 0 -2.02 
hectares number 134 and those owning above 2.02 hectares number 
51. Average annual rainfall varies from 910 - 925 mm. The village has 
28 wells and irrigated area is 37 hectares out of the total cultivable area 
of 418.66 hectares. Cotton is grown in 252 hectares, Soyabean in 84.20 
hectares, Tur in 50.43 hectares, Jowar in 27.11 hectares, wheat in 
14.60 hectares and Moong in 1.68 hectares.              
8.83 While interacting with the villagers, the Committee got first  hand 
information about the plight of the farmers of Maregaon. The farmers 
very candidly blamed the policies of the Government which they felt 
was responsible for their plight. In particular, their ire was targeted 
towards BT Cotton. The Committee were info rmed that with the 
inception of BT Cotton, input costs had gone high resulting in farmers 

 
 
347 
 
falling into the debt trap. Further, the falling price of co tton in the 
international market resulted in farmers not getting remunerative price 
for their produce. They also stated that in the absence of a buffer zone, 
those wanting to cultivate non - BT Cotton were not able to do so.  Bt. 
cotton was pushing the farmers into the vicious cycle of debt and being 
unable to repay the debt due to decreasing earning farmers were under 
severe stress and developing a feeling of loss of their self -respect which 
was ultimately pushing them to commit suicide.  
 
8.84 The Committee also interacted with a couple of widows who in the 
aftermath of their husband‟s suicide were hard pressed  to make both 
their ends meet. The villagers implored upon the Committee to voice 
their request to the concerned central authorities to ban farming of BT 
Cotton in the country. They also voiced their unhappiness with the relief 
offered to them via the Prim e Minister‟s Relief Package especially i n 
terms of milch animals. They were given exotic breeds like Jersey and 
Holstein who were unable to adjust to the local environmental 
conditions and as a result died. They wanted indigenous breeds instead. 
 
8.85 During the course of their interaction, farmers from the village of 
Bhambraja requested the Committee to visit their village as well. 
 
8.86 The Committee acceded to their request and visited Bhambraja 
Village in Yavatmal District on 2 March, 2012. This village has witnessed 
14 cases of suicide by farmers post BT Cotton, i.e. from 2002. They also 
rubbished the claims of their village being a model village for BT Cotton  
as reported 28 August, 2011 in the edition of a national daily under the 
caption „Reaping Gold through BT Cotton‟ and other articles. Rather 
than driving the farmers towards prosperity, it was driving them away 
from agriculture as was evident from lots of land lying fallow. Also many 

 
 
348 
 
have lost faith in farming and some have shifted to soyabean  where the 
losses are less. It was further stated that over a hundred people 
including landed farmers have migrated from this model farming village 
showcasing Mahyco-Monsanto Biotech‟s BT Cotton  as farming no more 
remained a paying proposition . They were a lso voiceferous in voicing 
their disapproval of the virtues of BT Cotton and wanted to revert back 
to non BT Cotton. The farmers did not relate the issue of the suicides or 
the crisis only the Bt Cotton. But they punctured many myths about its 
miracles, costs and „savings.  
8.87 On 01  March, 2012 the Committee held discussions with the 
representatives of Government of Maharashtra, Relief and Rehabilitation 
Commissioner, Vasantrao Naik Sheti Swav lamban Mission, Amravati, 
Insurance Companies and farmers. They were informed that as a large 
number of incidences of farmers‟ suicides were found in six districts of 
the Vidharbha Region viz. Amravati, Akola, Yavatmal, Buldana, Wa shim 
and Wardha, Government of M aharashtra had declared a Special 
Rehabilitation Package for these districts on 19 th December, 2005. For 
the period 2006 -2011 Amravati District witnessed 1523 instances of 
farmer suicide out of which 360 related to agrarian reasons. Akola 
District witnessed 974 instances of farmer suicide out of which 480 
related to agrarian reasons. Yavatmal District witnessed 1874 instances 
of farmer suicide out of which 475 related to agrarian reasons. Buldana 
District witnessed 1019 instances of farmer su icide out of which 340 
related to agrarian reasons. Wardha District witnessed 707 instances of 
farmer suicide out of which 198 related to agrarian reasons. On being 
queried by the Committee about the reasons for these suicides, it was 
stated that crop failure and indebtedness were the agrarian reasons and 
illness, addiction, unemployment, family dispute and other reasons were 
also responsible.  

 
 
349 
 
8.88 The Committee asked Shri P. Sainath, Rural Editor, The Hindu, 
who has been extensively covering farmers issue s for more than 18 
years, mostly in Vidharbha, about the reasons behind these suicides.  
During this Oral Evidence on 3 November, 2011 he stated: 
“I would like to make three points.  VÉÉä ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉ +ÉÉiàÉciªÉÉ BÉE® ®cÉ cè, ´Éc BÉEÉèxÉ 
cè? ´Éc 80 -90 {É®ºÉå] BÉEè¶É µÉEÉì{É {ÉEÉàÉÇ® cè* VÉÉä {ÉèbÉÒ BÉEÉÒ {ÉEºÉãÉ ãÉäiÉä cé, ´Éä ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉ ¤ÉcÖiÉ BÉEàÉ 
ºÉÖºÉÉ<b BÉE®iÉä cé* ªÉÚ.{ÉÉÒ., ÉÊ¤ÉcÉ® àÉå ªÉc +ÉÉÆBÉE½É ¤ÉcÖiÉ BÉEàÉ cè, BÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉE ´ÉcÉÆ {ÉÚEb µÉEÉì{É {ÉEÉàÉÇºÉÇ cé* VÉcÉÆ 
BÉEè¶É µÉEÉì{É VªÉÉnÉ cè VÉèºÉä àÉcÉ®É­]Å, àÉvªÉ |Énä¶É, BÉExÉÉÇ]BÉE, BÉEä®ãÉ +ÉÉÉÊn àÉå ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉÉå BÉEÉÒ +ÉÉiàÉciªÉÉ 
VªÉÉnÉ cÉä ®cÉÒ cè*  Suicides are overwhelmingly committed by the cash crop 
farmers because the  risks of cash crop are higher, the indebtedness is 
higher, the expenditure is higher, the bank loans and money lenders’ loans 
are higher and the prices are more volatile on the global market because 
cash crop prices are controlled by half-a-dozen multinational corporations in 
the world.    
Lastly, the highest number of suicides committed by the cash crop 
farmers is that of cotton farmers.  ´Éc BÉE{ÉÉºÉ BÉEÉ ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉ cè* ºÉ¤ÉºÉä VªÉÉnÉ, ºÉ¤ÉºÉä ¤É½É 
OÉÖ{É VÉÉä +ÉÉiàÉciªÉÉ BÉE® ®cÉ cè, ´Éc BÉE{ÉÉºÉ BÉEÉ ÉÊ BÉEºÉÉxÉ cè, VÉÉä ¤ÉÉÒ.]ÉÒ.BÉEÉì]xÉ ªÉÚVÉ BÉE® ®cÉ cè*  So, 
my question is, at a time when suicides are overwhelmingly committeed by 
the farmers engaged in areas of cotton, groundnut, vanilla, coffee and 
pepper; at a time when the highest number of suicide s are in Bt. Cotton 
areas, should we then introduce GM in food crops where there are 
relatively no suicides at all ?  
As a Reporter, I have to tell you that when I work in the countryside, I 
live with the people I write about.  I do not fly into Nagpur and  cover from 
there.  I live in the villages that I write about.  I stay with the farmers I write 
about.  I have seen incredible misery for these last 18 years.  It would be 
irresponsible for me to advise you to say let us have GM in food crops also.   

 
 
350 
 
No European country is doing it.  We are being asked to do it.  It would be 
totally irresponsible on my part to make such a recommendation when our 
food crop farmers earn less, stagnate but they are not committing suicides.” 
8.89 Blaming the high input costs al so for the miseries of the farmers , 
he informed the Committee: 
“I think the Central Institute for Cotton Research (CICR) has 
already given a new data in this hon. Committee.  The 2010 -11 
data on cotton production in India is the same as 2004, which is 
pre Bt. technology.  There was hybrid cotton in 2004 and very, 
very little Bt. cotton.  There was no Bt. technology.  Seventy eight 
per cent of Maharashtra‟s cotton was hybrid.  Eighty nine per cent 
of the country‟s cotton was hybrid.  Today, the level of 
productivity of Bt. is back to 2004 level.  It means the decline has 
begun very steeply.  You have incurred incredible costs without 
commensurate benefits.   
Let me give you some numbers and some figures on the 
productivity. I have brought some documents for y ou, which I will 
give you.  According to International Research of Cotton Journal, 
there are six poor African countries like Uganda, Nigeria, Morocco, 
Ethiopia, Mali and Burkina Faso, which do not have a cotton 
research centre.  They do not have a single c otton scientist.  They 
do not have a single large corporation.  They have very poor 
topsoil.  Their topsoil is not like our rich soil of India but very poor 
topsoil.  They use virtually no fertilizer.  They use very little 
pesticides and their productivity  level is the same as ours.  
Without any of our scientists and technology, their productivity 
level is equal to us.  This is the International Research Journal on 
cotton.  I am leaving these sheets for you.  The productivity level 
of kilograms per hectare of lint is not different from ours.  So, we 

 
 
351 
 
have put in billions of dollars to give what?  That is my first 
question.”  
8.90 The witness also attributed the agrarian crisis to the fact that yield 
benefits to the farmers were not in consonance with what wer e being 
publicized hence the returns were not matching the high input costs.  
Dwelling upon further on this aspect he stated during the Oral Evidence 
on 3 November, 2011:  
“Firstly, in areas like Vidharbha and Maharashtra it is not 
even 80 per cent; in Vid harbha more than 95 per cent of the 
cotton area is under Bt. Cotton.  Very little of any other variety of 
cotton is being grown.  Let me read you the latest figures of the 
Government of Maharashtra which I have obtained yesterday on 
the productivity and you can see how productive it is.  I will come 
to the history of cotton in India because the other claim about the 
net export and import is untrue.  On 90 lakh acres of cultivated 
land the Maharashtra Government expects just 253 lakh quintals 
of cotton. 
This is yesterday‟s announcement by the Government of 
Maharashtra.  Two hundred and fifty three lakh quintal of cotton is 
produced on 90 lakh acres of land, which comes to about 2.81 
quintal per acre.  So, where is the productivity? That is the 
estimate.  They gave it six months ago.  They gave an estimate of 
410 lakh quintals and brought it down to 350 lakh quintals.  Now, 
last week they bring it down to 253 quintals.  I can assure you 
that they will bring it down to 220 lakh quintals.  In fact, yield per 
acre will be much less than 2.81 quintals.  
If, we take the national data of cotton and acreage, it is not 
productivity that has increased in the last two years but it is 

 
 
352 
 
acreage that has increased.  The tonnage and the quintalage have 
increased.  Nowhere, it is exceeding four quintals per acre and in 
return for input cost that are many times higher.   
Secondly, India imports of cotton went up dramatically in 
the last few years through end -users certificates.  The Americans 
are dumping cotton on us because they are subsidising their 
cotton with billions of dollars.  This is my question and appeal to 
the Committee.    If, Bt. cotton is so profitable, if Bt. cotton is 
very good then why must the United States of America give it four 
billion dollars of subsidy?   It is because they cannot beat our 
farmers and our prices.  Our industrialists and textile Mughals are 
using subsidised American cotton for several years in the last 
decade.  It comes through various end -users certificates from 
Singapore and from non -cotton growing countries also.  But 
please see the overall figures.  Why did the Government ban 
export of cotton from India in the last year?  It is because there 
was not enough American cotton and our textile mills wanted to 
keep the cotton cheap, so they wo uld not give our farmer a 
remunerative price.” 
8.91 Voicing similar concerns,  Chairman, National Biodiversity 
Authority   informed the Committee during his Oral Evidence on      21 
October, 2011: 
“I think this has been an issue which basically, personally 
for me has been a little bothering.  As you rightly said, the reason 
why there have been so much of investments in terms of 
developing this technology is to improve livelihoods, is to improve 
food security, and is to manage environment better.  But, again,  
as I said, in this background document, if you look at the 
investments that have gone in to development specially in 

 
 
353 
 
agricultural biotechnology, in terms of the focus on crops, so far 
majority of the investments have gone in to crops which have got 
a litt le more commercial viability than essentially focussing on 
food security.  The focus or the attempt that is made here is not 
to say that the investments actually should not be on the crops 
where they should be.  But it is just a kind of anxiety to share that 
the investment should also be on crops where the local food 
security needs to be secured.  Actually, if you look at the 
information available including in India, majority of the 
investments are going in to commercially viable crops where they 
have attra cted a lot of attention in terms of both research and 
development as well as in terms of transformation.  But we hardly 
have examples or experience to show that there is enough 
investment which is supplementing the investments we are having 
in terms of gen etic transformation, moving forward biotechnology 
to secure food in terms of other food crops which actually form 
the food basket of day to day nutrition and day to day food 
security of the local communities. So what I have said here is 
essentially to brin g the point that investments are happening but 
these investments are happening in a little imbalanced way.” 
8.92 In view of the divergent views obtaining on the Subject and the 
complexities involved, the Committee sought the considered view s of 
the National Biodiversity Authority on effects of genetically modified 
food crops on bio-diversity, bio-safety, human health and related 
aspects.  
8.93 NBA informed the Committee that e ver since the transgenic 
technology found its way into agricultural production systems, the 
debate about the need and safety of this technology exist. While the 
primary arguments for promoting agricultural biotechnology include 

 
 
354 
 
increasing food supply, redu cing losses, stabilizing the economic well -
being of farmers and reducing use of pesticides and herbicides, the 
arguments against genetic modification focus on the safety and stability 
of the modified crops, the impacts on biological diversity (biodiversity ) 
and the socio -economic impacts of deployment of such crops. While 
agriculture in India has been progressive in achieving both self -
sufficiency and self -reliance in food production, the proponents of 
genetic transformation opine that such technology must be developed 
and deployed as a pro -active measure to deal with food security and 
economic security of farming families for the future. From what 
emerged as a „Precautionary Approach‟ within the Agenda 21 
discussions prior to the UN Conference on Environmen t and 
Development (UNCED, Rio 1992) to dealing with environmental issues 
that is enshrined in the overall context of sustainable development, a 
stage has been reached where the „Precautionary Principles‟ are re -
validated and re -designed. The question now i s whether it is „evidence 
of absence‟ or „absence of evidence‟ with regard to safety in 
biotechnology that is driving policy making on some critical issues of 
science and technology in terms of development and deployment.  
8.94 Debates in India about trans genic technology are as old as 
biotechnology itself. While the use of transformation and biotechnology 
in medical and pharmaceutical sciences has attracted limited public 
attention, such technology in agriculture received considerable attention 
for many ye ars. Three fundamental reasons can be attributed to this. 
First, India is an agrarian economy. Second, the socio -economic impact 
of agriculture and related technologies are critical for securing 
livelihoods of the poor. Third, India is a vibrant democracy that provides 
space for all possible views on issues of national interest, including 
agriculture.  

 
 
355 
 
8.95 Tracing out the development of transgenic technology NBA 
informed the Committee that g enetic transformation technology, 
especially in agriculture, is seen as a great opportunity for increasing 
productivity both in terms of quality and quantity by many scientists. 
The quantitative aspect here is more to do with reducing crop losses 
than othe rs. The technology peaked at a time when the intellectual 
property regime also provided platforms for multinationals to invest in 
promoting and using the technology. But the history of transgenic crops 
tell one story – the investments are in crops that hav e better 
commercial markets than crops that secure nutrition and livelihoods. 
This is evidenced by the investments made around the world in crop 
biotechnology where it is just a handful of crops that received the luxury 
of caring and improvements while the  crops that secure the livelihoods 
and nutrition for poor farmers such as millets, greens and others were 
the losers. Such imbalance in focus and investments itself started the 
debate about the intentions of such technology as well as the transfer of 
such technologies in countries that have limited technical and policy 
over-sight to deal with biotechnology and its impacts. At the same time, 
biotechnology is a classic case of scientific anthropological research 
when it comes to limited efforts to gain public  confidence in many parts 
of the world.  
8.96 Clarifying fur ther in this regard , Chairman, National Biodiversity    
Authority    informed  the  Committee during his Oral  Evidence on 21 
October, 2011: 
“I think this has been an issue which basically, personal ly 
for me has been a little bothering.  As you rightly said, the reason 
why there have been so much of investments in terms of 
developing this technology is to improve livelihoods, is to improve 
food security, and is to manage environment better.  But, aga in, 

 
 
356 
 
as I said, in this background document, if you look at the 
investments that have gone in to development specially in 
agricultural biotechnology, in terms of the focus on crops, so far 
majority of the investments have gone in to crops which have got 
a l ittle more commercial viability than essentially focussing on 
food security.  The focus or the attempt that is made here is not 
to say that the investments actually should not be on the crops 
where they should be.  But it is just a kind of anxiety to share that 
the investment should also be on crops where the local food 
security needs to be secured.  Actually, if you look at the 
information available including in India, majority of the 
investments are going in to commercially viable crops where they 
have at tracted a lot of attention in terms of both research and 
development as well as in terms of transformation.  But we hardly 
have examples or experience to show that there is enough 
investment which is supplementing the investments we are having 
in terms of genetic transformation, moving forward biotechnology 
to secure food in terms of other food crops which actually form 
the food basket of day to day nutrition and day to day food 
security of the local communities. So what I have said here  is 
essentially to bring the point that investments are happening but 
these investments are happening in a little imbalanced way.” 
 8.97 India also entered the scene in developing and deploying 
transgenic crops (genetically modified crops) since early 1990s, with 
very good i ntentions and preparations to deal with ensuring the safety 
of such technology so that it does not harm the environment and 
human health. The policy and regulatory frameworks suggested, 
developed and implemented had all the good provisions to ensure public 
safety and ensure food sovereignty of the country.  The policy and 
regulatory frameworks were put in place using well thought -out plans. 

 
 
357 
 
However, the developments in technology and deployment over -took 
the speed of policy implementation which caused appre hensions in the 
minds of general public about the technology and the over -sight for its 
deployment.  
8.98 NBA also submitted that the environmental, ecological dimensions 
of impacts of genetically modified food crops are perhaps the single 
largest gap in our scientific knowledge base, globally. Such impact 
assessments are site specific as well as crop specific. There is an urgent 
need to establish relevant centres of excellence in India to generate 
authentic data and information on the short, medium and long term 
impacts of genetically modified crops on our environment and 
biodiversity. If environmental and health safe ty are prime concerns of 
developing and using genetically modified crop plants, then we have 
lagged behind in generating evidence about the positive and/or negative 
impacts of the technology on biodiversity.  
8.99 Elucidating on this point  further during his Oral Evidence on 21 
October, 2011, Chairman, National Biodiversity Authority stated: 
“But, over the years, the research progression has been that we 
were able to gather a lot of evidences in terms of the human 
impacts of genetically modified crops and quite a bit of research in 
terms of general environmental impacts of genetically modified 
crops. Even though research has commenced in terms of 
understanding the impacts of such crops on native biodiversity, 
the local varieties and the impact of such genet ically modified 
crops on the overall biodiversity, we are in a situation where the 
results of such research are still inconclusive. The reason why the 
results are inconclusive is based on a very simple fact that the 
interaction that happens in the field be tween a new variety or a 
new crop or a modified crop and the native crop, the local variety, 

 
 
358 
 
has to be studied over a longer period of time because normally 
the evaluation of these issues are to be carried over several 
years….. First, whenever a technology  like this is developed and 
whenever this technology is being tested to be commercialised or 
to be deployed for consumption, for commercial harvesting for 
use, we come into play in terms of looking at the safety of such 
modifications and its impact on biol ogical diversity. But as I 
mentioned before, unfortunately in India we still do not have any 
scientific protocol or institution to deal with it because the 
Biodiversity Authority has its own limitations in terms of human 
resources, mandates and our own ove rsight on some of these 
issues. So, certainly our guidance will be to develop such kind of 
protocols and safety mechanisms as soon as possible so that we 
can be a little bit more clear and authentic in terms of providing 
our guidance, advice and direction on the safety of many of these 
crops species.” 
8.100   The witness further added: 
“In terms of undertaking impact assessment, certainly it is 
an important prerequisite before we can rule out either the 
invasiveness of the species or the possibility of GM c rop to be 
contaminated into the local varieties and breeds.  So, certainly 
there is the issue of environmental impact assessment.  But 
specifically looking at the impacts of biological diversity it is 
essentially a prerequisite before we move forward in te rms of 
agreeing, adopting the GM technology.  That definitely is the case 
because in the absence of information, in the absence of clear 
data available, many of the apprehensions are going to be a bit of 
speculations only.  So, in that context, doing an en vironmental 
impact assessment is definitely essential and that is something 

 
 
359 
 
which is going to be a prerequisite for us to make an informed 
decision on the safety of GM crops.” 
8.101   Queried about the lack of protocols and a well established 
mechanism for the purpose, the witness stated: 
“Certainly as it is said both in the background note and in 
the answer to the question, no doubt there is a need for us to 
establish protocol systems and a form of regulatory oversight 
focussing on the issue of many of GMO s on ecology biodiversity 
and local varieties of germplasm.  But as of date, we do not have 
a formal mechanism that can be looked upon to provide a 
guidance or advice.  We do have protocol in terms of looking at 
food safety on certain elements of environme ntal safety in terms 
of human health, but certainly as of now we do not have an 
institution or an established protocol to look at the impacts on eco 
system and biodiversity.  
So, in that context or in that situation, we actually have two 
options.  One is t o immediately, as soon as possible, address this 
particular gap in terms of our research knowledge and 
understanding in establishing such kinds of institutions, facilities 
or protocols so that we can move forward the technology in terms 
of its development and deployment.  But in the absence of it, as it 
is being done now, we need to look at some of these issues on a 
case by case basis and certainly in some of these issues the 
experience is going to be as and when we move forward in terms 
of undertaking the research.   
So, specifically in answer to your question, one, as of now, 
we do not have the facilities and protocols to do it; we need to 
establish those.  But whether the GM technology should wait for 

 
 
360 
 
such protocol to be established before we move forward  on 
deployment, certainly it will be a prerequisite.” 
8.102     In addition, like other regulatory areas, the biotechnology 
regulatory issue has also suffered from differing institutional mandates 
and coordination challenges.  
8.103  About the i mpact of genetically modified food crops on 
biodiversity, NBA informed the Committee that the impact as well as 
benefits and risks of GM crops depend on the interactions between the 
ecological functions and natural history of the modified crop with the 
ecosystem wi thin which it is embedded. Proper understanding and 
assessment of evolutionary, ecological and agronomic factors of the 
modified crop in question must be considered when assessing GM crops 
and their impact on biodiversity and ecosystems. The assessment of GM 
crops should be broadened to include identification of possible 
alternative agricultural practices, suitable ecosystem management, 
impacts on biological diversity and related policies that include 
agriculture, science and technology, conservation, socio -economic 
components and intellectual property protection. Such an assessment 
would be facilitated by a clearer understanding of the costs of 
agriculture and the ecological services. The benefits of GM crops should 
be compared to those of other means of ag ricultural intensification such 
as organic farming, integrated pest management, and agricultural policy 
reform. A gradual and cautious approach to the use of GM crops that 
relies on a truly comprehensive risk assessment could allow people to 
reap substantial benefits from GM crops while mitigating their serious 
risks (Patteson et.al. 2000).  
8.104 According to NBA a  fair assessment of the relative merits of 
different agricultural practices mentioned above requires a systematic 
understanding of these alterna tives. However, there has been little 

 
 
361 
 
systematic research on the relative ecological and economic merits of 
alternate agricultural systems. One of the key reasons for this is the 
sectoral/differential approach to agricultural management systems, its 
safety, efficacy and impacts. Such challenges are also faced by 
institutions and systems as well around the world.  Research and 
assessments have shown us that introduction of new species in 
agricultural systems are not new. Combination and re -combination of 
new characters and traits into agricultural crops form the basis of 
present day production systems. Introduction of crops and fish species 
with good intentions of boosting productions have caused havoc in 
many countries where the exotic species have replaced native species. 
The economic loss of invasive alien species in this regard is considered 
to the tune of USD 3 trillion per year (GISP, 2009). The comparative 
advantage of new species, in general, has been their ability to adapt to 
new environments and grow  better out-competing the native varieties. 
Therefore careful environmental impact assessment of new species, 
including genetically modified species will be required to assess their 
impacts on ecosystems and biodiversity.  
8.105  As regards effect of g enetically modified food crops on human 
health, NBA stated  globally, the regulatory oversight on genetically 
modified organisms functions on two basic premise. Firstly, the 
transformed organism is effective and secondly it does not cause any 
adverse impact on the environment and/or human and/or animal 
health. Risk assessment and risk management form the core of decision 
making systems with regard to such safety assessments.  
8.106  The human health assessment of modified crops is based on the 
following questions – what will be the impact of inserted gene on human 
health?; will there be any negative impacts on human health due to the 
consumption of the new food crop in any form? and whether there will 

 
 
362 
 
be any un -intended impacts of products of inserted gene on oth er 
functional elements of human body, including other genes?  
8.107  Safety assessment protocols available today are fairly 
comprehensive and robust with regard to assessing the human health 
safety of transformed food crops. India has one of the most 
comprehensive safety assessment protocols in this regard. Apart from 
human health, the assessments conducted in India also focus attention 
on animal health. National protocols on the safety assessments include 
the Recombinant DNA Safety Guidelines (1990 & 1994), Revised 
Guidelines for Research in Transgenic Plants and Guidelines  for Toxicity 
and Allergenicity (1998), Guidelines and SOPs (standard operational 
procedures) for the Conduct of Confined Field Trials of Transgenic Plants 
(2008), Guidelines for the Safety Assessment of GM Foods (2008) and 
Protocols for Safety Assessment of Genetically Engineered Plants/Crops 
(2008).  
8.108  Dwelling upon the current scenario NBA quoted the following 
from the Inter Academy Report on Bt. Brinjal.  
 “Most countries growing transgenic crops or importing transgenic food 
or feed have a regulatory system in place. According to a recent report already, 
762 approvals for 155 Events in 24 crops have been provided world -wide. 
These approaches are also influenc ed by Substantial Equivalence, Principle of 
familiarity and Generally Regarded as Safe (GRAS) as working principles as well 
as by multilateral negotiations related to environmental and human health 
safety (e.g., Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, Internation al Plant Protection 
Convention, Codex Alimentarius) and trade (e.g., Agreement on the Application 
of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, Agreement on Technical Barriers of 
Trade, Agreement on Trade -related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights and 
United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity.  
The regulatory system in India involves multi -layered recommending 
and approval committees. The Institutional Bio -safety Committee (IBSC) and 

 
 
363 
 
Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation are concerned with laborat ory 
research, green house experiments, contained field trials and multi -location 
research trials as well as bio -safety. A Monitoring and Evaluation Committee 
(MEC) monitors multi -location research trials and large -scale field trials and 
makes an appropriat e recommendation to RCGM. The Genetic Engineering 
Appraisal Committee is responsible for approvals related to large -scale field 
trials, experimental seed production and commercial release by de -regulation. 
These committees work on behalf of the Ministry of  Science and Technology or 
Ministry of Environment and Forest or Ministry of Agriculture. The regulatory 
guidelines, first proposed in 1990, have been up -dated from time -to-time and 
recently in 2008, Guidelines and standard operating procedures for confine d 
field trials of regulated, genetically engineered plants, Protocols for food and 
feed safety assessment of GE crops, and Guidelines for the safety assessment 
of food derived from genetically engineered plants, were introduced. Further, in 
2009, an Event Based Approval Mechanism has been notified. Recently, a 
blueprint for Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India has been prepared 
and made public. Some of the concerns raised are being addressed in the 
proposed Bill”.  
8.109 However, a comprehensive asse ssment methodology or protocol 
related to evaluating the impacts of GM crops on biodiversity does not 
exist as of today. Given the need for long -term monitoring of effects of 
GM crops on biological diversity, it is important to note that none of the 
agencies or frameworks mentioned has been provided with a mandate 
to look into this aspect. Environmental Impact Assessments is the most 
time consuming of all risk assessments if it needs to be done 
appropriately. EIA is not a one -time assessment but should be a  
periodical assessment. Such assessments need to be done ex-ante and 
post-ante as well.  
8.110  NBA also suggested the following as a way forward to deal with 
safety issues related to genetically modified crops in India.  The table 
below outlines the key questions that need to be answered with rega rd 
to the risks and benefits of such modifications:  

 
 
364 
 
Types of Impact Benefit-Related 
Questions 
Risk-Related Questions 
Agricultural What are the alternatives 
to GM crop development 
and deployment that could 
contribute to greater 
agronomic, economic, 
social, and ecological 
benefits?  
 
Does the GM crop prevent 
some specific harm to 
humans or ecosystems, 
e.g., does it reduce 
excessive use  of 
pesticides?  
 
Does the modification 
increase the resilience of 
ecosystems in a manner 
that contributes to 
maintain crop production?  
 
 
What are the risk 
assessment and 
management strategies to 
ensure there is no adverse 
impact on agrobiodiversity?  
 
 
Has the crop in question  
been properly examined to 
determine whether genetic 
modifications to produce a 
desired trait have not also 
inadvertently produced 
possible risky changes? 
Ecological Does the modification help 
environmental and 
production system 
problems? 
 
Does the modification 
contribute to improving the 
means for preservation and 
conservation of 
agrobiodiversity? 
Does the modification 
threaten the local 
agrobiodiversity through 
introgression/out-crossing 
and other means? 
 
Does the modified 
crop/trait have the 
potential to increase the 
fitness of the organism 
outside of the managed 
environment? 
 
Will the modification create 
a situation where mono -
cropping exposes chances 
for break -down of 

 
 
365 
 
resistance? 
Social Who will benefit from the 
genetic modification and 
how will the benefits be 
shared? 
 
 
Does the modified crop 
increase the local and 
house-hold capacities of 
resource poor farmers to 
secure their food and 
incomes? 
 
Does the modification help 
increase the resilience of 
local people and farme rs in 
their dependence on 
external inputs for farming 
practices? 
 
Will the benefits of 
modification be shared with 
communities and farmers 
by the developers of the 
technology in a manner 
that builds the trust and 
confidence of the 
underlying premise for 
such an intervention? 
Is there a socio -economic 
risk in deploying the 
technology? 
 
 
Will be farmers become 
more dependent on 
promoters of the 
technology in terms of 
procuring the material and 
subsequent sale of 
seed/crop? 
 
 
Who will cover the risks of 
the technology in case of 
any adverse impacts? 
 
 
Is there proper institutional 
mechanisms and safety 
nets in place to deal with 
risk management with 
minimal impacts on 
farmers? 
 
8.111 There is an urgent need for concerned agencies working on 
biotechnology to support and establish appropriate protocols, methods 
and tools to assess the environmental and biodiversity -related impacts 
of genetic modification and such assessment procedures does not exist 
in a comprehensive manner, efforts should be made to establish  
programmes and support systems to generate scientific and credible 
data on ecological and environmental impacts of modified crops.  It is 

 
 
366 
 
high time such an approach is put in place.  In the absence of agreed 
methodologies and procedures to deal with socio -impacts on transgenic 
research with regard to crops in India (with the exception of impacts of 
Bt-cotton to some extent), we are running the risk of pronouncing 
judgements without must evidence.  Lastly, but importantly, we need to 
augment our public sect or agencies with more to generate data since 
the assessee cannot also double up as an assessor.  However, such 
support should come with accountability, frameworks for transparency 
and appropriate capacities to deal with economic, environmental, social 
and legal analyses. 
8.112  In conclusion, the NBA stated that the following four elements 
form the core of moving forward the genetically modified crop related 
debates in India: 
1. Establishment of dedicated centre(s) of excellence who will 
be mandated to develop and  undertake environmental and 
safety assessments of genetic ally modified crops, including 
assessments on impacts to local biodiversity with 
appropriate independence as well as accountability. 
2. Creation of independent, neutral and credible public -sector 
research facilities that will  undertake all safety related 
assessments related to genetic modifications. 
3. Establishing agreed methodologies and assessment 
procedures to undertake socio-economic  and 
communication analysis with regard to genetically modified 
crops and 
4. Ensuring appropriate networking of relevant agencies 
working on various aspects of biotechnology with suitable 

 
 
367 
 
re-mix of mandates and responsibilities supported by both 
flexible frameworks to operate and accountability to be 
responsible for decisions. 
8.113 The Committee note that Biotechnology has made salutory 
contributions to the agriculture sector for decades together.  
Plant breeding, tissue culture, cropping practices, etc. are all 
practiced worldwide by farmers.  Most of these biotechnologies 
are locally developed with local research support and have 
significantly contributed to the farmers well being.  The 
Committee further note that in last two decades or so 
transgenics in  agriculture crops is being propagated as the 
panacea for several ills besetting the agriculture sector.  Several 
Ministries/ Departments/Agencies in their submissions before 
the Committee have expounded the virtues of this comparatively 
new technology.  T he Industry has also been very supportive of 
transgenics in agricultural crops.  According to ICAR transgenic 
crops by nature are eco -friendly, sustainable and protective to 
environment and biodiversity; increase productivity, thereby, 
contributing to nati onal food, feed and fibre -security, lower 
production costs, conserve bio -diversity as a land saving 
technology capable of higher productivity on a per unit land 
basis; efficiently utilize inputs such as fertilizers and water; 
increasing stability of produc tion to lessen suffering during 

 
 
368 
 
famines due to abiotic and biotic stresses, improving economic 
and social benefits, ensuring safer human health through 
reduction of chemical inputs in agriculture alongwith safer soil, 
water and food.  The Department of Sci ence and Technology 
have also recommended recombinant DNA technology as one of 
the breakthrough technologies like nuclear energy, super 
computers, etc. and have stated that such breakthrough 
technologies have revolutionary potential to bring paradigm 
shifts in the existing systems.  Ministry of Environment and 
Forests, DBT, DHR/ICMR, GEAC have all supported 
transgenics/genetical engineering in agricultural crops , 
including the food crops more or less for the same reasons.  All 
of these Ministries/Department s/Agencies have also assured 
the Committee that the assessment and evaluation protocols 
and regulatory mechanism in place are adequately robust albeit, 
they will need to be upgraded as the technology acquires more 
finesse.  The Government have also cited t he success of 
transgenics crops cultivation in countries like USA, Argentina, 
China, etc. as a justification for introducing transgencis in India.  
Locally, the substantial increase in the cultivation of Bt. Cotton 
during the last decade or so has been sho wcased before the 
Committee as the measure of success.  It is being said that the 
area under Bt. cotton cultivation has gone up from 24000 ha. in 

 
 
369 
 
2001 to 8 million ha. plus now.  The Committee have also been 
informed by the Government that apart from produ ction, 
productivity has also increased due to cultivation of Bt. cotton.  
The drop in usage of pesticide due to Bt. cotton cultivation is 
also being quoted as a plus point of the transgenics technology.  
The Government have also informed the Committee that  Bt. 
cotton has not affected bio -diversity, is a sustainable crop and 
has improved the income of the farmers. 
8.114 About the safety concerns, which are aplenty, transgenics 
being a comparatively new technology, the Government have 
told the Committee that no approval is granted to the transgenic 
crops unless these has been a thorough analysis of its effects on 
the environment, bio -diversity, bio -safety, human health and 
health of livestock and animals. The Government have also 
informed the Committee that sa fety and efficacy is evaluated by 
science based experimentation and analysis on a case by case 
basis and, therefore, cannot be generalized as these are product 
specific.  Simultaneously, some of the 
Departments/Ministries/Agencies of the Government viz. 
DSIR/CSIR, Department of AYU SH, Department of Commerce, 
Department of Consumer Affairs, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution, National Biodiversity Authority  and Food Safety 

 
 
370 
 
Standards Authority of India  have expressed their serious 
concerns on various aspects relating to transgenics in 
agriculture crops.  These pertain to effect on bio -diversity, 
safety and efficacy of the technology, sustainability, chronic 
toxicity, cost benefits analysis , human and livestock health, 
environment impact assessment, saf ety of GM food and food 
products, exports of food grains, etc. 
8.115  The Committee also have had the benefit of well 
considered views of several other stakeholders from outside the 
Government.  These views based on science, field experience, 
first hand observation, evaluation and assessment totally go 
against the views of the Government and build a strong case 
against transgenics in agriculture crops more particularly in food 
crops. 
8.116  The Committee have critically analysed the evidence 
placed before  them both for and against the transgenic 
agriculture crops.  And pure science, within its restrictive realm, 
has not been the only benchmark of this analysis.  Some of the 
most compelling concerns factored in by the Committee include 
India being one of th e richest centres of bio -diversity, 
agriculture providing sustenance to almost 70% of rural 
populace, more than 70 % of India‟s farmers being small and 

 
 
371 
 
marginal farmers for whom agriculture is not a commercial 
venture but a way of life and a means of surviv al; food security 
and safety; manpower intensive nature of agriculture in India; 
the severe agrarian crisis afflicting the Country for years now; 
60 per cent of cultivated area still being rainfed; the 
irretrievability of transgenic crops once released in the 
environment; effects on environment, human health and 
livestock and animal health, to quote a few. 
8.117  The experience of the Country with Bt. cotton shows that 
with the advent of the transgenic variants and the initial hype 
surrounding it, the tradi tional cotton varieties have just been 
wiped out.  The Committee could very well sense the 
desperation of farmers of Vidharbha with whom they interacted 
during their Study Visit in March 2012, due to non -availability of 
traditional varieties of cotton.  In spite of their best efforts, they 
are now not able to shift from transgenic cotton cultivation to 
cultivation of traditional and more farmer friendly varieties due 
to total non-availability of seeds.  The Committee witnessed with 
their own eyes these serio us disadvantages caused by the 
practice of monoculture.  The National Bio -diversity Authority 
has further proved with concrete instances that transgenics 
affect bio -diversity in a big way.  Several other stakeholders 

 
 
372 
 
including eminent scientists, farmer‟s organization, etc. have 
also informed the Committee about the adverse and lasting 
impact of transgenic crops on bio -diversity.  The Government‟s 
assertions that our bio -diversity will be safely stored in gene 
banks may be a mus eologist‟s delight but do not  comfort the 
Committee a bit, as bio -diversity can only evolve further in 
nature and not in gene banks.  It has also to be borne in mind 
that India has a substantial stake in Nagoya Protocol on Access 
and Benefit sharing which will be affected adversely wi th any 
tinkering with our rich bio-diversity.   
8.118 Coming to the aspect of food security , the Committee are 
more than convinced that there are better options available for 
increasing food production and productivity than transgenics 
technology about who se safety, sustainability and a host of 
issues of concern, the last word is still long long away.  Most 
importantly, India today is not in the situation of desperation 
that was obtaining before the first Green Revolution .  Hence any 
short cuts or desperate  measures are not required to be 
experimented with.  Integrated Pest Management, organic 
farming, bio-fertilisers, molecular breeding, increasing irrigation 
potential, minimizing post harvest crop losses, efficient and leak 
proof distribution system, etc. in the opinion of the Committee, 

 
 
373 
 
are far more simpler, easy to do, sustainable, bio -diversity 
friendly options which also do not have any ill effects on human 
health and livestock and animal health. 
8.119 While summing -up, the Committee would also like to 
comment further on the regulatory mechanism although it has 
already been dealt with in a separate Chapter in this Report.  
The Internal Bio -Safety Committee functions in the promoter 
company and performs all basi c assessments and evaluations of 
a transgenic product being developed by that very company .  It  
also generates data on the basis of which RCGM and GEAC base 
their evaluation, as stated previously in this Report .  This 
mechanism does not inspire confidence for obvious reasons.  
The Department of Biot echnology which is mandated with the 
promotion of bio -technology in the Country, funds various 
transgenics research projects and activities both in public , as 
well as , private sector companies.  This funding is of a 
significant order.  The transgenic products created through 
these projects and activities are then assessed and evaluated by 
an adjunct of DBT viz. RCGM.  On top of it, the final approval for 
environmental/commercial release is granted by GEAC which is 
co-chaired by a DBT nominee.  With the Chairman of GEAC  as 
well as the Vice Chairman  being civil servant s, it is not very 

 
 
374 
 
difficult to appreciate the primacy of DBT nominated co -Chair in 
GEAC in the decision m aking process.  The Committee, inspite of 
DBT‟s protestations to the contrary, have strong reasons to 
agree with the opinion of several stakeholders that in a 
regulatory set-up where the promoter has an overwhelming say 
and presence in the regulatory mecha nism,  an element of 
subjectivity in assessment and evaluation is unavoidable.  The 
entire system, therefore, reflects a pro -DBT/pro-industry tilt 
which is best avoided.  Apart from this major shortcoming, the 
Committee‟s examination has revealed that the extant system is 
grossly inadequate and antiquated to face the typical challenges 
a population intensive, agrarian economy like India poses when 
the question of introduction of  such modern technologies in 
agriculture sector crops up.  
8.120 The Government  have been for some years now toying 
with the idea of a Biotechnology Regulatory Authority.  The 
Committee feel that regulating biotechnology is too small a 
focus in the vast canvas of biodiversity, environment, human 
and livestock health, etc. and a multitude of other such related 
issues.  They have, therefore, already recommended in a 
previous Chapter setting up of an all encompassing Bio -safety 
Authority through an act of Parliament, which is extensively 

 
 
375 
 
discussed and debated amongst all stakeholders, be fore 
acquiring shape of the law.  Unless and until such an authority is 
in place, any further movement in regard to transgenics in 
agriculture crops will obviously be fraught with unknown 
consequences.  While there is a lot of apprehension about the 
safety of the technology , what is more worrying is the absence 
of any liability clause or mechanism in the system which could 
compensate the poor farmers and the consumers in the 
eventuality of crop loss and harm to bio-diversity health, 
environment, etc.  With the various crop insurance schemes also 
not being of much help to a majority of farmers any prospective 
losses to the farmers due to cultivation of transgenic agricultural 
crops would have a crippling effects on their fortunes, reeling is 
they already are under severe agrarian crisis for years together 
now.   
8.121 In such a situation the various players in the system of 
governance, who have some role or the other in the regulation, 
management, handling, oversight, distribution, consumer 
affairs, human health, livestock health, etc. have to shoulder the 
responsibility of ensuring that any potential harm or damages to 
the system are eliminated/controlled.  However, as has been 
very clearly brought out in a previous Chapter most of the 

 
 
376 
 
Ministries, Departments and other agencies of the Government 
who have to shoulder major responsibility , when the transgenic 
agricultural crops come into the system, are not at all ready to 
optimally perform their designated roles.  In fact some of the 
Ministries/Departments have been revved into action only after 
the Committee took this subject for examination and interacted 
with them.  FSSAI, which has to play the most important role in 
the scheme of things alongwith NBA is still grappling with 
teething troubles and is not in a p osition to deliver atleast for 
coming years.  NBA and PPV & FRA, as has been brought out 
previously in the Report , are virtually non -existent.  In such a 
scenario how the Government intends to deal with the effects of 
cultivation of transgenic crops outside containment defies logic.   
8.122  On another plane, long term environment impact 
assessment and chronic toxicology studies of the effects of 
transgenic agriculture crops ha ve not even been attempted till 
now.  The Government are yet to take a final call  on labeling.  
There is a complete lack of post market surveillance, as has 
been pointed out in one particular example of lacs of tons of Bt. 
cotton seed oil having gone into the food chain during last ten 
years without anybody in the Government being awar e or 
concerned about it.   

 
 
377 
 
8.123 A major issue that has escaped the attention of the 
Government during all these years is question of ethics.   In the 
extant social -cultural milieu, a serious thought requires to be 
given to the ethical dimensions of transg enics in agricultural 
crops.  Even a miniscule degree of insensitivity on this matter 
can lead to avoidable discontent which apart from causing 
societal tensions would also have grave socio economic 
repercussions.  
8.124  During their extensive interaction s with farmers in the 
course of their Study Visits, the Committee have found there 
have been no significant socio -economic benefits to the farmers 
because of introduction of Bt. cotton.  On the contrary, being a 
capital intensive agriculture practice,  inv estments of the 
farmers have increased manifolds thus, exposing them to far 
greater risks due to massive indebt edness, which a vast 
majority of them can ill afford.  Resultantly, after the euphoria of 
a few initial years, Bt. cotton cultivation has only added to the 
miseries of the small and marginal farmers who constitute more 
than 70% of the tillers in India. 
8.125 The Rashtrapati in his maiden address in the Central Hall 
of Parliament on 25 July, 2012 observed „trickle down theory do 
not address the legitimate aspirations of the poor.  We must lift 

 
 
378 
 
those at the bottom so that poverty is erased from the dictionary 
of India‟.  In case of transgenics in agriculture crops in India, 
the experience of last decade has conclusiv ely shown that while 
it has extensively benefitted the industry , as far as the lot of 
poor farmers is concerned , even the trickle down is not visible.  
The Committee, therefore, unanimously recommend that till all 
the concerns voiced in this Report are ful ly addressed and 
decisive action is taken by the Government with utmost 
promptitude, to put in place all regulatory, monitoring, 
oversight, surveillance and other structures, further research 
and development on transgenics in agricultural crops should 
only be done in strict containment and field trials under any garb 
should be discontinued forthwith.                       
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        BASUDEB ACHARIA   
7 August, 2012                  Chairman, 
16 Shravana, 1934 (Saka)                Committee on Agriculture 

APPENDIX-I 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 4 March, 2010 from 1505 hours to 
1640 hours in Committee Room „C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
6. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
9. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
10. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
11. Shri Prabodh Panda 
12. Shri Premdas 
13. Shri Uday Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
15. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
17. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
18. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
          
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 
 
 

MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT  OF AGRICULTURE AND 
CO-OPERATION) 
 
1. Shri P.K. Basu          Secretary (A&C) 
 
2. Shri N.K. Das          Special Secretary 
 
3. Shri A.S. Lamba           Additional Secretary   & Financial 
Adviser 
 
4. Shri Ashish Bahuguna           Additional Secretary 
 
5. Shri G.C. Pati           Additional Secretary 
 
6. Mrs. Upma Chawdhry           Joint Secretary 
 
7. Shri Mukesh Khullar           Joint Secretary 
 
 
INDIAN COUNCIL FOR AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 
 
 Dr. Swapan K. Datta DDG (CS), ICAR 
 
 
2.  At the outset the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Co -
operation) and other Ministries/Departments/Agencies to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  He also felicitated the newly appointed Secretary of the Department 
of Agriculture and Co-operation on behalf of the Commit tee and on his own behalf.  
The Hon‟ble Chairman then gave a brief background on the selection of the Subject 
„Cultivation of Genetically Modified Crops – Prospects and Effects‟ by the 
Committee for examination and asked the representatives of the Departme nt to 
brief the Committee on the subject.  Thereafter, the witnesses   after introducing 
themselves, briefed the Committee.  After the briefing, they responded to the 
queries of the members on various aspects of the subject. 
  
3.  The Chairman then thanked  the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for briefing the Committee on the subject. He also directed 
them to send at the earliest information on points which had remained unclarified 
during the Sitting or on which information was not re adily available, to the 
Secretariat of the Committee. 
(The witnesses then withdrew). 
 
 
 
 

4. Before the Sitting adjourned , the Committee decided to seek a list of 
stakeholders related to the subject from the Department.  
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.  
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
/---------------------/ 
  

APPENDIX-II 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the Fifteenth July, 2010 from 1500 hours to 
1745 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
5. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Premdas 
8. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
9. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
 10.     Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
12. Shri A. Elvarasan 
13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan  
14. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
15. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
16. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
17. Smt. B. Jayashree 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar       -      Additional Secretary  
2. Shri P.C. Koul -      Additional Director 
 
   WITNESS 
 
 1. Prof. Deepak Pental - Vice-Chancellor, Delhi  
  University, Delhi 
 2. Dr. S. Nagarajan - Chairperson, Protection 
of   Plant Varieties & 
Farmers   Right Authority, New 
Delhi 
 3. Prof. V.S. Chauhan - Director, International  

   Centre   for 
Genetic Engineering &   Biotechnology, New 
Delhi 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting. Thereafter, 
he directed that the witness be ushered in. 
(At around 1505 hours Prof. Deepak Pental was ushered in) 
 
3. The witness made an audio -visual presentation before the Committee.  He also 
briefed the Committee about the effects of Cultivation of Genetically Modified Crops on 
human health, livestock health, environment, genetics, molecular biology, etc..  The 
Members sought several clarifications on issues pertaining to the Subject to which the 
witness responded in detail.  The Chairman thanked the witness for appearing before 
the Committee.  
The witness then withdrew. 
 
(At around 1625 hours Dr. S. Nagarajan was ushered in) 
 
 
4.  The witness made an audio-visual presentation before the Committee.  He also 
apprised the Committee about the likely impact of cultivation of genetically modified 
food crops in India  on Indian agriculture .  The members put several querries on  the 
Subject to which the witness responded in detail.  The Chairman then thanked the 
witness for deposing before the Committee.  
 
The witness then withdrew. 
 
(At around 1710 hours Prof. V.S. Chauhan was ushered in) 
 
 
5. The witness apprised the Committee about the developments taking place in 
the field of Genetically Modified Food crops and their ramifications on the Indian 
agriculture. The members raised several questions pertaining to the Subject to which 
the witness an swered in detail. The Chairman thanked the witness for appearing 
before the Committee.  
 
The witness then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIX-III 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the Twenty-eighth September, 2010 from 1500 hours to 
1755 hours in Committee Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Shri Jayant Choudhary 
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
8. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
9. Shri Prabodh Panda 
10. Shri Premdas 
11. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
12. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
13. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
14. Shri Narendra Budania 
15. Shri A. Elavarasan 
16. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
17. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan  
18. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
19. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
20. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy    -      Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul -      Additional Director 
 
   WITNESSES 
 1. Dr. C.R. Bhatia   - Former Secretary, 
    Department of Biotechnology, 
Government of India 
  2. Prof. A.K. Tyagi   -       Director, 
              National Institute of Plant  
              Genome Research, New Delhi 
  3. Dr. Rakesh Tuli -         Director, 
              National Agri-Food  
              Biotechnology Institute, Mohali,  
              Punjab 
  4.  Shri Devinder Sharma -     Forum for Biotechnology & Food 
              Security, Noida 
 

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, he directed that the witness may be ushered in.  
(At around 1505 hours Dr. C.R. Bhatia was ushered in) 
3. The witness made an audio-visual presentation on the Subject “Cultivation of Genetically 
Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects” before the Committee. The Members sought 
clarifications on the several issues pertaining to the Subject to which the witness responded in 
detail.  The Chairman thanked the witness for appearing before the Committee.  
The witness then withdrew. 
(At around 1610 hours Prof.. A.K. Tyagi was ushered in) 
4. The witness made a presentation before the Committee based on the Memoranda 
already submitted by him to the Committee on the Subject.  He also explained in detailed the 
various implications of Genetically Modified Food Crops.  The members querried the witness in 
regard to several aspects of the Subject.  The witness clarified the same. The Chairman thanke d 
the witness for appearing before the Committee and directed him to submit replies to the points 
on which information could not be readily provided, to the Secretariat by 5 October, 2010.   
The witness then withdrew. 
(At around 1700 hours Dr. Rakesh Tuli was ushered in) 
5. The witness made an audio -visual presentation before the Committee and also briefed 
them at length on the Memoranda which he had submitted previously.  The members sought 
certain clarifications from the witness on the Subject.  The Commi ttee also decided that in view 
of the vast ramifications of the Subject, the witness be called to depose before them again.  The 
Chairman thanked the witness for deposing before the Committee and also directed him to 
appear before the Committee for further Oral Evidence on 11 October, 2010.   
The witness then withdrew. 
(At around 1740 hours Shri Devinder Sharma was ushered in) 
 
6. The witness briefly presented the views of the Forum for Biotechnology & Food Security 
on the Subject before the Committee.  Sin ce the oral evidence of the witness remained 
inconclusive, the Committee decided that the witness be asked to tender further oral evidence 
before them in future.  The Chairman thanked the witness for appearing before the Committee 
and also directed him to appear before the Committee for further Oral Evidence on 11 October, 
2010.  
The witness then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.  
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on 11 October, 2010. 

APPENDIX-IV 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
The Committee sat on Monday, the Eleventh October, 2010 from 1430 
hours to 1800 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia  –   Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Premdas 
8. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
9. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
11. Shri Narendra Budania 
12. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
13. Shri A. Elavarasan 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan  
15. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
16. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
17. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
   1. Shri S. Bal Shekar - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata - Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
1. Dr. Ajay Parida - Executive Director, 
       M S Swaminathan  
       Research Foundation, 
Chennai 
2. Dr. Rakesh Tuli - Director, 
       National Agri-Food  
       Biotechnology Institute, 
       Mohali, Punjab 

3. Shri Devinder Sharma  - Forum for Biotechnology &  
       Food Security, Noida 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, he directed that the witness may be ushered in. 
(At around 1435 hours Dr. Ajay Parida was ushered in) 
3. The witness made an audio -visual presentation on the Subject “Cultivation of 
Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects” before the Committee. The 
Members sought clarifications on the several issues per taining to the Subject to which 
the witness responded in detail.  The Chairman thanked the witness for appearing 
before the Committee. 
The witness then withdrew. 
(At around 1550 hours Dr. Rakesh Tuli was ushered in) 
4. The witness had appeared before the C ommittee during their previous Sitting 
on 28 September, 2010.  However, his evidence remained inconclusive on the said 
day.  The witness, therefore, in the first instance completed the audio -visual 
presentation on the subject, which could not be completed during the previous Sitting 
of the committee.  He, thereafter, briefed the Committee at length on the Subject.  
The Members queried the witness in regard to several aspects of the Subject which 
were duly clarified by the witness. The Chairman thanked the w itness for appearing 
before the Committee.   
The witness then withdrew. 
(At around 1710 hours Shri Devinder Sharma was ushered in) 
5. The oral evidence of the witness had also remained inconclusive during the 
Sitting of the Committee on 28 September, 2010. The witness made an audio-visual 
presentation on the Subject.  He also briefly presented the views of the Forum for 
Biotechnology & Food Security before the Committee. The Chairman thanked the 
witness for deposing before the Committee.   
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on 19 October, 2010. 
  

APPENDIX-V 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
    The Committee sat on Tuesday, the Nineteenth October, 2010 from 1030 hours to 
1725 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Shri Jayant Choudhary 
4. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
5. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Premdas 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
11. Shri Narendra Budania 
12. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
13. Shri A. Elavarasan 
14. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
15. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
16. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
17. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy     -      Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul -      Additional Director 
 
   WITNESSES 
 
1. Dr. R.S. Paroda   - Chairman, Trust for  
Advancement of 
Agricultural Sciences and 
Former DG, ICAR 
 
2. (i)  Shri Sekhar Natarajan   - Chairman, Monsanto India 
Ltd. 
 (ii) Dr. Gyanendra Shukla   - Director, Corporate Affairs  
 (iii) Dr. Santanu Dasgupta  - Scientific Affairs Lead 
3.    Shri S. Ramchandra Pillai - President, All India Kisan 
Sabha (Ashoka Road), 
New Delhi 

 
 
4. Shri K. Nageswara Rao  - Vice-President, All 
India Kisan Sabha (Ajoy Bhavan), New Delhi 
 
5.  (i) Shri Samit Aich - Executive Director, 
Greenpeace 
   India Society, 
Bengaluru 
 
 (ii) Shri Rajesh Krishnan - Campaign Manager, 
Sustainable 
Agriculture 
 
   (iii) Smt. Divya Raghunandan - Campaigns Director,        
Greenpeace India 
 
6. Prof. N.K. Ganguly - Former DG, ICMR and 
Distinguished Biotech 
Scientist, 
Transnational Health 
Science and 
Technology Institute  
 
7. Ms. Sunita Narain - Director, Centre for 
Science and 
Environment, New 
Delhi  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, he directed that the witness might be ushered in.  
 
(At around 1030 hours Dr. R.S. Paroda was ushered in) 
 
3. The witness made an audio -visual presentation on the Subject “Cultivation of 
Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects” before the Committee. The 
Members sought clarifications on the various issues pertaining to the Subject to which 
the witne ss responded in detail.  The Chairman thanked the witness for appearing 
before the Committee.  
The witness then withdrew. 
 
(At around 1135 hours Shri Sekhar Natarajan and his colleagues were ushered in) 
 
4. The witness made an audio -visual presentation before the Committee based on 
the Memoranda already submitted by him to the Committee on the Subject.  He 
alongwith his colleagues also explained in detail the various implications of Genetically 
Modified Food Crops and the activities of Monsanto in this field.  The members 
querried the witnesses in regard to several aspects of the Subject.  The witnesses 
clarified the same. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee.  
 

The witnesses then withdrew. 
(At around 1235 hours Shri Ramchandra Pillai was ushered in) 
 
5. The witness presented the views of his Organization before the Committee 
based on the Memoranda  submitted  earlier.  The  members  sought certain  
clarifications  from  the wit ness on the Subject which were replied to. The Chairman 
thanked the witness for appearing before the Committee. 
 
The witness then withdrew. 
(At around 1310 hours Shri K. Nageswara Rao was ushered in) 
 
6. The witness presented the views of his Organization before the Committee.  He 
also  replied to the various queries raised by the members. The Chairman thanked the 
witness for appearing before the Committee.   
 
The witness then withdrew. 
(The Committee adjourned for lunch at 1350 hours to meet again at 1500 hours) 
(At around 1500 hours Shri Samit Aich and his colleagues were ushered in) 
 
 
7. The witness briefed the Committee about the views of Greenpeace India 
Society on the Subject.  Thereafter, with th e permission of the Chairman, two of his 
colleagues made an audio -visual presentation before the Committee.  The members 
asked several queries related to the Subject to which the witnesses responded to in 
detail. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
(At around 1615 hours Prof. N.K. Ganguly was ushered in) 
 
8. The witness spoke at length about the various aspects of the Subject 
concerning human health.  He also presented his views on the variou s aspects 
requiring systemic improvement.  The members asked several questions on the 
Subject and related matters, to which the witness responded.  The Chairman directed 
the witness to submit the document on ethics and equity referred to during the 
evidence.  The Chairman thereafter thanked the witness.   
The witness then withdrew. 
(At around 1650  hours Ms. Sunita Narain was ushered in) 
 
9. The witness made a presentation before the Committee based on the 
Memorandum and other documents submitted by her to the Committee previously.  
She also explained in detail the practices obtaining elsewhere in the filed of transgenic 
crops and genetically modified food crops.  She also dwelt upon the various 
implications of the genetically modified food crops on human he alth, rural livelihood, 
economy, exports, etc.  The members raised several queries during her presentation, 
which were responded to by the witness.  The Chairman then thanked the witness.   

 
The witness then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
  
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on 28 October, 2010.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX-VI 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
        The Committee sat on Thursday, the Twenty -Eighth October, 2010 from 1100 
hours to 1355 hours before adjourning for lunch and from 1430 hours to 1820 hours in 
Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Jayant Choudhary 
4. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
7. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
8. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
9. Shri Prabodh Panda 
10. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
11. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
12. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
13. Shri Uday Singh 
14. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
15. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
17. Shri Narendra Budania 
18. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
20. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
21. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
22. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
23. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy     -      Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul -      Additional Director 
 
   WITNESSES 
 
1. Dr. Vandana Shiva - Navdanya, New 
Delhi  
2. Dr. Sagari R. Ramdas - Anthra, Secundrabad, 
A.P. 

3. Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti - Kheti Virasat 
Mission, JAITU, 
Faridkot 
 
4. Prof. G. Padmanabhan - Department of 
Biochemistry, Indian 
Institute of Science, 
Bengaluru 
5. Ms. Aruna Rodrigues - Sunray Harvesters, 
Mhow 
6. Shri Prashant Bhushan - Sr. Advocate, 
   Supreme Court of 
India 
   
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, he directed that the witness might be ushered in.  
 
(At around 1105 hours Dr. Vandana Shiva was ushered in) 
 
3. The witness made a presentation before the Committee based on the 
Memoranda already submitted by her.  She also elaborated upon the ramifications of 
GM crops on environment, bio -diversity, human health, livelihoods, etc..  The 
Members sought clarifications on several issues pertaining to the Subject to which the 
witness responded in detail.  The Chairman thanked the witness for appearing before 
the Committee.  
 
The witness then withdrew. 
(At around 1240 hours Dr. Sagari R. Ramdas was ushered in) 
 
4. The witness made an audio-visual presentation before the Committee. She also 
explained in detail the various implications of Genetically Modified Food Crops with 
particular emphasis on veterinary science, human health, liability aspect, labelling, 
livelihoods, etc.. The members querried the witness in regard to several aspects of the 
Subject.  The witness clarified the same. The Chairman thanked the witness for 
appearing before the Committee.  
The witness then withdrew. 
(The Committee adjourned for lunch at 1355 hours to meet again at 1430 hours) 
(At around 1430 hours Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti was ushered in) 
 
5. At the outset the witness sought the permission of Chairman to circulate 
additional papers on Kisan Swaraj Yatra.  Thereafter, she put forth her views on the 
Subject with the help of an audio -visual presentation. The members sought several 
clarifications f rom the witness on the Subject which she clarified in detail.   The 
Chairman thanked the witness for deposing before the Committee  
 
The witness then withdrew. 
(At around 1550 hours Prof. G. Padmanabhan was ushered in) 
 
6. The witness made an audio -visual presentation before the Committee. The 
Chairman asked the witness to also explain to the Committee effects of Genetically 

Modified Food Crops on human health.  The witness briefed the Committee on the pros 
and cons of cultivation of  
 
 
GM food crops.  The members sought several clarifications pertaining to the various 
aspects of the Subject to which he responded.   The Chairman thanked the witness for 
appearing before the Committee.  
 
The witness then withdrew. 
(At around 1650  hours Ms. Aruna Rodrigues was ushered in) 
 
7. The witness presented her views on the Subject before the Committee based 
on the Memoranda already submitted by her previously. The Chairman put forth some 
questions to the witness which she responded to.  The Chairman thanked the witness 
for appearing before the Committee.   
The witness then withdrew. 
(At around 1740 hours Shri Prashant Bhushan was ushered in) 
 
8. The witness made a brief presentation before the Committee based on the 
Memoranda already submitted by him. He also explained in detail the various legal 
implications of Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops, the international 
practices, their imp act on health of both human beings and livestock, conflict of 
interest between regulatory bodies and commercial entities, etc. The members 
querried the witness in regard to several aspects of the Subject.  The witness clarified 
the same. The Chairman thanked the witness for appearing before the Committee.  
 
The witness then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
   
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on 10 November, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX-VII 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the Tenth November, 2010 from 
1500 hours to 1650 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite 
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
7. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda 
9. Shri Premdas 
10. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
12. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
13. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
15. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
16. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
17. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy    -    Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul -    Additional Director 
 
   WITNESS 
 

1. Shri M. Prabhakar Rao - Chairman & Managing Director, 
Nuziveedu Seeds Pvt. Ltd., 
Hyderabad  
   
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, he informed the members that Shri Shams her Singh 
Surjewala, Chairman of Kisan and Khet Mazdoor Congress, who was scheduled to 
tender Oral Evidence before the Committee on the Subject „Cultivation of Genetically 
Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects‟ would not be able to do so due to 
indisposition.   A  documentary  film titled  „Poison on the Platter‟  directed  by        
Shri Mahesh Bhatt on the effects of Genetically Modified Food Crops and Food on the 
soil, human health, livestock health etc.  was then screened for the Committee.   
 
(At around 1535 hours Shri M. Prabhakar Rao was ushered in) 
 
3. The witness made a presentation before the Committee based on the 
Memoranda already submitted by him.  He also elaborated upon the ramifications of 
GM crops on environment, bio -diversity, human health, livelihoods, etc.. and also on 
the Seeds Industry.  Th e Members sought clarifications on several issues pertaining to 
the Subject to which the witness responded in detail.  The Chairman thanked the 
witness for appearing before the Committee.  
 
The witness then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
  
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on 11 November, 2010. 
  

APPENDIX-VIII 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the Eleventh November, 2010 
from 1515 hours to 1625 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
4. Shri Prabodh Panda 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
5. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
6. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
7. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
8. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
9. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
10. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy    -    Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul -    Additional Director 
 

 
WITNESS 
 
1. Dr. Sujatha Byravan - Former Director, 
 Council for Responsible Genetics, USA and Sr. Fellow, Centre for 
Development Finance, Institute for Financial Management and Research, Chennai 
   
2. At the outset, the Chairman wel comed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, he directed that the witness might be ushered in. 
  
(At around 1515 hours Dr. Sujatha Byravan  was ushered in) 
 
3. The witness made an audio -visual presentation before the Committee.  She 
also briefed the Committee about the effects of Cultivation of Genetically Modified 
Crops on human health, livestock health, environment, genetics, molecular biology, 
etc..  The Membe rs sought several clarifications on issues pertaining to the Subject to 
which the witness responded in detail.  The Chairman thanked the witness for 
appearing before the Committee.  
The witness then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on 15 November, 2010  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX-IX 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the Fifteenth November, 2010 from 
1520 hours to 1745 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
9. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
10. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy     -    Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  -    Additional Director 
 

WITNESS 
 
1. Dr. G.V. Ramanjaneyulu - Director, 
    Centre for Sustainable 
Agriculture, 
Hyderabad 
 
2. Dr. G.P.I. Singh  - Director – Principal, 
    Adesh Institute of 
Medical Sciences & 
Research, Bhathinda 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, he directed that the witness might be ushered in. 
(At around 1520 hours Dr. G.V. Ramanjaneyulu was ushered in) 
3. The witness made an audio -visual presentation before the Commit tee.  He also 
briefed the Committee about the effects of Cultivation of Genetically Modified Crops on 
health, environment, etc..  He also suggested certain plausible solutions to the threat 
to Food  Security  of  the  Country.  The  Members  queried  the  witness  on  various 
issues pertaining to the Subject to which he responded in detail.  The Chairman 
thanked the witness for appearing before the Committee.  
The witness then withdrew. 
(At around 1640  hours Dr. G.P.I. Singh was ushered in) 
4. The witness made an elaborate audio -visual presentation before the Committee 
which mainly focussed on the effects of Genetically Modified Food Crops on human 
health, livestock health, genetics, molecular biology, etc.  The Members sought several 
clarifications on issues pertaining to the Subject to which the witness responded in 
detail.  The Chairman thanked the witness for appearing before the Committee.  
The witness then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

APPENDIX-X 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 22 nd December, 2010 from 1110 
hours to 1350 hours and 1515 hours to 1640 hours in Committee Room ‟C‟, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K. C. Singh Baba 
4. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
6. Smt Ashwamedh Devi 
7. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda 
9. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
10. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
11. Shri Uday Singh 
12. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
14. Shri Narendra Budania 
15. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
16. Shri A. Elavarasan 
17. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
18. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
19. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
20. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
21. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P. V. L. N. Murthy - Director 

2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
 1. Federation of Indian Chambers 
  of Commerce & Industry 
 
       (i) Shri Sachid Madan  - Co-Chairman, FICCI Agriculture 
Committee & Chief Operating 
Officer, Technico Pvt. Ltd. 
 
      (ii)  Dr. S. Bhaskar Reddy - Head – Agriculture FICCI 
 
 2. Prof. R. N. Basu  - Former Vice Chancellor, 
Calcutta University , Kolkata and 
former Chairman, West Bengal 
State Agriculture Commission 
 
3. Prof. T. K. Bose  - Former Dean Faculty of  
Agriculture, Director (Research) 
Bidhan Chandra Krishi Vishwa 
Vidyalaya, Member State 
Agriculture Commission. 
 
 4. Dr. P. M. Bhargava  - Former Director, Centre for 
       Cellular and Molecular Biology, 
       Hyderabad 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting 
of the Committee. Thereafter, he directed that the witness be ushered 
in.  
(At around 1115 hours the representatives of FICCI were ushered in) 
 
3. The witness es briefed the Committee about the effects of 
Cultivation of Genetically Modified Crops on environment, trade and 
industry and exports .  They also briefed the Committee about the 
safeguards in place in other countries with respect to cultivation of 

Genetically Modif ied Crops. The Members sought several clarifications 
on issues pertaining to the subject to which the witness es responded in 
detail. The Chairman thanked the witness es for appearing before the 
Committee.  
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
(At around 1230 hours Prof. R. N. Basu and Prof. T.K. Bose alongwith their 
two associates were ushered in) 
 
4. The witnesses informed the Committee about  their views on the Subject 
„Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food  Crops – Prospects and Effects‟. They 
also made an aud io-visual presentation on the subject before the Committee. 
Thereafter, they also replied to the queries raised by the Chairman and Members 
of the Committee on the subject. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for 
appearing before the Committee. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
(At around 1350 hours the Committee adjourned for Lunch. 
The Sitting resumed at 1515 hours) 
 
5. The Chairman directed that the next witness be ushered in.  
(At around 1515 hours Dr. P. M. Bhargava was ushered in) 
6. The witness deposed before the Committee in detail about the pros and 
cons of cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops. He also responded to the 
queries raised by the Members. T he Chairman thanked the witness for appearing 
before the Committee. 
The witness then withdrew. 
 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

APPENDIX-XI 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 18 th  January, 2011 from 1500 hours to 
1555 hours in Committee Room `B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi     -In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
4. Smt Shruti Choudhry 
5. Smt Ashwamedh Devi 
6. Smt Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
8. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
9. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
10. Shri Prabodh Panda 
11. Shri Premdas 
12. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
13. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
14. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
15. Shri Uday Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Shri Narendra Budania 
17. Shri A. Elavarasan 
18. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
19. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
20. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
21. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
22. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 

 
Shri P. V. L. N. Murthy  - Director 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH)/ICMR 
 
1. Dr. V. M. Katoch   Secretary and Director General, 
ICMR 
2. Shri G. S. Toteja   Scientist `F‟, ICMR 
 
In the absence of the Chairman , the Committee chose Shri Satyavrat 
Chaturvedi, M.P.  (Rajya Sab ha) to act as Chairman for the s itting under Rule 
258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare (Department of Health Research) to the sitting and 
requested them to introduce themselves. After introduction, the representative of 
the Department of Health Resea rch briefed the Committee on the effects of 
“Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops” on human and livestock health, 
genetics, molecular biology and other related aspects of the subject. 
 
3. The members sought several clarifications on  the potential health hazards 
to humans resulting from consumption of Genetically Modified Food Crops, the 
regulatory controls required, adequate/sufficient safety aspects to be considered 
before the cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops are intro duced in the 
Country etc.  to which the witness  responded. 

4. Before the sitting concluded, the Chairman thanked the witnesses for  
appearing before the Committee and sharing their views on the subject and 
directed them to send information on points on whi ch information could not be 
readily provided by them during the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat by 24 
January, 2011. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX-XII 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10th February, 2011 from 1500 hours 
to 1700 hours in Committee Room ‟B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
5. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Premdas 
8. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
9. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
10. Shri Uday Singh 
11. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
13. Shri A. Elavarasan 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
15. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
16. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
17. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
18. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma - Joint ecretary 
2. Shri P. V. L. N. Murthy  - Director 

3. Shri P.C. Koul   - Additional 
Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF 
BHARATIYA KISAN SANGH 
 
1. Shri Aniruddha Ramchandra Murkute, President 
2. Shri Dinesh Dattatrey Kulkarni, Secretary 
3 Shri Mohini Mohan, Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH) 
 
1.     Sh. Anil Kumar    Secretary  
2.     Dr. D.D. Sharma,    Joint Secretary  
3. Dr. Rakesh Sarwal   Joint Secretary 
4. Sh. Bala Prasad   Chief Executive Officer,  
National Medicinal Plants Board 
5. Dr. S.K. Sharma   Adviser (Ayurveda) 
6. Dr. Ramesh Babu   Director General, CCRAS 
7. Dr. Shakir Jamil   Director General, CCRUM 
8. Dr. C. Nayak    Director General, CCRH 
9. Dr. Sesi Keran   Director NIN 
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 

1. Ms. Ranjini Warrier   Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the 
Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, he directed that the witness be 
ushered in. 
  
(At around 1505 hrs the representatives of Bharatiya Kisan Sangh were 
ushered in) 
3. The Chairman welcomed the  representatives of Bharatiya Kisan 
Sangh who after introducing themselves briefed  the Committee about 
the effects of Cultivation of Genetically Modified Crops on the prospects 
of small, medium and landless farmers, the traditional agriculture 
practises, economy, seed and food security of the Country, etc.  The 
Members sought several clarifications on issues pertaining to the 
Subject to which the witness es responded i n detail.  The Chairman 
thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee.  
 
4. The witnesses, thereafter, handed over the updated Memorandum 
of their Organisation to the Chairman, who directed that it be taken on 
record. 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
(At around 1615 hrs the representatives of Department of AYUSH were 
ushered in) 
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare (Department of AYUSH).  The witnesses introduced 
themselves and then informed the Committee about  their views on the 
Subject „Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and 
Effects‟  through an audio -visual presentation before the Committee. 

Thereafter, they replied to the queries raised by the Chairman and 
Members of the Committee on the subject. The Chairman thanked the 
witnesses for appearing before the Committee. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
/---------------------/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX-XIII 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 14 March, 2011 from 1500 
hours to 1715 hours in Committee Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Uday Singh 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
10. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
 
Secretariat 
 
 1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma  -    Joint Secretary 

 2. Shri P.C. Koul -    Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
 
1. Indian National Science Academy, New Delhi 
(i) Dr. Krishan Lal   - President, New Delhi 
(ii) Prof. M. Vijayan    - Past President, INSA 
 (iii) Prof. Akhilesh K. Tyagi    - Vice President and Director,      
National Institute of Plant 
Genome Research (NIPGR), 
New Delhi 
 2. Indian National Academy of Engineering, New Delhi 
  Dr. P. S. Goel     - Past President  
 3. National Academy of Science, Allahabad 
  Prof. Asis Datta      - Past President  
 4. Indian Academy of Sciences (IASc), Bengaluru 
 (i) Prof. A.K. Sood     - President  
(ii) Prof. Dipankar     - Secretary 
 Chatterji   
 5. National Academy of Agricultural Sciences, New Delhi  
 (i) Dr. R.B. Singh  - President 
 (ii) Dr. Swapan K. Dutta  - Fellow & DDG, Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research, New 
Delhi 
 (iii) Dr. H.S. Gupta  - Fellow & Director, Indian 
Agricultural Research 
Institute, New Delhi 
 (iv) Dr. P Anand Kumar      - Fellow & Head of Department 
of Biotechnology, The Indian 
Agricultural Research 
Institute, New Delhi 
 6. National Academy of Medical Sciences, New Delhi  
 (i) Dr. K.K. Talwar  - President and Director of Post 
Graduate Institute of Medical 

Education & Research, 
Chandigarh 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the 
Committee and representatives of the Six National Science Academies 
of India to the Sitting. The Chairm an then asked the witnesses to 
introduce themselves. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took the Oral Evidence of the 
representatives of the Six National Science Academies for and in 
connection with examination of the Subject „Cultivation of Genetically 
Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects‟.  The members sought 
several clarifications on the various aspects of the Subject.  The 
witnesses responded to them.  
4. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing 
before the Committee as well as for  furnishing valuable information 
desired by the Committee on the Subject. He also directed them to send 
any updated material which they wish to send to the Committee and 
also the replies to the querries which could not be clarified by them 
during the Sitti ng to the Committee Secretariat latest by 24 March, 
2011.   
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept 
separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

APPENDIX-XIV 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the Fifteenth March, 2011 from 
1500 hours to 1550 hours in Committee Room „D‟, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Uday Singh –  Acting Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
5. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
8. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
9. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
10. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
  

  Secretariat 
 
 1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma  -    Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.C. Koul -    Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
 
  Ministry of Commerce and Industry  
  (Department of Commerce) 
 
 1. Shri P.K. Chaudhery - Special Secretary 
 2. Shri Siddharth  - Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri Asit Tripathi - Chairman, APEDA 
 4. Ms. Shubra  - Joint Director General 
 
2. At the outset, Joint Secretary, Lok Sabha Secretariat informed the Committee 
that due to unforeseen exigencies, it would not be possible for the Chairman to chair 
the Sitting.  Therefore , the Committee chose Shri Uday Singh, MP (Lok Sabha) to act 
as Chairman for the Sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha.  Thereafter, the Acting Chairman welcomed the members of 
the Committee and representa tives of Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
(Department of Commerce) to the Sitting. The Acting Chairman then asked the 
witnesses to introduce themselves. 
 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took the Oral Evidence of the representatives of 
Department of Commerce for and in connection with examination of the Subject 
„Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects‟.  The members 

sought several c larifications on the various aspects of the Subject.  The witnesses 
responded to them.  
 
4. The Acting Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before 
the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee 
on the Subject. He also directed them to send any updated material which they wish 
to send to the Committee Secretariat latest by 25 March, 2011.   
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX-XV  
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 10th June, 2011 from 1100 hours to 1310 
hours in Committee Room ‟C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
4. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
5. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Premdas 
8. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Uday Singh 
11. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
12. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
14. Shri Narendra Budania 
15. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
16. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
17. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
18. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
19. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
20. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 
 
 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional 
Director 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy 
Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES  OF MINISTRY  OF  SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY  
(DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY)  
 
1. Dr. M. K. Bhan   Secretary, DBT 
2. Dr. K. K. Tripathi    Scientist „G‟  
3. Dr. V. P. Gupta   Scientist „G‟ 
4. Dr. S. R. Rao    Scientist „G‟ 
5. Dr. K. S. Charak   Scientist „G‟ 
6. Dr. (Mrs.) Raj Lakshmi   Scientist „G‟ 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting 
of the Committee. Thereafter, he directed that the witness be ushered 
in. 
 
(At around 1105 hrs the representatives of 
Department of Biotechnology were ushered in) 
 
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Science &  
Technology (Department of Biotechnology).  The witnesses introduced themselves 
and the Committee, thereafter, took the oral evidence of the representativ es of 
Department of Biotechnology for and in connection with examination of the Subject 
„Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food  Crops – Prospects and Effects‟. The 

Chairman and Members sought several clarification on the various aspects of the 
subjects which was responded to by the witnesses. 
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee 
on the Subject.  
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
/---------------------/ 
  

APPENDIX-XVI 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 10th June, 2011 from 1510 hours to 1700 
hours in Committee Room ‟C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Thangso Baite 
3. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
4. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
5. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Premdas 
8. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Uday Singh 
11. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
12. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
14. Shri Narendra Budania 
15. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
16. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
17. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
18. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
19. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
20. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 
 
 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P. C. Koul  - Additional Director 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES  OF MINISTRY  OF  SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY  
(DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH) 
 
1. Prof. S. K. Brahmachari Secretary, DSIR and DG, CSIR 
2. Shri V. K. Gupta  Director, TKDL & Sr. Adviser  
DSIR/CSIR 
3. Dr. Ramesh V. Sonti Scientist „G‟ CCMB/CSIR 
4. Dr. Sudeep Kumar  Head, PPD, CSIR 
5. Shri R. R. Abhyankar Scientist „G‟ DSIR 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting 
of the Committee. Thereafter, he directed that the witness be ushered 
in. 
(At around 1515 hrs. the representatives of 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research were ushered in) 
 
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Science 
& Technology (Department of Scientific and Industrial Research) and 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. The witnesses introduced 
themselves and the Committee, thereafter, took the oral evidence for 
and in connection with examination of the Subject  `Cultivation of 
Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects‟. 
 

4. During the course of the Sitting the Principal witness informed 
about the substantial amount of work being done on GE related 
research in the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad 
that was relevant to the subject under examination.  
(At about 1610 hrs., the Chairman, withdrew from the Sitting and        
Shri Prabodh Panda, MP (Lok Sabha) took the Chair) 
5. The Committee sought several clarifications on issues pertaining 
to the Subject to which the witness es responded. The Acting Chairman 
then thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee as well 
as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee on the 
Subject. He also directed them to send the information which was not 
readily available with them, to the Committee Secretariat latest by 17 
June, 2011. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
/---------------------/ 
  

APPENDIX-XVII 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the Seventeenth June, 2011 from 
1100 hours to 1230 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Prabodh Panda –  Acting Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite 
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
7. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
8. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
13. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 
    Secretariat 
 
 1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy -    Director 
 2. Shri P.C. Koul  -    Additional Director 
 

WITNESS 
 
Ministry of Science and Technology 
(Department of Science and Technology) 
 
 1. Dr. T. Ramasami      -  Secretary  
 2. Dr. B. Hari Gopal - Adviser & Head, SERC 
Division 
 
2. At the outset, Director, Lok Sabha Secretariat informed the Committee that due 
to unforeseen exigencies, it would not be possible for the Chairman to chair the 
Sitting.  Therefore, the Committee chose Shri Prabodh Panda, MP (Lok Sabha) to act 
as Chairman for the Sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha.  Thereafter, the Acting Chairman welcomed the members of 
the Commi ttee and directed that the representatives of the Ministry of Science and 
Technology (Department of Science and Technology) be ushered in.   
(At around 1110 hours the witnesses took their seats in the Committee 
Room) 
3. The Acting Chairman then welcomed th e witnesses to the Sitting and asked 
them to introduce themselves.  The Committee, thereafter, took the Oral Evidence of 
the representatives of the Department of Science and Technology for and in 
connection with examination of the Subject „Cultivation of G enetically Modified Food 
Crops – Prospects and Effects‟.  The members sought several clarifications on the 
various aspects of the Subject.  The witnesses responded to them.  
4. The Acting Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before 
the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee 
on the Subject. He also directed them to send any updated material which they wish 
to send to the Committee and also the replies to the queries which could not be 

clarified by them during the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat latest by 24 June, 
2011, positively.   
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

APPENDIX-XVIII 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the Seventeenth June, 2011 from 
1500 hours to 1650 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite 
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
7. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda 
9. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
10. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
11. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
12. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
15. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
16. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 
 
  

Secretariat 
 
 1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy -    Director 
 2. Shri P.C. Koul  -    Additional Director 
WITNESS 
Ministry of Environment and Forests 
 1. Dr. T. Chatterjee -  Secretary 
 2. Sh. M.F. Farooqui - Additional Secretary  
 3. Sh. H.K. Pande - Joint Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests to the Sitting. The Chairman then 
asked the witnesses to introduce themselves. 
3. The representative of the Ministry presented their views on the Subject ‘Cultivation of 
Genetically Modified Food C rops – Prospects and Effects’ through an audio -visual presentation.  
The Committee, thereafter, took the Oral Evidence of the representatives of the Ministry  of  
Environment   and   Forests   for   and  in  connection  with  examination  of  the Subject. The 
members sought several clarifications on the various aspects of the Subject.  The witnesses 
responded to them.  
4. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired  by the Committee on 
the Subject.  They were also directed to furnish information on points which could not 
be clarified during the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat by 24 June, 2011, 
positively. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

APPENDIX-XIX 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 14 th July, 2011 from 1400 
hours to 1555 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda 
9. Shri Premdas 
10. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
11. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
12. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
13. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
15. Shri Narendra Budania 
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
17. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
18. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
19. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
20. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
21. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
   
  

Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy -    Director 
3. Shri P.C. Koul -    Additional Director 
 
WITNESS 
      
 1. Shri P.I. Suvrathan - Chairperson, Food Safety 
and Standards Authority 
of India 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting.  Thereafter, 
the Chairman informed the Members that the Sitting scheduled for 15 th July, 2011 to 
take evidence of the Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee on the subject 
„Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops - Prospects and Effects‟ was cancelled 
due to non -availability of Chairman, GEAC o wing to his training programme in the 
USA.  The Chairman further informed that the Sitting scheduled for 22 July, 2011 has 
been preponed to       1400 hrs. on that day to enable the Ghanian Parliamentary 
Committee on Agriculture and Cocoa Affairs to intera ct with the Committee. He then 
directed that the witness be ushered in. 
 
(At about 1410 hours  P.I. Suvrathan and colleagues took their seats in the Committee Room) 
 
 
3. The Chairman welcomed the witness to the Sitting.  Thereafter, the witness 
briefed the Committee on the Subject „Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops – 
Prospects and Effects‟.   
 
(At about 1500 hours, the Chairman withdrew from the Sitting and  
Shri Prabodh Panda, MP, Lok Sabha took the Chair) 
 
 

4. The Members queried the witness on various issues pertaining to the Subject, 
to which he responded in detail.  The Acting Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witness 
for appearing before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information 
desired by them on the Subject. He also di rected him to send any updated material 
which he wished to send to the Committee and also the replies to the queries which 
could not be clarified by him during the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat latest by 
22 July, 2011, positively.   
 
 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
  

APPENDIX-XX 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 22 nd July, 2011 from 1600 hours 
to 1800 hours in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite 
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam  
7. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
8. Shri Prabodh Panda 
9. Shri Premdas 
10. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
11. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
12. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
13. Shri Uday Singh 
14. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
     Rajya Sabha 
 
15. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
16. Shri Narendra Budania 
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
18. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
20. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
21. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
22. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
23. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
    
  

Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  -    Director 
3. Shri P.C. Koul  -    Additional Director 
 
WITNESS 
          Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education) 
 
1.   Dr. S. Ayyappan         - Secretary & DG, ICAR 
2.   Dr. Swapan K. Datta   - Dy. Director General (CS) 
3.   Dr. H.P. Singh          - Dy. Director General (Hort.) 
4.   Dr. A.K. Singh   - Dy. Director General (NRM) 
5.   Dr. (Mrs.) B. Meena Kumari   - Dy. Director General (Fy.) 
6.   Dr. K.D. Kokate          - Dy. Director General (Extn.) 
7.   Dr. H.S. Gupta   - Director, IARI 
8.   Dr. T.P. Rajendran  - Asstt. Director General (PP) 
9.   Dr. J.S. Sandhu         - Asstt. Director General 
(Seeds) 
10.   Dr. P. Ananda Kumar  -  Director, NRCPB 
11.   Dr. K.R. Kranthi          - Director, CICR, Nagpur 
12.   Prof. K.C. Bansal         - Director, NBPGR 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and the representatives of Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) to the Sitting.  The Chairman 
then asked the witnesses to introduce themselves. 
 
3. The representative of the Department of Agricultural Research and Education gave a brief 
presentation on the activities of the Department in the field of transgenics, etc..  The Committee, 
thereafter, took the Oral Evidence of the representatives of the Department for   and  in  
connection  with  examination  of  the Subject  ‘Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops – 
Prospects and Effects’.  The members sought several clarifications on the various aspects of the 
Subject.  The witnesses responded to them.  

 
4. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee on 
the Subject.   
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

APPENDIX-XXI 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 3 rd August, 2011 from 1500 hours 
to 1710 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha  
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam  
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Premdas 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Uday Singh 
11. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
     Rajya Sabha   
12. Shri Narendra Budania 
13. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
15. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
    
  

Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  -    Director 
3. Shri P.C. Koul  -    Additional Director 
 
WITNESS 
 
Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee 
 
1. Shri M.F. Farooqui  - Chairman, GEAC and Addl. 
Secretary, Ministry of 
Invironment andForests  
 
2. Prof. Arjula Reddy  - Co-Chairman, GEAC and  
      Vice-Chancellor, Yogi Vemana  
      University, Cudappa, 
Andhra Pradesh  
 
3. Shri H.K. Pande  - Vice Chairman and Joint  
      Secretary, Ministry of   
     Environment and Forests  
 
4. Dr. (Mrs.) Ranjini Warrier   - Member Secretary, GEAC  
      and Director, Ministry of 
      Environment and Forests  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting.  He then directed that 
the Principal Witness be ushered in.   
(At around 1505 hours Chairman, GEAC was ushered in) 
3. The Chairman conveyed to him the observations of the Committee in the con text of his 
previous appearance before them on 17 June, 2011 as a representative of Ministry of 
Environment and Forests and in regard to circumstances necessitating the postponement of the 
Sitting of the Committee scheduled on 15 July, 2011 to take Oral Ev idence of the representatives 

of GEAC on the Subject  ‘Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects’ 
had to be postponed.  The Chairman also conveyed him the decision of the Committee in the 
matter for future compliance. The Chairman then directed that the other witnesses be ushered in.   
(At around 1515 hours the other witnesses took their seats in the Committee Room) 
 
4. After the customary introduction, the representative of Genetic Engineering Appraisal 
Committee made an audio-visual presentation on the Subject  ‘Cultivation of Genetically Modified 
Food Crops – Prospects and Effects’ before the Committee.  During the course of the Oral 
Evidence, the members sought several clarifications on the various aspects of the Subject.  Th e 
witnesses responded to them.  
 
5. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee on 
the Subject.  He also directed the representatives of GEAC to send any updated 
material which they wished to send to the Committee and also the replies to the 
queries which could not be clarified by them during the Sitting to the Committee 
Secretariat latest by 10 August, 2011, positively.   
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned 
  

APPENDIX-XXII 
   
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 11th August, 2011 from 1500 
hours to 1700 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi.  
PRESENT 
    Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Thangso Baite 
4.  Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
9.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
10.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
11.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
12.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
13.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
14.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
15.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
16.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
    1. Shri Deepak Mahna  -  Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Director 
   3. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
  
-2WITNESSES  
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND CO-OPERATION) 
 
1. Shri P.K. Basu Secretary (A&C)  
2. Dr. P.L. Gautam Chairperson PPV&FRA 
3. Shri G.C. Pati Additional Secretary 
4. Shri Ashish Bahuguna Additional Secretary & Financial  
5. Dr. Gurbachan Singh  Agriculture Commissioner 
  
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. They, thereafter, took up the Draft Report on                        
“Infrastructural Facilities for Development of Food Processing Industries - An 
Evaluation” for consideration.    
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report 
without any modification.  They also authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
above Draft Report after getting it factually verified from the concerned 
Ministry/Department and present the same to the Parliament.   
 
4. The Chairman, thereafter directed that the representatives of the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Co -operation), called,  

in connection with the examination of  “ Cultivation of Genetically Modified 
Food Crops-Prospects and Effects” be ushered in.  
(at about 1515 hours the witnesses took their seats in the  
Committee Room) 
 
5. After introducing his colleagues , the Secretary (Department of 
Agriculture and Co-operation) briefed the Committee on the various aspects of 
Subject „Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and 
Effects‟. During the course of the Oral Evidence, the members sought several 
clarifications on the several issues pertaining to the Subject.  The witnesses 
responded to them.  
6. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairman thanked the witnesses for 
appearing before the Committee and providing them necessary inputs on the 
subject.  He also directed them to send information, on points which needed 
further clarification, to the Secretariat of the Committee by 24 August, 2011. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
  

APPENDIX-XXIII 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 21 st October, 2011 from 1500 
hours to 1630 hours in Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde  
6. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
7. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
8. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Laxman Tudu 
11. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
     Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
13. Shri Narendra Budania 
14. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
15. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
16. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
17. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
18. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 
   
  

Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  -    Director 
3. Shri P.C. Koul  -    Additional Director 
WITNESS 
 
National Biodiversity Authority of India, Chennai 
 
 
1.  Shri Balakrishna Pisupati - Chairman 
2.  Shri C. Achalender Reddy - Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee to the Sitting.   He 
then directed that the representatives of the National Biodiversity Authority of India be ushered 
in.   
3. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the Committ ee took their 
Oral Evidence for and in connection with examination of the Subject „Cultivation of 
Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects‟.  The members sought 
several clarifications on the various aspects of the Subject.  The witnesses res ponded 
to them.  
4. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee on 
the Subject. He also directed them to send any updated material which they wish to 
send to the Committee and also the replies to the queries which could not be clarified 
by them during the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat latest by 31 October, 2011, 
positively.   
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 

APPENDIX-XXIV 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 21 st October, 2011 from 1635 
hours to 1745 hours in Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde  
6. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
7. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
8. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Laxman Tudu 
11. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
     Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
13. Shri Narendra Budania 
14. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
15. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
16. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
17. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
18. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 
    
  

Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  -    Director 
3. Shri P.C. Koul  -    Additional Director 
 
WITNESS 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Consumer Affairs) 
 
 
1.  Shri Rajiv Agarwal  - Secretary 
2.  Smt. Ganga Murthy  - Sr. Economic Adviser 
3.  Shri Manoj Parida  - Joint Secretary 
4.  Shri G.N. Sreekumaran - Joint Secretary 
5.  Dr. Anandi Ravichandaran - Economic Adviser  
   
  Bureau of Indian Standards 
 
  Shri Sarad Gupta  - Director General   
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the  representatives of Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) and asked them to 
introduce themselves.   
3. The Committee, thereafter, took the Oral Evidence of the representatives of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs for and in connection with examination of the Subject 
„Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects‟.  The members 
sought several clarifications on the various aspects of the Subject.  The witnesses 
responded to them.  
4. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee on 

the Subject. He also directed them to send any updated material which they wish to 
send to the Committee and also the replies to the queries which could not be clarified 
by them during the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat latest by 31 October, 2011, 
positively.   
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
  

APPENDIX-XXV 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3 rd November, 2011 from 1430 
hours to 1540 hours in Room No. „53‟, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
5. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6. Shri Premdas 
7. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
8. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
11. Shri D. Venugopal 
 
     Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
13. Shri Narendra Budania 
14. Shri A. Elavarasan 
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
17. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
18. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
19. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
    
 
  

Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  -    Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 (Department of Food and Public Distribution) 
 
 
1.  Dr. B. C. Gupta  - Secretary 
2.  Shri T.S. Randhawa - Additional Secretary & FA 
3.  Shri C. Vishwanath - Joint Secretary (BP/PD) 
4.  Dr. D.K. Bhalla - Joint Secretary (Impex, SRA & EOP) 
5.  Shri T. Jacob   - Joint Secretary (Admn. & Sugar) 
6.  Shri Naveen Prakash - Joint Secretary (Storage and P&FCI) 
7.  Ms. Ravneet Kaur - Joint Secretary (WDRA) 
 
 
 Food Corporation of India 
 
1.  Dr. Amar Singh - Chairman & Managing Director (In-Charge) 
 
2.  Shri Surinder Singh - Executive Director (Procurement) 
 
 Central Warehousing Corporation 
 
 Shri B.B. Pattanaik -  Managing Director 
 
   
 

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) to 
the Sitting and asked the Witnesses to introduce themselves.   
3. The Committee, thereafter, took the Oral Evidence of the representatives of the 
Department of Food and Public Distribution for and in connection with exam ination of 
the Subject „Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects‟.  
The members sought several clarifications on the various aspects of the Subject.  The 
witnesses responded to them.  
4. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee on 
the Subject. He also directed them to send any updated material which they wished to 
submit to the Committee and also the replies to the queries which could not be 
clarified by them during the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat latest by 16 
November, 2011, positively.   
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
  

APPENDIX-XXVI 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3 rd November, 2011 from 1545 
hours to 1700 hours in Room No. „53‟, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
5. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6. Shri Premdas 
7. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
8. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
11. Shri D. Venugopal 
 
     Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
13. Shri Narendra Budania 
14. Shri A. Elavarasan 
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
17. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
18. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
19. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
    
  

Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  -    Additional Director 
WITNESS 
 
Shri P. Sainath - Rural Affairs Editor, The Hindu 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the witness to the Sitting.  Thereafter, 
the witness put forth his views on the subject “Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food 
Crops – Prospects and Effects”.  He spoke in detail about the ramifications of 
Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops on farmers growing GM/transgenic 
crops, agricultural practices, general public and the agricultural economy of the 
Country.  The members sought several clarification on the various other aspects of the 
Subject to which the witness responded in detail.  
 
3. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witness for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee on 
the Subject. He also directed him to send any updated material which he wished to 
submit to the Comm ittee and also the replies to the queries which could not be 
clarified by him during the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat latest by 16 
November, 2011, positively.   
 
 
The witness then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
  

APPENDIX-XXVII 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FORTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 03 August, 2012 from 1500 hours to 1735 
hours in Committee Room   „E‟ (Basement), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOKSABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Thangso Baite 
4.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
7.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
8.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
9.  Shri Premdas  
10.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
11.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
12.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
13  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
14.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
15.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
16.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
17.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
18.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
19.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
20  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
21.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 
 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.C. Koul   - Additional Director 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting 
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the Draft   
Report on “Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and 
Effects” of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation). 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report on 
“Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and Effects ” of 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultur e and Cooperation) with some 
modifications.  The Chairman requested the members to give their suggestions, if 
any, by 7 August, 2012. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise 
the Report after getting it factually verified from the concerned Ministry and present 
the same to the Parliament.   
*4. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
*5. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
 *6. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
*7. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
*   Matter not related to this Report. 
 

Annexure – I 
STATUS OF GM CROPS APPROVED FOR FIELD TRIALS BY 
THE RCGM / GEAC DURING 2007-till date 
S.No.  Crop Company 
Name 
Trial Trait / Gene/ 
Event 
Approved 
Locations 
Present 
Status 
1   
Cauliflower  
Sungro Seeds 
Research Ltd. 
BRL-I Insect 
Resistance 
 
cry1Ac event 
CFE 4 
Own R&D 
centers at Jatheri 
(Haryana) & 
Bangalore  
Not initiated 
Nunhems India 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Event 
Selection  
Insect 
Resistance 
 
RST08-30, 15 
events 
 
Own R&D 
Centre 
Not initiated.  
Project has 
been 
discontinued. 
2  Cotton  Dow 
AgroSciences 
India Pvt. Ltd. 
BRL-I  
 
 
 
 
 
BRL-II 
Insect 
Resistance 
and Herbicide 
Tolerance 
 
cry1Ac& cry1F 
(WideStrike = 
Event 3006-
210-23 and 
Event 281-24-
236) 
Aurangabad 
(MH) & 
Vadodara (Guj) 
in July 2010 
 
 
Guntur (AP), 
Attur (TN) and 
Dharwad (KN) 
during   August 
2010 
Ongoing about 
to harvest. 
 
 
 
 
Trials are in 
progress 
JK Agrigenetics 
Ltd. 
BRL-I  Insect 
Resistance 
cry1Ac (Event-
1) and cry1EC 
(Event-24) 
 
Bathinda 
(Punjab) and 
Sriganganagar 
(Rajasthan) 
during Kharif 
2010 
Ongoing  
MAHYCO BRL-II Insect 
resistance and 
Bathinda 
(Punjab), Sirsa 
Completed 

Herbicide 
tolerance 
(Round up 
Ready Flex) 
 
cry1Ac & 
cry2Ab (MON 
15985) and 
CP4EPSPS  
(MON 88913) 
(Haryana), 
Hanumangarh 
(Rajasthan), 
Surat (Gujarat), 
Khandwa (MP), 
Nagpur 
(Mahatashtra), 
Ranga Reddy 
(Andhra 
Pradesh), 
Dharwad 
(Karnataka) in 
Kharif 2010 
 
Coimbatore 
(Tamil Nadu) in 
Kharif 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ongoing  
Krishidhan 
Seeds Ltd. Jalna 
Event 
selection  
Insect 
resistance 
 
Cry1Ac and 
cry1 
Company owned 
farm at Jalna in 
Kharif 2010 
 Not initiated. 
Central Institute 
of Cotton 
Research 
(CICR), Nagpur 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance and 
G hirsutum 
tolerance 
 
cry1Ac gene 
CICR, Panjari 
Farm in Kharif 
2010 
Ongoing  
Central Institute 
of Cotton 
Research 
(CICR), Nagpur 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance and 
G hirsutum 
tolerance 
 
cry1F gene 
CICR, Panjari 
Farm in Kharif 
2010 
Ongoing   
Central Institute 
of Cotton 
Research 
(CICR), Nagpur 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance and 
G arboretum 
tolerance 
CICR (RS), 
CICR, Sirsa, 
Haryana in 
Kharif 2010 
Ongoing 

 
Cry1Ac gene 
    3 Rice 
Bayer 
Bioscience Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Event 
selection 
 Insect 
resistance 
 
cry 1 Ab, cry 
1Ca  & bar 
genes 
Chinnakanjrala 
Patancheru and 
Bayer 
Bioscience Pvt 
Ltd., Davangere, 
Karnataka.  
 
Trials at one 
location 
Chinnakanjrala 
initiated. 
Avesthagen Ltd. Event 
selection 
Hybrid vigour 
 
Oryza sativa 
taipae 309 
Company‟s own 
research farm at 
Hyderabad 
Not initiated 
Mahyco BRL-1 Insect 
resistance 
 
cry 1Ac gene 
Coimbatore & 
Tanjore (TN), 
South 24 
Parganas & 
Midnapur (WB), 
Bhandara & 
Raigad 
(Maharashtra), 
Davangere & 
Mandya 
(Karnataka), 
Gaya (Bihar), 
Ranchi 
(Jharkhand), 
Anand (Gujarat) 
in 2007 
 
Trials 
completed in 
all locations 
except at 
Midnapore 
where trial was 
uprooted.   
Metahelix Life 
Science Ltd. 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance 
 
Cry 1Ac and 
Cry1Ab gene 
Vattinagulapalli 
Village, RR Distt, 
AP. 
Initiated 
M/s. EI DuPont 
India Pvt Ltd, 
Hyderabad 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance SPT 
maintainer 
Sardar Krishi 
Farm, Krishak 
Nagar, Labhandi 
Raipur, Medek, 
Not initiated 

 
ZM-AA1-Os-
MSCA1-
DsRED2 
genes and Os-
MSCA-1-ZM-
AA1-DsRED2 
AP. 
University of 
Calcutta, 
Kolkata 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance 
 
Ferritin gene 
Rice Research 
Station,  
Not initiated  
BASF, Mumbai BRL-1 Insect 
resistance 
 
OS ARGOS 
and 
containing OS-
hox5, 
Homeobox- 
Leucine Zipper 
gene 
Tamil Nadu 
Agriculture 
University 
(TNAU), 
Coimbatore 
Not initiated 
because of the 
impending 
approval of the 
State Govt 
 
4. 
 
 
           
Tomato  
Avesthagen Ltd. Event 
selection 
Increased 
lycopene 
content 
 
unedited NAD9 
Own Research 
Farm, 
Hyderabad. 
Not initiated. 
National 
Research 
Centre for Plant 
Biotechnology 
(IARI) 
Event 
selection 
Stress 
tolerance 
 
Antisense ACC 
synthase gene 
NRCPB, 
Genetics Farm, 
IARI Campus, 
PUSA, New 
Delhi 
Trials are in 
progress. 
Mahyco Pollen 
flow study 
Insect 
resistance 
 
Cry 2Ab gene 
Company‟s 
Research Station 
at Jalna 
Not initiated 

Institute of 
Horticultural 
Research (IIHR), 
Bangalore 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance to 
Topso virus  
 
Peanut Bud 
Necrosis virus 
(PBNV) 
At IIHR R&D 
centre at 
Bangalore 
Initiated 
Institute of 
Horticultural 
Research (IIHR), 
Bangalore 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance to 
leaf curl virus  
 
TLCV 
At IIHR R&D 
centre at 
Bangalore 
Initiated 
Institute of 
Horticultural 
Research (IIHR), 
Bangalore 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance to 
PBNV and 
TLCV 
 
Peanut Bud 
Necrosis virus 
(PBNV) & 
TLCV 
At IIHR R&D 
centre at 
Bangalore 
Not initiated 
5. Groundnut ICRISAT Event 
Selection  
Insect 
resistance 
Chitinase gene 
 
 
Research farm at 
Patencheru 
Ongoing  
ICRISAT Event 
Selection 
Coat protein 
gene (cp) for 
tobacco streak 
virus against 
peanut stem 
Necrosis 
Disease 
Research farm at 
Patencheru 
Ongoing  
University of 
Agricultural 
Sciences (UAS), 
Bangalore 
Event 
Selection  
Insect 
resistance 
 ( stress 
tolerance) 
R&D, UAS, 
Bangalore 
Not initiated – 
scheduled for 
April 2011 

 
DREB 1A 
University of 
Agricultural 
Sciences (UAS), 
Bangalore 
Event 
Selection  
Insect 
resistance 
 ( stress 
tolerance & 
drought 
tolerance) 
 
DREB 1B 
R&D, UAS, 
Bangalore 
Not initiated – 
scheduled for 
April 2011 
6. Cabbage Nunhems India 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Event 
Selection  
Insect 
Resistance 
 
cry 1b and cry 
1c gene.   
 
Own R&D 
Centre 
Not initiated. 
Project has 
been 
discontinued. 
7. Potato Central Potato 
Research 
Institute, Shimla.  
Event 
selection 
Insect 
resistance 
 
RB transgenic 
potato clones 
two lines 
(904/SP951) of 
RB 
At own R&D 
Farm (Kufri 
Giriraj) located at 
CPRI Campus 
Not initiated 
Central Potato 
Research 
Institute, Shimla.  
Event 
selection 
Insect 
resistance 
Solanum 
tuberosum 
subsp. 
Tuberosum 
 
KchipLnvRNAi-
2214 
Central Potato 
Research Station 
located at 
Jalandhar, 
Punjab 
Completed 
Indian 
Agricultural 
Research 
Institute (IARI), 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance to 
GR=PVY 
At their own 
Research Land 
Completed  

New Delhi  
Potato Virus Y 
8. Corn Monsanto India 
Ltd. 
BRL-II 
trials 
Insect 
resistance and 
herbicide 
tolerance 
 
cry 2Ab2 and 
cry 1A.105 
genes, (event 
MON 89034 
and 
CP4EPSPS 
genes) 
For Rabi Season 
at Begusarai/ 
Samastipur, 
Bihar and 
Bhagalpur 
(Bihar), TNAU, 
Coimbatore 
(TN), UAS 
(Dharwad), 
ANGRAU, 
Karimnagar 
(AN).  
 
For Kharif 2011 
at nine locations 
namely BHU 
Varanasi, UP; 
Begusarai Bihar; 
Bhagalpur Bihar; 
TNAU 
Coimbatore; 
UAS Dharwad; 
ANGRAU 
Karimnagar; 
MPUAT Udaipur; 
AAU Vadodara 
and DWSR 
Jabalpur MP. 
Trial at 
Samastipur 
terminated. 
Trial at UAS, 
Dharwad 
ongoing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not initiated. 
Pioneer 
Overseas 
Corporation 
BRL-1 
trials 
Insect 
resistance and 
herbicide 
tolerance 
Cry1F and 
CP4EPSPS 
genes (stacked 
event of TC 
1507 X NK 
603) 
Guntur, ANGRU 
and UAS, 
Dharwad 
Ongoing. 
Dow 
Agrosciences 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance 
Cry 1F (event 
TNAU, 
Coimbatore and 
Bhavani Sagar 
Trials were 
initiated but 
terminated. 

TC 1507) 
M/s. Syngenta 
Biosciences Pvt 
Ltd, Pune 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance 
Cry 1Ab gene 
(Event Bt 11) 
MPUA&T, 
Udaipur and 
BHU, Varanasi 
Ongoing. 
9. Sorghum National 
Research 
Centre for 
Sorghum 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance 
 
Cry1B gene 
NRCSCRY1B 
event 4 and 
NRCSCRY 1B 
event 19 
At own Research 
Farm, 
Hyderabad 
Not initiated 
Central 
Research 
Institute for 
Dryland 
Agriculture 
(ICAR), 
Hyderabad 
Event 
selection  
Insect 
resistance 
 
Cry 1B gene 
(M35-1) 
At own Research 
Farm, 
Hyderabad 
Completed 
 
10. Okra Mahyco BRL-1 Insect 
resistance. 
 
Cry 1Ac gene 
Jalna, Jalgaon 
(Maharashtra), 
Vadodara 
(Gujarat), Durg 
(CG), Jaipur 
(Rajasthan), 
Karnal 
(Haryana), Gaya 
(Bihar), Nadia 
(WB), Haveri 
(Karnataka), 
Coimbatore (TN) 
in 2007 
 Completed 
11. Brinjal Bejo Sheetal 
Seeds Pvt. Ltd. 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance 
 
Cry 1Fa1 
(event 142) 
Jalna, Guntur 
and Varanasi 
Completed 

 Sungro Seeds 
Research 
Limited 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance  
 
Cry 1Ac gene 
Company owned 
farm in New 
Delhi in 2007 
Completed. 
 
12. 
           
Mustard 
Delhi University BRL-1 Yield increase 
 
barnase / 
barstar gene 
Agricultural 
Research Station 
experimental 
Farm, Navgaon 
(RAU, Bikaner), 
Agricultural 
Research 
Station, 
Sriganganagar 
(RAU, Bikaner) & 
KVK, Kumher 
(Bharatpur) 
Ongoing 
National 
Research 
Centre for Plant 
Biotechnology 
(IARI) 
BRL-1 drought stress  
 
Osmotin gene 
HAU, Hissar, 
PAU, Ludhiana, 
Bharatpur, 
DRMR, ICAR. 
Trials are in 
progress. 
13. Wheat National 
Research 
Centre for Plant 
Biotechnology 
(IARI) 
BRL-1 Effect of 
mutant strains 
 
Azotobacter 
 
Within IARI 
Campus, PUSA, 
New Delhi. 
Trials are in 
progress. 
14. Watermelon Institute of 
Horticultural 
Research (IIHR), 
Bangalore 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance 
 
Bud Necrosis 
Virus 
At IIHR, R&D Not initiated. 
15. Transgenic 
Papaya 
Institute of 
Horticultural 
Research (IIHR), 
Bangalore 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance 
PRSV 
 
cp –gene. 
At IIHR, R&D  Not initiated. 

16. Transgenic 
Sugarcane 
Sugarcane 
Breeding 
Institute (ICAR), 
Coimbatore 
Event 
Selection  
Insect 
resistance 
 
Cry1Ab gene 
At Institute 
Research Farm 
in Coimbatore 
Not initiated 
17. Para 
Rubber 
Tree 
Rubber 
Research 
Institute of India, 
Kottayam 
BRL-1 Insect 
resistance 
 
dismutase 
gene (cDNA) 
Dapchari, Thane 
in Maharashtra 
and Chethackal, 
Thombikandom 
in Kerala 
Not initiated in 
Kerala due to 
objection from 
State 
Government  
 
To be initiated 
in Maharashtra 
in July 2011. 
 
  

Annexure-II 
Minutes of the meeting of the Genetic Engineering  Appraisal Committee  (GEAC) 
held on 27.04.2011. 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
The  meeting  of  the  GEAC  was  held  on  27.04.2011  in  National  Agriculture  Sciences 
Centre, Pusa under the chairmanship of Shri M. F. Farooqui, Additional Secretary, MoEF 
and Chairman, GEAC. 
 
List of participants is annexed. 
 
 
Agenda item 1:  Consultation with experts and scientist on regulatory process 
for Genetically Modified Crops as part of Bt brinjal post moratorium follow-up. 
 
1.0  At  the  outset,  the  Chairman  welcomed  all  the  experts  and  thanked  them  for 
sparing their valuable time in attending this important meeting. He further informed that 
the meeting has  been convened as a follow-up  to the  dire ction  given by the Hon‟ble 
Minister   to  the   GEAC  in  his   decision  document  dated   9.2.2010   while  imposing 
moratorium on Bt Brinjal Event EE-I developed by M/s. Mahyco, TNAU, Coimbatore and 
UAS, Dharwad. 
 
2.0  To facilitate a focused discussion on the outcome of the public consultation, he 
requested Dr. Ranjini Warrier, Member-Secretary GEAC to make a brief presentation on 
the outcome and key concerns that emerged during the public consultations. Dr Warrier 
in  her  presentation  explained  in  brief  (i)  Purpose  of  this  meeting,  (ii)  Documents 
Circulated to Members; (iii) Legal and Statutory Requirements; (iv) Facts on Bt. Brinjal 
development; (v) Process followed by the GEAC; (vi) Process followed in the public 
consultation; (vii) Summary of key concerns. The following points were noted: 
 
I.  The purpose of this meeting is to deliberate 
 
 
a.   key concerns that have emerged as outcome of the public consultation 
b.   need of additional studies to assess the safety of Bt Food Crops 
c.   protocols and procedures to be followed while conducting the additional 
studies 
 
II.  To  a  query  on  why  the  Inter-Academy  Report  on  GM  Crops  (updated)  was 
circulated  to the  Members as  it  has not  been  discussed in the  GEAC, it was 
clarified that all post-moratorium analysis document received by  the GEAC which 
include (i) Dr Lou M Gallagher report pertaining to the scope and adequacy of the 
GEAC toxicology ri sk assessment; (ii) David A. Andow report on the scope and 
adequacy of the GEAC environmental risk assessment pertaining to Bt Brinjal, (iii) 
updated  In ter-Academy  Report on GM Crops; (iv) Socio-Economic Analysis of 
Production  and  Marketing  of  Brinjal  and  Ex-ante  Assessment  of  Economic 
Benefits of Bt Brinjal in India have been circulated for information. 
 
III.  The CEE report contained  statements  made by 631 stakeholders in the public 
consultations meeting (both propositions and concerns).  The concerns r aised by 
various stakeholders have been studied in detail and broadly categorized under 
 
 

 
six  categories,  viz.  general  issues, molecular/genetic  aspects,  health/food  and 
feed  safety  concerns,  en vironmental  concerns,  market/trade  issues  and  other 
issues.  Specific comments reflected in the decision document have been further 
sub-categorized under each category as indicated below: 
 
 
A.   HEALTH/FOOD AND FEED SAFETY CONCERNS 
 
 
1.   Sub chronic 90 day rat feeding study not adequate 
2.   Feeding study design flawed to mask statistical differences in laboratory 
studies 
3.   Need for long term chronic toxicity studies 
4.   Concerns about the concept of substantial equivalence 
5.   Enhanced potential toxins, allergens and anti-nutrients 
6.   Reduced nutritional value of Bt brinjal/GM food 
7.   Transfer of novel genes to humans and animals and bacteria 
8.   Need for human trials 
9.   Issues related to Ayurveda and Siddha 
 
 
B.  ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS 
 
 
10. Potential gene transfer to related cultivated and wild species 
11. Impact on biodiversity/traditional varieties 
12. Impact on non-target organisms 
13. Accumulation of residue levels  of expressed proteins in agro- ecosystem 
14.  Risk of becoming weedy/invasive 
15. Insect resistance development 
16. Environmental risk assessment not in accordance with Cartagena Protocol 
on Biosafety 
 
C.  MOLECULAR /GENETIC ASPECTS 
 
 
17.   Bt brinjal expresses  chimeric gene (fusion of cry 1Ab & cry1ac ). Safety 
testing has been done only for cry 1 Ac gene 
18.  Contains gratuitous cassette for antibiotic resistance (aad gene encoding 
spectinomycin/streptomycin resistance) The cassette has a promoter for 
bacterial expression 
19.  Use of Agrobacterium based transformation system can cause cancerous 
tumors. 
20.  Effect of transferring viral sequences to plants, viruses and other 
organisms (CaMV 35 can activate dominant viruses. 
21.  Proteomics, transcriptomics (high throughput sequencing), metabolomics, 
2D gel electrophoresis required for hazard identification or identifying 
unintended effects not carried out. 
 
D.  MARKET/ TRADE ISSUES 
 
 
22. Need for post market surveillance 
 
 
 
 

 
23. Labeling issues 
24. Impact on organic farming 
25. Socio economic issues 
26. Liability issues due to contamination 
 
 
E.  OTHER ISSUES 
 
 
27. Use of company data/lack of independent studies 
28. Lack of public consultation in decision making 
29. Lack of public awareness 
30. Technology ownerships  by the MNCs 
 
 
F.  GENERAL ISSUES 
 
 
31. General opposition to GM crops 
32. Need of Bt. Brinjal / Use of Alternative Strategies 
33. Inefficient regulatory frameworks/mechanisms – Not compliant with Codex 
and Biosafety Protocol 
34. Lack of independence in the regulatory agency. 
 
 
 
IV.  It was also clarified that the list of concerns presented is only an indicative list but 
covers key areas of concerns, which need to be addressed by the Committee. 
 
3.0  Subsequent to the presentation, the Chairman, GEAC invited views of the experts 
on general and specific issues covering the following: 
 
I.  Gaps, if any, in the sub-chronic/acute toxicity studies 
II.  Need for long term toxicity studies to assess the impact of Bt brinjal on human 
health. 
III.  Need for profiling techniques/non-targeted approaches to identify unintended 
effects 
IV.  Use of Antibiotic Resistance Marker (ARM) genes in GM food crops 
V.  Impact on biodiversity/ traditional varieties due to gene flow 
VI.  Crossability with the wild relatives 
VII.  Insect Resistance Management Strategies 
VIII.  Socio-economic and trade concerns 
IX.  Reliability of the company‟s data/ independent testing. 
X.  Lack of independence in the regulatory agency 
 
4.0  The Committee extensively deliberated on the above issues. The following points 
were noted: 
 
A.  General Issues 
 
I.  On the general issue, many experts were of the view that the Government should 
give a clear cut direction on whether GM Food is required or not for the country.  If the 
 
 
 
 
 

perception is not clear; it is going to affect ongoing research in public institutions and 
universities. 
 
B.  Specific Issues 
 
 
On specific issues, three points namely (i) need for additional biosafety studies to assess 
the safety of cry 1 Ac protein; (ii) acceptance of company data & (iii) the way forward were 
discussed. Details of the deliberations are summarized below: 
 
I.  Need for additional biosafety studies to assess the safety of Bt protein 
 
 
i  On whether additional studies are required to assess the safety of Bt protein, most 
of the Experts were of the view that the studies prescribed under the current regulatory 
system and studies conducted with Bt brinjal are adequate.   However Dr P M Bhargava, 
representatives of Department of AYUSH and Dr Ram Vishwakarma, Director, Indian 
Institute of Integrative Medicine, Jammu were of the view that additional studies may be 
required. 
 
ii  Experts who were of the view that additional studies are not required to assess 
the safety of Bt protein provided the following justification: 
 
• Given that cry1Ac protein has been used extensively in global agriculture and 
has gone through biosafety clearances in so many countries, there should be 
no doubt  about  the safety  of  the cry1Ac gene.   Adequate tests  have been 
conducted  for  Bt  Brinjal  also.  Cry1AC  protein  in  corn  has  been  tested  in 
human and animal for more than 15 years. 
• The safety data generated by NIN has been elaborated by experiments carried 
out within and outside the country that demonstrate (i)  Cry1Ac interacts 
specifically with receptors aminopeptidase and cadherin of pest  Helicoverpa 
only; (ii) divergence in the structure of cadherin and aminopeptidase results in 
lack of activity of Cry1Ac protein. Thus structurally diverse orthologous receptors 
of human corresponding proteins do not react at all with Cry1Ac; 
(iv) protein Cry1Ac is degraded in 20 seconds to non toxic molecules at acidic 
pH (v)  specificity is further demonstrated by the observed lack of activity 
against larvae of  Spodoptera litura (vi)  aminopeptidase of S.litura does not 
interact with Cry1Ac protein. 
• No new data or evidence has been established to prove that Bt protein is 
unsafe or hazardous. Even the reports of international experts are an analysis 
of the EC-II Report and their main concern is that the GEAC had set a too 
narrow scope. Their recommendations/ conclusions are based on “indications” 
or “possibilities” 
• Bt technology is best suited and an alternative way  to control cryptic borers 
such as bollworms, which are internal feeders, much like the brinjal fruit and 
shoot borer. 
• Data from CICR has clearly shown  reduced application of pesticides in 
cultivated Bt cotton crop The reduction in insecticide usage from Rs 718 
crores in 2004 for lepidopteran caterpillars to Rs 110 crores (Rs 23 crores for 
 
 
 
 

American bollworm) in 2010, can be seen as a spectacular achievement of Bt 
cotton technology. 
• Sizeable quantities of highly toxic insecticides such as carbosulfan, carbofuran, 
triazophos, metasystox, monocrotophos, phorate, methyl parathion, 
phosphomidan, dicofol etc which are considered to be extremely hazardous to 
the environment and which have been severely regulated by the FAO (Food 
and Agricultural Organization), WHO (World Health Organization) and the 
UNEP (united Nations Environment Programme) are being used on Brinjal 
crop. The three organophosphate insecticides (phosphamidon, methyl 
parathion and monocrotophos) belong to the category of either „banned or 
restricted use‟ in India. But, it is a matter of immense concern that these are 
regularly used on Brinjal crop just before harvest. All these insecticides are 
systemic and are translocated into fruits, thus posing immense dangers. 
• Bt cotton seed meal is being fed to cattle in India for a number of years now. 
No authenticated cases of adverse effects on farm animals have been 
reported so far. 
• A large diversity of wild/weedy forms related to brinjal exists in India. Among 
these, the group comprising S. incanum-S, insanum complex is crossable with 
brinjal under artificial cross-pollination.  The amount of crossability varies with 
genotypes, but successful crosses produce viable hybrids. As Bt is not a 
dominant gene, it  will not result in any fitness advantage even if it is 
transferred. 
• S. melongena (brinjal) and S. incanum-S. insanum have never been reported 
as invasive or difficult to eradicate weeds.  The probable hybrids existing in 
nature also do not pose any problems as serious weeds. In our experience of 
nearly two decades of work on Indian Solanums, we have never found these 
plants growing in dense populations. They exist as individual plants or sparse 
populations of 10-15 plants in nature or as sporadic plants around cultivated 
fields. 
• The fear that adoption of Bt brinjal will lead to loss of indigenous diversity of 
cultivated forms is rather exaggerated.  If Bt cotton is any example and Bt 
brinjal is as successful, we will see numerous seed companies transferring Bt 
gene into their varieties/hybrids that are already acceptable to the farmers and 
consumers. While Bt gene would be common among these, the rest of the 
genome will be as diverse as it is at present. 
• About 4,000 accessions of brinjal germ plasm are available in the gene bank 
with NBPGR.  It is the responsibility of public institutions like NBPGR to 
preserve the natural forms as India is a centre of diversity of not only brinjal 
but several other crops. 
 
iii  Several  members   also  expressed  concern   about   the   sustainability   of   the 
technology.  They  opined  that  the  main  concern  about  cry1Ac  gene  is  resistance 
development  of  the  fruit  and  shoot  borer  to  Bt  brinjal,  especially  because  it  is  a 
monophagous  p est.   The  transgenic  line  under  consideration  does  not  provide  full 
protection against the target insect pest.  Also this insect pest has only one host plant, 
brinjal.  The recommended refugia of 5% would be grossly insufficient to delay resistance 
significantly. However, globally acknowledged expertise available in the country, and at 
 
 
 
 

CICR can be utilized to devise effective resistance management strategies  immediately 
prior to the release based on stochastic models developed by CICR. 
 
iv  Dr P M Bhargava did not support the above views.  He opined that the need for 
additional studies to a ssess the  safety of Bt protein needs to be  reviewed in  light of new 
evidences available. He further stated that the objective regarding purpose of the tests, 
such as where; how; the list of tests needed to be conducted; etc has not been achieved 
by today‟s meeting. He suggested that a separate meeting with additional experts may be 
convened to discuss the list of 39 studies suggested by him in his letter to the Hon‟ble 
Minister for Environment & Forests and to the GEAC. In response, Members were of the 
view  that  additional  tests  if  prescribed,  should  be  on  the  basis  of  international  best 
practices  and  experiences.  No  Utopian  protocols  only  specific  for  India  should  be 
prescribed as raising the bar would increase the affordability cost to farmers. Members 
were also of the view that studies such as proteomics, transcriptomics, etc. are currently 
only research tools and do not provide any value addition to the biosafety assessment. Dr 
Bhargava did not agree with the above views and reiterated emphatically that he was not 
against the technology but in light of the new evidences and experiences available, there 
is an urgent need for a scientific debate on the additional studies suggested by him.  He 
opined that during  the debate,  members who do not agree with the requirement may 
provide scientific  basis  and  evidence  on  why  a  particular  study  is  not  required.  He 
suggested that during the next meeting, experts such as Prof. Madhav Gadgil, a socio- 
economic expert and others may be invited for having a wider opinion on the matter. It 
was clarified that the meeting notice and relevant papers have been circulated to Prof 
Gadgil  but  no  response has  been  received.  However,  the  relevant  papers  would  be 
resent  after  contacting  Prof  Gadgil.  Dr  Bhargava  also  requ ested  Member  Secretary, 
GEAC  to  circulate  his  letter  dated  September  2,  2010  eliciting  the  list  of  39  studies 
required for  biosafety  assessment.  It  was  clarified  that  the  communication  has  been 
circulated and would be resent to all the members. 
 
v  Representatives of the Department of AYUSH (Ayurveda,   Unani and Medicinal 
Plant Board) opined that they were participating in this process for the first time and they 
were  enlightened  by  the  discussions  and  views  of  the  eminent  experts.  They  also 
informed that discussions with MoEF on concerns pertaining to gene flow and crossibility, 
etc. have been clarified. While the Department was willing to go along with the views of 
experts regarding  the safety of Bt protein, they were of the view that their concern is 
limited to the fact that brinjals had a special medicinal advantage in traditional system of 
medicine.  They suggested  that  compositional  comparative  analysis  of  both  traditional 
brinjal and  Bt brinjal to ascertain the alteration, if any, in the bioactivities, nutritional and 
medicinal values as some of the Solanum species are used in the preparation of classical 
formulations  of  Indian  medicines  used  in  the  treatment  of  neurological  and musculo- 
skeletal disorders. It was further recommended that such studies may be conducted in 
public  sector  institutions  such  as  Central  Drug  Research  Institute(CDRI),  Lucknow, 
National  Institute  of  Nutrition  (NIN),  Indian  Institute  of  Integrated  Medicine  (IIM)  and 
others. 
 
vi.  In response to the above  o bservations,  Dr Sesikaran, Director,  NIN  requested 
scientists from AYUSH to provide the following information based on which appropriate 
follow  up  action  to identify and  estimate  such  components  in  the  Bt  Brinjal  under 
 
 
 

 
 
consideration  will  be carried out  as  additional  components  of 
compositional equivalence studies: 
 
• Nature of medicinal properties of brinjal 
• The specific varieties which have been documented in literature to 
have such properties 
• the active ingredients / ingredient which have such properties 
• Their chemical nature, mode of action clinical indications etc if 
information is documented 
• The standardized methodology to measure these components and / or 
their active / inactive metabolites which could act as fingerprints for 
identification 
• The methodology for estimation as accepted based on their sensitivity 
and specificity limits of detection etc 
 
vii  Dr Ram Vishwakarma, Director, Indian Institute  of Integrated  Medicine, Jammu 
suggested that International Safety Guidelines with no conflict of interest should be strictly 
followed.  He  further  suggested  that  international  regulatory  data  is  available  on  the 
website  and  needs  to  be  studied  by  the  GEAC  to  verify  whether  the  protocols  and 
procedures follo wed to generate biosafety data with Bt brinjal conforms to international 
practices/scrutiny. 
 
II  Acceptance of company data 
 
 
All members except Dr P M Bhargava agreed that any data generated in accredited GLP 
laboratories can be accepted as this practice is being followed internationally for release of 
all products.   Dr. Bhargava opined that there is a need for setting up an independent 
GMO testing facility devoid of conflict of interest and encompassing all the stakeholders 
for generation of biosafety data for regulatory purposes and data submitted by the 
company should not be accepted. 
 
III  Suggestions on Way Forward: 
 
 
The following recommendations of Dr G Padmanabhan were supported by many Experts, 
however, Dr P M Bhargava categorically opposed it: 
 
1.   Limited release of Bt seeds to identified  farmers under strict expert supervision 
should be undertaken to evaluate its performance in public space. This would also 
help in the assessment of its suitability for cooking purposes and as a food item. If it 
is considered absolutely necessary, this period can also be used to test a couple of  
parameters: 1. Analysis of alkaloids 2. Chronic toxicity test for 180 days. He 
further  opined  that these two tests are needed  only to send the message that 
GEAC is not averse to go the extra-mile to address even remote issues of safety. 
 
5.0  Joint  Secretary  (seeds)  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  supporting  the  suggestion  for 
limited release also stated that Ministry of Agriculture has initiated several developmental 
programs to improve food security and awareness. For successful implementation of the 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
promotional programs GM technology is  required. He further suggested that the review 
should  be science based and completed in a time bound manner. 
 
6.0  In his concluding remarks, the Chairman opined that the issues involved are very 
complex and it may not be possible in one meeting or one sitting, to come to an agreed 
consensus on what needs to be done, etc.   On the issue of whether GM technology is 
needed or not,  he informed that  the GEAC is guided  by the  statement  made by the 
Hon‟ble  Prime  Minister  at  the  Indian  Science  Congress  on  January  3,  2010  at 
Thiruvananthapuram  wherein he   has categorically stated that “we should pursue all 
possible leads that biotechnology provides that might increase our food security as we go 
through climate related stress subject to the condition that the question of safety is given 
full weightage, with appropriate regulatory control based on strictly scientific criteria”. 
 
7.0  The Chairman also opined that due consideration should be given to issues raised 
by  the  State  Governments  and  such  apprehensions  have  to  be  addressed  in  a 
transparent manner to ensure public acceptability of the technology. He also pointed out 
that the current regulatory process is going through a transition period as new initiatives 
such as the Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India Bill is under active consideration 
of the Government.  During the interim period, the GEAC will continue its dialogue with 
experts and take necessary action to strengthen  the regulatory framework in India. He 
requested all experts, as a follow-up to today‟s meeting, to forward a half-page 
recommendation on the way forward including the need for additional  studies  within 7 
days. With a view to facilitate scientific debate he further suggested, while recommending 
additional studies, the experts may al so indicate the end point for such studies, its 
applicability in the biosafety assessment, whether such studies are prescribed by other 
regulatory agencies and if so what the prescribed protocols are. 
 
8.0  Thanking all the members once again for their active participation,  he informed 
that a second consultative meeting will be convened by the GEAC to discuss the 
recommendations received from experts and other departments  on  the requirement for 
additional biosafety studies. 
 
The meeting ended with a vote of thanks to the Chair and Members. 
 
 
***************** 
  

Annexure – III 
LIST OF POINTS ON THE SUBJECT “CULTIVATION OF GENETICALLY 
MODIFIED FOOD CROPS – PROSPECTS AND EFFECTS” 
 
1 The role, responsibility 
and the 
comments/explanation 
of UAS, Dharwad & 
CICR, Nagpur who 
were involved in the 
development of the 
variety and hybrid in 
question may please 
be obtained and 
furnished. 
Role of UAS, Dharwad 
A research project was approved under 
National Agricultural Technology Project 
(NATP) funding, during 1999 -2004, on Bt 
transgenic cotton.  The Lead Centre of this 
Project was National Research Centre for 
Plant Biotechnology (NRCPB), Delhi.  The 
University of Agricultural Sciences (UAS), 
Dharwad and Central Institute for Cotton 
Research, Nagpur were cooperating centres 
of the Project.  UAS, Dharwad carried out 
genetic transformation of the cotton variety, 
Bikaneri Nerma  (BN), using cry 1Ac gene 
construct, th at was provided by NRCPB, to 
develop the Dharwad event (which was later 
called BNLA 106 event) of BN Bt variety.  
During 2005, comparative evaluation of all the 
events, developed under the NATP project 
was conducted for Cry 1Ac expression and 
„BNLA 106‟ Bt  event was found comparatively 
better and hence, this was taken forward for 
the mandated regulatory evaluations, as 
RCGM trials. 
Role of CICR 
CICR was involved in undertaking and 
coordinating RCGM and GEAC regulatory 
trials as well as generation of Biosafety data of 
BN Bt event during 2005 to 2008. 
BN Bt and Bt. NHH 44 hybrid seeds, that were 
produced at UAS, Dharwad were sent to CICR 
in May, 2009 for distribution to state seed 
agencies. 
2. Similarly, the role, 
responsibility and the 
comments/explanation 
of NRCPB who 
provided the relevant 
gene construct to 
UAS, Dharwad may 
also be furnished. 
National Research Centre for Plant 
Biotechnology, New Delhi provided a gene 
construct (cry 1Ac) to UAS, Dharwad in 
January, 2000 as its part of NATP funded Bt 
Transgenic cotton.  The name of the gene 
construct was pBinBt3. 

3. The NRCPB may also 
be asked to explain 
non-detection of the 
Mon 531 in BN Bt. 
Seeds when they 
confirmed gene 
integration and copy 
number by Southern 
analysis which is a 
highly sensitive 
procedure. 
The Southern analysis carried out at NRCPB 
did not detect MON 531 event, in the samples 
made available in 2003, by UAS, Dharwad. 
4. The work was 
published in Current 
Science in 2007.  
However, the authors 
of the paper have only 
been asked after a 
meeting held on 27 
December, 2011 to 
submit a corrigendum 
to the Journal to rectify 
the paper.  ICAR may 
be requested to clarify 
why this was not done 
during last four years 
plus or at least in 2009 
when the production of 
BN Bt. and Bt. NHH 
44 seeds was 
stopped.  
During discussions on 27 th December, 2011, 
an error in the vector map shown in the 
Current Science paper was noticed.  The 
authors have been asked to rectify this error. 
5. The reported presence 
of Mon 531 in BN Bt. 
Seeds was discussed 
in a meeting convened 
at New Delhi on 10 
December, 2009 
under DDG (CS), 
ICAR.  Based on 
evidence available it 
was decided that the 
production and 
commercial sale of BN 
Bt. And Bt. NHH 44 
seeds be stopped.  
Another meeting on 
the subject has been 
 In around September -October, 2009, 
representatives of M/S Mahyco -Monsanto met 
various officials of ICAR including Deputy 
Director General (Crop Science), D irector, 
NRCPB, New Delhi and Director, CICR, 
Nagpur and informed that the BN Bt and Bt 
NHH 44 hybrid seeds available in the market 
were found to contain Monsanto gene and 
event, MON 531.  A detailed report was 
prepared by CICR, Nagpur in October, 2009, 
wherein this view of representatives of M/s 
Mahyco-Monsanto expressing their views has 
also been recorded.  Consequently, a meeting 
was held in ICAR on 10 th December, 2009, 
wherein the decision to stop further production 
of BN Bt and Bt NHH 44 seeds was taken. 

held two years later on 
27th December, 2011 
when the matter came 
in press reports.  A 
clarification may be 
obtained on how the 
matter was reported 
and by whom in 2009 
and what action apart 
from discontinuation of 
seed production was 
taken by ICAR and 
other institutions 
involved as they all 
public sector entities. 
 
  In this meeting of December, 2009, it was felt 
that the reported presence of MON 531 in the 
BN Bt and Bt NHH 44 seeds may be on 
account of some contamination of the seeds 
at some stage.  Therefore, it was decided that 
production could only be restarted, after 
complete purification for uniformity and 
homozygosity of cry 1Ac gene, BNLA 106 
original event. 
6. A detailed note on the 
role and responsibility 
of M/s Avasthagen 
who characterized the 
BN Bt. Event in 2006 -
07 may be obtained 
and submitted along 
with their reports 
pertaining to the 
instant case. 
BN Bt event was characterized by M/s 
Avesthagen. This is akin to identifying the 
unique signature, or footprint, of the gene 
given to them. 
7. A detailed note on the 
stance of and the 
action taken by the 
private party whose 
proprietary Cry 1 AC 
gene Mon 531 event 
is. 
No action has been initiated by the private 
party. 
8. A detailed note on the 
question when the 
presence of Mon 531 
was reported in 2009 
leading to 
discontinuation of 
production and 
commercialization of 
BN Bt. and Bt. NHH 
44 seeds why have 
ICAR chosen to 
inquire into the matter 
now after two years 
that too when it was 
When it was noted by ICAR that Mon 531 was 
reported to be present in BN Bt, the following 
actions was taken: 
The seed production for cultivation of BN Bt 
was suspended. 
 
The ICAR asked UAS, Dharwad and NRCPB, 
New Delhi to take up purification, if possible, 
of BN Bt as explained in (5) above. 
 
The progress was reviewed on April, 27, 2011 
and process of purification of BN Bt event was 
reported by UAS, Dharwad and NRCPB, New 
Delhi to be in progress. 

reported in the media.  
A report was submitted on 20 th October, 2011 
by NRCPB, New Delhi with regard to the 
molecular analysis of the purified BN Bt event. 
 UAS, Dharwad was asked to provide 
“purified” sample material to CICR, Nagpur for 
validation. 
 
The ICAR also decided to set up an Expert 
Committee, consisting of experts from outside 
ICAR, to look into the entire issue and advise 
further course of action. 
 
 
9. A detailed note on the 
role of CICR in the 
matter because 
though the project was 
assigned to UAS, 
Dharwad, CICR has 
applied for RCGM 
permissions and 
GEAC approvals, 
submitted application 
for registration to PPV-
FRA, distributed seeds 
from UAS, Dharwad to 
seed corporations 
during May, 2009. 
CICR was involved in undertaking the 
coordination of regulatory field evaluations of 
the BN Bt Cotton variety and Bt NHH 44 
hybrid (RCGM & GEAC trials) and their 
biosafety evaluation.  CICR further undertook 
the seed distribution of BN Bt and Bt NHH 44 
hybrid seeds to state seed agencies and 
cotton farmers. 
 
CICR also submitted an application with 
Protection of Plant Variety and Farmers Right 
Authority (PPV & FRA) in May, 2009, as a 
mandatory requirement for commerci alization.  
However, in the light of the reported presence 
of MON 531, in BN Bt seeds, on 3 rd August, 
2011, this application was requested to be 
withdrawn/cancelled.  The leave for 
withdrawal has since been granted by this 
Authority on 16th January, 2012. 
10. It also needs to be 
clarified as to who had 
proprietary right over 
the developed variety 
and hybrid. 
The proprietary rights belong to the institutions 
which developed BN Bt cotton variety/Bt 
NHH44 cotton hybrid. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
          Annexure - IV 
 
 
 
 
Research Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi) 
 
 
 
TITLE OF PROPOSAL 
 
 
ANIMAL FEEDING TRIAL ON BIO -SAFETY STUDIES 
WITH BIOTECHNOLOGICALLY TRANSFORMED BT-
COTTON CROP USING SEED MEAL 
 
 
 
 
 
DIVISION OF ANIMAL NUTRITION 
CENTRAL SHEEP & WOOL RESEARCH 
INSTITUTE, AVIKANAGAR - 304 501 
 
INDIA 
 
FUNDED BY: 
Central Institute For Cotton Research 
(ICAR) 
Post Bag No.2, Shankar Nagar 
NAGPUR- 440 010, Maharastra 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
 
 
Research Report of Inter Institution Project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE OF PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
ANIMAL FEEDING TRIAL ON BIO -SAFETY STUDIES WITH 
BIOTECHNOLOGICALLY TRANSFORMED 
BT-COTTON CROP USING SEED MEAL 
 
 
 
 
Collaboration Between 
 
 
 
 
CENTRAL SHEEP & WOOL RESEARCH INSTITUTE,  
(ICAR) 
AVIKANAGAR - 304 501, INDIA 
 
& 
 
 
Central Institute For Cotton Research 
(ICAR) 
Post Bag No.2, Shankar Nagar 
NAGPUR- 440 010, Maharastra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
 
S. No. Particular Page 
1 Project title 3 
2 Objectives 3 
3 Date of start 3 
4 Division/ Department 3 
5 Location of the study 3 
6 Project Leader and associates 3 
7 Executive Summary 4-5 
8 Detailed research report 6-25 
9 Research findings 26 
10 Financial Details of the Project 27 
11 Certificate and Signature of PI and Co-PIs 28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
 
Title : Animal feeding trial on bio-safety studies with of Bt- 
cotton crop using seed meal 
Objective: To asses the bio-safety of feeding genetically modified 
BT gene containing cottonseed in lamb feeding 
Priority research area : Bio-safety of transgenic crops 
Sanction / Fund receipt No. : AA/2-1/9-07/Trains-crop/10/37;  dated:  05-03-07 
Proposed start date : May 1, 2007 
Actual date of start : August 1, 2007 
Name and address of 
Institute/ Organization : 
Central Sheep & Wool Research Institute. Avikanagar- 
304 501, Rajasthan. India 
Location of work: Animal Nutrition Division, 
Central Sheep & Wool Research Institute, 
Avikanagar- 304 501, Rajasthan. 
Tel : 01437-220143 
Fax : 01437-220163 
Project Leader  and associates: 
Principal Investigator Dr S. A. Karim 
Director 
Central Sheep and Wool Research Institute (ICAR) 
Avikanagar, 304 501 (Via- Jaipur), Rajasthan, India 
Tel: 01437-220143 
Fax: 01437-220163 
E-mail: sakarim53@yahoo.co.in 
Co-Principal Investigator Dr M. K. Tripathi 
Senior Scientist (Animal Nutrition) 
E-mail: mktripathi@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
 
 
Bt cotton is a transgenic plant, producing an insect controlling protein 
Cry1A(c),  the  gene  which  has  been  derived  from  the  naturally  occurring 
bacterium,  Bacillus   thuringiensis.   The  cotton   hybrids   containing   Bt  gene 
produces its own toxin for bollworm attack thus significantly reducing chemical 
insecticide  use  and  providing  a  major  benefit  to  cotton  growers  and  the 
environment. Bt cotton contains the three genes inserted via genetic engineering 
techniques, wherein, the Cry1Ac gene, encodes an insecticidal protein, Cry1Ac, 
derived from the common soil microbe Bacillus thuringiensis which has concern 
on food and feed safety issues. With this background, a project entitled “Animal 
feeding trial on bio-safety studies with of Bt-cotton crop using seed meal” 
was initiated at Division of Animal Nutrition, Central Sheep and wool Research 
Institute (ICAR)  Avikanagar,  in  collaboration  with Central  Institute  For Cotton 
Research (ICAR), Nagpur. The project aim was to asses the bio-safety of BT- 
cottonseed in lamb feeding, which was initiated during August 07 and continued 
for 120 days on weaner lambs at a high plane of nutrition. 
 
 
Nutrient (OM, CP and fiber fractions) and mineral (Ca, P. Mn, Co and Zn) 
contents  were  identical  in  BT-cotton  and  non-BT  cotton  seeds.  The  growth 
performance of lambs was similar on control, non- BT cotton seed and BT-cotton 
seed included diets. The growing lambs consumed 168 g BT-cotton seed per day 
and did not have apparent adverse effect on dry matter intake, nutrient utilization 
and nitrogen balance. Similarly BT-cotton seed intake of 0.681 % of body weight 
or 19.5 % of dry matter intake did not produce deleterious effect on performance 
and  dry  matter  intake,  thus  palatability  and  growth  performance  was  not  a 
problem for BT-cotton seed feeding in lambs even under high plane of nutrition. 
Rumen fermentation  characteristics  viz, pH, TVFA and NH3-N concentrations 
was not influenced by feeding of GNC, non- BT cotton seed or BT-cotton seed in 
lamb diets. Heamatological observations did not change due to BT-cotton seed 
feeding compared to non-BT cottonseed or GNC feeding.  Intrestigly feeding of 
BT-cotton seed increased RBC and decreased WBC in blood. Serum IgG level 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton crop 
using seed meal 
 
did not change due to BT and non-BT cotton seed feeding. Thus feeding of BT- 
cottonseed to lambs did not alter immunity and allergen status. 
 
 
Internal organs weights as g per kg empty live weight (ELW)  indicated 
precise effect of BT- cottonseed feeding on internal organ changes. The weights 
of kidney,  spleen, pancrease, heart, lung, penis, kidney fat, cole fat, GI tract, 
ingest and empty GI tract were not different among BT cotton seed and non-BT 
cotton seed fed lambs. However BT cotton seed feeding increased liver weight, 
testicle weight and testicles fat g / kg empty live weight. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar                                                        year 2007-2008 
 
 
 

 Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
Chemical composition of Non-BT and BT-cotton seeds 
 
 
 
The chemical composition (% DM basis) of cotton seed is presented in table1. 
The Non BT cotton seed (N-BT) and BT cotton seed (BT) had 92.76 % and 94.46 % 
dry matter (DM); 20.35 %  and  22.97 % crude protein (CP); 95.1 % and 93.9 % 
organic matter (OM);  57.22 % and 56.16%  NDF; 36.44 % and 29.42 % ADF and 
20.77 % and 26.74 % hemicellulose  respectively. The CP and hemicellulose contents 
were higher in BT than N-BT cotton seed. However, the OM, NDF and ADF content 
showed a reverse trend being high in NBT than BT. 
 
 
Mineral contents  viz.  Calcium,  Phosphorus,  Manganese  and Copper were 
identical in  N-BT and BT cottonseed, while Zinc content was higher in BT-cotton 
seeds by 10 ppm. 
 
Table 1 
Chemical Composition of cottonseed 
 
 Type of Cotton seed  
Chemical constituents (g/kg DM) Non-BT BT 
Dry matter 896.0 908.7 
Organic matter 951.4 938.9 
Crude protein 203.5 229.7 
Neutral detergent fiber 572.2 561.6 
Acid detergent fiber 364.4 294.2 
Hemicellulose 207.7 267.4 
Mineral contents   
Calcium (g %) 0.193 0.144 
Phosphorus (mg %) 11.270 12.839 
Manganese (ppm) 27.829 28.018 
Copper (ppm) 18.517 17.272 
Zinc (ppm) 36.544 43.996 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
Composition of Diets 
 
Diets were prepared to provide adequate essential and non-essential nutrients 
to  support  optimum  growth  of  growing  lambs  as  per  ICAR  recommendations. 
Ingredient composition and constituents of concentrate are presented in table-2. Bajra 
Kadbi (Perl  Millet  Stover)  was  used  as  major  roughage  source.  Complete  feed 
mixture (premixes) of total mixed ration (TMR)  contained 35 part Bajra Kadbi, 60 
parts concentrate mixture and 5 part molasses. Thus TMR had roughage: concentrate 
ratio of 35: 65. A total of three test diets were prepared. The concentrate mixture was 
prepared  using  various  grinded  concentrate  ingredients  (Table-2). Diet of control 
animals contained groundnut cake (GNC), as conventional protein supplement, which 
was replaced by  Non-BT  cotton seeds and BT-cotton seed in diets fed to animals 
allocated in Non-BT and BT group of test diets. Diets were balanced for total protein 
content with the addition of GNC. 
 
 
The  total  mixed  rations  were  iso- nitrogenous that contained crude protein 
 
14.7, 14.6 and 13.9 % respectively in control, N-BT and BT diets. Fiber fractions viz. 
NDF, ADF, hemicellulose and cellulose were slightly higher in N-BT diet compared 
to control and BT diets. 
 
 
Animals and Dietary Treatment 
 
 
Weaner Malpura lambs (90 + 5 day of age; 15.5 + 0.89 kg) were used for the 
present experiment. The animals were randomly allocated to three dietary treatments, 
maintaining a sex ratio of 50:50; male and female lambs. 
 
 
Keeping in view the quantity of BT-cottonseed received three of each male 
and female lambs were randomly allocated to each treatment II and III, while control 
group had ten lambs of similar sex ratio. 
Treatment I: Control; Groundnut cake was used as major protein supplement 
 
Treatment II: N-BT; Non-BT cottonseed was used to replace groundnut cake (g/g) 
 
Treatment III: BT ;  BT cottonseed was used to replace groundnut cake (g/g) 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
Table 2 
 
Composition of diet (total mixed ration), concentrate mixture and cottonseed 
 
 Diets 
Ingredient composition (g/kg) Control N-BT BT 
Total mixed ration    
Perl millet stover 350 350 350 
Concentrate 600 600 600 
Molasses 50 50 50 
Concentrate mixture    
Maize 250 220 220 
Barley 250 210 220 
Wheat bran 90 60 70 
De-oiled rice bran 80 40 50 
Groundnut cake 300 140 110 
Cottonseed non-BT - 300 - 
Cottonseed-BT - - 300 
Common Salt (NaCl) 10 10 10 
Mineral mixture 15 15 15 
Supplivit-M 5 5 5 
Chemical composition (g/kg DM)    
Dry matter 927.6 944.6 941.5 
Organic matter 900.0 912.6 890.5 
Crude protein 146.7 145.5 139.4 
Neutral detergent fiber 515.3 591.0 561.9 
Acid detergent fiber 347.2 370.3 389.6 
Hemicellulose 168.1 220.7 172.3 
Cellulose 264.5 274.7 312.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
Diet and Feeding Regimen 
 
 
 
Three test diets were prepared to provide adequate nutrient to support active 
growth phase  of weaner lambs. The total mixed ration  contained 60 % concentrate 
that had 30 % groundnut cake (GNC) fed to control group of lambs, whereas lambs of 
non-   BT  (Cottonseed)  and  BT   (BT-Cottonseed)   group  had  30  %  respective 
cottonseed. Total mixed rations were prepared separately, which had 18 % either of 
GNC, non-BT Cottonseed and BT-Cottonseed. 
 
 
Experimental  animals  were  fed  individually  in  separate  enclosures,  feed 
offered and  residue left were recorded daily to determine daily feed intake. Feed 
residues were discarded before offering the feed of the day. The feed of the day was 
offered once in the morning at 10:00 h, to an excess of 10 % of previous days intake. 
Animals were allowed loitering in an open yard, without vegetation for two hrs daily. 
Water was available free choice twice in day at 09: 00 h and 16:00 h. 
 
Growth Performance of Lambs 
 
 
 
To asses the growth performance lambs, body weight changes were recorded 
by weighing lambs every week before offering the feed and water for two consecutive 
days, these means live weights were used to monitor growth profile of the lambs. The 
growth performance of lambs is  presented in table 3. The pattern of live weight 
change is given in Figure 1. 
 
 
Initial (p= 0.228) and finishing (p= 0.633) live weight of lambs were similar, 
which were  respectively 14.3 and 26.9; 15.6 and 25.4; and  16.3 and 27.8 kg of 
control, N-BT and BT groups. Total live weight gain of 12.6, 10.6 and 12.9 kg; and 
average daily weight  gains were 102;  89 and 111 g were also similar among three 
groups. Similarly, feed conversion ratio (kg feed/ kg  gain) and feed efficiency (%) 
were also similar among three groups of lamb which ranged from 8.2 to 9.1 kg and 
11.1 to 12.3 % respectively. 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

B o dyw e i g htc h a n ge( k g ) 
Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
Table 3 
Growth performance of weaner lambs on diets containing BT or non-BT cottonseed. 
 
 Diets* SEM P 
 C N-BT BT   
Initial live weight (kg) 14.3 15.6 16.3 0.529 0.228 
Finishing live weight (kg) 26.9 25.4 27.8 1.008 0.633 
Total live weight gain (kg) 12.6 10.9 12.9 0.666 0.496 
Average daily gain (g) 102 89 111 5.349 0.270 
Total feed intake (kg) 102.5 96.3 108.2 4.298 0.591 
Feed conversion ratio (kg feed/ kg 
 
gain) 
8.2 9.1 8.6 0.230 0.320 
Feed conversion efficiency (%) 12.3 11.1 11.8 0.338 0.390 
*Diets: Total mixed ration contained roughage, concentrate and molasses in ration of 
60:35:5, concentrate contained groundnut cake (Control-C), non-Bt cottonseed (N-BT) or 
Bt-cottonseed (BT) as major protein source, which fed to lambs. 
 
 
28 
 
 
26 
 
Control N-BT BT 
 
24 
 
 
22 
 
 
20 
 
 
18 
 
 
16 
 
 
14 
 
 
12 
0 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56 63 70 77 84 91       98      105     112   119   126 
Days of feeding 
 
Fig. 1: Body weight (BW) change of lambs fed diets containing groundnut cake 
(control), BT or Non-BT cotton seed as protein supplement. 
BW (kg, Control lambs) = 13.561 + 0.689X - 0.0003X2 (R2  = 0.977) 
BW (kg, N-BT lambs)  =15.260 + 0.328X + 0.0130X2  (R2  = 0.985) 
BW (kg, BT lambs) = 15.860 + 0.470X + 0.0109X2  (R2  = 0.970) 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
Nutrient Intake, Utilization and Balance 
 
A metabolic trail was carried out toward the end of experiment on all animals 
of treatment II and III, whereas on six representative animals of treatment I. During 
metabolic trial animals were  allowed three days acclimatizing to metabolic cages 
followed by seven days collection of faeces and urine voided. Daily records of feed 
intake,  faeces  and  urine  voided  were  maintained  to   determine  nutrient  intake, 
utilization and balance. 
 
 
Urine was collected under 10 % sulphuric acid, maintaining a pH between 2-3 
to avoid  degradation of urinary purine derivatives. Urine purine derivates estimates 
the microbial protein synthesis in rumen. 
 
Dry matter intake 
 
Daily  dry  matter  intake  varied  from  706  g  to  861  g  among  three  dietary 
treatment groups and was not statistically (p= 0.373) different. The lambs in present 
experiment consumed feed dry matter 71, 69, and 78 g/ kg W0.75 (P= 0.383), and 3.1, 
3.2 and 3.5 % of body weight (P= 0.399), respectively in control, N-BT and BT group 
of  experimental  lambs  (Table  4).  Similarly  intake  of  roughage,  concentrate  and 
protein source (g/day) were also not statistically different among three lamb groups. 
Apparently, compared to control and N-BT group of lambs, the lambs fed BT-cotton 
seed had higher dry matter intake in terms of g/day, g/kg W0.75  and % of body weight. 
The growing lambs consumed 168 g BT-cotton per day did not have apparent adverse 
effect on dry matter intake. Similarly BT-cotton seed intake of 0.681 % of body 
weight or 19.5 % of dry matter intake did not produce deleterious effect on dry matter 
intake, thus palatability is not a problem for BT-cotton seed feeding in lambs. 
 
 
Nutrient intake and digestibility 
 
 
 
Intake of organic matter (OM; 711, 647 and 766g), crude protein (CP; 116, 
103  and  120  g),  NDF  (408,  417  and  483  g),  ADF  (274,261  and  335  g) and 
hemicellulose  (133, 156 and 148 g), respectively of control, N-BT and BT lamb 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
groups, was not statistically different among three feeding regimen, whereas intake of 
cellulose was  higher (p = 0.053)   in BT group of lambs (269g) compared to N-BT 
(194g) lamb group, however  control and BT- group of lambs had similar cellulose 
intake. 
 
 
Digestibility of dry matter, 60.3 57.8 and 58.9 %; OM, 63.2, 62.6 and 62.9 %; 
CP, 62.2, 59.7 and 60.2 % and NDF 43.5, 49.1 and 46.7 % and were respectively in 
control, N-BT and BT  diet fed lambs, which were similar among the three feeding 
regimens. However, digestibility of ADF was significantly (p = 0.022) lower by 7 % 
units, while hemicellulose digestibility was higher (p = 0.047) by 10 % units in BT 
lambs compared to N-BT lamb group, whereas cellulose digestibility was similar 
between BT and Non-BT lambs. Interestingly, the digestibility of DM, OM and CP 
were slightly higher but NDF, ADF, and cellulose were lower in control lambs. 
 
 
 
 
Nutritive Value of Diet 
 
 
 
Three diets prepared using GNC, N-BT cotton seed and BT-cotton seed did 
not significantly influence nutritive value of diet in terms of digestible crude protein 
(DCP, g/ kg) and metabolizable energy (ME, MJ/ kg) content of diet.  The DCP % 
was 9.1, 8.7 and 8.4 while ME content was 8.5, 8.6 and 8.4 MJ/ kg diet respectively 
in control, N-BT and BT diets (Table 5). 
 
 
Digestible Nutrient and Energy Intake 
 
 
 
Intake of digestible nutrient and metabolizable energy were also not different 
among three dietary treatments. Digestible DM intake (g/ day) was 483, 407 and 509 
g; digestible OM intake (g/ day) 456, 403, and 484 g and (g / kg diet) 569, 573 and 
560 g; digestible CP intake (g/ day) 72, 61 and 73 g and ME intake (MJ/ day) was 
 
6.8, 6.0 and 7.3, respectively in control, N-BT and BT lamb group. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
Table 4 
 
Nutrient intake and utilization of weaner lambs on diets containing BT or non-BT 
cottonseed. 
 
 Diets* SEM P 
 C N-BT BT 
Body weight (BW, kg) 24.3 22.08 24.52 0.794 0.407 
Body weight W0.7 5 (kg) 10.93 10.16 11.00 0.272 0.403 
Dry matter intake      
g/day 790.32 705.93 860.53 43.685 0.373 
g/kg W0.75 71.04 69.25 77.79 2.571 0.383 
kg/ 100 kg BW 3.19 3.20 3.50 0.101 0.399 
Roughage intake (g/day) 276.61 247.08 301.19 15.290 0.373 
Concentrate intake (g/day) 513.70 458.86 559.35 28.395 0.373 
Protein source intake      
g/day 154.11 137.66 167.80 8.519 0.373 
Kg/100 kg BW 0.623 0.624 0.681 0.197 0.399 
Intake and digestibility coefficient      
Dry matter      
Digestibility coefficient 0.603 0.578 0.589 0.006 0.268 
Organic matter      
Intake (g/day) 711.28 646.63 766.30 38.701 0.477 
Digestibility coefficient 0.632 0.626 0.629 0.006 0.902 
Crude protein      
Intake (g/day) 115.94 102.71 119.96 6.192 0.521 
Digestibility coefficient 0.622 0.5969 0.6019 0.0145 0.779 
Neutral detergent fiber      
Intake (g/day) 407.49 417.21 483.53 23.520 0.379 
Digestibility coefficient 0.435 0.491 0.467 0.011 0.104 
Acid detergent fiber      
Intake (g/day) 274.40 261.41 335.26 16.700 0.157 
Digestibility coefficient 0.338 0.460 0.392 0.019 0.022 
Hemi-cellulose      
Intake (g/day) 133.09 155.80 148.27 7.663 0.496 
Digestibility coefficient 0.636 0.542 0.637 0.019 0.047 
Cellulose      
Intake (g/day) 209.04 193.92 268.92 13.803 0.053 
Digestibility coefficient 0.520 0.629 0.598 0.015 0.002 
*Diets: Total mixed ration contained roughage, concentrate and molasses in ration of 
60:35:5, concentrate contained groundnut cake (Control-C), non-Bt cottonseed (N-BT) or 
Bt-cottonseed (BT) as major protein source, which fed to lambs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
Table 5 
 
Nutritive value of diets, digestible nutrient intake and N-balance of weaner lambs on diets 
containing BT or non-BT cottonseed. 
 
 
 Diets*   
C N-BT BT SEM P 
Nutritive value of diets      
Digestible crude protein (g/ kg) 91.24 86.85 83.91 2.184 0.411 
Metabolizable energy (MJ/ kg) 8.53 8.59 8.40 0.079 0.627 
Digestible nutrient and energy intake 
Digestib le DM intake (g/ day) 482.55 407.08 509.18 29.634 0.367 
Digestible OM intake (g/ day) 455.79 403.40 483.77 27.213 0.501 
Digestible OM intake (g/ kg diet) 569.19 573.12 560.26 5.304 0.627 
DCP intake (g/ day) 71.72 61.18 72.55 4.079 0.474 
ME intake (MJ/ day) 6.83 6.05 7.25 0.408 0.501 
DOMR (g/ day) 296.27 262.21 314.45 17.689 0.501 
DOMR (g/ kg diet) 369.98 372.52 364.17 3.448 0.627 
N-utilization and balance      
N-intake (g/day) 18.55 16.43 19.19 0.991 0.521 
N-excretion      
Faeces (g/day) 7.08 5.75 7.59 0.537 0.375 
Urine (g/day) 5.19 4.28 5.66 0.326 0.225 
Total (g/day) 12.27 10.86 13.24 0.648 0.340 
N- balance      
g/day 6.28 5.57 5.95 0.478 0.848 
% of intake 33.36 33.58 30.61 1.678 0.748 
% of absorbed 53.67 52.41 51.11 2.787 0.939 
*Diets: Total mixed ration contained roughage, concentrate and molasses in ration of 
60:35:5, concentrate contained groundnut cake (Control-C), non-Bt cottonseed (N-BT) or 
Bt-cottonseed (BT) as major protein source, which fed to lambs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
Similarly, digestible organic matter apparently fermented in rumen (DOMR; 
g/ day) and DOMR in term of g/ kg diet were also similar among control, N-BT and 
BT diets, DOMR (g/ kg  diet) was respectively amounting to 369, 372 and 364 g 
among three dietary regimens (Table 5). 
 
 
Nitrogen Utilization and Balance 
 
 
 
Nitrogen utilization in terms of N- intake, N-excretion in faeces and urine and 
balance were not statistically different among control, N-BT and BT diets. N- intake 
was 18.6, 16.4 and 19.2 g; N-excretion in faeces was 7.1, 5.8, 7.6g and in urine was 
5.2, 4.3 and 5.7 g and total-N excretion was 12.3, 10.9 and 13.2 g respectively in 
control, N-BT and BT diets. 
 
 
Similar to N-utilisation, N-balance was also not different among three dietary 
treatments. N-  balance in term of g/ day was slightly higher (6.3 g) in control lambs 
compared to N-BT (5.6 g)  and BT (6.0 g) diet fed lambs (Table 5).  N-balance as 
percent of intake ranged between 31 to 34 % and as per cent of absorbed 51 to 54 % 
in control, N-BT and BT diets. 
 
 
Table 6 
 
Rumen fermentation and microbial protein synthesis of weaner lambs on diets containing 
BT or non-BT cottonseed. 
 
 Diets*  P-values** 
 C N-BT BT SEM T P T*P 
pH 6.68 6.71 6.68 0.0287 0.867 0.001 0.008 
TVFA (mEq/l) 80.66 86.94 82.49 2.807 0.638 0.004 0.222 
NH3-N (mg/l) 97.54 76.20 88.74 2.145 0.62 0.168 <0.001 
*Diets: Total mixed ration contained roughage, concentrate and molasses in ration of 
60:35:5, concentrate contained groundnut cake (Control-C), non-Bt cottonseed (N-BT) or 
Bt-cottonseed (BT) as major protein source, which fed to lambs. 
** Significance level (Diet effect- T, Period effect-P, Interaction T×P). 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

PH 
Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
Rumen Fermentation Characteristics 
 
 
 
Samples of rumen liquor (50 ml) were withdrawn from intact lambs at 0, 4, 8, 
 
12, 18 and 24 h post- feeding using a stomach tube. Each sample was placed in a 100 
ml glass jar and the pH determined using a portable pH meter within 4 to 5 min of 
sampling. After pH measurement rumen fluid was strained with four layer of muslin 
cloth,  a  few  drops  of  saturated  mercuric  chloride  were  added  to  stop  microbial 
activity and stored –20ºC pending analysis. Rumen fluid samples were also processed 
to monitor the ciliate protozoa population.  A  10 ml rumen fluid was  processed to 
separate cellular and extra cellular fractions to estimate microbial enzymes activity in 
rumen. 
 
 
Rumen fermentation characteristics are presented in Table 6. The rumen fluid 
pH  was  almost  similar  in  control,  N-BT  and  BT  group  of  lambs,  which  was 
respectively 6.68, 6.71 and 6.68. Sampling period had significant (p<0.001) influence 
on  rumen  fluid  pH  and  was  stable  between  4  to  18  hr  of  post  feeding  (Fig  2). 
Interactions among post feeding hours and treatment were also significant (p<0.008). 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
7 
 
 
7 
 
 
6 
 
 
6 
 
Control 
5  NBT 
BT 
 
5 
 
 
4 
0  4  8  12  18  24 
 
 
 
Fig 2: Rumen pH at different post feeding Hours 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

T V FA (m mole/dl) NH3-N concentration mg/dl 
Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
11 
 
10 
 
9 
 
8 
 
7 
 
6  Control 
N-BT 
5  BT 
 
4 
0  4  8  12  18  24 
 
Post  feeding hr 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
12 
 
11 
 
10 
 
9 
 
8 
 
7  control 
6  NBT 
5  BT 
 
4 
0  4  8  12  18  24 
Post feeding hours 
 
 
Fig 3: Rumen TVFA and NH3-N at different post feeding Hours 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
Rumen TVFA Concentration 
 
 
 
The ruminal TVFA (mmol/ l) were also similar in control, N-BT and BT 
group of lambs, which were respectively 80.7, 86.9 and 82.5 m mol. Sampling period 
had significant (p<0.004) influence on TVFA concentration, a sharp decline in TVFA 
concentration was between 4-8 hr post  feeding for BT and N-BT diet fed lambs, 
where  this  decline  was  between  8-12 hrs post feeding  in control lambs (Fig 3). 
Interactions among post feeding hours and treatment were not significant (p = 0.222). 
 
 
Rumen NH3-N Concentration 
 
 
 
The rumen NH3-N (mg/ l) concentratio n were similar in control, N-BT and 
BT group of lambs, which were respectively 97.5, 76.2 and 88.7 mg. Sampling period 
also did not influence  NH3-N concentration, a sharp decline in NH3-N concentration 
was between 4-8 hr post feeding,  while it increased till 12 hr post feeding, thereafter 
established  (Fig  3).  Interactions  among  post  feeding  hours  and  treatment  were 
significant (p < 0.001). 
 
 
Blood Composition and Hematology attributes 
 
 
 
Blood samples were collected through jugular vein puncture at start of the 
experiment and at every 30th  day of the experiment to study blood bio-chemical and 
hematological changes. 
 
 
Results  of  hematology  are  presented  in  table  7.   Hemoglobin  (Hb  %) 
concentration  was almost similar (11.1%), whereas packed cell volume (PCV, %) 
ranged from 11.7 to 12.9 %;  ESR at 2 hr ranged from 25.6 to 29.5 and white blood 
cells ranged from 6.8 to 8.3× 103/µl which  were not statistically different among 
control, N-BT and BT  group  of  lambs. While red blood  cells concentration was 
significantly (p  <0.001) higher (18.41×106/µl) in BT diet fed lambs  compared to 
control (15.03× 106/µl) and N-BT (14.85×106/µl) lambs. 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
Table 7 
Hematology of weaner lambs on diets containing BT or non-BT cottonseed. 
 
 Diet*  P-values** 
 C N-BT BT SEM T P T×P 
Haemoglobin (Hb %) 11.17 11.07 11.09 0.119 0.915 0.202 0.016 
Packed cell volume (%) 12.92 11.72 11.70 1.561 0.199 <0.001 0.830 
ESR 1hr 24.75 25.43 39.82 4.315 0.497 0.042 0.310 
ESR 2hr 29.2 25.6 29.5 1.980 0.707 0.009 <0.001 
Red blood cells (×106/µl) 15.03b 14.85b 18.41a 0.482 <0.001 0.494 0.986 
White blood cells (×103/µl) 6.82 7.8 8.25 0.445 0.220 0.033 0.603 
Lymphocytes (%) 58.73 62.00 59.92 0.839 0.347 0.355 0.057 
Neutrophils (%) 35.78 33.22 35.80 0.780 0.308 0.269 0.076 
Monocytes (%) 3.81 3.56 3.68 0.273 0.943 0.777 0.008 
Eosinophils (%) 1.75 1.86 1.18 0.193 0.251 0.093 0.544 
Serum IgG (U/dl) 35.10 36.29 37.08 0.533 0.190 0.690 0.420 
*Diets: Total mixed ration contained roughage, concentrate and molasses in ration of 
60:35:5, concentrate contained groundnut cake (Control-C), non-Bt cottonseed (N-BT) or 
Bt-cottonseed (BT) as major protein source, which fed to lambs. 
** Significance level (Diet effect- T, Period effect-P, Interaction T×P). 
 
 
Hemoglobin concentration was lower in BT lambs at 60th  day of sampling 
thereafter  increased  but  control  lambs  shown  a  steady  increase  in  Hb  level  with 
progress of experiment,  however N-BT lambs had highest Hb level at 90th  day of 
blood collection (Fig 4). But these  differences were not statistically  different (p= 
0.202),  however  interaction  between  treatment  and  period  of  collection  were 
significant (p = 0.016). 
 
 
ESR concentrations  incrased  throughout  experiment  in  control  and  N-BT 
 
lambs, but  BT lambs had fluctuation levels, which increased from 0 to 30 and 60 to 
 
120 days of feeding but decreased sharply between 30 to 60 days of sampling (Fig 4), 
and were significantly (p = 0.042) different among the sampling whereas interactions 
were not significant. 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Haemoglobin (%) 
ESR (%) 1hr 
Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
12.5 
 
 
12 
 
 
11.5 
 
 
11 
 
 
10.5 
 
 
10 
 
Control 
N-BT 
BT 
 
9.5 
 
 
0  30  60  90  120 
 
Days of feeding 
 
 
 
44 
 
42 
 
40 
 
38 
 
36 
 
34 
 
32 
 
30 
 
28  Control 
N-BT 
26  BT 
 
24 
0  30  60  90  120 
 
Day of feeding 
 
 
Fig 4: Hemoglobin (%) and ESR (%) concentration of lambs during experimental feeding 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Red blood cells (×10 6/µl) 
White blood cells (×103 /µl) 
Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
Control 
20 N-BT 
BT 
19 
 
 
18 
 
 
17 
 
 
16 
 
 
15 
 
 
14 
 
 
13 
0 30 60 90 120 
 
 
 
12 
Control 
11  N-BT 
BT 
10 
 
 
9 
 
 
8 
 
 
7 
 
6 
 
 
5 
 
 
4 
0  30  60  90  120 
Days of feeding 
 
Fig 5: RBC and WBC concentration of lambs during experimental feeding 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
Pattern of Red blood cells and white blood cells concentration are presented in 
fig 5. The RBCs were higher throughout experiment in BT lambs compared to control 
and N-BT lambs. Neither sampling period nor treatment and period interactions were 
statistically significant. 
 
 
White  blood  cells  concentration  decreased  significantly  (p  =  0.033)  with 
increase in experimental period in three group of lambs. Interactions among treatment 
and period of sampling were not statistically different. 
 
 
Serum IgG level 
 
 
 
Serum  IgG  determination  assesses  the  immunity  and  allergens  status  of 
animals. Increased levels are the indicative of immunity depression and induction of 
allergens. The IgG levels were not different (p = 0.190) among in control, N-BT and 
BT diet fed lamb groups. The pattern of IgG change during experimental feeding of 
BT and N-BT diet to lambs is presented in Table 7 and Fig. 6. Neither period of blood 
sampling nor interactions between dietary treatments and period of blood collection 
had significant influence on IgG level of lambs.  Thus feeding of BT-cottonseed to 
lambs did not alter immunity and allergens status of animals. 
 
 
Slaughter Study to asses Changes of Internal Organs 
 
 
 
Animals were slaughtered using standard procedure under the supervision of 
institute veterinarian, internal organs were weight and collected for histopathological 
examinations.  Carcass  of  BT-cotton  fed  animals  were  not  sold  to  consumer  and 
disposed off using stands producers. 
 
 
Internal organs weights as gross and in terms of per kg empty live weight 
(ELW) were estimated to assess a precise effect of BT- cottonseed feeding on internal 
organ changes. The gross weights of liver and testicles, gross weight and per kg ELW 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Serum IgG U/dl 
Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
of kidney, spleen, pancrease, heart, lung, penis, kidney fat, cole fat, GI tract, ingest 
and empty GI tract were not different among three feeding regimes. 
 
 
However, liver weight (g / kg ELW) were different (p = 0.04), and were 16.99 
g in control lambs, 17.57 g in BT lamb group and 14.95 in N-BT lamb group. The N- 
BT lamb group had lowest  and BT lamb group had highest liver weight, However 
control and BT lambs had statistically similar liver weights. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
Control 
40  N-BT 
BT 
 
39 
 
 
38 
 
 
37 
 
 
36 
 
 
35 
 
 
34 
0  60  90  120 
 
Days of feeding 
 
 
Fig 6: Serum IgG level of lambs during experimental feeding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
Table 8 
 
Slaughter study of weaner lambs on diets containing BT or non-BT cottonseed 
 
 
 
Attributes Diets*  SEM P 
 Control N-BT BT 
Empty Live weight kg 23.52 25.06 25.48 0.721 0.517 
Liver weight g 398.8 375.0 448.3 16.415 0.239 
Liver weight g/kg ELW 16.99b 14.95a 17.57b 0.429 0.040 
Kidney weight g 60.00 65.00 61.67 2.357 0.770 
Kidney weight g/kg ELW 2.56 2.60 2.46 0.131 0.929 
Spleen weight g 45.00 45.00 43.33 1.757 0.927 
Spleen weight g/kg ELW 1.93 1.79 1.70 0.088 0.566 
Lung weight g 515.00 520.00 583.33 20.713 0.360 
Lung wt g/ kg ELW 22.02 20.74 22.94 0.763 0.641 
Kidney fat g 195.00 360.00 405.00 45.315 0.079 
kidney fat g/kg ELW 8.39 14.48 15.83 1.7056 0.114 
Cole fat g 316.25 500.00 563.33 57.291 0.138 
Cole fat g/ kg ELW 13.56 20.06 21.85 2.066 0.188 
Dressing % of ELW 58.17 56.79 55.51 0.789 0.386 
Pancreas weight g 37.50 25.00 40.00 4.120 0.433 
Pancreas weight g/kg ELW 1.57 0.99 1.56 0.142 0.271 
Heart weight g 108.75 110.00 100.00 3.310 0.483 
Heart wt g/ kg ELW 4.63 4.38 3.96 0.156 0.177 
Testicles weight g 155.0b 202.5b 266.7a 19.041 0.006 
Testicles weight g/kg ELW 6.57b 8.11ab 10.58a 0.732 0.023 
Testicles fat g 47.50 35.00 43.33 2.357 0.110 
Testicles fat g/kg ELW 2.03a 1.40b 1.70ab 0.110 0.049 
Penis weight g 52.50 50.00 43.33 3.093 0.486 
Penis weight g/kg BW 2.22 2.00 1.69 0.121 0.155 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
GI tract weight kg 5.13 5.15 5.69 0.257 0.661 
GI tract weight g/kg ELW 217.28 205.11 224.37 8.457 0.762 
Empty GIT weight kg 2.14 2.31 2.57 0.101 0.188 
Empty GIT weight g/kg ELW 91.10 92.20 100.70 2.573 0.261 
Ingesta weight kg 2.99 2.84 3.12 0.213 0.915 
Ingesta weight g/kg ELW 126.18 112.91 123.67 8.156 0.856 
*Diets: Total mixed ration contained roughage, concentrate and molasses in ration of 
60:35:5, concentrate contained groundnut cake (Control-C), non-Bt cottonseed (N-BT) or 
Bt-cottonseed (BT) as major protein source, which fed to lambs 
 
 
 
Gross testicle weight was higher (p = 0.006) in BT lambs compared to control 
and  N-BT  lambs,  similarly  testicles  weights  in  terms  of  g/  kg  ELW  was  also 
significantly (p = 0.023) higher in BT lambs compared to Control lambs but were not 
statististically different to N-BT lambs. However testicles fat g / kg ELW was lowest 
in N-BT lambs compared to control and BT-lambs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
Findings of the Project 
 
 
 
The CP and hemicellulose contents were higher and ADF content was lower 
in BT-cotton seed compared to than non-BT cotton seed, 
 
Mineral contents  viz. Calcium, Phosphorus, Manganese and Copper were 
identical in N-BT and BT cottonseed, while Zinc content was higher in BT- 
cotton seeds by 10 ppm, 
 
The growing lambs consumed 168 g BT-cotton seed per day and did not 
have apparent adverse effect on dry matter intake. Similarly BT-cotton seed 
intake of  0.681 % of body weight or 19.5 % of dry matter intake did not 
produce  deleterious  effect  on dry matter  intake,  thus  palatability  is not a 
problem for BT-cotton seed feeding in lambs. 
BT-cotton seed feeding @ 20 % of total dry matter intake improved growth, 
nutrient utilization, rumen fermentation and N balance compared to non-BT 
cotton seed feeding, 
 
BT-cotton seed feeding did not alter haematological attributes of lambs and 
were with in the normal range of variations, 
 
BT-cotton seed feeding increased RBC and decreased WBC in blood, 
 
Serum IgG level did not change due to BT and non-BT cotton seed feeding. 
Thus feeding of BT-cottonseed to lambs did not alter immunity and allergens 
status, 
 
Internal  organs  weights  as g per  kg empty  live  weight  (ELW)  estimated 
precise  effect  of BT- cottonseed  feeding on internal  organ changes.  The 
weights of kidney, spleen, pancrease, heart, lung, penis, kidney fat, cole fat, 
GI tract, ingest  and empty GI tract were not different among between BT 
cotton seed and non-BT  cotton seed fed lambs. However BT cotton seed 
feeding increased liver weight, testicle weight and testicles fat g / kg empty 
live weight. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton 
crop using seed meal 
 
 
 
Funds Utilization 
 
 
 
 
 
Total funds received: Rs. 4,45,000=00 
 
 
 
 
 
Total expenditure incurred: Rs. 4,88,000=00 
 
 
 
 
 
Deficit of funds due to over expenditure : Rs. 43,000=00 
 
 
 
 
Reasons for over expenditure: 
 
The total emoluments of the Research Fellow have been revised and 
applicable with effect from 01.04.2007. Hence, fellowship arrears are to be 
paid to SRF worked under the project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar   year 2007-2008 

 
124 
 
 
 
Animal feeding trial on bio -safety studies in Lambs using Biotechnologically transformed  BT-cotton crop 
using seed meal 
 
 
 
 
 
CERTIFICATE 
 
 
 
 
Institute  and  investigators  of  the  project  in  principle  agree  with  the  research 
results reported in present report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. S. A. Karim  
Principal Investigato r  28.03.2008 
-------------------------------------------  
Signature with date 
 
 
Dr M. K. Tripathi 
Co- Principa l Investigator  
 
 
 
28.03.2008 
-------------------------------------------  
Signature with date 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Direc tor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central Sheep & Wool Researc h Institut e Avikanagar      year 2007-2008 
 
 
 
 
 


 
125 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
126 
 
 
 
 
 


 
127 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
128 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
129 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
130 
 
 
  


 
131 
 
Annexure- VI 
 
Area under Bt. Cotton cultivation (Final), January, 2011  
 
(In hectares) 
 
    States Kharif- 
2002 
Kharif- 
2003 
Kharif- 
2004 
Kharif- 
2005 
Kharif- 
2006 
Kharif, 
2007 
Kharif, 
2008 
Kharif, 
2009  
Kharif, 
2010 
(Anticipa
ted) 
Kharif, 
2011  
(Targ
et) 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
3762 5400 70400 330000 657435 
 
1001000 1143000 1430000 
 
1706000 
 
1587000 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
1470 13200 85119 134639 310000 479980 479980 592700 545156 608870 
Gujarat 
 
9031 41200 124463 149317 402977 429000 890000 1825000 
 
1894000 1925000 
Maharashtra 
 
12280 21600 159600 488000 1655000 2562000 2880000 3150000 3576000 3576000 
Karnataka 
 
2160 3000 33906 27909 74000 146685 225000 262000 
 
370,000 380000 
Tamil Nadu 
 
370 7600 11856 17800 40000 46060 75200 78100 50200 
 
112500 
Punjab 
 
- - - 72000 160000 
 
490000 477000 474000 
 
460000 495000 
Haryana 
 
- - - 12000 50000 278686 378000 475000  
 
470000  580000  
Rajasthan 
 
- - - 2281 3775 38730 121000  265000  265000 240000 
Total 29073 92000 485344 1233946 3353187 5472141 6669180 8551800 
 
9336356 
 
9504370 
 
 
Source: DAC 
  

 
132 
 
Annexure- VII 
 
Area – Million ha. 
Production- Million bales of 170 kgs. each 
 
ALL INDIA AREA AND PRODUCTION OF COTTON 
 
S.No. Year Area Production 
1 2000-01 8.53 9.52 
2 2001-02 9.13 10.00 
3 2002-03 7.67 8.62 
4 2003-04 7.60 13.73 
5 2004-05 8.79 16.43 
6 2005-06 8.68 18.50 
7 2006-07 9.14 22.63 
8 2007-08 9.41 25.88 
9 2008-09 9.41 22.28 
10 2009-10* 10.31 23.93 
11 2010-11** 11.00 33.50 
.  
 * Fourth advance estimates as released on 19.7.2010 
 ** First advance estimates as released on 23.9.2010 
Source:   Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Department of Agriculture  
               and Cooperation. 
  

 
133 
 
Annexure- VIII 
 
 
Options for the Regulation of Genetically Modified Foods in India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Resource Document Prepared by the  
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
178 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1 Introduction..................................................................................................................................................................... 179 
2 Concepts and Principles of GM Food Safety Assessment ............................................................................ 179 
2.1 Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................ 179 
2.2 The Comparative Approach for Safety Assessment of GM Foods ...................................................... 4 
3 The Regulation of GM Foods in India ............................................................................................................. 6 
3.1 Legislation ............................................................................................................................................................ 184 
3.2 Guidance ............................................................................................................................................................... 185 
3.3 The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 ............................................................................................. 186 
3.4 Interim Regulation of GM Food Stuffs by GEAC................................................................................... 187 
3.5 The Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India ............................................................................. 188 
4 The Regulation of GM Foods in Other Countries ............................................................................................. 189 
4.1 Australia & New Zealand ............................................................................................................................... 189 
4.2 Canada .................................................................................................................................................................1902 
4.3 Japan ....................................................................................................................................................................... 191 
4.4 European Union ...............................................................................................................................................1914 
4.5 United States .....................................................................................................................................................1936 
4.6 Points of Consensus .......................................................................................................................................1947 
4.6.1 Regulatory Authority ................................................................................................................... 1947 
4.6.2 Subject of the Safety Assessment ........................................................................................... 1958 
4.6.3 Processed Food Products ................................................................................................................ 18 
4.7 Relevant International Agreements .......................................................................................................1969 
4.7.1 World Trade Organization ........................................................................................................... 196 
4.7.2 Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety ............................................................................................ 1981 
 

 
179 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) is in the process of elaborating a 
procedure that will  allow for the safety assessment and subsequent decision to 
approve/disapprove foods derived from genetically modified (GM) plants.  In order to provide 
some context for the FSSAI’s deliberations, this resource document was prepared to:  
 Introduce the concepts and principles of GM food safety assessment; 
 Summarize the current regulatory system for GM foods in India; 
 Summarize how GM foods are regulated in other countries;  
 Provide regulatory options for the FSSAI as regards GM foods; and 
 Propose a regulatory model for GM food safety assessment in India that the FSSAI 
may wish to consider.   
 2 CONCEPTS AND PRINCIPLES OF GM FOOD SAFETY ASSESSMENT 
 2.1 INTRODUCTION  
Although modern biotechnology 1 broadens the scope of genetic changes that can be 
introduced into organisms used for food, it does not inherently result in foods that are less  
safe than those produced by more conventional techniques 2,3. This principle has important 
ramifications for th e safety assessment of genetically modified (GM) foods. It means that a  
new or different standard of safety is not required, and that previously established principles 
for assessing food safety still apply. Moreover, the inherent precision of molecular bi ological 
methods for introducing specific genetic changes should enable a more direct and focused 
assessment of safety. 
While countries may differ in statutory and non -statutory approaches to regulating GM foods, 
the criteria used to assess the safety of t hese products is generally consistent from one 
country to another 4.  This reflects the concerted efforts that have been made internationally 
to harmonize the risk assessment of foods derived from modern biotechnology (see Table 1).  
The outcomes of these c onsultations have contributed significantly to the development of 
internationally accepted approaches to assessing the safety of GM foods as articulated in two 
important documents published in 2003 by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC) 5: 
“Principles f or the Risk Analysis of Foods Derived from Modern Biotechnology” 6              
(hereinafter referred to as “Codex Principles”) and “Guideline for the Conduct of Food Safety 
                                                           
1 Modern biotechnology means the application of: i) In vitro nucleic acid techniques, including recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and 
direct injection of nucleic acid into cells or organelles, or ii) Fusion of cells beyond the taxonomic family, that ov ercome natural physiological 
reproductive or recombinant barriers and that are not techniques used in traditional breeding and selection.  Source:  The Ca rtegena Protocol on 
Biosafety, as referenced in Codex’ Principles for the Risk Analysis of Foods Derived from Modern Biotechnology. 
2  OECD. (1993). Safety evaluation of foods derived by modern biotechnology, Concepts and Principles. Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD), Paris. 
3 United States National Academy of Sciences. (2004). Safety of Genetically Engineered Foods: Approaches to Assessing Unintended Health 
Effects.  The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C. 
4 World Bank. (2003). Biosafety regulation: a review of international approaches (Report No. 26028).  The World Bank Agriculture and Rural 
Development Department, Washington, D.C. 
5 At the same time, the Codex Alimentarius Commission also published a third document, Guideline for the Conduct of Food Safety Assessment 
of Foods Produced Using Recombinant-DNA Microorganisms.   
6 http://www.codexalimentarius.net/download/standards/10007/CXG_044e.pdf 

 
180 
 
Assessment of Foods Derived from Recombinant -DNA Plants” 7 (hereinafter referred to as 
“Codex Plant Guideline”). 
The CAC was created in 1963 by FAO and World Health Organization (WHO) to develop          
food standards, guidelines and related texts such as codes of practice under the Joint 
FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme. The main purposes of this Programme are protecting 
the health of consumers and ensuring fair trade practices in the food trade, and promoting 
coordination of all food standards work undertaken by international governmental and non -
governmental organizations 8.  The 23rd Session of the CAC agreed to establish the Ad Hoc 
Intergovernmental Task Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology under the following 
Terms of Reference: 
 To elaborate standards, guidelines, or other principles, as appropriate, for foods 
derived from biotechnology;  
 To coordinate and closely collaborate, as necessary, with appropriate Codex 
Committees within their mandate as related to foods derived from 
biotechnology; and  
 To take full account of existing work carried out by national authorities, FAO,  
WHO, other international organizations and other relevant international fora.  
The Task Force successfully completed its work within the original four year time frame, 
culminating with the publication of the Codex Principles and Guideline referenced above.  
In 2004 the Task Force was re -established and has subsequently developed two annexes to 
the Codex Plant Guideline which were adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 
2008.  The first deals with the food safety assessment of foods derived from GM pl ants 
deliberately modified for nutritional or health benefits 9. The second annex deals with food 
safety assessment in situations when low levels of GM plant material approved in one country 
may be present in food in importing countries which have yet to ev aluate and approve the GM 
plant10.  The Task Force also developed a “Guideline for the Conduct of Food Safety 
Assessment of Foods Derived from Recombinant -DNA Animals” 11 that addresses safety and 
nutritional aspects of foods consisting of, or derived from, a nimals that have a history of safe 
use as sources of food, and that have been modified by modern biotechnology to exhibit new 
or altered expression of traits.  This guideline was also adopted by the Codex Alimentarius 
Commission in 2008. 
Table 1: Key inter national consultations addressing the safety assessment of GM foods 
(1990-present). 
Year Organization Title and link (where available) 
1990 FAO1/WHO2 
Strategies for assessing the safety of foods produced by biotechnology, a joint FAO/WHO consultation, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 5-10 November 1990 
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/1990/en/index.html) 
1990 IFBC3 
Biotechnologies and food: Assuring the safety of foods produced by genetic modification. Regulatory 
                                                           
7 http://www.codexalimentarius.net/download/standards/10021/CXG_045e.pdf 
8 http://www.codexalimentarius.net/web/index_en.jsp 
9 http://www.codexalimentarius.net/download/standards/10021/CXG_045e.pdf 
10 http://www.codexalimentarius.net/download/standards/10021/CXG_045e.pdf 
11 http://www.codexalimentarius.net/download/standards/11023/CXG_068e.pdf 

 
181 
 
Toxicology and Pharmacology, 12: S1-S196. 
1993 WHO 
Health aspects of marker genes in genetically modified plants. Report of a WHO Workshop, Copenhagen, 
Denmark, 21-24 September 1993. 
1994 WHO 
Application of the principles of substantial equivalence to the safety evaluation of foods or food 
components from plants derived by modern biotechnology. Report of a WHO Workshop, Copenhagen, 
Denmark, 31 October-4 November 1994. 
1996 FAO/WHO 
Biotechnology and food safety. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Consultation, Rome, Italy, 30 September-4 
October 1996. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 61 
1996 ILSI4 
ILSI Allergy and Immunology Institute (AII) guidance for assessing the allergenic potential of foods derived 
from biotechnology. 
1997 OECD5 
Safety Assessment of New Foods: Results of an OECD Survey of Serum Banks for Allergenicity Testing, And 
Use of Databases (http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/1997doc.nsf/LinkTo/sg-icgb(97)1-final) 
1998 OECD 
Report of the OECD Workshop on the Toxicological and Nutritional Testing of Novel Foods 
(http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/1998doc.nsf/LinkTo/sg-icgb(98)1-final)  
2000 FAO/WHO 
Safety aspects of genetically modified foods of plant origin, a joint FAO/WHO consultation on foods derived 
from biotechnology, Geneva, Switzerland  
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/ec_june2000/en/index.html) 
2000 CAC6 
First session of the Codex ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology. 
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/ctf_march2000/en/index.html) 
2001 FAO/WHO 
Allergenicity of genetically modified foods, a joint FAO/WHO consultation on foods derived from 
biotechnology, Rome, Italy, 22-25 January 2001 
2001 CAC 
Second session of the Codex ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology. 
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/ctf_march2001/en/index.html) 
2002 OECD 
Report of the OECD Workshop on the Nutritional Assessment of Novel Foods and Feeds 
(http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/2002doc.nsf/LinkTo/env-jm-mono(2002)6) 
2002 CAC 
Third session of the Codex ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology. 
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/ctf_march2002/en/index.html) 
2003 CAC 
Fourth session of the Codex ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology. 
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/july2003/en/index.html) 
2003 OECD 
Report on the Questionnaire on Biomarkers, Research on the Safety of Novel Foods and Feasibility of Post-
Market Monitoring (http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/2003doc.nsf/LinkTo/env-jm-mono(2003)9) 
2005 CAC 
Fifth session of the Codex ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology. 
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/sept05/en/index.html) 
2006 CAC 
Sixth session of the Codex ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology. 
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/dec06/en/index.html) 
2007 CAC 
Seventh session of the Codex ad hoc Intergovernmental Task Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology. 
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/sept07/en/index.html) 
 
 
1Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
2World Health Organization 
3International Food Biotechnology Council 
4International Life Sciences Institute 
5Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
6Codex Alimentarius Commission 
 2.2    THE COMPARATIVE APPROACH FOR SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF GM FOODS  
To date, the safety assessment of GM foods has been based on the principle that these 
products can be compared with traditional foods that have an established history of safe use. 
The objective is to determine if the GM food presents any new or altered haz ard in                 
comparison with its traditional counterpart, or whether it can be used interchangeably with 
its traditional counterpart without affecting the health or nutritional status of consumers. The 
goal is not to establish an absolute level o f safety, but rather the relative safety of the new 
product such that there is a reasonable certainty that no harm will result from intended uses 
under the anticipated conditions of processing and consumption.  

 
182 
 
Accounting for processing and consumption patterns is important even for traditional 
foods. A number of plants consumed by humans are acutely toxic in their raw state, but are 
accepted as food because processing methods alter or eliminate this toxicity. For example, the 
cassava root is quite toxic , but proper processing converts it into a nutritious and widely 
consumed food. Soybeans and Lima beans, among other crops, contain antinutrients ( e.g., 
soybean trypsin inhibitor and lectins) and require proper processing. Potatoes and tomatoes 
can contain toxic levels of the glycoalkaloids solanine and alpha -tomatine, respectively. Thus, 
the presence of a toxicant in a plant variety does not necessarily eliminate its use as a food 
source. In considering the safety of the GM food, it is therefore important to examine the 
range of possible toxicants, critical nutrients or other relevant factors, as well as its 
processing, intended use and exposure.  
This comparative approach has been embodied in the concept of substantial equivalence; a 
concept which was deve loped before GM foods came to the market. It was first described in         
an OECD publication in 1993 12. This document was the product of some 60 experts from 19 
OECD countries, who spent more than two years discussing how to assess the safety of GM 
foods. The concept of substantial equivalence was further endorsed by an FAO/WHO joint 
expert consultation in 1996. It recognized that the establishment of substantial equivalence is 
not a safety assessment per se, but that establishing the characteristics and composition of the 
GM food as equivalent to those of a familiar, conventional food with a history of safe 
consumption means that the new product will be no less safe under similar consumption 
patterns and processing practices.  
One important benefit of the  concept of substantial equivalence is that it provides flexibility 
that can be useful in food safety assessment. It is a tool that helps identify any difference, 
intended or unintended, which might be the focus of further safety evaluation. Because it is a 
comparative process for evaluating safety, the concept of substantial equivalence can be 
applied  at  several  points  along  the  food  chain  (e.g.,  at  the  level  of  the  harvested  or       
  
 
unprocessed food product, individual processed fractio ns, or the final food product or 
ingredient) allowing the safety assessment to be targeted to the most appropriate level based 
upon the nature of the product under consideration. 
The most recent FAO/WHO joint expert consultation on foods from biotechnology 13 re-     
examined the concept of substantial equivalence and concluded that the safety assessment 
requires an integrated and stepwise, case -by-case approach, which can be aided by a           
structured series of questions. They reaffirmed that the concep t of substantial equivalence, 
which focuses on the determination of similarities and differences between a GM food and its 
conventional counterpart, aids in the identification of potential safety and nutritional issues,        
and that this comparative app roach is the most appropriate strategy for evaluating the safety 
and nutritional quality of GM foods. They further clarified that the concept of substantial 
equivalence is not a safety assessment in itself as it does not characterize hazard; rather it  
should be used to structure the safety assessment of a GM food relative to its conventional 
                                                           
12  OECD. (1993). Safety evaluation of foods derived by modern biotechnology, Concepts and Pr inciples. Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD), Paris. 
13 FAO/WHO. (2000). Safety aspects of genetically modified foods of plant origin, FAO/WHO consultation 29 May – 2 June 2000. Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome and Wor ld Health Organization (WHO), Geneva. 
http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/ec_june2000/en/index.html 

 
183 
 
counterpart (comparator). The Consultation was satisfied with the approach used to assess the 
safety of GM foods that have been approved for commercial use. Safety ass essments based on  
the concept of substantial equivalence have been the most practical approach to addressing           
the safety of foods and food ingredients developed through modern biotechnology. In fact,          
there are presently no alternative strategies providing a better assurance of safety 14. 
The Codex Guideline includes the following reference to substantial equivalence (paragraph         
13).  
13. The concept of substantial equivalence is a key step in the safety assessment 
process. However,  it is not a safety assessment in itself; rather it represents the  
starting point which is used to structure the safety assessment of a new food relative  
to its conventional counterpart. This concept is used to identify similarities and 
differences betwe en the new food and its conventional counterpart2. It aids in the 
identification of potential safety and nutritional issues and is considered the most 
appropriate strategy to date for safety assessment of foods derived from           
recombinant-DNA plants . The safety assessment carried out in this way does not          
imply absolute safety of the new product; rather, it focuses on assessing the safety of 
any identified differences so that the safety of the new product can be considered 
relative to its conventional counterpart. 
Applying the concept of substantial equivalence requires that sufficient analytical data be 
available in the literature, or be generated through analysis, to allow effective comparison 
between the GM food and its traditional counterp art. This suggests a basic limitation of the 
substantial  equivalence  concept:  dependence  on  a  comparator  and  on the information that 
is  
 
 
available or can be generated for the comparator, means safety assurance is relative to the 
components assess ed for the particular comparator. The choice of comparator is  therefore 
crucial to effective application of the concept of substantial equivalence in establishing the 
safety of a GM food. An appropriate comparator must have a well -documented history of use . 
If adverse effects have been associated with the particular food type, specific components 
considered to cause these effects should be described and well characterized to permit 
effective comparison. 
Without exception, all of the GM foods approved to dat e have been the result of incorporating 
(or selecting for) one or two rather simple single-gene traits into plants. Except for canola and 
soybean varieties with modified oil composition ( e.g., high lauric acid; high oleic acid), 
delayed softening tomatoes for improved shelf -life and maize ( e.g., high lysine for livestock 
feed; modified amylase for ethanol production 15), all of these traits have been targeted 
toward reducing agricultural inputs by conferring resistance to insects and/or viruses, or 
tolerance to environmentally friendly broad -spectrum herbicides. Since these products were 
                                                           
14 FAO/WHO. (2000). Safety aspects of genetically modified foods of plant origin, FAO/WHO consultation 29 May – 2 June 2000. Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome and World Health Organization (WHO), Geneva. 
http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/ec_june2000/en/index.html 
15 Although SYN-E3272-5 (Event 3272), developed for production of maize grain primarily for industrial ethanol, and REN-ØØØ38-3 
(LY038), developed for production of maize grain for livestock feed, are not intended for food consumption, they were submitted for food 
safety assessment and approval by the appropriate regulatory authorities because of the possibility that the products may enter into the food 
value chain (http://www.agbios.com/dbase.php?action=ShowProd&data=Event+3272&frmat=LONG  and 
http://www.agbios.com/dbase.php?action=ShowProd&data=LY038).  

 
184 
 
the result of rather simple modifications and did not result in the introduction of new 
components into the food supply, the application of the concept of substantial equivale nce to 
structure the safety assessment was straightforward.  
The next generation of products will be much more complex and will include new products 
with intentionally altered nutritional profiles 16 , nutraceuticals, edible vaccines, and 
biopharmaceuticals p roduced in plants and animals. For these products, it will be more 
challenging to find appropriate comparators due to the larger and often deliberate differences 
expected from the traditional counterparts.  This will make the application of the concept of 
substantial equivalence more difficult and the safety assessment of these products will likely 
require more sophisticated testing strategies.     
 
3 THE REGULATION OF GM FOODS IN INDIA 
 3.1  Legislation 
In India, the regulation of all activities related to GMOs and products derived from GMOs  
was initiated with the notification of Rules for the Manufacture/Use/Import/Export and 
Storage of Hazardous Microorganisms, Genetically Engineered Organisms or Cells , 1989  
(commonly referred to as Rules, 1989) under the provisions of the Environment (Protection) 
Act, 1986 through the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF).  The Rules, 1989 which 
created six competent authorities, are primarily implemented by MoEF and the Department  
of Biotechnology (DBT), Ministry of Science and Technology.  The competent authorities 
created under the Rules, 1989 are: the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RDAC); the 
Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM); the Genetic En gineering Approval 
Committee (GEAC); Institutional Biosafety Committees (IBSC); State Biosafety            
Coordination Committees (SBCC); District Level Committees (DLC).  
The Rules, 1989 are very broad in scope and essentially capture all activities, prod ucts and 
processes related to or derived from biotechnology.  They include reference to foods 
derived from biotechnology in Rule 11, Permission and Approval for Food Stuffs which 
states: 
Food stuffs, ingredients in food stuffs and additives including proce ssing aids 
containing or consisting of genetically engineered organisms or cells, shall not be 
produced, sold, imported or used except with the approval of the Genetic 
Engineering Approval Committee.  
Until recently, this meant that GEAC was the competent authority to approve or disapprove 
the release of GM foods in the marketplace.  However, this changed with the enactment of 
the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 17 which includes genetically modified foods within 
the definition of food under the Food Safety and Standards Act18 (see section 2.2 below).  
                                                           
16 A framework for the safety and nutritional assessment of foods and feeds nutritionally enhanced through biotechnology has bee n published : 
ILSI. (2004). Nutritional and safety assessment of foods and feeds nutritionally improved through biotechnology. Comp rehensive Reviews in 
Food Science and Food Safety 3: 38-104. 
17 The Food Standards and Safety Act, 2006 “consolidates the laws relating to food and to establish the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India for laying down science based standards for articles of food and to regulate their 

 
185 
 
 3.2    Guidance 
In 1998, DBT published “Guidelines for Toxicity and Allergenicity Evaluation of Transgenic 
Seeds, Plants and Plant Parts” which, until 2008, was the only guidance that explicitly 
addressed the safety assessment of GM foods in India.  As there were no inter nationally 
accepted guidelines for the safety assessment of GM foods at that time, DBT’s 1998 
guidelines referenced a number of OECD test standards developed for chemicals which, in 
many cases, were either not appropriate for whole food analyses or were no t suitably 
modified so that the test provided meaningful safety related information about a GM food 
or the novel protein(s) expressed in that food.  
In 2005, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) as the scientific and technical 
advisory body to the  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (at that time the nodal agency 
responsible for ensuring the safety of food in India) convened a multi -stakeholder 
consultation to address the issue of GM food safety assessment.  The outcome of the 
consultation was co nsensus that the Codex Alimentarius’ “Guideline for the Conduct of 
Food Safety Assessment of Foods Derived from Recombinant -DNA Plants” should form the 
basis    of the Government of India's own regulatory guidance for the safety assessment of 
foods derived  from genetically modified plants. ICMR established a drafting committee 
which subsequently prepared “Guidelines for the Safety Assessment of Foods Derived from 
Genetically Engineered Plants”.  These Guidelines, which were adopted by RCGM and          
GEAC in 2008, establish the criteria for undertaking the safety assessment of GM foods in 
India.  The 2008 GE Food Guidelines are complemented by a series of five protocols: (1) 
Acute Oral Safety Limit Study in Rats and Mice; (2) Sub -chronic Feeding Study in R odents; 
(3) Protein Thermal Stability; (4) Pepsin Digestibility Assay; and, (5) Livestock Feeding 
Study.  Two additional protocols on bioinformatics analyses and specific serum testing are 
currently under development. 
In 2006, the Ministry of Environment a nd Forests published “Procedure for Clearance by 
GEAC for Import of GM Products” 19.  This document lists import procedures for three 
categories of GM foods: 
i. LMOs 20 for food, feed and processing  (e.g., maize, corn, soybean, potato): For 
import of LMO as FF P detailed environmental clearance of GEAC needs to be            
obtained for which detailed biosafety and food safety studies need to be furnished.         
The GEAC may stipulate additional studies taking into consideration the 
                                                                                                                                                                                         
manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import, to ensure availability of safe and wholesome food for human 
consumption and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.” (MoLJ, 2006)   
18 “Food means any substance whether processed, partially processed or unprocessed, which is intended for human 
consumption and includes primary food to the extent defined in clause (zk), genetically modified or engineered food or 
food containing such ingredients, infant food, packaged drinking water, alcoholic drink, chewing gum, and any substance, 
including water used into the food during its manufacture, preparation or treatment but does not include any animal feed, 
live animals unless they are prepared or processed for placing on the market for human consumption, plants prior to 
harvesting, drugs and medicinal products, cosmetic, narcotic or psychotropic substance.”  (MoLJ, 2006) 
19 http://www.envfor.nic.in/divisions/csurv/geac/gmo_lmo.htm 
20 LMO is the acro nym for “Living Modified Organism” terminology from the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety 
to the Convention on Biological Diversity.  "Living modified organism" means any living organism that 
possesses a novel combination of genetic material obtained through the use of modern biotechnology. 

 
186 
 
environmental risk in case  of accidental release. The importer would also require 
compliance as per the provisions of Biosafety Protocol.     
ii. GM processed food derived from LMOs  (e.g., corn flour, soymeal, potato chips): 
In case of GM processed food, the GEAC follows an “event based approval” in a           
given crop. The importer is required to obtain one time approval of GEAC for which 
the following information may be furnished: 
 List of gene/events approved in the crop species for commercial production in the 
country of export/ country of origin. 
 Whether the product has been approved for consumption  in countries other than 
producing countries 
 Food safety study conducted in the country of origin. 
 Analytical / compositional report from the country of export/ origin.  
 Whether further processing is envisaged after import. If so details of the same.  
 Whether the gene/events from which the product has been derived has been 
approved and is in commercial production, marketing, use for food/feed in the 
country of origin/export. 
iii. Pro cessed food containing ingredients derived from LMO  (e.g., bread 
containing from non -GM flour but containing enzymes derived from GMO/LMO for 
increasing shelf life / non GM potato fried in GM soybean oil etc): If the processed 
food contains any ingredient derived from category i and ii mentioned above, and if 
the LMO / product thereof has been approved by the GEAC, no further approval is 
required except for declaration at the port of entry.  In case it does not have the 
approval of GEAC, the procedure mentioned at ii above may be complied.  
It is not clear how effective the “Procedure for Clearance by GEAC for Import of GM 
Products”, has been in clarifying the process for obtaining GM food approvals.  For example, 
GEAC has yet to adopt an event -based approva l system even though this is indicated in 
category ii above.   
3.3 THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS ACT, 2006 
The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006  established the FSSAI as the statutory body for 
“laying down science based standards for articles of food and regulating manufacturing, 
processing, distribution, sale and import of food so as to ensure safe and wholesome food 
for human consumption” 21.  The  Act, 2006 has a significant impact on the regulation of GM 
foods in India as it: 
 Provides the FSSAI with the authority to regulate GM foods through the inclusion of 
“genetically modified or engineered food or food containing such ingredients” 
within           the definition of food; 
 Effectively removes GM foods from the remit of GEAC.  Section 89 of the Act, 2006 
overrides all other food related laws and states “The provisions of this Act shall have 
                                                           
21 www.fssai.gov.in 

 
187 
 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewi th contained in any other law 
for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law 
other than this Act.”  
Specific to the regulation of GM foods the Act, 2006 states:  
22. Save as otherwise provided under this Act and regulat ions made thereunder, 
no person shall manufacture, distribute, sell or import any novel food, genetically 
modified articles of food, irradiated food, organic foods, foods for special dietary 
uses, functional foods, neutraceuticals, health supplements, prop rietary foods and 
such other articles of food which the Central Government may notify in this behalf.  
and 
(2) "genetically engineered or modified food" means food and food ingredients 
composed of or containing genetically modified or engineered organisms o btained 
through modern biotechnology, or food and food ingredients produced from but 
not containing genetically modified or engineered organisms obtained through 
modern biotechnology; 
The Act, 2006  also empowers the FSSAI to establish a Scientific Panel on  Genetically 
Modified Organisms and Foods whose members are to be independent scientific experts.  
The            FSSAI recently announced the membership of the inaugural panel 22.  To date no 
implementing rules or regulations for GM foods have been notified by the FSSAI. 
3.4 INTERIM REGULATION OF GM FOOD STUFFS BY GEAC  
In response to the promulgation of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006  and the 
establishment of the FSSAI, the Ministry of Environment and Forests published Notification 
S.O. 1519(E) in the Gazette of India on 23 August 2007 that exempted Rule 11 from the Rules, 
1989.  Rule 11 states:  
Food stuffs, ingredients in food stuffs and additives including processing aids 
containing or consisting of genetically engineered organisms or cells, shall not be 
produced, sold, imported or used except with the approval of the Genetic           
Engineering Approval Committee. 
However, because the FSSAI had yet to publish rules that describe how GM food stuffs ( i.e., 
processed foods containing one or more ingredients derived from a genetically modified 
organism) will be regulated under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006  at the time Rule          
11 was rescinded, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submit ted a request to GEAC to 
continue to regulate of GM food stuffs under Rules, 1989 as an interim measure 23.  To this            
end a series of three supplemental notifications were published in the Gazette of India on 25 
February 2008, 3 October 2008 and 17 March 2009.  The latest notice states: 
                                                           
22 http://www.fssai.gov.in/ViewContentDetails.aspx?ContentId=9&CategoryId=4 
23 Decisions taken at the 80th meeting of the Genetic Engineering Approval Committee held on 1.10.2007. 
http://www.envfor.nic.in/divisions/csurv/geac/decision-nov-82.htm 

 
188 
 
S.O. 880(E). Notification No. S.O. 1519(E) dated 23 -8-2007 is kept in abeyance till          
30-09-2009 or until issue of further notification by the Ministry of Health and          
Family Welfare regarding regulation of GM processed foods by the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority, whichever is earlier. 
GEAC has interpreted the Food Safety and Standards  Act, 2006  to mean that FSSAI’s 
regulatory mandate vis. GM foods extends only to processed foods that conta in GM 
ingredients and that “GM food/seeds which can propagate in the environment would 
require prior approval of GEAC 24”.  This is not consistent with the definition of genetically 
modified food in the Act, 2006 which includes “food and food ingredients com posed of or 
containing genetically modified or engineered organisms obtained  through modern 
biotechnology”. This definition arguably applies to foods that are viable ( e.g., grain, seeds, 
tubers and fruit) as well as non -viable or processed food products, m eaning that all GM 
foods should be regulated by the FSSAI.  
3.5 THE BIOTECHNOLOGY REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
In 2007 the Government of India approved the National Biotechnology Development Strategy 
which promoted the establishment of a national biotechn ology regulatory authority that 
would act as an “independent, autonomous and professionally led body to provide a single 
window mechanism for biosafety clearance of genetically modified products and 
processes”25.  DBT  has been given the responsibility to e stablish and operationalize this new 
regulatory authority, the Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India 26  (BRAI).  
Biotechnology regulation will continue under the existing regulatory framework until the 
BRAI is fully functional. 
In order to establish and empower the BRAI, the “Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of          
India Bill, 2009” was prepared by an expert committee convened by DBT under the 
Chairmanship of Professor M.S. Swaminathan.  A review of the Bill and the associ ated 
Establishment Plan for the BRAI are beyond the scope of this paper but preliminary versions 
of both were made available for public review and comment in 2008 and can still be viewed         
at http://dbtindia.nic.in/uniquepage.asp?id_pk=668.  Note tha t both the Establishment Plan 
and Bill have undergone revisions since these versions were published but the essential 
elements of the Establishment Plan and Bill remain largely the same.  
Specific to the regulation of GM foods, the Establishment Plan for th e BRAI recommended 
coordination of safety assessments between the FSSAI and BRAI and provided for three 
options to do so: 
1. The Risk Assessment Unit 27 (RAU) of the BRAI could undertake all or part of the 
safety assessment of GM foods on behalf of the FSSAI an d submit its report to the 
Chairperson, FSSAI for product approval; 
                                                           
24 Decisions taken at the 80th meeting of the Genetic Engineering Approval Committee held on 1.10.2007. 
http://www.envfor.nic.in/divisions/csurv/geac/decision-nov-82.htm 
25 http://dbtindia.nic.in/biotechstrategy/National%20Biotechnology%20Development%20Strategy.pdf 
26 Until very recently the new authority was popularly referred to as the National Biotechnology Regulatory Authority (NBRA) however the 
name was changed to the Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India during the review of the associated draft bill by the Ministry of Law and 
Justice.  Documentation about the BRAI on DBT’s website still refers to the authority as the NBRA. 
27 The Risk assessment Unit will undertake the case-by-case assessment of products and processes regulated by the BRAI.  It will be a 
permanently staffed unit of the BRAI with a multi-disciplinary team of scientists responsible for undertaking science-based risk assessments, 
including but not limited to those required to approve: import of regulated  organisms and products; inter-state transport of regulated organisms; 

 
189 
 
2. GM food safety assessment could remain the exclusive purview of the FSSAI; and  
3. The regulation of GM foods could be removed entirely from the mandate of the 
FSSAI and vested with the NBRA.   All other rules and regulations that pertain to  
food would still apply to GM foods as regulated by the FSSAI and any other 
authority in India. 
Schedule I of the BRAI Bill, 2009 identifies the categories of biotechnology derived products 
that will be reg ulated under the Bill.  Part I(1)(b) of Schedule I states “Any genetically 
engineered plant, animal, micro -organism, virus or other animate organism used as food” will 
be regulated by the Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry Division of the BRAI.  This may be  
interpreted to mean that Option 3 above will become the working modality unless additional 
revisions to Schedule I are made before the BRAI Bill is promulgated.  It is anticipated that the 
Bill will be laid before Parliament this year.   
The Regulation of GM Foods in Other Countries 
There is no uniform model for regulation GM foods that has been applied internationally as 
regulatory systems must necessarily reflect national priorities, which differ between 
countries and also within a country over time.  Nevertheless, it is instructive to compare how 
countries with established and functional regulatory systems have addressed the key 
programmatic and operational issues.  This chapter reviews the regulatory systems for GM 
foods of Australia          and New Zealand, Canada, the European Union, Japan and the United 
States and then           provides a comparative summary that highlights how fundamental 
issues related to the implementation of their respective regulatory systems have been 
addressed. 
Australia & New Zealand 
Authority for regulating food in Australia is derived from the Food Standards Australia New 
Zealand Act 1991 28which is administered by the bi -national Food Standards Australia New 
Zealand (FSANZ) and enforced by the State/Territory Health Depar tments within Australia 
and New Zealand.  There is a general prohibition on the sale and use of food produced               
using gene technology unless the food is listed in Standard 1.5.2 of the Food Standards           
Code.29  Importers or producers apply to FSANZ to have a new GM food included on the list of 
approved foods. 30 FSANZ completes a safety assessment of the GM food for which the 
applicant provides the data although information from other sources may also be used by                 
FSANZ.  Appr ovals are listed in Standard 1.5.2 and the amendment to the Standard is then 
published31.  Any special conditions on the sale and use of a GM food are also listed in the 
amended Standard. 
FSANZ carries out safety assessments on a case -by-case basis, which m eans each new genetic 
modification (event) is assessed individually for its potential impact on the safety of the food.   
FSANZ compares the GM food with a similar, commonly eaten conventional food from a 
                                                                                                                                                                                         
field trials of regulated organisms, clinical trials of regulated organisms and products for pharmaceutical production; manufacture of regulated 
organisms and products; and pre-market safety assessment of regulated organisms and products. 
28 http://www.comlaw.gov.au/ComLaw/Legislation/ActCompilation1.nsf/0/34FDA538E7B40ACFCA256F71004DA6FE/ 
$file/FoodStandANZ91.pdf 
29 http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/_srcfiles/FSC_1_5_2_GM_v85.pdf 
30 http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/_srcfiles/GM Guidelines Nov 05.pdf, 
 http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/_srcfiles/Application Format - GM June 05.doc 
31 http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/thecode/foodstandardscode/standard152foodprodu4248.cfm 

 
190 
 
molecular, toxicological, nutritional and compositi onal point of view.  The aim is to find out if 
there are any differences between the GM food and its conventional counterpart, which is 
already known to be safe to eat.   
Canada 
Health Canada is responsible for the safety assessment of all food products, i ncluding novel 
food products under the Novel Food Regulations of the Food and Drugs Act, which were  
promulgated in October 1999. 32  Under these regulations, a manufacturer or importer of a 
novel food 33 (which includes GM foods) must notify Health Canada 45 days prior to the sale 
or advertising for sale of these products. The department undertakes to respond within 45             
days should additional safety information of a scientific nature be required, and will notify the 
manufacturer within 90 days of re ceipt of such information as to whether it is sufficient.            
Until the Novel Food Regulations  came into force in 1999, the safety assessment of novel          
foods was based on voluntary compliance with the Guidelines for the Safety Assessment of 
Novel Foods.34  
Risks to be assessed relate to major changes brought about by the application of processes to 
the particular food product which may, based on the manufacturer's experience or generally 
accepted theory, adversely impact: the composition, stru cture or nutritional value of the food 
or its generally recognized physiological effects; the manner in which the food is metabolized 
in the body; or the microbiological safety, the chemical safety or the safe use of the food.  
Safety considerations for foo ds produced from genetic engineering are of the same nature as 
those that arise from other means of altering the genome, such as conventional breeding. 
Each safety assessment considers a range of both direct and indirect consequences. The 
former includes t he nutritional, toxic or allergenic effects resulting from the presence of new 
gene products, as well as intentionally altered levels of existing gene products. Indirect 
consequences would include altered levels of existing gene products or changes in plan t 
metabolism resulting in the production of new components, or altered levels of existing 
components. The consequences of mutations due to the genetic modification, such as 
interruption of coding or control sequences or activation of latent genes, leading to new 
components or altered levels of existing components are also investigated.  
Health Canada has published “Guidelines for the Safety Assessment of Novel Foods Derived 
from Plants and Microorganisms” which provide guidance in classifying a product as 'n ovel' 
and contain specifications to product developers regarding the data they must provide to 
regulatory authorities in order to demonstrate the safety of their product.  Novel foods that 
are products of modern biotechnology are evaluated on an event spec ific basis and, according 
to Health Canada’s Guidelines: 
                                                           
32 Health Canada. (1999). Schedule No. 948: Novel Foods Regulations. http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/food-
aliment/english/subjects/novel_foods_and_ingredient/sch948e.pdf 
33 Novel food" means (a) a substance, including a microorganism, that does not have a history of safe use as a food; (b) a food that has been 
manufactured, prepared, preserved or packaged by a process that (i) has not been previously applied to that food, and (ii) causes the food to 
undergo a major change; and (c) a food that is derived from a plant, animal or microorganism that has been genetically modified such that  (i) 
the plant, animal or microorganism exhibits characteristics that were not previously observed in that plant, animal or microorganism, (ii) the 
plant, animal or microorganism no longer exhibits characteristics that were previously observed in that plant, animal or microorganism, or  (iii) 
one or more characteristics of the plant, animal or microorganism no longer fall within the anticipated range for that plant, animal or 
microorganism.  
34 Health Canada. (1994). Guidelines for the Safety Assessment of Novel Foods. (http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/food-
aliment/english/subjects/novel_foods_and_ingredient/novele.pdf) 

 
191 
 
Data should be provided for the raw food, in other words, the edible part of the 
plant in its unprocessed state. Data may also be required for the food prepared for 
human consumption by conventional means to examine the effects, where 
applicable, of  
 
processing, storage and cooking to look , for example, at the effectiveness of 
cooking to destroy anti -nutrients in cases where anti -nutrients normally destroyed 
by cooking are present.  
Novel food decisions are published by Health Canada 35. 
4.3   Japan 
The Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (MHLW) is responsible for food safety    
approvals of GM plants under the Food Sanitation Law .36  Food safety is reviewed by the 
Food Safety Commission (FSC), an independent risk assessment body under the Cabinet 
Office.37  The Genetically Modified Foods Expert Committee of the FSC, consisting of plant 
biotechnology scientists from universities and public research institutes, undertakes the 
actual scientific review.  Upon completion, the FSC provides its safety assessment 
conclusions to MHLW.   
The safety assessment is based on comparison of the GM food with its conventional 
counterpart where there is a history of the safe use of the conventional counterpart as a 
food or food ingredient. 38  All intended and unintended effects  of the inserted DNA should 
be covered from both a toxicological and a nutritional standpoint, including the effect on 
endogenous genes, identified by the sequence analysis of flanking regions, which may have 
been modified by the inserted DNA.  The effects  of processing on any novel traits should be 
considered as should any potential for the accumulation of toxic metabolites.  Where safety 
cannot be confirmed on the basis of the data presented, further testing maybe required.  
The list of approved events for food is available from MHLW39. 
4.4    European Union 
Within the European Union (EU), all GMOs and derived products must be evaluated by the 
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) before they can be authorised in the EU.  To obtain 
such an authorization, a product developer must submit an application that is consistent with 
EU legislation which provides for two different regulatory frameworks: Regulation (EC) No 
1829/2003 on genetically modified food and feed and Directive 2001/18/EC on the 
deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms (GMOs).   
The framework used is chosen by the applicant and depends on the nature and the purpose of 
the GMO in question. GM foods (and feeds) are handled under Regulation (EC) No           
1829/2003 whereas GMOs intended for deliberate release into the environment are dealt 
with under Directive 2001/18/EC.  In both cases, EFSA is responsible for conducting scientific 
                                                           
35 http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fn-an/gmf-agm/appro/index-eng.php 
36 http://www.jetro.go.jp/jpn/regulations/guidebook/pdf/free/food2004nov-e.pdf 
37 http://www.fsc.go.jp/english/index.html 
38 http://www.fsc.go.jp/senmon/idensi/gm_kijun_english.pdf 
39 http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/topics/food/pdf/sec01.pdf 

 
192 
 
risk assessments  of  GMOs  and  for  the  provision  of  science advice to the Euro pean 
Commission           
 
and the Member States.  While EFSA provides the scientific basis for EU decisions on GMOs, 
the Authority is not involved in the decision -making process which is the responsibility of the 
European Commission and Member States.  
Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 EFSA provides for a centralized risk assessment procedure 
that assesses the human, livestock and environmental safety of a GMO.   The steps in this 
procedure are as follows40: 
 The GMO application is submitted by the product develo per to a Member State that 
immediately forwards it to EFSA who must work to deliver an Opinion within six 
months. 
 All Member States have full access to the application and to full studies and data 
presented by the applicant via EFSA’s dedicated extranet.  
 Member States have the possibility of raising objections and commenting on the 
application, including on the full data and studies presented by the applicant.  
 If the application includes the cultivation of a GMO, one of the Member States is 
delegated to perform the environmental risk assessment. 
 EFSA finalises the full scientific risk assessment of the GMO (within six months unless 
additional data are requested from the applicant) in its Scientific Opinion.  
 EFSA forwards the Scientific Opinion to the Europe an Commission along with all 
other information required under Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003.  
 The overall opinion is published on the websites of both EFSA and the European 
Commission. 
 The European Commission consults the public on the overall opinion during  a 30 day 
period. 
 Based on the overall Opinion, the European Commission and Member States are then 
responsible for taking a decision on the applicant’s request.  
Under Directive 2001/18/EC, the risk assessment is decentralized in that it is completed 
first by a Member State and, if necessary, independent scientific advice may be sought 
from EFSA.  The steps in this procedure include 41: 
 The GMO notification is sent by the applicant to a Member State and the risk 
assessment of the GMO is carried out by that Member State. 
 The Member State’s risk assessment is sent to the European Commission which then 
forwards it to all Member States for their comments and input on the risk assessment 
(the so-called “Community period”). 
                                                           
40 http://www.efsa.europa.eu/cs/BlobServer/Non_Scientific_Document/Factsheet_GMO_frameworkv4,3.pdf?ssbinary=true 
41 http://www.efsa.europa.eu/cs/BlobServer/Non_Scientific_Document/Factsheet_GMO_frameworkv4,3.pdf?ssbinary=true 

 
193 
 
 If objections are raised by Member States and cannot be resolved amongst Member 
States, EFSA is asked to provide an Opinion (within 90 days) focusing particularly on 
the points of scientific divergence between Member States.  
 Based on EFSA’s Opinion, the European Commission and Member States are th en 
responsible for taking a decision on the applicant’s request.  
Risk assessments and scientific opinions 42 prepared by EFSA are completed by EFSA’s 
Scientific Panel on GMOs.  The panel is comprised of leading experts selected from the EU and 
is multidiscip linary in nature.  Membership on the Panel is for three years and it works 
independently on behalf of EFSA.  Membership on the Panel can be extended to non -EU 
scientists if warranted.   
4.5    United States 
In 1992, the FDA published in the Federal Registr y a Statement of Policy on its approach to           
the regulation of foods derived from GM plants.  The purpose of this policy was to provide a 
risk-based “decision tree” to guide plant breeders and food manufacturers through issues 
critical to ensuring the safety, nutritional value, and wholesomeness of new foods. 43  Under 
this “standard of care”, which applies equally to new foods produced through traditional 
breeding as well as biotechnology, FDA also provided guidance on regulatory issues such as 
when an introduced substance is not generally recognized as safe and would require pre -
market approval as a food additive, and when special labelling would be required under 
Federal Food Drug and Cosmetics Act  (FFDCA).  Food producers are not required to seek          
FDA pre -market approval or apply a special label for a new variety of food if it is           
substantially equivalent to existing varieties already on the market.  Guidance documents 44 
on the consultation procedures have been issued and updated and  a draft rule on 
Recommendations for the Early Food Safety Evaluation of New Non -Pesticidal Proteins 
Produced by New Plant Varieties Intended for Food Use has also been published. 45 
The “Guidance on Consultation Procedures: Foods Derived from New Plant Vari eties” details 
the system the FDA has established to manage the consultation process:  
The Office of Food Additive Safety of the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition               
(CFSAN) and the Office of Surveillance and Compliance of the Center f or Veterinary                
Medicine established the Biotechnology Evaluation Team (BET) to facilitate and ensure 
consistency in the process by which developers consult under the 1992 policy and inform                 
FDA regarding the marketing of foods and food ingredients derived from new plant varieties 
including  those  developed  using  rDNA techniques.    The  BET  oversees  the  consultation                  
 
process, identifies regulatory and scientific issues that need to be addressed, and once all 
relevant issues have been adequately addressed, brings the consultation to closure. 46 
                                                           
42 Scientific opinions prepared by the Scientific Panel on GMOs can be viewed at 
http://www.efsa.europa.eu/EFSA/ScientificPanels/GMO/efsa_locale-1178620753812_GMOOpinions455.htm 
43 http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/bioprgui.html 
44 http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~lrd/consulpr.html 
45 http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/bioprgui.html 
46 http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~lrd/consulpr.html 

 
194 
 
There are no formal requirements for the data to be submitted for an approval from the FDA; 
during the product development process,  in consultation with the BET, the developer will 
accumulate the information that it believes is adequate to ensure that the product is safe and 
complies with the relevant provisions of the FFDCA.  At this stage, FDA recommends that           
the developer  submit a summary of the safety and nutritional assessment that has been 
conducted and meet with FDA scientists to discuss the scientific data and information that 
support the summary of the safety and nutritional assessment.  This meeting allows the 
developer and FDA to discuss and clarify the data and information provided in the summary 
document.  Summaries of completed consultations are published by CFSAN 47. 
If the introduced trait is a “plant incorporated protectant” ( e.g., an insecticidal protein) a 
registration and exemption from food tolerance must be obtained from the EPA under the 
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act .  Regulations are contained in              
40CFR15248, 40CFR17249 and 40CFR174.50 
4.6   POINTS OF CONSENSUS 
As exemplified by the descriptions in Sections 3.1 -3.5, it is apparent that while countries have 
different legal and regulatory frameworks for addressing the safety assessment and 
authorization of GM foods (see also Table 2) there are important commonalities that reflec t 
international consensus on key programmatic and operational issues.  Three of these issues 
that are critical to the regulation of GM foods in India are discussed below.  
4.6.1    Regulatory Authority 
In the five countries reviewed above (and in other coun tries with functional biotechnology 
regulatory systems), the regulatory authority for GM foods is the same authority that is 
responsible for administering food safety law(s). This recognises that the safety 
assessment of GM foods is part of, and not separa te from, programs that address the 
broader context of ensuring the safety of the foods that the public consumes.   The “GM 
nature” of a food derived from a GM crop or other GM organism is not (and should not be) the 
solely defining characteristic of that fo od as regards safety.  Other, and arguably more 
important, food safety and food quality considerations 51 and associated laws, regulations, 
standards and guidance  apply  to  GM  and  non-GM  foods  alike  which  is  typically  why  GM  
food  safety  
 
 
assessment is positioned within ministries of health and their associated food safety and 
standards agencies.  
                                                           
47 http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/fcn/fcnNavigation.cfm?rpt=bioListing 
48 http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_05/40cfr152_05.html 
49 http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_05/40cfr172_05.html 
50 http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_05/40cfr174_05.html 
51 In 2002, the World Health Organization published a list of potential hazards associated with food (in descending order of importance): 
microbial pathogens; zoonotic diseases; parasitic organisms; physical contaminants and adulterants; naturally-occurring toxicants; agro-
chemical and veterinary drug residues; prions; persistent organic pollutants; heavy metals; GMOs that may contain allergens or toxins that are 
not found in conventional foods. WHO (2002). Food Safety and Food-Borne Illness. World Health Organisation, Geneva. 

 
195 
 
4.62.2     Subject of the Safety Assessment 
In all but one country where GM plants, foods and feeds have been submitted for regulatory 
authorization, the safety assessment and subsequent regulatory decision is applied not to a 
variety or a hybrid but to an “event” i.e., a genotype produced from the transformation of a 
single plant species using a specific genetic construct 52.   This means that the G M food           
safety assessment and approval of an event applies to the event as well as any other 
hybrids or varieties bred from that event using conventional plant breeding techniques 
and their derived food products.   These approvals typically do not apply to a subsequent 
transformation of the same plant species using the same construct that was used to transform 
the approved event – instead this would be considered a new event as it would result in a 
different genotype53.  The exception to event -specific approvals occurs in India.  For example, 
GM cotton continues to be regulated and approved on a hybrid -by-hybrid basis even though 
the safety assessment of parental event, MON 531, has been accepted by GEAC.  There is           
every indication that RCGM and GEAC will continue to regulate other GM crops in this same 
way54. 
The rationale behind approving an event vs. a variety or hybrid is scientifically defensible as it 
builds on decades of knowledge and experience with stability of trait expression gained 
through genotypic and phenotypic evaluation and selection which, as with conventional plant 
breeding, is an int egral part of the development of a GM plant.  It also affords an acceptable 
assurance of safety within realistic financial, human resource and institutional resource 
allocations.     
4.6.3    Processed Food Products 
To date, 22 countries have approved GM f oods for human consumption.  In all cases the pre -
market safety assessment was of the primary or whole food product harvested from the GM 
crop (e.g., potato tubers from potato, whole kernel from maize, seed from soybean etc.).  The 
subsequent food approval is applicable to the whole food and any other food product derived 
from the approved whole food ( e.g., corn starch and corn syrup from an approved GM corn 
event are also considered safe and are not independently evaluated).  There are no 
examples of a pro cessed food product containing an ingredient derived from a GM 
plant ( e.g., a biscuit containing cornstarch derived from GM corn or a potato chip 
derived from a GM potato or soy oil derived from a GM soybean) being assessed for 
safety as a stand-alone “GM food”.   This approach to determining the safety of the primary 
or whole food is analogous to the safety assessment of food additives, whereby the additive is 
evaluated from a safety perspective and, when determined to be safe, can be used in any 
number of food products.  The food products with the additive are not, themselves, subject to 
an additional safety assessment. 
Table 2: Summary of regulatory authorities, laws and regulations applicable to GM foods  
in selected countries. 
                                                           
52 For example, two lines of the same plant species transformed with the same or different constructs constitutes two events. 
53 In Canada and the U.S. retransformations of the same plant species with the same construct as an approved event can be 
evaluated using a subset of the typical information and data requirements, effectively providing for an expedited review 
process.  
54 RCGM and GEAC have publicly stated that they have adopted an event-specific approval process, but recent decisions taken 
by both regulatory committees indicate this is not the case. 

 
196 
 
Country Regulatory 
Authority Law Regulation(s) Guideline(s) 
India Food Safety and 
Standards 
Authority 
Food Safety and 
Standards Acts, 
2006 
None to date.  
Australia & 
New Zealand 
Food Standards 
Australia New 
Zealand 
Food Standards 
Australia New 
Zealand Act 1991 
Food Standards Code Guidelines for the Safety 
Assessment of 
Genetically Modified 
Foods 
Canada Health Canada Food and Drugs 
Act 
Novel Food Regulations  
European 
Union 
European Food 
Safety Authority 
 Regulation (EC) No 
1829/2003 on 
genetically modified 
food and feed 
Directive  2001/18/EC 
on the deliberate 
release              into the 
environment of 
genetically modified 
organisms 
Guidance document for 
the risk assessment of 
genetically modified 
plants and derived food 
and feed by the Scientific 
Panel on Genetically 
Modified Organisms 
(GMO) - including draft 
document updated in 
2008 
Japan Ministry of Health, 
Labour and Welfare 
Law 55 of 2003 - 
Food Sanitation 
Law 
Food Sanitation Law 
Enforcement 
Regulations 
Standards for the Safety 
Assessment of 
Genetically Modified 
Foods (Seed Plants) 
United States EPA, FDA Federal Food Drug 
and Cosmetics Act; 
Federal 
Insecticide, 
Fungicide and 
Rodenticide 
Act Toxic 
Substances Control 
Act 
40CFR152 -           
Pesticide registration 
and classification 
procedures; 
40CFR17-   Procedures 
and requirements for 
plant-incorporated 
protectants;  
40CFR172 – 
Experimental use 
permits 
 
 4.7   RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS  
India is a signatory to, or has ratified, a number of multilateral agreements and conventions 
that are potentially relevant to the regulation of GM foods.  The most significant of these in            
the context of this document are introduced below. 
4.7.1    World Trade Organization 
The World Trade Organisation (WTO) administers rules governing trade between its  
members (over 150 countries) according to approximately 30 agreements. 55  Two of these 
agreements are relevant to national policies on biotec hnology:  the Agreement on the 
                                                           
55 http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/ursum_e.htm  

 
197 
 
Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS), 56 which controls the mechanisms 
and procedures for countries to impose barriers on the movement of plants and animals into 
and within a country; and the Agreement on Te chnical Barriers to Trade (TBT), 57 which 
considers the application of technical standards and labelling regimes to determine if they 
present an unwarranted barrier to the trade in certain goods.  Because they were negotiated 
prior to the commercialization o f any genetically modified (GM) organisms, the SPS and the 
TBT agreements do not contain provisions that are GMO -specific and so apply to all products 
of agricultural, forest or aquatic biotechnology.   
SPS Agreement 
Sanitary and phytosanitary measures are  defined as measures taken to prevent damage to 
human, animal or plant health from risks arising from the entry, establishment or spread of 
pests and diseases.  Included in this are measures to control organisms which carry diseases 
and any additives, cont aminants or toxins of foods, beverages or feedstuffs which can cause 
damage or disease.  Countries have a national right to protect their territories from such 
damage and the agreement seeks to establish methods to implement measures so that they do 
not un fairly discriminate between different countries where similar conditions prevail and 
become a barrier to trade. 
The SPS Agreement sets out the basic rules for food safety and animal and plant health 
standards.  Although it allows individual countries to se t their own standards, it requires that 
regulations be based on science, and that they should be applied only to the extent necessary 
to protect human, animal, or plant life and health.  Under the SPS Agreement, nations are 
encouraged to adopt internationa l standards 58 where they exist, but may define even higher 
standards provided they are based on a sound scientific risk assessment, and do not 
discriminate against imports.  Recognizing that a complete risk assessment may not be 
possible in the short term b ecause of scientific uncertainty or the lack of sufficient evidence, 
Article 5.7 of the SPS Agreement allows countries to temporarily adopt restrictive measures.  
In such cases, countries are expected to seek the additional information required to complete  
a full risk assessment within a reasonable period.  Maintaining restrictive measures 
indeterminately in the absence of scientific evidence of risk solely for “precautionary” reasons 
are not allowed.   
 
 
 
 
TBT Agreement 
It is recognised that technical stan dards, and procedures to ensure conformity with such 
standards, are important in the smooth functioning of international trade, but that where 
these are differentially applied they can also be a barrier to entry.  The TBT Agreement seeks 
to ensure that tec hnical negotiations and standards, as well as testing and certification 
                                                           
56 http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/15-sps.pdf 
57 http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/17-tbt.pdf 
58 These standards are developed by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the International Office of Epizootics and the International Plant 
Protection Convention (IPPC).  

 
198 
 
procedures, do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade.  Countries retain the right to 
establish protection at levels they consider appropriate and should not be prevented from 
taking measures necessary to ensure those levels of protection are met.  The Agreement 
therefore encourages countries to use international standards where these are appropriate, 
but it does not require them to change their levels of protection as a result of st andardization. 
The articles of the TBT Agreement focus on the procedures for setting and implementing 
standards and the assessment of conformity with these standards.  In a similar manner to the 
SPS measures, countries are encouraged to participate in stan dard setting through 
international bodies as much as possible.  No particular types of technical barriers are 
mentioned in the Agreement, but one area that is considered important to trade in GM 
organisms is the imposition of labelling regimes for products  based on their method of 
manufacture as opposed to their composition.  The issue of labelling for products of GM 
organisms is a complex topic that should be addressed outside of discussions relevant to 
safety assessment and so is beyond the remit of this document.  
4.7.2   Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety 
The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity is the only 
international environmental agreement that is concerned exclusively with the transboundary 
movement ( i.e., trade) of products of modern biotechnology that are living modified 
organisms59.  It applies to the “transboundary movement, transit, handling and use of all 
living modified organisms that may have adverse effects on the conservation and sustainable 
use of  biological diversity, taking also into account risks to human health 60”.  GM foods are  
considered only if they are LMOs that may be subject to transboundary movement for direct 
use as food, feed or for processing (FFPs) 61 and then only in the restricted co ntext of their 
potential impact on the environment.  The Protocol does not apply to processed food 
products nor does it address the food safety of LMOs that are FFPs.    
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
59 A Living Modified  Organism (LMO) is defined in the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety as any living organism that possesses a novel 
combination of genetic material obtained through the use of modern biotechnology. The Protocol also defines the terms 'living  organism' and 
'modern biotechnology' (see Article 3). 
60 Article 4 (http://www.cbd.int/biosafety/articles.shtml?a=cpb-04) 
61 Article 11, Article 18(a) and Annex II (http://www.cbd.int/biosafety/articles.shtml?a=cpb-11; 
http://www.cbd.int/biosafety/articles.shtml?a=cpb-18; http://www.cbd.int/biosafety/articles.shtml?a=cpb-42. 