      
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 (2013-14) 
 
 
 
FORTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2013 / VAISAKHA, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
49 

2 
 
FORTY NINTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
                (2012-2013) 
 
 
         (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 (2013-14) 
 
 
 
         Presented to Lok Sabha on           30.04.2013           
     Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on        30.04.2013 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2013 / VAISAKHA, 1935 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
COA No. 2.... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
© 2013 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
  

4 
 
CONTENTS 
        PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………………         
(iii)   INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………….             (v) 
ABBREVIATIONS………………………………………………………………              (vii) 
 
CHAPTER I         IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF  
        THE COMMITTEE       01 
 
CHAPTER II       INTRODUCTORY       03 
  (i) Introductory       03 
  (ii) Food Testing Laboratory, R&D and  
Promotional Activities of the Food  
Processing Sector      09 
 
 (iii)       Overview of Demands     10 
 (iv) Allocation and Utilisation of Funds during  
Eleventh Plan Period     11 
           (v) Twelfth Five Year Plan     15 
           (vi) New Schemes      18 
           (vii) Results Framework Document    26 
           (viii)  Outstanding Utilization Certificates   28 
 
CHAPTER III        SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS         42 
      (i) Scheme for Infrastructure Development  42 
  (a) Mega Food Parks (MFP)    43 
(b) Cold Chain, Value-Addition and  
Preservation Infrastructure   53 
    (c) Establishment of New/Modernization 
 of Existing Abattoirs    61 
 
(ii) Scheme for Technology Upgradation/  
Establishment/ Modernisation of  
Food Processing Industries    65 
 
         (iii) Scheme for Quality Assurance, Codex 
 Standards and Research and 
 Development and other Promotional  
Activities       71 

5 
 
 
(a) Quality Assurance     72 
(b) Codex Alimentarius    74 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I Scheme wise Outlay & Expenditure during 11th Plan, 2012-13 
 & BE for 2013-14 for the Ministry of Food Processing Industries  86  
II Implementation Status of 30 Mega Food Parks    88 
III Status of Implementation of Integrated Cold Chain Projects  
approved with the financial assistance of Ministry of Food 
 Processing Industries        91 
IV Details of the Units Assisted during the Financial Year 2012-13 
 (Upto 31.12.2012) under the Scheme for Cold Chain, Value Addition  
and Preservation Infrastructure       95 
  
 
 
APPENDICES 
          
 I Minutes of the 24th Sitting of the Committee held on 03 April, 2013 97    
 
 II Minutes of the 26th Sitting of the Committee held on 25 April, 2013 100              
  

6 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2012-13) 
 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.   Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
30.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
(iii) 

7 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Joint Secretary 
 
2. Shri T.H. Rao   - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

8 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this  Forty-ninth Report on the 
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Committee under Rule 331E (1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure considered the 
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries which were 
laid in Lok Sabha  on 22 March, 20 13. The Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries and  Planning Commission 
at their Sitting held on                  03 April, 2013. The Committee wish to express their 
thanks to the officers of the  Ministry of Food Processing Industries  and Planning 
Commission for appearing before them and for furnishing the information the y  desired 
in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry.   
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee  at their Sitting held 
on 25 April, 2013. 
 
4. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold at the end of each Chapter of the Report. 
 
 
         
        
     
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                   BASUDEB ACHARIA 
25  April, 2013                                           Chairman, 
05 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)                                            Committee on Agriculture  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

9 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 
ASI Annual Survey of Industries  
AAGR Average Annual Growth Rate 
AHDF Animal Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries  
AP Andhra Pradesh 
BE Budget Estimates 
BOT Build-Operate-Transfer 
BOO Build –Operate-Own 
CMRSD Centre for Market Research and Social Development  
CCEA              Cabinet Committee on Economic  Affairs 
CSS         Centrally Sponsored  Scheme 
CA Controlled Atmosphere  
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DAC Department of Agriculture and Corporation 
DMI Directorate of Marketing and Inspection  
DARE Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
DST Department of Science and Technology 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
EC Executive Committee 
EDP Entrepreneurship Development Programme 
EoI Expression of Interest 
FDI Foreign Direct Investment  
FTL Food Testing Laboratory  
FPTC Food Processing Training Centre 
FSSAI Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organisation 
FBOs Food Business Operators 
FSS Act Food Safety Standards Act 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GMP Good Manufacturing Practices  
GHP Good Hygienic Practices 
GoI Government of India 
HACCP Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points 
HRD Human Resource Development  
HPC High Powered Committee 
HP Himachal Pradesh  
HUDA Haryana Urban Development Authority  
IIP Index of Industrial Production  
IF Innovation Fund 
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research  
ISO International Organisation for Standardization  
IL&FS Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services 
IT Income Tax 
IQF International Quality Federation 
JV Joint Venture  
 

10 
 
J&K Jammu and Kashmir 
KIADB Kolar Industrial Area Development Board 
MSEs Micro and Small Enterprises 
MFP Mega Food Park 
MFPI Ministry of Food Processing Industries  
MNRE Ministry of New Renewable Energy 
MFPO Meat Food Products Order 
MA Modified Atmosphere 
MT Metric Tone 
NHB National Horticulture Board 
NMFP National Mission on Food Processing  
NFPDC National Food Processing Development Council 
NCSE Non-Conventional Sources of Energy 
NERAMAC North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation 
Limited 
NDC National Development Council 
NER North Eastern Region  
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
PMA Programme Management Agency 
PMC Process Management Consultants  
PSUs  Public Sector Undertakings   
PPC Progress Payment Certificate 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
R&D Research and Development  
RFD Result Framework Document 
RKVY Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna 
SERB Science and Engineering Research Board 
SLEC State Level Empowered Committee 
SFPDC State Food Processing Development Councils  
SME Small and Medium Enterprises 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
SEZ Special Economic Zone 
TQM Total Quality Management 
TRA Total Risk Assessment  
UT Union Territory  
UP Uttar Pradesh 
UCs Utilisation Certificates 
VCF Venture Capital Fund 
VAT Value Added Tax 
WTO World Trade Organisation  
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
CHAPTER – I 
IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Thirty-third Report of the Committee on Agriculture on Demands for Grants 
2012-13 of Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented to Lok Sabha on      
25 April, 2012 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha  on 26 April, 2012. The Report 
contained 16 Recommendations. 
1.2 On the basis of Action taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries in respect of the Recommendations contained in the Thirty -third Report, the  
Committee presented their Forty -Second Report to Speaker, Lok Sabha on 
26.February, 2013. The Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 25 February, 2013. After analyzing the Action Taken Notes furnished 
by the Ministry, th e Committee commented on the action taken by the Government in 
the context of Recommendations at Para Nos. 2.20 and 2.21, 2.22, 2.23 and 2.24, 3.33, 
3.34 and 3.38, of the Thirty -third Report. The Analysis further revealed that out of         
16 Recommendat ions contained in the Thirty -third Report of the Committee,                 
13 Recommendations (81.25%) have been accepted by the Government.  The 
remaining 03 Recommendations (18.75%) have not been accepted by the Government. 
1.3 In terms of Direction 73 -A of the Directions by Speaker, Lok Sabha, the Minister 
concerned is required to make a Statement in Lok Sabha about the status of 
implementation of Recommendations contained in the original Report of the Committee 
within six months of the said Report to P arliament.  A Statement under Direction 73 A in 

12 
 
the context of the Thirty-third Report was made on 21 August, 2012 adhering to the time 
frame stipulated for the purpose.  
1.4 The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the action 
taken by th e Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-third Report, the Committee were furnished by the Government within 
the stipulated time.  The Committee further note that in pursuance of Direction  
73-A of Directions by the Speake r, Lok Sabha, the Minister concerned is required 
to make a Statement on the status of implementation of Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Original Reports of the Committee within six 
months of their presentation to the Parliament.   According ly, a Statement under 
Direction 73 A in the context of the Thirty -third Report was made on 21 August, 
2012 adhering to the time frame stipulated for the purpose. The Analysis of the 
action taken by the Government reveals that out of 16 Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty -third Report of the Committee, 13 Recommendations 
(81.25%) have been accepted by the Government. The remaining                              
03 Recommendations (18.75%) have not been accepted by the Government.  The 
Committee desire the Government to take conclusive action in respect of the 
eight Recommendations commented upon in their Forty -second Act ion Taken 
Report and furnish further action taken notes to the Committee expeditiously.  
 
 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
(i) Introductory 
 A major issue facing the C ountry is to ensure remunerative prices to the farmers 
for their produce.   While increased productivity is an essential component of a vibrant 
agricultural sector, improved post -harvest handling and processing is essential to 
ensure value addition, reduction in wastage and good qu ality products reach the 
market.  A strong and dynamic food processing sector plays a vital role in diversification 
and commercialization of agriculture, enhances shelf life, ensures value addition to the 
agricultural produce, generates employments, enhances income of farmers and creates 
markets for export of agro foods. 
2.2 Food processing involves many type of value addition to agricultural or 
horticultural produce and also includes processes such as grading, sorting, packaging 
etc. which enhances shelf life of the produce.  The sector provides vital linkages and 
synergies between industry and agriculture.  
2.3 The food processing aims to make food more digestible, nutritious and extend its 
shelf life.  Due to seasonal variations , high level of wastage or shortages can arise if 
adequate measures are not taken to preserve and store the foods.  Food processing 
includes the basic activities like cleaning, grading and packaging as in case of fruits and 
vegetables and alteration of the raw material to a stage just before the final preparation. 
Value addition is ensured through the processes to make ready -to eat food  like bakery 
products, instant foods, flavored and health drinks, etc. 

14 
 
2.4 Food processing offers an opportunity for the creation of sustainable livelihoods 
and economic development for rural communities.  Food processing help the farmers to 
get better returns, higher yield, and lower the risks of perishability . It helps the 
consumers to have access to a greater variety at better prices and new products . The 
economy also gets benefitted with new business opportunities for the entrepreneurs and 
the work force gets employment. 
2.5 India has a huge agricultural production base and can easily become one of the 
leading food suppliers to the world while at the same time serving the vast growing 
domestic market of over a billion people.  It creates incredible market opportunities for 
food producers, food processors, machinery makers, f ood technologists and service 
providers in this sector. 
2.6 The growth of the food processing sector would be critical for the Indian economy 
with main objective to meet the twin national objectives of “inclusive growth” and „food 
security”.  Inspite of such positive factors, significant investment opportunities are yet to 
be tapped in the areas of supply chain management, cold storages, financing, retailing 
and exports.  Historically, agriculture and food processing sector have been plagued by 
factors such as low public investment, poor infrastructure, inadequate credit availability 
and high levels of fragmentation.  However, this scenario is changing fast in the last few 
years.  Most food processing enterprises have been exempted from industrial licensing 
under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 with the exception of beer 
and alcoholic drinks and items reserved for the small scale sector.  Automatic approval 
is given upto 100 per cent equity for foreign investment for a majority of proces sed 
foods. 

15 
 
2.7 Effective post-harvest management allows not only the minimization of losses but 
also increases the value of the marketed agricultural products by transforming the 
agricultural raw materials.  The policy initiatives of the government also in clude 
assistance for opening up of Mega Food Parks  (MFPs), Cold Chain , skill development 
and Research and Development (R&D) activities. Apart from the few schemes from the 
Central Government , various State Government s are implementing their own food 
processing promotion policies and schemes. 
 The following Table indicates the contribution of food processing sector in the 
recent years:
 
2.8 Food processing sector forms an important segment of Indian economy in terms 
of its contribution to the Gross Dom estic Product ( GDP). It contributes 9.0 to 10.0 per 
cent of GDP in agriculture and manufacturing sectors.  During the last 5 years ending 


16 
 
2010-11, this sector has been growing at an Average Annual Growth Rate  (AAGR) of 
around 6 per cent as compared to arou nd 4 per cent in agriculture and 9 percent in 
manufacturing. In 2011 -12 as per the Index of Industrial Production (IIP), FPI grew at 
15.1 per cent and manufacturing growth rate was close to 3.0 per cent. 
Sector-wise Strength of Registered Food Processing Units 
 
2.9 Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is permissible for all the processed food products 
up to 100 percent on automatic route , except for the items reserved for Micro and Small 
Enterprises (MSEs).  For manufacturing of items reserved for MSEs, FDI is permissible 
under automatic route up to 24 per  cent. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in  Food 
Processing Sector (April 2007 to May 2012) is shown in the table below:- 


17 
 
 
 
2.10 As per the Annual Survey of Industries  (ASI) 2010-11 (P), the Invested Capital in 
food processing industries stood at Rs.2,49,337 crore growing at an AAGR of 22.17 per  
cent during five years ending 2010-11. 
Capital Investment in Registered Food Processing Industries 
 
2.11  The important challenges i n the sector include avoidance of the significant 
wastage at every level , value addition  at each value , h igh food inflation, high post -
harvest wastage particularly in fruits and vegetables, low level of processing etc.  
2.12 When the Committee asked as to how the Ministry propose to gear themselves 
to overcome the se challenges and ensure its commitment of providing enhanced 
income to the farmers, they stated in a note furnished to the Committee:  
“Ministry of Food Processing Industries has identified certai n areas for 
development of food processing sector like development of infrastructure, 


18 
 
creation of food processing facilities, human resource development to meet the 
requirement of the sector, research and development of technologies/ processes/ 
products, creation of food testing lab infrastructure for quality assurance etc. to 
provide impetus to the growth of the food processing sector. Ministry has taken 
up a number of schemes to make intervention in these areas. The scheme of 
infrastructure development is  being implemented with components like mega 
food parks, integrated cold chain and setting up / modernization of abattoirs. The 
scheme aims to provide infrastructure to bring together farmers, processors and 
retailers by linking agricultural production to the market to ensure maximization of 
value addition, minimization of wastages and improving farmers income. To 
create adequate processing infrastructure in the country the scheme of 
technology upgradation/ establishment/ modernization of food processing 
industries is being implemented. The scheme has been subsumed in the 
National Mission on Food Processing which is being implemented through State/ 
UT Government. To ensure safety and quality of food products and infrastructure 
of food testing labs is being c reated under the scheme of quality assurance, 
codex standards and R&D.  Research & Development is also an important area 
which is receiving focused attention of the Ministry. Through strengthening of 
Institutions and providing financial assistance under Na tional Mission of Food 
Processing, human resource development programme is being implemented in 
the country to cater to the growing need of the sector for skilled and qualified 
manpower. “   
 
2.13 Following are the number of p ersons employed under Registered Food 
Processing Industries: 
Year 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
(P) 
AAGR $ 
Persons 
(In lakh) 
14.76 15.05 15.64 16.06 16.75  
Growth 
(%) 
6.09 1.96 3.87 2.71 4.30 3.79 
Source: Annual Survey of Industries, MOSPI; P: MOSPI; P: Provisional  Results; $: Average Annual 
Growth Rate. 
 The above Table clearly indicates that since 2006 -07, the strength of persons 
engaged in the registered food processing sector has increased by 2 lakhs.  Further, the 
growth rate which was 6.09 per cent 2006 -07 has  dipped to 1.96 per cent in the 
subsequent year, which stands at 4.30 per cent in the 2010-11. 

19 
 
2.14 When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to enhance the employment 
generation in the country by the food processing sector, the Secretary, MFPI duri ng 
evidence stated that a large number of food processing units, both registered and non -
registered, provide ample opportunities for employment in the sector. He stated:   
“employment in the unregistered sector is a matter of concern, although output 
and c apital employed have gone up, employment has come down and that is 
because it appears that industry is moving to more capital intensive methods. We 
do not have any targets as such for employment nationally and we even do not 
get the information about the t otal employment on a year to year basis.  In the 
past we had been trying to project it on the basis of certain assumptions and that 
is why I gave the numbers for two years because for the unregistered sector the 
survey is done only once in five years. But for the registered units we have 
annual su rvey and we do not have the information for 2011 -12. We have 
information only for 2009 -10 and 2010 -11. In 2009 -10 it was 16.06 and in  
2010-11 it was 16.75. This is all in terms of lakh. So, there was an increase of 
about 0.69 lakhs in 2010 -11 over 2009 -10. We do not have the figures for  
2011-12. We will get in a few months. This is in the registered sector. But , even 
now, if you see the employment intensity food processing sector have a large 
share of employment and it is still a more relatively employmen t intensive sector.  
But, definitely this sector is also moving towards more capital intensive methods”.  
 
2.15 The Ministry furnished in the Post Evidence Reply that the food processing units 
are set up by the entrepreneurs in the private sector. Employment has gone up in the 
Registered Sector from 13.92 lakhs in 2005 -06 to 16.75 lakhs in 2010 -11. However, for 
the Unregistered Sector, it has gone down from 63.46 lakhs in 2005-06 to 47.93 lakhs in 
2010-11. No target of employment, however, is set by the Ministry.  
(ii)  Food Testing Laboratory, R&D a nd Promotional Activities of t he Food 
Processing Sector 
2.16 The Committee was informed that in order to implement schemes more 
effectively and to ensure better and more effective utilization of funds, work of the Food 
Testing Laboratory  (FTL), which is a component of the Scheme for Setting up/Up -

20 
 
gradation of Qualit y Control/Food Testing Laboratory  has been  assigned to Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) under the Ministry of Agriculture, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education  (DARE) with effect from 01 April 2012.  Similarly, 
the R&D component of the Scheme has been entrusted to the Science and Engineering 
Research Board (SERB), under the Ministry of Science and Technology for 
implementation.  Further, t he cold chain projects for horticulture produce are being 
implemented through National Horticulture Board ( NHB).  This would enable the 
Ministry to focus on policy issues confronting the food processing sector and effective 
monitoring of the programme implementation.  
(iii) Overview of Demands 
2.17 The Ministry of Food Processing Industry is concerned with formulation and 
implementation of the policies and plans for the food processing sector within the overall 
national priorities and objectives.  The Ministry acts as a catalyst for bringing in greater 
investment into this sector, guiding and helping the industry and creating a conducive 
environment for healthy growth of the food processing sector.   
 
2.18 Demand No. 46 pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries for the 
fiscal year 2013 -14 was presented to the Lok Sabh a on 22.03.2013.  The details of 
allocation proposed in Demand No. 46 are given below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Sl.No. Section Plan Non-Plan Total 
 
1. Revenue    
 Voted 708 11.11 719.11 
 Charged - - - 
2. Capital    

21 
 
 Voted - - - 
 Charged - - - 
 Grand Total - - 719.11 
 
2.19 The total allocation for the Ministry of Food Processing Industr ies is Rs. 719.11 
crore for the Fiscal 2013 -14.  Out of this, Rs. 708 .00 crore and Rs.11.11 crore are on 
Plan and Non -Plan sides, respectively, under the Revenue Section.  There is no 
allocation on Capital side. 
It may be pertinent to mention here that during 2013 -14, the Ministry had 
proposed an allocation of Rs.1309.00 crore on Plan side, against which, an amount of 
Rs.708.00 crore has been allocated by the Planning Commission. 
2.20 The details of Revised Estimates (RE) for 2012-13 and Budget Estimates (BE) 
for 2013-14 are given below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
 RE 2012-13 BE 2013-14 
 Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
Revenue 660 10.16 708 11.11 
Capital -- -- -- -- 
  
2.21 It may also be noted that on the Plan side the allocation to the Ministry is Rs.708 
crore which is 6.77% higher than their RE 2012 -13 allocation of Rs.660 crore.  On the 
Non-Plan side, this year‟s allocation is marginally higher than last year‟s allocation of 
Rs.10.16 crore. 
(iv) Allocation and Utilisation of Funds during Eleventh Plan Period  
2.22 The following are the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual  
Expenditure during the Eleventh Plan period: 

22 
 
       [Rs. in Crores] 
Years Plan Outlay BE RE Actual Expenditure 
2007-08 250.00 250.00 200.00 182.97 
2008-09 870.30 290.00 242.00 223.14 
2009-10 1137.75 340.00 280.00 277.53 
2010-11 1126.95 400.00 400.00 394.40 
2011-12 646.00 600.00 550.00 518.84 
  4031.00 1880.00 1672.00 1596.88 
 
2.23 The outlay for the different schemes, during the years 2012 -13 (BE), 2012 -
13(RE), 2012-13 (Actual Expenditure) and 2013-14 (BE) is as under: 
 
2.24 The Ministry had proposed an allocation of Rs.5,261.64 crore for Eleventh Plan, 
whereas the approved outlay was only Rs.4,031 crore and the actual allocation was far 
S. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme BE  
2012-13 
 RE  
2012-13 
Expenditure 
as on  
25.03.2013 
BE  
2013-
14 
1. Scheme for Infrastructure  
Development (Mega Food 
Park, Cold Chain, Value 
Addition & Preservation 
Infrastructure, Abattoir) 
191.00 184.19 176.76 247.00 
2. 
Scheme for Technology 
Upgradation/ Establishment/ 
Modernisation of Food 
Processing Industries. 
100.00 186.46 154.59 165.00 
3 
Scheme for Quality Assurance, 
Codex Standards , R&D and 
other Promotional Activities 
35.00 31.91 30.27 35.00 
4. 
Scheme for Human Resource 
Development  
4.00 4.00 3.98 4.00 
5. 
Scheme for Strengthening of 
Institutions 
80.00 68.12 66.91 75.00 
6. 
National Mission on Food 
Processing  
250.00 185.32 184.31 182.00 
 
Total 660.00 660.00 616.82 708.00 

23 
 
less at just Rs.1,672 crore. Out of this significantly reduced amount, the Ministry were 
able to spend only Rs.1596.88 crore.  The details of Scheme-wise Outlay & Expenditure 
during 11 th Plan, 2012 -13 and BE for 2013 -14 for the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries are given at Annexure – I. 
 
2.25  When the Committee enquired about the reasons for not achieving the assigned 
targets, the Ministry informed that most of schemes were approved about a year and 
half after commencement of the Eleventh Plan.  As against approved 30 Mega Food 
Park, only 10 Mega Food Park s were approved in Phase-I of schemes of Infrastructure 
Development. In 2008-09, 10 projects were approved , 5 Parks were approved in  
2010-11 and remaining 15 projects were approved in 2011-12.  In Cold Chain, Value 
Addition and Preservation Infrastructure , 39 additional projects were approved in  
2011-12.  In Modernization of Abattoir as against approval of 50  projects, only 10 
projects were approved for Phase -I.  As a result thereof, the schemes could not be 
taken up.  Hence, the overall progress was slow.  During implementation, certain issues 
relating to ind ividual schemes cropped up which slowed down the pace of 
implementation (e.g. land related issues for MFP).   
 
2.26 The Committee not ed that a huge disconnect exists  between funding proposals  
of the Ministry and actual spending, which is evident  over the entire Eleventh Plan and 
first fiscal of the Twelfth Plan.   The Committee also desired to know as to whether the 
Ministry have analysed the reasons behind this alarming situation to find out where 
does the fault lies.  Is it with the planning of  proposals, or working out the proposals or 
in implementation process?  And what systemic improvements would the Ministry like to 

24 
 
take with a view to eliminate this disconnect so that the sector is not deprived of its due 
funding. The Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing Industry during their Oral Evidence 
stated that:– 
“ for the 11 th Plan, we had an approved outlay of a little over Rs.4,000 crore and 
against that we were able to spend only about a little over Rs.1600 crore. There 
are two reasons for this. One is on a year to year basis you are constrained by 
the allocation that you have got . Secondly, for some of the schemes the 
approvals came late and in the 11 th Plan, there was a big shift in the Ministry in 
the sense that we took up these new infrastructure projects of which we had no 
experience at all. So, in comparison in the 12 th Plan, we feel we are in a better 
position for the following reasons. One is infrastructure which still accounts for a 
major chunk of our plan outlay , we have now experience of about four years in 
implementing these projects. And as you can see from the year to year 
expenditure figures, on all the infrastructure schemes the expenditure levels have 
been going up and this is commensurate with the physical activity, in particular 
cold chain.” 
 
2.27 When the Committee enquired about the deficiencies/bottlenecks observed in the 
implementation of the Schemes  and the corrective action taken, the Ministry in a note 
stated: - 
“the major deficiency is the limited staff available to carry out the various 
schemes as also the availability of funds. With a view to removing  the 
deficiencies and for better implementation of the schemes, Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries has launched a new Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) - 
National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP) during 12th Plan (2012 -13) for 
implementation through St ates / UTs. The basic objective of NMFP is 
decentralization of implementation of Ministry‟s schemes, which will lead to 
substantial participation of State Governments/UTs. The NMFP contemplates 
establishment of a National Mission as well as corresponding M issions in the 
State and District level. NMFP is likely to improve significantly the Ministry‟s 
outreach in terms of planning, supervision and monitoring of various schemes. 
 

25 
 
2.28 Evaluation of Schemes/projects is undertaken from time to time, so as to cor rect 
any deficiency/bottleneck in the implementation.  In this regard,  the Ministry informed 
that: – 
“the Ministry undertook independent evaluation of the schemes being 
implemented by the Ministry.  Based on the observations of the evaluation study 
and the  experience gained during the implementation, action for course 
correction is being taken by the Ministry by modifying the respective scheme 
guidelines.” 
 
(v) Twelfth Five Year Plan 
 
2.29 Explaining the pr ocedure required to be followed  for projecting financial 
requirement, Ministry of Food Processing Industries informed that while working out the 
financial requirements for their various activities, both for the Five Year Plan and the 
Annual Plan, t he Planning Commission had constituted a Working Group to make 
Recommendations for 12 th Five Year Plan. Subsequently, the Ministry had constituted 
six Sub-Groups for focused discussion and recommendation on various key areas. T he 
Working Group submitted its R eport after intensive consultation with industr ies, 
academia, scientists and representatives of the State Governments. The Report also 
included inputs from six separate Sub -groups and deliberations held during four 
Working Group meetings over this period. The approach to the 12 th Five Year Plan has 
also taken into consideration the mid -term evaluation of plan schemes and learning 
experiences of implementation during the 11 th Plan. Based on the recommendations of 
the Working Group, the financial requirements had been worked out for various 
activities for the 12th Five Year Plan.  

26 
 
2.30 Based on the Recommendations of the Working Group on FPI , the Ministry had 
proposed an allocation of Rs.14,606 crore for the 12 th Plan. The Planning Commission 
has allocat ed Rs.5,990 crore, which is barely around forty per cent of the proposed 
allocation.  However, the actual allocation for first year (2012 -13) was Rs.660 crore 
barely touching half the proposed average outlay for 2012 -13.  Similarly, for the year 
2013-14, the Plan outlay proposed by the Mini stry was Rs.1309 crore whereas  only 
Rs.708 crore have been allocated.  
2.31 The delays in approval of 11 th Plan had impacted the implementation of many 
Schemes of the Ministry .  When the Committee asked as to how the Ministry has 
geared itself to ensure th at proposed schemes during 12 th Plan are not affected  by the 
delay in finalization of Twelfth Plan document , the Secretary, MFPI, during evidence 
stated :–  
“the big shift we wanted to make in the 12 th Plan was to decentralise the 
implementation which we feel that in the long run will help in spreading the 
activities and also of course on the financial side there will be a corresponding 
increase in the expenditure. So, we did not wait for the 12 th Plan to be finalised. 
As soon as the Working Group report was finalised in September 2011 and the 
Steering Committee okayed it in October, 2011, we moved the Planning 
Commission and they very quickly in December gave us the in principle approval. 
And that is why in January last year, even before the 12th Plan started, we started 
writing to the State Governments to take preparatory action for which the 
Government had given a sum of a little over Rs.50 crore.  
 
The reason why we had to start early was because in m ost of the States 
they do not have a food processing Department. It is generally looked after by 
agriculture or it is looked after by industry. In most of the States they do not even 
have a Head of Account for food processing. So, we required a lot of lead  time. 
Both the Planning Commission and the Finance Ministry were very supportive 
and that is how we were able to start the activities, we were able to 
operationalise the scheme in August last year, and several of the States have 
already started the proces s of actual distribution of benefits and support to the 
sector on the ground.  
 

27 
 
So, we do not have any new scheme which we now will have to take up 
which is very different from the 11 th Plan. We had two new schemes, the 
Innovation Fund and the Venture Capi tal Fund. But looking to allocation that we 
have got of Rs.5,990 crore and the requirements of our other schemes, we have 
deferred the implementation of these two schemes.” 
 
He further added - 
“since we wanted to do it from the first year of the 12 th Plan, we had gone to the 
Planning Commission in November 2011 and in December, they had given us 
their in principle clearance, that pending finalization of the 12 th Plan, this is only 
an administrative arrangement, rather than doing it from Delhi, it should be done 
in a decentralized manner; this is in keeping with the general principles that the 
Planning Commission has been indicating of decentralization. So, there is no 
problem, I presume, in that. Since the steering group had already recommended, 
they had no problem in that. Similarly, the Finance Ministry also had indicated in 
January itself that in principle, they would approve it. The Finance Minister, in his 
budget speech last year, announced the scheme. We implemented it from the 1 st 
April 2012, which is the start of the 12 th Plan, but because the 12 th Plan had not 
been finalized, we had only the outlay available last year for 2012 -13, we took 
Cabinet‟s approval only for 2012-13. So, when it went to the Cabinet, it went with 
the concurrence of the Planning  Commission and the Finance Ministry. There 
was an EFC held last year, for the first year of the 12 th Plan. That is why; I had to 
hold one more EFC this year in February for the remaining four years. When we 
went last year, we did not have the 12 th Plan outlay. We had the outlay for 2012 -
13. The question was do we want to continue doing it from Delhi because of the 
technicality that the Plan had not been approved and the answer that we got from 
all the forums was that this is a move in the right dir ection; the State 
Governments were also very enthusiastic about it. So, we had no difficulty, but to 
repeat once again, it was only for the first year of the 12 th Plan. That is why, we 
had to go once again to the Cabinet this year.” 
2.32 When the Committee enquired if it is desirable to have Plan Document prepared  
in advance, so that the implementation of Schemes, start on the very first day of the 
Plan period, the representative of Planning Commission stated during evidence: –  
“It is definitely a desirable situation.  I fully agree with you but one thing should be 
recognised in this.  This time the Planning Commission has made an endeavour 
for a larger involvement of all the strata of people and stake -holders.  That had 
taken so me time.  This time we have focused on not only decentralisation but 
also to see that the implementation mechanism should be more improved and 
more inclusive.  Whenever you are going to implement certain changes, given 
the big size of stake -holders consultations that we had in the process during the 

28 
 
preparation of 12 th Plan and side -by-side one manufacturing policy was being 
prepared, we had to synchronize with them and all this process took time.  This is 
not new.  Even during 11th Plan the preparation of Plan had taken some time and 
there was one year lag but we have taken care of the mission itself.  We have 
gone all the way to have some positive departure.” 
 
2.33 Asked further, as to which are the sectors, where Schemes have been delayed, 
he stated: 
“So far as industry division is concerned, in fact not only food processing I 
deal with many sectors of our industry division.  There we have not delayed the 
major projects”. 
2.34 Commenting upon impact of delay on the on-going schemes, he further stated:  
“There have been no adverse effects on the implementation of any scheme.  In 
fact these Schemes have been continued in the first year of the XII Plan i.e.  
2012-13. No need has been felt to take up this matter with any agency since the 
XII Plan allocations have been finalized.” 
 
2.35 Ministry of FPI too agreed that ideally  Twelfth Plan should commence from         
1st April 2012.  In the post evidence reply furnis hed to the Committee, the Ministry 
stated:–  
“it is desirable that the Plan document is ready and schemes whether ongoing or 
new start operating from the very first day of the particular plan period.  However, 
this Ministry has taken proactive action to ensure implementation of its schemes 
without any difficulty. During the first year of the XII Plan, the Ministry has been 
able to achieve an expenditure of 99.59% of the total allocation.  During the 
current fiscal  (2013-14), Ministry has already made advance planning for 
obtaining appraisals/approvals etc. of the competent authorities, so that 
implementation of the schemes continues without disruption.” 
 
(vi) New Schemes 
2.36 The Ministry have informed that following new schemes are proposed to be taken 
up during the 12th Plan period:- 
 

29 
 
(a) National Mission on Food Processing 
(b) Innovation Fund Scheme 
(c) Venture Capital Fund. 
 
 (a) National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP)  
1.  Introduction: 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MFPI) has launched a new 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) - National Mission on Food Processing 
(NMFP) during 12th Plan (2012-13) for implementation through States / UTs. The 
NMFP contemplates establishment of a National Mission as well as 
corresponding Missions in the State and District level. NMFP is likely to improve 
significantly the Ministry‟s outreach in terms o f planning, supervision and 
monitoring of various schemes.  
2.  Objectives: 
i. To augment the capacity of food processors to upscale their operations 
through capital infusion, technology transfer, skill Upgradation and 
handholding support.  
ii. To support established self help groups working in food processing sector 
to facilitate them to achieve SME status. 
iii. Capacity development and skill upgradation through institutional training to 
ensure sustainable employment opportunities to the people and also to 
reduce the gap in requirement and availability of skilled manpower in food 
processing sector. 
iv. To raise the standards of food safety and hygiene to the globally accepted 
norms. 
v. To facilitate food processing industries to adopt HACCP and ISO 
certification norms  
vi. To aug ment farm gate infrastructure, supply chain logistic, storage and 
processing capacity. 
vii. To provide better support system to organized food processing sector. 
3.  Five Guiding Principles:  
a. Organizing the unorganized food processors, including Self -Help Groups, 
to help them reap advantages of Mission initiatives  
b. Ensuring advantages of programmes/ schemes/ institutions/ infrastructure 
of NMFP reach Micro and Small Enterprises on preferential basis  

30 
 
c. Dedicated, professional, sensitive and accountable support structure to 
initiate and implement the Mission initiatives in a transparent manner  
d. Mission initiatives to be shaped and driven by proposed beneficiaries  
e. Adoption of best practices for scaling up programmes/initiatives 
4.  Structure: 
(A) National Level:  
(i).  The Mission will be governed by the National Food Processing 
Development Council (NFPDC) headed by the Hon‟ble Minister of Food 
Processing Industries as its Chairman. 
(ii).  To administer the Mission, a National Executive Committee headed by 
Secretary, MFPI has been constituted with Joint Secretary, MFPI as Member 
Secretary. The EC will ensure smooth functional linkages amongst the different 
agencies. The EC would meet once in every quarter 
(B).  State Level: 
  State Level Empowered Committee (SLEC) 
(a) To carry out administration of the State Food Processing Mission, a State 
level Empowered Committee (SLEC) will be constituted by the State 
Government under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary having 
representatives from other concerned Departments, as deemed proper by 
the concerned State Governments including the representative of Finance 
Department of the State. Central Government will nominate its 
representative who will be a Member in the SLEC. The State Mission 
Director to be appointed by the State Government will be the nodal 
agency and they may be invited in the implementation and monitoring of 
NMFP. 
(b) State food processing departments/Directorate of Food Processing 
Industry/any suitable organization so identified by the State will act as 
Mission Directorate for state food processing Mission.  
(c) States may decide whether to implement the NMFP scheme through State 
level bodies or district level bodies or as the case may be or as may be 
decided by SLEC.   
At the operational level, State Governments would have the freedom to 
nominate, or create a sui table autonomous agency to be registered under the 
Societies Registration Act for implementing the Mission programmes at the State 

31 
 
and District levels. The Panchayati Raj Institutions existing in the State may be 
involved in the implementation structure 
 
5.  Funding Pattern for NMFP:  
 
This scheme is implemented as a centrally sponsored scheme in all the 
States in the ratio of 75:25 (Govt. of India and States) except for North Eastern 
States, where the ratio would be 90:10. All the UTs would be funded on 10 0% 
grant basis.  
Allocation of funds to the States / UTs would be based on their population 
(50%) and Area (50%) and Minimum base / floor rate /amount @ Rs. 2.00 crore 
for States and Rs. 1.00 crore for UTs.   
6.  Components of the Mission proposed to be im plemented during 
2012-13: 
The Major Programmes/Schemes covered under NMFP during 2012-13 of 
12th Plan are:  
(i) Scheme for Technology Up -gradation/ Establishment / Modernisation of 
Food Processing Industries. 
(ii) Scheme for Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure for 
Non Horticultural Products. 
(iii)    Scheme for Human Resource Development (HRD) 
a. Creation of Infrastructure Facilities for Running Degree/ Diploma/ 
           Certificate Courses in Food Processing Technology. 
b. Entrepreneurship Development Program (EDP) 
c. Food Processing Training Centre (FPTC 
(iv)     Scheme for Promotional Activities 
a. Organizing Seminar/Workshops 
b. Conducting Studies/Surveys 
c. Support to Exhibitions/Fairs 
d. Advertisement & Publicity 
 
(II)  New Schemes proposed to be implemented during 2013-17:  
(i) Scheme for Creating Primary Processing Centers / Collection  
           Centers in Rural Areas. 

32 
 
(ii)  Modernisation of Meat Shops. 
(iii)  Reefer Vehicles. 
(iv)  Old Food Parks 
            
  No physical and financial targets have been kept for the scheme for 
abattoirs during 2012 -13 & 2013-14. The Abattoir Scheme will be subsumed in 
NMFP for implementation by the States w.e.f. 2014 -17. During i.e. 2012 -13 & 
2013-14, the Abattoir Scheme will be implemented by Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries (MOFPI).  
         In case State / UT Governments desires to deviate from the Mission 
guidelines and / or add new components, they may submit proposals to the 
Mission Directorate in MOFPI, Govt. of India, which will be placed before NFPDC 
for a final decision.    
6.  Component-wise allocation of funds: 
State level Empowered Committee (SLEC) will be competent authority to 
decide inter-se allocation of funds amongst the above components. However, not 
more than 10% and 20% of the allocation will be utilized for the Promotional 
Activities and Human Resource Development components, respectively. SLEC 
may allocate resources to the other two co mponents as per the requirement of 
the states.  
7.  Approval Procedure: 
The SLEC will decide the level competent to accord project specific 
approvals under all the 4 components. SLEC will also decide the modalities, 
including delegation of sanction powers of the schemes to sub committees / 
officers, including the scrutiny of individual proposals and release of funds. SLEC 
periodically will monitor, review and evaluate the implementation of NMFP in the 
State. The Area Officers of the Ministry will be responsible to participate in the 
SLEC meetings, regularly and help in monitori ng the progress of implementation 
of NMFP in the concerned state, undertake the physical visits in the state, submit 
periodic reports to the Mission Directorate and also to ensure overall coordination 
with the State Mission Directorate and the Ministry.       
State Mission Directorate would ensure identification of beneficiaries in the 
respective States / UTs for various schemes of NMFP during 2012 -13. They will 
also ensure physical verification of the projects assisted including taking up 
concurrent evaluation as well as submission of monthly progress reports to the 
Ministry in soft and hard copies . Ministry of Food Processing Industries will also 

33 
 
undertake periodical evaluation of the implementation of the scheme by engaging 
professional agencies, if necessary. 
8.  Recall of Grant: 
SLEC will have the authority to r e-call the grant in case of mis utilization of 
the grant by the applicant.  
(a) If the project is not completed even within the extended project period.  
(b) If the institute/ organization become non -functional or said activity/ 
organization is closed before 3 years of release of final installment.  
 
9.  Convergence with schemes of State Governments: 
Benefits under this scheme can be given in addition to the benefits under 
the schemes of the State Governments, if any, at the discretion of the State 
Governments / SLEC. Each State may design State specific schemes under 
which additional benefits can be provided in addition to the NMFP assistance. 
10.  State Food Processing Development Councils (SFPDC) 
        Each State would have a SFPDC to be chaired by the Chief 
Minister/concerned Minister. This would help in the effective monitoring, 
supervision and monitoring of the scheme at the state level. Parliamentary 
Consultative Committee of MFPI had recomm ended to include Hon‟ble MPs of 
the Consultative Committee in the State Food Processing Development Councils 
(SFPDCs) for effective monitoring of the implementation of NMFP at state level. 
Accordingly, State Governments had been suitably advised in the matter.   
 
11.  Flexibility to the states: 
 
To give States / UTs flexibility for any deviation from guidelines / taking up 
of new schemes, if any, as per their local requirements, the National Food 
Processing Development Council (NFPDC) will consider such pro posals of the 
State Governments. 
12.  Present status of NMFP:  
(a).  Constituted National Food Development Council (NFPDC). First and 
second meetings held on 1.6.2012 and 19.02.2013, respectively.  
 
(b).  Constituted Executive Committee (EC) for NFPDC. Two  meetings held on 
1.8.2012 and 11.12.2012 

34 
 
 
 (c).  Conveyed Government of India (GOI) approval on 28.8.2012 and released 
GOI share to 32 states / UTs for implementation of NMFP main scheme.  
 
(d).  Final Guidelines for components/schemes implemented during 2012-13 
under NMFP also circulated on 28-08-2012.  
 
(e)  Monthly video conferences have been organized regularly with the States/ 
UTs to monitor / obtain feedback on implementation of NMFP. 
 
(f).  Workshops held for all the states at Delhi in June / July,2 012 and an 
additional one for North Eastern states at Guwahati in Dec,2012 
 
(g).  NERAMAC has been appointed PMA for North Eastern States. PMA for 
rest of the states / UTs is being finalised shortly. 
 
(h).  Rs. 184.31 crores (Rs. 35.25 crores for preparatory activities / advance 
action + Rs. 149.06 crores for NMFP main Scheme) has been released to 
States/UTs. 
 
Proposal for continuation of continuation of the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme – National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP) during remaining four 
years of 12 TH Plan (2013 -17) has been recommended by EFC with some 
modifications / enhancements in the schematic assistance. The proposal would 
now be placed before the CCEA for approval. 
 
(b).  Innovation Fund for Food Processing:  
 
The proposed Innovation Fund for Food Processing would aim at 
supporting potential entrepreneurs with sole focus of transforming their 
innovations into viable business opportunities . It has been proposed to provide 
with Incubation facilities, at designated institutions, for nurturing their ideas, along 
with financial support. Such financial assistance may be in from of soft loan or 
grant or a mix of both, based on nature of proposals.  
 
The proposed Innovation Fund may encourage marke t-oriented applied 
research and innovation and would act as a bridge between lab and industry. 
The Fund is likely to assist small entrepreneurs, especially from rural areas, in 
bringing about indigenous and low cost solutions to address sector specific 

35 
 
concerns such as limited shelf -life and low processability of local agricultural 
produces.  
 
(c).  Venture Capital Fund for Food Processing Sector: 
  
A large majority of food processing enterprises continue to face serious 
constraints in access to bank credit due to issues like low net worth, lack of 
tangible security and absence of a proven track record, usual concerns for SME 
sector. The food processi ng enterprises though suffer from additional limitations 
due to seasonal operations and thus lower capacity utilization. Further, the 
market development and quality assurance costs are relatively higher for food 
processing sector. All these constraining fa ctors have resulted in bankers being 
wary of providing adequate finance to the sector.  
 
The Ministry proposes to create a dedicated Venture Capital Fund (VCF) 
for food processing sector to address this concern. A dedicated VCF may allow 
food processing un its to leverage their limited resources in a more effective 
manner. Further, the provision of Strategic Capital through VCF may be 
combined with management support and marketing linkages.  
 
To be sure, there have been various efforts made for creating vent ure 
capital funds in India in recent years, both in public sector and corporate sector. 
Most of these capital funds though suffer from relatively narrower definition of 
―ventures/projects which are eligible for support and often feel inclined to 
support in itiatives only in modern sectors like Information Technology and 
Biotech which promise projected returns justifying strategic stakes in them. In this 
process, food processing enterprises, which may have a much larger potential of 
creating livelihood opportunities, have little funding support.  
 
The approach to the proposed Fund would be, therefore, different from 
normal venture/angel funds, often more interested in projections for divesting 
their strategic stakes at appropriate stage. The proposed Venture C apital Fund 
would though encourage viability but its touchstone would be livelihood and 
would thus prefer projects which have a potential to impact largest number of 
rural poor. 
 
Outlay of Rs. 5990 crores for the full 12 th Five Year Plan has been made 
available by Planning Commission for this Ministry.  The above two initiatives / 
schemes recommended by Working Group are not being taken up for the present 
due to lack of resources.   

36 
 
(vii) Results Framework Document 
2.37 The Ministry of Food Processing Industry, has set -upon itself the vision, 
objective, etc., for promoting and strengthening food processing sector , which also acts 
as a guiding tool to achieve the desired outcomes in terms of RFD.   These are as 
under: 
 
Vision 
To make India, a global leader in Food Processing and export of safe, 
hygienic, nutritious and quality processed food items. 
Objective 
1. Enhancing Processing level and reduction in wastages. 
2. Institutional Strengthening 
3. Food Safety & Quality assurance 
4. Capacity building 
5. R&D; in food processing 
6. Value Addition 
Mission 
To achieve 20% processing level, 35% value addition and 3% share in 
global trade by 2015 through promotional policy support, financial assistance, 
fiscal incentives and creation of state-of-the-art infrastructure. 
Functions 
1. Developmental initiatives through creation of a conductive environment for 
healthy growth of the sector. 
 
2. Promotional support by promoting rationalization of tariffs and duties 
relating to the sector 
 
3. Policy support through formulation and imple mentation of policies for the 
sector within the overall national priorities and objectives. 
 
2.38 The Committee has been informed that at the beginning of each financial year, 
with the approval of the Minster concerned, each Department prepare a Results -

37 
 
Framework Document (RFD) consisting of the priorities set out by the Ministry 
concerned, agenda as spelt out in the manifesto , if any, President‟s Address, 
announcements/agenda as spelt out by the Government from time to time. The Minister 
In-charge decide the inter-se priority among the departmental objectives. 
After six months, the achievements of each Ministry / Department are  reviewed 
by a Committee on Government Performance and the goals reset, taking into account 
the priorities at that point of time.  This enable to factor in unforeseen circumstances 
such as drought conditions, natural calamities or epidemics. 
At the end of the year, all Ministries / Departments review and prepare a report 
listing the achievements of their Ministry / Department against the agreed results in the 
prescribed format.  This Report has to be finalized by the 1st May of each year. 
2.39 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries  have been preparing the RFD and 
placing them for greater transparency and public scrutiny.  The High Powered 
Committee (HPC) headed by the Cabinet Secretary awards the composite score on the 
basis of performance of the Department against the targets set to fulfill its objectives. 
2.40 For the year 2011 -12, the composite score of the Ministry was 83%, which is 
considered to be below average compared to.  The Committee when reasoned for such 
low composite score, the Secretary during evidence, stated: – 
“the entire process of the RFD is based on certain structure where we at the start 
of the year sit down with the Task Force and we identify our targets and we 
identify our success indicators for the year. At times we find in retr ospect those 
indicators to be very ambitious and we are not able to achieve them. That is why 
the success ratio did come down and the composite score, as you rightly 
mentioned, is lower than the average. But while every year we sit down and we 
reframe RFD strategy and we do try and improve that. But, I think, what we have 

38 
 
tried to do is that whatever are the resources available to us, we have tried to 
ensure that these resources are used to the maximum possible. So, it is in that 
context that I have mentioned that the best way to get more resources is through 
better performance. I think the steps that we have taken in the last few years, the 
increased focus on the infrastructure development, which was started in the 11 th 
Plan, I think, it was a big step in t he right direction. Till then we were not doing 
much for infrastructure. We were directly giving to the industries. So, investing in 
infrastructure, I think, is going to pay big dividends.  Certainly we are a little 
disappointed with the progress in the mega food parks and the abattoir schemes. 
We do hope that the performance will improve and in the last couple of years it 
has improved. Some of the teething problems in these schemes have been 
overcome. Similarly, in the 12 th Plan the big initiative that we have taken is 
decentralising scheme implementation so that we have more time to think about 
scheme designing and policy issues, like the issue that was just raised about 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI).  We should work more 
closely with the industries and the FSSA I so that we have sustainable industry. I 
think that would help to grow the industry.  We have to build consumer 
confidence. These are the things that were relatively neglected when we were 
directly investing all our resources, in the direct management of the schemes.” 
 
(viii) Outstanding Utilization Certificates (UCs) 
2.41 The grants are issued as per General Financial Rules, which forbid issue of 
further grant, if UCs are pending for previous grant issued.  Details of pending UCs 
furnished by the Ministry, as on 15-03-2013, are given below: 
No. of Pending UCs Amount of Pending UCs 
2967 Rs.501.60 Crore 
 
FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR 
2.42 While increasing production and productivity are essential components of 
a vibrant agriculture sector, improved post harvesting handling and processing 
are essential to ensure value addition, reduction in waste and ensure quality food 
products reaching the market.  A strong and dynamic food processing sector 
plays a stellar  role in the diversification and commercialization of agriculture, 

39 
 
enhancing shelf-life, ensur ing value addition to agriculture produce, generat ing 
employment, enhanc ing income of farmers  and creat ing markets for export of 
agro-foods.  Food security, food inflation, improved nutrition and rural poverty 
are some of the development concerns addressed by the food processing sector.  
The food processing sector acts as a bridge between agriculture and 
manufacturing sectors by providing healthy and affordable food to stimulate the 
overall growth of the Country. The importance of food processing sector is 
second to none since it contributes as much as 9 -10% of GDP in agriculture, 
provide employment to 16.75 la kh persons and infuse capital investment to the 
tune of Rs. 249,337 crore in the registered processing industry.    The multi -
pronged strategy for enhancing processing level and reduction in wastages; 
institutional strengthening; food safety and quality as surance; capacity building; 
R&D and technical support; and value additions, are some of the key areas which 
can overturn the fortunes of the sector.  However, the Committee are distressed 
to note that inspite of potential high value addition to the economy, the role of the 
sector has not been understood in the right perspective both by the Government 
and the planners.  The Committee are of the view that unless drastic and radical 
steps are taken, the dream of India becoming global leader in the food processing 
and export of safe, hygienic nutritious and quality processed food items, will 
remain a distant dream.   The Committee, while exhorting upon the Government 
to overcome the se deficiencies, recommend the Ministry to enhance their ability  
to successfully implement major Schemes , so as to improve utilization of 
allocated funds substantially.  This will facilitate the Ministry to play a meaningful 

40 
 
role not only for the food processing sector but also to the agriculture sector as a 
whole.  
PLANNING PROCESS 
2.43 The Committee are exasperated to be apprised that all the agencies 
concerned with the finalization of Twelfth Plan document have not paid any heed 
to their advise, rendered time and again, for streamlining the planning process, 
as the incumbent process is riddled with need for obtaining multi -agencies 
clearance, which are time consuming.  The fate that befell the Eleventh Plan was 
the guiding factor for the instant recommendation.  The Committee note that the 
Approach Paper to the Twelfth Five Year Plan was approved on 22 October, 2011 
i.e. on the eve of operationalization of Plan w.e.f. 1.4.2012.  In between, the 
planning process had t o pass through plethora of working groups before being 
considered by NDC on 27 December, 2012.  Ideally a scheme ought to be 
operationalized from day One of a Five Year Plan.  Both the Ministry of Food 
Processing and Industry and Planning Commission too su bscribe to this cardinal 
planning principle.  The Committee, however, are concerned to note that this has 
seldom happened in the past.  Since Tenth Plan period and before that also, there 
has been persistent delays in the finalization and operationalization of a Five Year 
Plan, thereby impacting outlays, timelines and even schemes to a large extent. 
The past planning experience has revealed that by the time, schemes / projects in 
a Five Year Plan period were approved formally, though retrospectively, one wa s 
in the midst of Plan period.  In the opinion of the Committee this systematic ill  
has to be overcome, in the interest of development, including Food Processing 

41 
 
Industry Sector.  In case of Twelfth Plan, synchronization with manufacturing 
policy; focus on decentralization so as to improve implementation mechanism for 
goal towards inclusive growth and wide -spread consultations were some of the 
factors, as stated by Planning Commission, were instrumental in delaying the 
approval.  Conceding that the Plannin g Commission has powers to allocate and 
approve resources for the Plans; the inordinate delay in their finalization, 
frustrates planning process and a sign of Planning Commission abdicating their 
authority of a planner.   
2.44 The  Committee while strongly  disapproving the protracted delay in  the  
finalization of the Twelfth Plan , which has still  to see the light of the day , do not 
find any merit and justification in according approval to schemes in piecemeal 
manner by EFC / SFC , when the Plan and the schem es are yet to be approved 
formally.  The Committee are of the view that such action on the part of the 
Ministry strikes at the very root of the  planning process and threatens the 
sanctity of planning itself .  The Committee wonder whether the instant rules / 
regulations permit such unwarranted action on the part of the Ministries 
concerned and the Planning Commission.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised thereof.  
 The Committee have been informed that all the major projects under 
Industry Division of Pl anning Commission and food processing sector, a 
component of Industry Division, are in time, except, projects of food processing 
sector.  The Committee fails to understand this exception and step -motherly 
treatment accorded to schemes of Food Processing Sector.   The Committee view 

42 
 
the neglect of food processing sector, by the Planning Commission seriously and 
desire that the sector should be accorded importance, as it warrants. 
2.45 The performance of Working Groups constituted by the Planning 
Commission, to plan and suggest financial requirement of a sector, needs much 
to be desired.   The recommendations of Working Groups are treated casually 
and often, the resources suggested by them are slashed by the Planning 
Commission itself.  This shows the scant re spect which Working Group receives 
at the hands of the Planning Commission and points towards their working in 
isolation, rather than in harmony with the different arms of the Government.   
Such incoherent actions, are another examples of deficient plannin g system, at 
macro level and in the process the better and more effective planning of 
resources is given a go by. 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS DURING ELEVENTH PLAN PERIOD 
 
2.46 During the course of the Eleventh Plan period the Committee have 
observed that Ministry were allocated an amount of Rs. 1880 crore only against 
the approved outlay of Rs. 4031 crore by the Planning Commission.  The fact that 
the Ministry was able to utilize 95% of revised allocated fund s, is a classical case 
of self agg randisement and bemuse the Committee.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, the ability to expand resources needs to be seen in the context of 
what was originally asked for at project formulation stage and or at the most 
Budget Estimates (BE)  stage.  M atching actual expenditure vis-a-vis Revised 
Estimates (RE) is no achievement at all.   The Committee further observe that the 

43 
 
Plan outlay allocation vis-a-vis BE stage fluctuated widely especially in the fiscals 
2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010 -11.  Similarly, stark mis match was observed between 
BE  & RE, for the years 2008 -09, 2009-10. The Committee are aggrieved to note 
that their constant pleas to rectify the imbalances have gone unheard during the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan.  As the sector provides a mechanism to bring together 
farmers, processors and retailers , linking agriculture production to market so as 
to improve livelihood in rural sector, the Committee would like to emphasise that 
all the agencies concerned i.e. the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Expenditure) should approach allocation of the Ministry on a new 
platform, taking into consideration the growth potential, especially critical rural 
infrastructure.  The allocation of funds to the Ministry must be evenly spread 
across all the f ive fiscals to ensure greater  flexibility in planning priorities and 
avoiding back loading of plan funds.  The Ministry would thus be able to absorb 
these funds easily and ensure optimum utilization of allocated resources.   The 
inability to utilize the reduced allocation in its entir ety during the course of the 
Eleventh Plan, should awake the Ministry and they should now take proactive 
steps to ensure optimal utilisation of funds to the hilt in the coming fiscal.   
FINANCIAL ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION  DURING FIRST YEAR OF THE 
TWELFTH PLAN 
 
2.47 The Committee are aggrieved to note the huge variations between the 
funds sought by the Ministry and the actual allocation made by the Planning 
Commission.  This  seems to make a mockery of the instant planning process 
since Planning Commission a nd the Ministry work in close tandem, to arrive at 

44 
 
the projected allocation , as per their own admission.  Having enlightened 
themselves with the viewpoint of the Ministry and the Planning Commission, the 
Committee impress upon both the agencies to arrive a t a model, wherein , the 
figures of proposed allocation and actual allocation are brought on an even keel.  
Being concerned to note that the first fiscal of the Twelfth Plan is reminiscent of 
the past ones, the Committee urge all the agencies concerned to i ntrospect at 
their working, identify their weak areas, work on them and thereby ensure that 
things turnaround in the next Fiscal and variation between proposal s, allocation 
and utilization is negated to the extent possible.  
ANALYSIS OF DEMAND 
2.48 The Committee find from Demand No. 46 pertaining to the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industry that for the current financial year i.e. 2013 -14, a sum of       
Rs. 719.11 cr ore has been allocated to the Ministry which is entirely under 
revenue section.  Out of this, Rs. 708 cr ore has been allocated in the P lan side 
which is 18% more than the RE figure of 600 cr ore in the year gone by.  On the 
non-plan side, there is no marginal change in the allocation during the years 
under reference.  The total allocation o f the Ministry for the FY 2013 -14 needs to 
be seen in the context of outlay of Rs. 1309.03 cr ore proposed by the Ministry.  In 
view of reduced allocation to the tune of Rs. 708 cr ore in the year 2013 -14, the 
resultant reduction has been apportioned to vari ous ongoing schemes of 11 th 
Plan which are being continued during the 12 th Plan.  As such, the up -scaling of 
the schemes being targeted to desired extent, will not be possible due to lower 
allocation.  The major schemes which are likely to be affected as a  consequence 

45 
 
of reduced allocation, to a very large extent are: (i) schemes for infrastructure 
development (allocation reduced to Rs. 247 cr ore against the proposed allocation 
of Rs. 503 cr ore); (ii) scheme for technology up -gradation / establishment and 
modernization of food processing industry (allocation reduced to Rs. 165 crore as 
against the proposed allocation of Rs. 325 crore).    Taking into consideration, the 
ample growth potential of the sector, the Committee desire that Government 
should pull up their sleeves and ensure that whatever the allocation assigned to 
them, is utilised prudently, and there is no occasion to reduce allocation at RE 
stage.   Further, in order to utilize funds efficiently, the Ministry should also 
synergize some of their schemes with that of other Ministries/ Departments like 
the Intensive Dairy Development Programme, Dairy Entrep reneurship 
Development Schemes of Dep artment of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries whereunder processing of milk and other dairy products, is one of the 
components & RKVY of Dep artment of Agriculture and Cooperation.  The 
Committee expect proactive action in the matter. 
EMPLOYMENT IN FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR 
2.49 The Committee find that one of the principle aims of promoting food 
processing sector is to provide gainful employment especially in rural and non -
metro urban cities and arrest migration of lab our to urban conglomerate.  The 
food processing sector being highly labour absorptive and less capital intensive 
in nature, generates employment to the tune of 16.75 lakh persons in the country 
annually in the registered sector, constituting 12.2% of total  employment.  A large 
section of Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) owe their growth and 

46 
 
prosperity to the positive contributions made by food processing industr ies.  The 
Committee are distressed to note that there has been downturn in the 
employment especially in the unregistered sector, despite rise in the output and 
capital employed. The employment in unregistered sector gone down 
dramatically from 63.46 lakh persons in 2005 -06 to 47.93 lakh persons in 2011 -12.  
The Committee desire that Governmen t should assess the reasons for this 
unsavoury development of declining trend in employment in the sector and take 
appropriate steps in this direction.   The Committee be apprised of the action 
taken in the matter. 
NEW SCHEMES OF TWELFTH PLAN 
NATIONAL MISSION ON FOOD PROCESSING  
2.50 The Committee find that the food processing schemes, hitherto suffered 
from lack of enthusiasm by State Governments and district administration as the 
projects formulated were inflexible and did not suit local need s.  To overcome 
such handicaps, the Government have  formulated a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme, known as National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP).  The Scheme 
was launched on 1 st April, 2012, aim ed to decentralize the operation of schemes 
through involvement of State Governments / UTs for better outreach, supervision, 
monitoring and ensuring job creation in a Mission -Mode.  The multi -pronged 
objectives of Mission envisages augmenting food processing capacity to upscale 
their operations through capital infusi on, technology transfer , skill up-gradation 
and l and-holding support, establish Self Help G roups (SHGs)  working in food 
processing sector to facilitate them to achieve SME status; capacity development 

47 
 
and skill up -gradation through institutional training t o ensure sustainable 
employment opportunities and also reduce gap in requirement and availability of 
skilled manpower in food processing sector; raise the standard of food safety 
and hygiene to globally accepted norms; augment farm gate infrastructure; 
supply chain logistic storage and processing capacity; facilitate the industry to 
adopt Internationally accepted certification norms; provide better support to 
organised food processing sector.   
The scheme subsumed existing components / schemes such as 
technology up -gradation / establishment / modernization of food processing 
industry, cold -chain, value addition and preservation of infrastructure in  
non-horticulture products, modernisation of abattoir, human resource 
development, creation of infrastructure f acilities for running degree, diploma, 
certificate course on food processing technology, entrepreneurship development 
programme, food processing training centre , etc.  Further, new schemes such as 
creating primary processing centre, collection centre in ru ral areas, 
modernization of meat shop and reefer vans are some of the new components 
included under the Mission mode.   
The Committee note that the Mission may enable the Ministry to access the 
States in addressing both institutional and infrastructure gap  along the value 
chain and thus create efficient supply chain, promote initiatives for skill 
development, training and entrepreneur ship to meet needs of both post -harvest 
management and food processing industry.  

48 
 
2.51 The Committee has taken note of struct ure of National Mission on Food 
Processing.  The State Governments donning the role of implementing agencies, 
in the schemes and project s of the Ministry, is a welcome paradigm shift, and a 
true national initiative.  The Committee is satisfied to note that  in the first year of 
its operation, the Scheme has performed well.   As against approved outlay of  
Rs. 185.32 crore, an expenditure of Rs. 18 1.44 crore was incurred.  In the second 
year, a provision of Rs. 182 crore provided, as against projected allocation of Rs. 
350 crore.  The Committee hope and trust that the Ministry will keep this tempo of 
performance in future as well.   
VENTURE CAPITAL FUND (VCF) AND INNOVATION FUND (IF) 
2.52 The Committee note that majority of food processing entrepreneurs face 
serious constraints of easy access of bank credit due to low net worth, lack of 
tangible security, absence of proven track record etc.  They also suffer from 
additional limitations due to seasonal operations and thus lower capacity 
utilization.  Further, the market development and quality assurance cost are also 
relatively higher for them.  The lack of incentive for innovation too impact s the 
entrepreneurs.  Entrepreneurship and skill development are hallmark to growth of 
a sector.  In order to address the constraints of long term credit and innovation, 
the Working Group constituted by the Planning Commission had recommended 
dedicated Venture Capital Fund (VCF) and Innov ation Fund (IF), respectively, to 
address these issues during the Twelfth Plan period.  The proposed Venture 
Capital Fund designed to allow food processing units to leverage their limited 
seasons in a more effective manner.  The innovative Fund was to enco urage 

49 
 
market oriented applied research, act as bridge between lab and industry and 
assist small entrepreneurs especially in rural areas.  The Committee are 
distressed to note that the highly spirited twin initiatives of the Ministry of 
venture capital and innovation, which can be game changer in the food 
processing sector, have been deferred for want of resources,  during the Twelfth 
Plan period.  As the schemes under reference are likely to spur growth and act as 
catalyst to boost the sector, the Committee  recommend that the funds for these 
schemes may be made available during Twelfth Plan period itself and the Plan 
proposal accordingly modified.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 
FOOD TESTING LABORATORY, R&D AND PROMOTIONAL ACTIVITIES OF THE 
FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR 
 
2.53 The Committee note that Food Testing Laboratory, R&D and promotional 
activities of the food processing sector have  been assigned to ICAR.  Similarly, 
R&D component of the scheme  is entrusted to Science and Technology Ministry 
and the cold -chain project for horticulture is to be looked after by the National 
Horticulture Board.  The specialists activities, assigned to different institutions , 
shall enable the Ministry to focus on polic y issues entirely.  The Committee 
appreciate the long awaited action on the part of Ministry, who hitherto were 
planner as well as executor of schemes of the Ministry.   The Committee would, 
however, sound a word of caution and desire that the Ministry sho uld actively 
coordinate and liaise with all these three institutions, to ensure that the 
objectives for which the activities outsourced are not lost sight of. 

50 
 
RESULT FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT 
2.54 The concept of Result Framework Document (RFD) was introduced to 
measure the performance of Ministries / Dep artments of Government of India.  
The Ministry of Food Processing Industry ha ve been coming out of RFD and 
putting the same in public domain.  The Committee are concerned to note that the 
composite score obtained b y the Ministry was below average i.e. 83% during the 
year 2011-12.  Although slackness in the development of infrastructure projects, 
mega food parks, abattoir schemes did impact the performance, the reasoning  
that the targets and indicators fixed for mea suring the achievements of the 
Ministries were too ambitious, for under -performance, as stated by the Secretary 
during evidence is hardly convincing.  The Committee believe that the outcome of 
RFD provides an opportunity to the Ministry to introspect the a reas where they 
are not performing well and hence can re -orient their focus and work towards 
achieving the targets.  The Committee do not take it kindly to the below average 
composite score of the Ministry as it reflects the performance of the Ministry  in 
poor light .  The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to put their 
house in order and ensure that RFD score of the Ministry  surges past 90% points 
during the coming years and stay intact there.   
OUTSTANDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES (UCs) 
2.55 The Committee are highly disappointed to note that the Ministry ha ve not 
made concerted efforts in reducing the number of pending UCs.  During the 
period from March 2011 to March 2013, 63 UCs, amounting to just Rs. 36 crore 

51 
 
were liquidated.  However, t he O utstanding Utilization Certificates (2967) 
amounting to Rs, 501.60 crore as on 1 5 March, 2013, are yet to be liquidated.  The 
Committee desire that the Government should tackle the pendency of UC s on a 
war-footing and impress upon all the implementing agen cies to clear their 
backlog.  They further observe that this huge pendency is reflective of bad 
accounting and financial management being practiced by the State  Governments 
/ Implementing Agencies  and urge upon them to initiate corrective measures at 
the earliest as in absence of the same, they are the ones who have to bear the 
consequences.  Lastly, they also plead upon the Government to ensure that the 
case of outstanding utilization certificates is eliminated during the current fiscal  
itself. 
 

52 
 
CHAPTER-III 
SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS 
(i)  SCHEME FOR INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
 One of t he major factor hindering the progress of Food Processing Industries in 
the Country is lack of infrastructure.  In order to address the problem of infrastructure 
constraints in the Food Processing Sector, the Ministry launched a Scheme for 
Infrastructure Development during Eleventh Plan. Under the  Plan Scheme, financial 
assistance in form of grant -in-aid is extended for setting up of  (a) Mega Food Parks (b) 
Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure , and (c) Establishment of 
New/ Modernization of Existing Abattoirs.  
 
3.2 During the 12 th Plan period, allocation of funds for Infrastructure Development 
Scheme, including Mega Food Park is in the tune of Rs. 2800.00 crore. Out of this ,  
Rs. 1800.00 crore has been allocated to the Mega Food Park component. The projected 
fund requirement  for the Infrastructure Development Scheme for  the Financial Year 
2013-14 is Rs. 503.00 crore which includes Rs. 270.00 crore for Mega Food Park.  The 
component against which the actual BE for entire Infrastructure Development as 
approved by the Government is Rs. 247.00 crore only.   
Details of Approved Outlay for Annual Plan 2011-12, 2012-13 & 2013-14 
S.No. Scheme/Programme Outlay for Annual 
Plan 2011-12 (BE) 
Outlay for Annual 
Plan 2012-13 (BE) 
Outlay for Annual 
Plan 2013-14 (BE) 
1. Scheme for Infrastructure 
Development (Including Mega 
Food Parks/Setting up New / 
Modernization of existing 
Abattoirs, Cold-chain facilities) 
300.00 191.00 247.00 
 

53 
 
Budgetary allocation under the Scheme for 2012-13 & 2013-14 is as under: 
 (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals (up to 
31.12.2012) 
2012-13 164.00 159.45 123.60 
2013-14 215.00 - - 
 
3.3 When asked about the reasons  for reduction of funds at RE stage, the Ministry 
informed that i n Mega Food Parks Scheme, there has not been any reduction at RE 
stage for the year 2012 -13. In this component, the BE was Rs.  86.00 crore ,which was 
enhanced to Rs.  93.00 crore at the RE stage.  In the component  of Cold Chain, Value 
Addition & Preservation Infrastructure , BE figure of Rs.  86.00 crore was revised to 
Rs.81.52 crore at RE stage. The reduction in this component was necessitated as there 
was limited progress in the projects in N orth Eastern Region (NER).  As a result , BE 
under Grant-in-aid for NE Region of Rs.8.00 crore was revised to Rs.4.02 crore.  In the 
component of Modernization of Abattoir, some of the approved projects co uld not 
achieve prescribed milestones for consideration of release of next ins tallment of Grant-
in-aid which was projected during the preparation of BE based on progress already 
made. Therefore, BE of Rs.  19.00 crore was revised to Rs.  9.62 crore at RE stage for 
this component.   The surplus funds in respect of Cold Chain and Moderni zation of 
Abattoirs components have been re -appropriated to other schemes where there were 
additional requirements of funds. 
 (a) MEGA FOOD PARKS  
3.4  The Scheme of Mega Food Park (MFP) aims to provide a mechanism to bring 
together farmers, processors and retailers and link agricultural production to the market 

54 
 
so as to ensure maximizing value addition, minimizing wastages, increasing farmers‟ 
income and creating employment opportunities in rural sector. The Mega Food Park 
Scheme envisages a well -defined agri/horticultural-processing zone containing state -of-
the art processing facilities with support infrastructure and well -established supply 
chain. 
(i) Objectives 
(a) To provide state of t he art infrastructure for food processing in the country 
in selected clusters to be identified in a demand driven manner. 
(b) To ensure value addition of agricultural commodities including poultry, 
meat, dairy, fisheries etc.   
(c) To establish a sustainable raw material supply chain for each cluster. 
(d) To facilitate induction of latest technology. 
(e) To address the issues of small farm size and small and medium nature of 
processing industries through a cluster approach with stakeholders 
managing the supply chain.   
(f) To provide an institutional mechanism for producers, processors, and 
retailers to work together to build the supply chain.  
 
 (ii) Approval of the Scheme  
The Government had approved the Scheme of Mega Food Parks in 2008 
with the stipulation to take up 10 projects in the 1st phase out of total 30 Mega 
Food Parks (MFP) envisaged under the Infrastructure Development Scheme for 
Mega Food Parks in the country du ring 11th Plan period.  Out of the 30 projects 
approved, 13 projects have been accorded final approval and 17projects have 
been accorded “In principle” approval. The status of the 30 projects is given in 
Annexure-II. 
(iii) Pattern of Financial Assistance  
Financial assistance is provided for grant -in-aid @ 50% of project cost 
excluding land component in general areas and @ 75% in NER and difficult 
areas, subject to a maximum of Rs. 50.00 crore for setting up of Mega Food 
Parks.   
  

55 
 
3.5 Explaining the rationale of involving private parties in the Scheme so as to give 
fillip to the sector, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries informed: – 
“The Mega Food Park scheme was launched to overcome the difficulties 
observed during the implementation of the Old Food Parks Scheme during 8 th to 
10th Plan periods. Most of the implementing agencies under the old scheme were 
State Government Undertakings/  PSUs. During the course of implementation, 
many factors were observed which caused delay or non -implementation of some 
of these projects. One of the major problems was inability on the part of the 
respective State Governments/  PSUs to contribute their share of equity. To 
overcome the bottlenecks of the food park scheme, the new scheme of Mega 
Food Park envisaged as a private driven scheme to make it more effective and 
market oriented. To ensure the private character, the equity participation of 
Government Agencies have been capped at 26%. Since the scheme is private 
driven in nature, selection of proj ect site is decided by the SPV according to its 
business plan. However, the State Governments are actively associated both at 
the time of selection of the projects and subsequently in the management of the 
Board of Directors to coordinate matters requiring State Government intervention 
including selection of sites.  
 
If viable areas are identified by the Government, suitable adequate land 
may not be available in those areas. Moreover, there is no shortage of proposals 
for setting up of mega food parks by th e private sectors as has been noticed in 
response to EoI called for 15 projects. A total number of 63 proposals were 
received and 27 were found to be eligible against the approval of competent 
authority for only 15 projects.   
 
 
The promotion of food proce ssing sector is organically linked with 
agriculture sector. All the proposals received have justified their locations of 
projects and proposed facilities based on the agricultural produce being 
generated in the catchment area of the project. The project is  based on hub and 
spoke model to spread the reach and benefit to larger areas and farmers. During 
the appraisal of the proposals emphasis is being given to forward and backward 
linkages, raw material availability, type of processing units suitable to that area 
etc.     
 
At the time of formulation of the scheme during the beginning of the 11 th 
Plan, a pre-feasibility study was conducted by a professional agency, viz. IL& FS 
in 5 States , one each  from  five different agro -climatic  zones of the country 
such as Punjab in North, Assam in North East, Jharkhand in East, Maharashtra 
in West and Andhra Pradesh  in  South. These States were identified as potential 
destinations f or Mega Food Parks. In spite of the pre -feasibility study, delay in 
implementation took place in all these States due to different reasons. Therefore, 

56 
 
feasibility study may not be a guarantee for speedier implementation of these 
projects.” 
 
3.6 Based on the progress of implementation, the fund requirement for the Scheme 
for the year 2013 – 14 have been worked out by the Ministry as following :- 
1. Grant-in-aid for 10 Mega Food Parks of Phase I    - Rs. 105.00 crore 
2.  Grant-in-aid for 5 Mega Food Parks of Phase II    -  Rs 85.00 crore 
3. Grant-in-aid for 15 Mega Food Parks of Phase III    -  Rs. 75.00 crore 
4. Other charges                  (i) PMA charges            - Rs.   3.90 Crore 
(ii) Adv & Publicity         -Rs.   0.10 Crore 
(iii) OAE                             - Rs.   1.00 Crore 
Total                                   - Rs. 270.00 Crore 
3.7 When the Committee enquired whether the Ministry have conducted any S urvey 
for location of Food Parks, the Secretary stated:–  
“No. We do not do that. It is because now the mega food park scheme, in any 
case, is driven by the private sector. That was the shift from the 8 th Plan to the 
10th Plan to the 11 th Plan. From the 8 th to the 10 th Plan it was just Food Park 
mainly implemented through State Governments. I n the 11 th Plan we started the 
mega food park scheme which is implemented by the private sector. Since it is 
done by the private sector they choose the location based on their understanding 
of the economics and also the most crucial thing, the availability  of land. So, we 
have not done any survey as such to identify sites. “ 
 
 
3.8 Following are the assumptions, which a food producers and the farmers will yield 
on completion of the Mega Food Park Projects: 
 Each MFP is expected to benefit 6000 farmers / producers directly and 
25000-30000 farmers indirectly.  
 
 Each MFP expected to invest about 100 crore in Common Facilities and 
leverage an additional investment about of Rs. 250 crore.  
 
 Projected annual turnover of a MFP will be about Rs. 450.00 - 500.00 crore.  
 
 Each MFP will generate about 30,000 direct and indirect employments.  

57 
 
3.9 Based on the these assumptions and also considering total private investment in 
the Park to the tune of Rs.  250 crore, includin g investment s in infrastructure 
development and processing cum ancillary units, the estimated total employment 
generation in a Mega Food Park is estimated at around 30000 to 35000 (around 25000-
30000 as direct employment and remaining 5000-10000 as the indirect employment). 
3.10 When asked  about the basis of these assumptions, the Minis try in their Post 
Evidence Reply stated that a professional agency, IL&FS was engaged for giving final 
shape to the scheme on the basis of their experience of the feasibility study.  Further, 
during preparation of EFC note for the mega food parks Scheme in the beginning of the 
11th Five Year Plan, based on the inputs from IL& FS, the following assumptions were 
considered for the projected benefits of the newly proposed Mega Food Park Scheme:- 
 Investment in a Mega Food Park:  The average project cost for setting up a 
Mega Food Park was estimated at Rs. 125 -150 crore including Rs.75 to 100 
crore of private investment and Rs. 50 crore of grant assistance. 
 
 While arriving at the projected investment in the Park by prospective units 
against the estimated private investment in infrastructure development, a modest 
leverage of 2.5 to 3.0 times was projected, taking into account the relatively 
longer gestation period of infrastructure projects in food processing sector. Thus, 
considering an average private investment of Rs. 75 to 100 crore in each of the 
MFP project, the investment in the Park was arrived at around Rs.225 -250 crore 
by way of setting up processing cum ancillary units at the Central processing 
Centre in the Park.  
 
 Estimated Aggregate Turnover of Units in the Park : Further, based on the 
raw material mix available in the catchment area of the Park and most potential 
processing activities that could be taken up using the available raw material mix 
and also the envisaged number of units that could be set up in a Park, the 
estimated cumulative turnover of all such proposed units was arrived at around 
Rs.450-500 Crore, assuming a reasonable investment turnover ratio of 2.  
 
 Employment Generation: As per the study conducted by Rabo Equity Advisors 
during preparation of the  Vision Document: 2015, it was concluded that in the 
food processing sector, every One crore of investment leads to a total 

58 
 
employment generation of 140, including both direct & indirect. Assuming 70% of 
it as direct employment generation, the actual numbe r of direct employment 
generated shall be around 100 per crore of investment in food processing 
industry. 
 
3.11 The timeline for implementation of the project from the release of 1 st installment, 
increased for 24 months to 30 months from the date of „ final approval‟.  N one of the 
approved projects could meet this deadline . When the Committee enquired about the 
reasons for the same, the Ministry assigned following are the reasons for slow progress 
of the Scheme: 
 
(i) Financial Closure of the Project (Sanction of Term Loan):  
 
In case of some projects, sanction of term loan by Bank has taken more 
than a year which caused severe delay in commencement of project 
implementation. Financial closure (sanction of term loan) is also a critical 
milestone for the project for availing 2 nd tranche of first installment of approved 
grant assistance. Thus, due to delay in financial closure, some of the approved 
projects could not avail this grant even after more than a year since Final 
approval.  
 
(ii) Permission of Sub -lease clause in case of allotment of land by State 
agency:  
 
The land for the project in certain cases has been allotted by State agency 
to SPV on a long term lease basis. In such cases, the lease agreement executed 
between State agency and SPV did not provide for sub -lease permission which 
caused restriction on SPV to sub -lease developed plots to prospective units. 
SPVs, in such cases, decided not to proceed for project implementation unless it 
receives approval for sub-lease. 
 
3.12 Explaining the progress of Mega Food Parks, the Ministry informed that there has 
been inordinate delay in the sanctioning and implementation of the Scheme of MFP:- 
“In the 1 st Phase the Government had approved 10 Mega Food Park Projects in 
September, 2008. Subsequently, Scheme Guidelines were formulated and EOI 
was invited in October, 2008. Following the prescribed procedure „In principle‟ 
approval was accorded to 10 projects on 16 -12-2008. Out of the 10 projects 
accorded „In Principle‟ approval, only 5  pr ojects in the States of Andhra 

59 
 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Uttrakhand, Maharashtra and North East (Assam) could 
meet the prescribed conditions to whom „Final Approval‟ was accorded on 27-03-
2009. Later on 2 more project one each in the States of Tamil Nadu and Wes t 
Bengal were accorded „Final Approval‟ on 16-03-2010 on fulfillment of prescribed 
conditions. Later on, the SPV of Maharashtra withdrew from the project stating 
its inability to implement it. The SPV of U.P. also withdrew from the Scheme and 
the SPV of Pu njab and Karnataka could not meet the prescribed conditions for 
final approval. In case of all these four States, „in principle/final approval‟ had to 
be cancelled and the entire selection process including issue of EOI had to be 
initiated afresh for selection of suitable SPVs in these States.   
 
During 2 nd phase of scheme implementation, the CCEA approval was 
accorded on 18.11.2010 for taking of 5 new projects. The EoI was issued on 
28.12.2010 and the last date of submission of the proposals was kept at 
28.02.2011. The selection process was completed in acc ordance with the 
scheme guidelines and in -principle approval was accorded to these five projects 
on 29.04.2011.  It may be observed that the entire selection process was 
completed only in five months. However, one of the project promoter s in Madhya 
Pradesh subsequently withdrew from the project and therefore, in -principle 
approval had to be accorded to the second proposal in the panel. All the five 
projects have been accorded final approval and are at different stages of 
implementation.   
 
During 3 rd phase of scheme implementation, the CCEA approval was 
accorded on 25.10.2011 for taking of 1 5 new projects. The EoI was issued on 
21.11.2011 and the last date of submission of the proposals was kept at 
17.02.2012. To give more transparency to the selection proce ss, it was decided 
to give chance to the applicants to represent against the decisions of technical 
committee as well as approval committee.  A panel of independent monitors was 
appointed to consider their representations. All the 15 projects  accorded in -
principle approval in September, 2012. 14 projects have submitted their DPRs 
within stipulated time period of six months which are under appraisal”.    
 
3.13 Explaining the present status of implementation of project of old Food Parks, the 
Secretary, MFPI stated: – 
“I would say that 33 out of the 56 are fully operational. I would also say that 10 
are partly operational. One more project has not been completed – the Rai Park. 
That is very close by. We had got some outside evaluation done. We will send 
the information about that also to you. This was done, if I remember right, by the 
Tariff Commission. They had done a detailed evaluation. That is another very 
successful Park. So, many of these Parks have been successful. From what I 
can make out from the records as to why in the Eleventh Plan we shifted from the 

60 
 
mainly public sector to the private sector is the time factor. They took a very long 
time in getting operationalised.” 
 
Further, he stated that – 
 
“I would submit that the major issues that we have conf ronted are land -related 
issue, not necessarily land availability, issues related to land. We had discussed 
that last year in the month of December. Then, the issue of sub -leasing had 
come up in Jharkhand, West Bengal, Assam. Sub -leasing permissions took time. 
At times, there have been problems between the promoters and the others. 
There have been delays in getting financial closure. We have implemented the 
scheme in three phases. In the first phase, we got 10 projects. In the second 
one, we have got 5 and i n the third, we have got 15. At each stage, we have 
changed the guidelines or made modification in the guidelines learning from the 
previous experience. So, two major changes we have made in the guidelines for 
the 15 new projects which were approved in 201 1. We will give them final 
clearance only after they are in possession of land. They have to obtain all the 
clearances including the change in land use classification. Secondly, they have 
to obtain financial closure. We will not give them final approval ti ll they do that. 
These things were done after the final approval in earlier two phases. 
 
I would further say that in infrastructure projects, large amounts of land are 
involved. It is possible that even after we do all these, a particular scheme may 
get delayed; a particular project may get delayed. I will give the example of Bihar. 
We had given in principle clearance. Then, we gave the final clearance. They 
have been allocated land by the Bihar Industrial Area Development Authority. 
They started work on th e project. After that, there were some local objections on 
the amount of compensation that had been given to some of the land owners. 
Because of that, the project is stalled for the last 12 months. We have taken it up 
with the State Government. The promoters have been frequently visiting there. At 
one stage, the State Government asked the promoters to look at alternative 
pieces of land. None of them were found to be more promising than this. Those 
discussions are still going on, now, this is something that is totally unforeseen. I 
think no matter how well you design a scheme, these land -related problems will 
be there and these are not peculiar to the food processing industries. We see 
them in almost every sector.  We are no exception to the rule. Whatever systemic 
changes we are making, the most important change we have done is, of course, 
the Mission where we are involving the State Governments more closely with us. 
So, we are building partnership with the State Governments. Most of these land -
related issues are with the State Government.” 
  
3.14 Growth of  Mega Food Parks was imperative  to give fillip to Food Processing 
Industries.  Taking into consideration the slow progress, when asked, whether any mid-

61 
 
course correc tion and improvement thought of  the Ministry in Post Evidence Reply 
stated that they have assigned an independent evaluation of the scheme to a 
professional agency, viz. Centre for Market Research and Social Development for the 
Scheme. The agency  submitted its Report and the major  findings/recommendations of 
the Report are: 
1. The Mega Food Parks should also get the benefits available to SEZs such as 
exemption/lower rates of Excise Duty and VAT. 
2. PMCs should closely monitor for timely financial closure of the project. 
3. The PMCs need to closely monitor the execution of all the components by SPV 
as per the DPR. There should also be close understanding between the SPV and 
PMC for successful implementation of project. 
4. State Government and local Administration should be more actively involved  in 
the project and should provide necessary support for expeditious project 
implementation. 
5. Ministry and SPVs should actively organize Road Shows and participate in major 
events at National and International level to seek participation from major 
investors to act as a anchor-tenant for Mega Food Parks. 
6. Necessary convergence should be done with the scheme of National Horticulture 
Board, NABARD, Rastriya Krishi  Vikas Yojna (RKVY) and Terminal Market 
Scheme for more effective and successful implementation of the scheme.  
 
 The following remedial measures have been taken to streamline the 
implementation of the Mega Food Parks:- 
 
i. The Ministry has taken up with various States from time to time to provide fiscal 
incentives to make the projects more viable. Some State Governments such as 
Andhra Pradesh, Punjab and Rajasthan have announced various tax benefits 
and other incentives.  

62 
 
ii. The Ministry ensures close interaction and effective professional inputs to 
facilitate smooth implementation of the project. Payment from TRA account is 
debited for every work order /contract only when the PMC countersigns it. The 
request for release of fund s from the SPV needs to be accompanied by the 
recommendations of PMC for consideration of sanction by the Ministry.  
iii. The scheme guidelines already provides for effective participation of the State 
Government in implementation of Mega Food Parks. The State Government 
representatives are associated with the process of selection of the project and 
are appointed as Ministry‟s Nominee Director on the Boards of respective SPVs 
of the Mega Food Parks. In addition, Mega Food Park Coordination Committees 
have been constituted under the Chairmanship of respective District Collector for 
close coordination in various grass root level activities.  
iv. To attract more investment, the Ministry has been organizing various seminars, 
investors- meet, workshop etc. During the curr ent financial year the Ministry has 
organized 4 workshops in Mumbai, Kolkata, Chandigarh and Bangalore. The 
SPVs of respective Mega Food Park projects were invited to participate and 
showcase the investment potential in their projects.  
v. The Ministry has be en making efforts for developing synergy and convergence 
with various schemes of the Government of India and that of State Government 
The intensity of the effort will continue during the current Plan period also.  
 
 In addition, learning from the experienc es of implementation of the scheme 
during 11 th Plan, Ministry has modified the scheme guidelines for more effective and 
faster implementation of the scheme. The major modifications in this direction are as 
under:- 
 
1. The applicant/ SPV having land available with one or more promoters is given 
additional weightage so that the subsequently no time is lost for arranging land 
for the project.  

63 
 
2. The financial closure (term loan sanction) has been made a pre -requisite for 
according final approval of the project which otherwise used to take almost six 
months to one year after approval of the project.  
3. Achievement of physical milestones including acquisition land for PPCs has been 
linked with release of different installments of  grants to ensure commensurate 
physical work at site in time bound manner.   
    
3.15 Regarding monitoring and implementation of Mega Food Parks, the Ministry 
informed that Ministry have  engaged multi -skilled professional agencies as PMAs to 
assist in monitoring and implementation of the Mega Food Park projects. The PMAs 
conduct field visits to the sites periodically and submit their reports to the Ministry 
regarding status of project imp lementation. The PMAs also submit a monthly progress 
report in respect of each project on the basis of inputs received from the SPVs and 
respective PMCs. The Ministry has also appointed State -specific area officers to 
supervise and monitor the implementati on of different schemes in each State. In 
addition, regular progress review meetings are held in the Ministry to monitor the status 
of implementation of various projects. Based on the deliberations of these meetings of 
further follow up actions are taken b y the Ministry to expedite/ facilitate project 
implementation.    
 (b) COLD CHAIN, VALUE-ADDITION AND PRESERVATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
3.16 The objectives of the Scheme are: 
(a) To provide Integrated and complete cold chain and preservation 
infrastructure facilities without any break, from the farm gate to the 
consumer. 
(b) To enable linking groups of producers to the processor and market 
through well equipped supply chain and cold chain. 

64 
 
The salient features of the Scheme are: 
(a) To provide integrated and  complete cold chain facilities without any break 
from the farm gate to the consumer, Pre -cooling facilities at production 
sites, reefer vans and mobile cooling units has been covered under the 
Integrated Cold Chain facilities projects. 
(b) Horticulture produces has also been included for support under Integrated 
Cold Chain Facilities. 
(c) Value addition centres may also include infrastructural facilities including 
processing / multi -line processing / collection centres, etc. for horticulture 
including organic produce, marine, dairy, meat and poultry, etc. 
(d) Irradiation facilities may also cover warehousing, cold storage facilities etc. 
for storage of raw material and finished products for efficient utilization of 
the facility. 
The Scheme provides financial assistance for the following components: 
(a) Minimal Processing Centre at the farm leveland this centre is to have 
facilities for weighing, sorting, grading, packing, pre -cooling, Controlled 
Atmosphere (CA) / Modified Atmosphere (MA) cold storage, no rmal 
storage and IQF. 
(b) Mobile pre-cooling vans and reefer trucks as may be suitable for transport 
of Non-horticulture produce. 
(c) Distribution hubs with multi product and multi CA /MA chambers cold 
storage / Variable Humidity Chambers, Packing facility , CIP Fog treatment, 
IQF and blast freezing. 
(d) Irradiation facility. 
 
To avail financial assistance, any two of the above components will have to be 
set up by the units.  Considering the functional nature of the facility, Irradiation facility 
can be treated as a standalone one for the purpose of availing grant.  
Pattern of Assistance 
 
During the Eleventh Plan period and first year of the Twelfth Plan, the Ministry 
provided Financial assistance (grant -in-aid) of 50% of the total cost of plant and 
machinery and technical civil works in General areas and 75% for NE region and 

65 
 
difficult areas (North -East including Sikkim and J&K, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand) subject to a maximum of Rs 10 crore to all implementing agencies such as 
Government organisations, Private sector organizations etc. 
 
3.17 A total of 79 Cold Chain projects were approved to be taken during the Eleventh 
Plan, out of which 74 projects have been sanctioned by the Ministry in different parts of 
the country.  Out of these 74 projects, 8 have already started commercial production.  A 
total of 11 projects have been cancelled .  In such case the promoters of 9 p rojects,  
were unable to submit the documents required for release of first installment of g rant 
within the stipulated period  of 9 months from the da te of approval.  2 projects were 
cancelled due to violation of scheme guidelines and mis -representation of facts.  
Remaining 54 projects are at various stages of implementation.   
 
3.18 To fill up the vacant slots , the Expression of Interest ( EoI) were invited with last 
date as 10.07.201 2 and the proposals received are being scrutinized by the Ministry .  
Status of progress of setting up of Cold Chain Projects is enclosed at Annexure – III. 
Expenditure during Financial Year 2012-13 
3.19 During the financial year 2012-13 (upto 31.12.2012), Ministry has released grant- 
in-aid of Rs. 52.59 crore under the s cheme. Details of the pro jects assisted by the 
Ministry are given in Annexure-IV. 
 
Target capacity  
3.20 The 63 projects approved so far will add 1 ,41,661 MT of Cold storage, 87 ,257 
MT of CA/MA Chambers, 17 ,800 MT of Deep Freezers, 41.4 MT/hr of IQF and 293 

66 
 
Reefer carriers. So far a capacity of 1 ,09,070.5 MT of cold storage, CA/MA, deep 
freezer; 91 reefer carriers,  11.025 MT per hour of IQF, and capacity of 58.3 lakh litres 
per day (LLPD) of milk has already been created.  
 
 
3.21 When asked whether any evaluation done to q uantify the gains accrued , the 
extent of reduction in wastages and value addition, deficiencies in the implementation of 
the scheme and corrective follow -up action taken , t he Ministry informed th at it had 
engaged M/s. Centre for Market Research & Social Development [CMRSD] for 
evaluation of the infrastructure development scheme of the Ministry with the 
components – Cold Chain, Value Addition & Preservation Infrastructure for 11th plan.   
3.22 The Evaluation Report reveals that: 
 The wastage of vegetables and fruit has come down to 20% – 30% from 20% - 
40% (reduction of 30%), while the wastage of milk and other dairy products has 
come down to 10% - 15% from 20% - 30% (reduction of 50%) due to cold chain 
infrastructure in the locality.   
 Due to proper cold chain facilities, the shelf life of the food items has been 
increased to 6 -8 months from 5 -15 days. Through irradiation, even the shelf life 
of the perishable foods has been increased to 8-12 months.   
 The direct employment has been i ncreased near about 3 times and the indirect 
employment has been increased near about 4 times after the operation of cold 
chain projects.  Overall, it was noticed that the scheme for integrated cold chain 
has a great impact in employment generation both directly as well as indirectly.  
 Overall analysis reflects that 6% -8%of the total products of the cold chain 
projects throughout the country are being exported, and the middle -east 
countries are the main importer of the frozen products from the country.   

67 
 
3.23 When asked about a ction taken on the suggestions made in the Evaluation 
Report, the Ministry informed the Committee that:- 
 The S tudy observed that some of the components in the DPR are not being 
executed by the project promoters. 
 The Study observed tha t due to national level selection of projects some of the 
States have not been able to get any cold chain project. 
 The Study observed that there is little interest and involvement of State 
Government and local administration in development of the projects. 
As regard to monitoring mechanism, to oversee the schemes, Ministry in a note 
stated that -  
 “For better implementation of the Cold Chain projects, the Ministry has 
decentralized the implementation process. During 12 th Plan Non -
horticulture cold chain pro jects are being implemented by respective state 
government under National Mission of Food Processing (NMFP). 
Horticulture based cold chain projects are being implemented through 
National Horticulture Board (NHB). The Ministry is regularly monitoring the 
progress of the implementation of the projects by holding review meetings 
with promoters and addressing the issues involved in implementation of 
the projects. Wherever necessary, concerned authorities like State/Central 
Govt., Banks and financial institution s have been approached to resolve 
the issues to expedite the implementation of the projects. The progress is 
also being monitored by field visit by Professional Management Agency. 
Ministry has also appointed its officers as area officers of certain number 
of states for focused monitoring and coordination with State 
Governments.” 
 
3.24 The Working Group on Food Processing Industries in its Report has 
recommended for continuation of the Cold Chain, Value Addition & Preservation 
Infrastructure Scheme for horticulture and non -horticulture produce during the 12 th Plan 
as Central Sector Scheme.  The Working Group has recommended for taking up 140 
new projects during 12 th Plan. Accordingly, the Ministry have received 146 applications 

68 
 
in response to the E oI and on scrutiny found that about 75 proposals were prima facie 
eligible as per the scheme guidelines. The Planning Commission has provided an 
allocation of Rs. 700 crore for the 12 th Plan period for the scheme. Since the funds 
provided by the Planning Commission are not adequate, the Ministry proposes to assist 
about 75 prima-facie eligible proposals during the 12th Plan.  
3.25 Uninterrupted supply of power is a pre-requisite for the operation of cold storages 
whereas a major part of the country is defici ent in power when enquired as to how the 
Ministry would implement the Scheme  which is based on the power , the Ministry stated 
that Solar Energy Center of the Ministry of New Renewable Energy (MNRE) has 
developed a biomass/solar based hybrid system for gene ration of electricity. The waste 
heat generated in this plant can be used for cold storages. In consultation with MNRE it 
was decided that some demonstration projects based on this technology may be set up 
by the State Government with the assistance availa ble under the schemes of MNRE 
and DAC.  The State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu have been advised to take up cold chain pilot 
projects based on the technologies developed by the Solar Energy Center of MNRE. 
 
Reefer Vehicles 
 
3.26 When asked about the constraints faced by the Ministry in transportation of 
perishable items through refrigerated trucks, the Ministry informed during evidence: 
“I briefly mentioned about the reefer vehicles. We also have in our cold chain 
schemes, a component for reefer vehicles; people do buy along with the rest of 
their cold chain. That is the whole idea of cold chain that you have a central hub 
and the vehicles provide the link between the collec tion centres and between the 

69 
 
ultimate markets. So, the entire product is carried in a cold chain. That is the 
idea. So these reefer vans are refrigerated trucks.  
These are part of our cold chain scheme now and there was a request that 
we should have stand  alone scheme for reefer vehicles because apparently 
people are now going in for hiring refrigerated vehicles.  This can be a business 
by itself rather than the cold chain owner having to own his own vehicles.  He can 
hire a fleet of refrigerated vehicles.” 
 
Irradiation Facilities 
 
3.27 Irradiation technology is widely used in scientific as well as commercial 
applications in the filed of agriculture animal science, pharmaceuticals and medical 
science etc.  One of the important applications of the radiation technology is post - 
harvest handling and management of foods.  Food Irradiation involves treating certain 
types of foods with ionizing energy or radiation.  Radiation processing of food 
strengthens food conservation, improves food hygiene and helps in: ( a) extension of 
shelf-life of food products by killing micro-organisms causing spoilage  (b) enhancement 
of safety by killing food b orne pathogens and parasites (c) inhibiting sprouting in tubers, 
bulbs and rhizomes (d) delaying ripening of fruits  (e) destroying insect pests in stored 
product and fruits. 
 
3.28 Considering the technological advantages, Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries also provides financial assistance for setting up of irradiation facilities for food 
products.  Financial assistance in t he form of grants -in-aid @50% of the total cost of 
plant and machinery and technical civil works in general areas and 75%  for North 
Eastern Region and difficult areas (North East including Sikkim and J&K, Himacha l 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand) subject to a maxi mum of Rs.10 crore is available under the 
scheme for all implementing agencies. 

70 
 
 
3.29 The Ministry has so far approved 4 projects for setting up of irradiation facility. 
Out of the 4 projects, 1 project has started commercial production and the facility is  
being used by the farmers for irradiation of the agriculture produce. The Status of these 
projects is as under:- 
S. 
No. 
Name Project Project 
cost (in 
Rs.Lakh) 
Facilities Implementation 
status 
1 M/s Innova Agri Bio 
Park Ltd, No. 308, 
Phase-3, KIADB 
Industrial Area, Malur, 
Dist. Kolar, Karnataka.  
1400 Irradiation facilities for 
fruits & vegetables such 
as onion, garlic, banana, 
potato, papaya, mango, 
spices and pulses  
75 % complete 
2 M/s Aligned Industries, 
at Plot No. 51-54, HUDA 
Industrial Area, 
Dharuhera, Rewari 
(Haryana)  
2202.18 Irradiation Processing 
Facility (85260 MT/year; 
approximately 20 MT/hr), 
Cold Store (1000 MT), 
Testing Laboratory  
   
25 % complete 
3 Impartial Agrotech (P) 
Ltd E-Block, House No-
1251,  
Rajaji Puram, Lucknow-
226017  
   
1478.97 Gamma Irradiation Plant 
with capacity of about 14.5 
MT/Hr including 2 cold 
storage chambers and 
other related facilities.  
75 % complete 
4 Jhunsons Chemicals 
Pvt. Ltd, E-
446,Chopanki Industrial 
Area,Near Bhiwadi, P.O-
Tapukera, Rajasthan  
1773 Gamma Irradiation 
processing facility  
Commercial 
production 
started 
 

71 
 
(c) ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW/MODERNISATION OF EXISTING ABATTOIRS 
 
 Setting Up/ Modernization of Abattoirs  
 
3.30 Hygienic and scientiﬁc slaughtering of animals and optimum utilization of by-
products are the most important issues in the Indian meat industry. Quality and hygiene 
levels in the wet market are low due to imperfect bleeding, primitive and crude 
slaughtering and de -feathering techniques, lack of infrastructure facilities like water, 
electricity and facilities for handling carcass/  ﬂaying,  cross  contamination  in  slaughter 
and   improper   handling   during   carriage.  These result in tremendous waste of meat, 
contamination/ deterioration of meat and also avoidable cruelty to the animals during 
the whole process. The qualitative and quantitative capacities of the abattoirs need to 
be upgraded and these are required to be linked with commercial processing of meat, 
both for domestic consumption and exports besides discouraging unauthorized 
slaughtering.  Accordingly, a Plan Scheme for establishing new abattoirs & modernising 
of old abattoirs was started in the 11th Five Year Plan. 
 
Objectives  
• Scientific and hygienic slaughtering of the animals. 
• Application of modern technology for slaughter waste management and pollution 
control. 
• More humane treatment of animals/minimizing transportation of animals. 
• Better by-product utilization/value addition. 
• Providing chilling facility to prevent microbial activity in slaughtered animals. 
• Better hygiene, safety and retail cold chain management. 
• Better forward linkage facility for finished meat and meat products. 

72 
 
Salient Features  
• The scheme has been made flexible with provision for inducting private capital, 
better technology and backward and forward linkages. 
• New Abattoirs will be most appropriately located outside city limits, since existing 
abattoirs of municipalities do not have enough land for expansion or 
modernization in most places which will also minimize need to transport animals 
by road or by train. Modernization of existing Abattoirs will be taken up at the 
existing site itself, wherever feasible. 
• Land for Abattoirs will be contributed by the Panchayats/ Urban Local bodies/ 
State Agencies enabling them to participate in these ventures. Land can also be 
arranged by private investor, who is setting up Abattoirs. 
• The scheme will be implemented with involvement of local bodies (Municipal 
Corporations and Panchayats) and will have flexibility for facilitating involvement 
of private investors through competitive bidding. 
• Professional agencies are being engaged as Project Management Agency (PMA) 
to assist the Ministry in project appraisal, implementation and monitoring of 
projects. 
Pattern of Financial Assistance 
Based on detailed discussion with stakeholders, industries and State 
Governments, the Scheme has now been modified to induct private capital, 
better technology, backward and forward linkages. Financial assistance (grant-in-
aid) is provided at 50% and 75% of cost of plant & machinery and technical civil 
work in general and difficult areas, respectively subject to maximum of Rs. 15.00 
crores for each project. Technical Consultancy fee maximum @ 5% o f grant is 
also provided to meet the cost of engaging Technical Consultancy firms at apex 
level to assist the Ministry. 
Approval of Scheme 
During financial year 2008 -09, setting up of 10 new abattoirs was 
approved by the CCEA on 26.02.2009 and Approval Committee of MoFPI 
approved the setting up of 9 new abattoirs during the year 2008 -09 and 
remaining one was approved during the year 2009 -10. Out of this, 2 new abattoir 
projects have been commissioned at Ahmednagar (Maharashtra) and Dimpaur 
(Nagaland) res pectively. During the current year 2012 -13, total grant -in-aid 
amounting to 790.47 lakhs has been disbursed to Majhitar (Sikkim - 61.67 lakhs), 
Shimla (Himachal Pradesh - 342.60 lakhs) and Kolkata (West Bengal) - 386.20 
lakhs) respectively. 
 

73 
 
3.31 The Scheme  is being implemented preferably under Public-Private Partnership 
(PPP) mode with the involvement of local bodies (Municipal Corporations and 
Panchayats) and has flexibility for involvement of private investors/ Exporters/FDI on a 
Build-Operate-Own ( BOO)/ Build-Operate-Transfer ( BOT)/ Joint Venture ( JV) basis. 
Regulatory functions continue to be discharged through local bodies. This will enable 
the local bodies to participate in the venture and also be assured of a stream of income. 
 
3.32 The current status of Abattoir projects under the scheme is as under:- 
Status of Abattoirs Project 
S. No. Name of Executor State 
Total 
Project 
Cost  
(Rs. in 
lakhs) 
Total 
Amount 
Sanctioned 
(Rs. in 
lakhs) 
Total 
amount 
disbursed 
till date  
(Rs.in 
lakhs) 
Remarks 
1  Dimapur Municipal 
Council 
Nagaland 2288 1437.50 1402.17 Completed 
2  Ahmednagar Goat 
Federation Co-op Ltd 
Maharashtra 2352 851.02 851.02 Completed 
3  Greater Hyderabad 
Municipal Corporation 
A.P. 3284 1478.98 591.59 1st and 2 nd 
installment 
released. 
4  Municipal 
Corporation, Shimla  
H.P. 2642 1500.00 600.00 1st and 2 nd 
installment 
released. 
5  Kolkata Municipal 
Corporation 
West Bengal 2845 1287.34 514.93 1st and 2 nd 
installment 
released. 
6  Jammu Municipal 
Corporation 
J&K 2300 1500.00 150.00 1st 
installment 
released. 
7  J&K Sheep and 
Sheep products 
Development Board, 
Srinagar 
J&K 2800 1410.00 141.00 1st 
installment 
released. 
8  Municipal 
Corporation, Patna 
Bihar 2638 1097.21 109.72 1st 
installment 
released. 

74 
 
9 Municipal 
Corporation, Ranchi 
Jharkhand 1867 864.55 86.46 1st 
installment 
released. 
10 Modern Abattoir at 
Majhitar, East Sikkim 
Sikkim 926.36 616.72 61.67 1st 
installment 
released. 
TOTAL 23942.36 12043.37 4508.56  
 
Expenditure during 11th Plan 
3.33 Grants-in-aid amounting to Rs. 40.93 crore  have been disbursed during 11th 
Plan (i.e upto 2011 -12). During 2012 -13, assistance of Rs. 7.908 crore has been 
released upto 31.12.2012. 
Upscaling of the 11th Plan Scheme 
3.34 A proposal for upscaling of the scheme has been approved to cover s etting up of 
25 new abattoirs and modernization of 25 existing abattoirs at a total project cost of Rs 
330.84 crore, inclusive of committed liabilities in respect of 8 on -going projects of 11th 
Plan.   
The upscaling scheme will be implemented in the Central Sector for the first two 
years of the 12th Five Year Plan i.e 2012 -13 and 2013 -14. Thereafter, the Scheme for 
Setting up of New/Modernization of Existing Abattoirs will be implemented by the State 
Governments through the National Mission on Food Pr ocessing for the rest of the 12th 
Five Year Plan since most of the proposals are from the Municipal Bodies which are 
closely connected to the State Governments. 
 
 

75 
 
(ii) SCHEME FOR TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION/ ESTABLISHMENT/ 
MODERNISATION OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
3.35 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries  is concerned with a number of food 
processing sectors such as grain processing, meat processing, poultry & egg 
processing, milk products, fish processing, fruit and vegetable processing, consumer  
food industries. Government has implemented the Scheme for technology upgradation/ 
establishment/ expansion/ modernisation of Food Processing Industries to provide 
promotional support to potential entrepreneurs.  
The scheme for Technology Upgradation/ Est ablishment/ Modernization of FPIs 
is applicable to promote latest technology in the preservation of perishable commodities 
including horticultural produce processing. The scheme envisages to extend the 
financial assistance for setting up of new food processing units as well as Technological 
Upgradation and Expansion of existing units in the country. Ministry extends financial 
assistance in the form of grants -in-aid to entrepreneurs @ 25% of the cost of Plant and 
Machinery and Technical Civil Works subject t o a maximum of Rs. 50 lakhs in general 
areas and 33.33% subject to maximum of Rs. 75 lakhs in difficult areas. This Scheme‟s 
expenditure during 2012 -13 sub sector -wise upto 31.12.2012 is furnished below and 
which is actually towards meeting the spillover o f cases of 11th Plan which has ended 
on 31.03.2012. 
 
3.36 During Ninth Plan, the Ministry had been operating different schemes to cover 
different segments like fruits and vegetables,  meat and poultry, milk, grain processing, 
fisheries etc. The total budgetary outlay for the scheme during 11 th Five Year Plan was 
Rs. 600 crores, out of which year wise expenditure has been given below:- 

76 
 
  
S . 
No. 
Year Expenditure (Rs. in crore) 
1 2007-08 119.30 
2 2008-09 96.87 
3 2009-10 82.49 
4 2010-11 105.67 
5. 2011-12 179.22 
Total 583.55 
           
 A total of 3209 cases with Rs. 795.26 crores liabilities were pending as on 
01.04.2012.    During 1 st year of 12 th Plan (2012-13) 644 units have been assisted with 
an amount of Rs. 99.32 crore (as on 31.12.2012) as against budgetary allocation of   
Rs. 100 crore for 2012 -13. Full financial assistance could not be released due to non -
availability of adequate funds. A t otal of 2,926 cases with a committed liability of almost 
Rs.699.18 crore still remain outstanding as on 10.10.2012, after exhausting the budget 
allocation of Rs. 100.00 crores in 2012 -13 of 12 th Plan. Keeping in view the huge back 
log of Committed Liabilit y, the fund requirement for the year 2013 -14 will be Rs. 325.00 
crore.  
      The Scheme has been subsumed in the National Mission on Food Processing 
(NMFP) launched in the 12 th Plan (2012-13) as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme.  Hence, 
no new applications ar e being accepted w.e.f. 01.04.2012. In other words, the 
applications w.e.f. 01.04.2012 under the scheme for Technology 
Upgradation/Establishment/Modernization of Food Processing Industries, which is 
subsumed in the NMFP are being received by the respective  State/UTs Governments 
under NMFP. Further, sanctions etc. under the NMFP will be done by the respective 

77 
 
State/UTs Governments, from the allocations of NMFP, which is a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme.                                                                               
 
3.37 Assistance in the form of grants -in-aid is extended under this Scheme for all 
segments of the food processing sector including  fruits and vegetables, milk, fish, grain, 
meat, poultry etc. 
 
Budgetary allocations under the Scheme are as under: 
        (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2012-13 100.00 186.46 154.59 
2013-14 160.00 - - 
  
 
 
Performance for the years 2010-11, 2011-12 & 2012-13 (as on 31.12.2012):- 
 
        (Rs. In lakhs) 
Year 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
Sectors No. Of 
cases 
Amount 
released 
No. Of 
Cases 
Amount 
released 
No. Of 
Cases 
Amount 
released 
Rice 
Milling 
58 784.40 349 4351.7 361 4877.56 
Pulse 
Milling  
52 451.88 97 1119.4 25 318.78 
Flour 
Milling 
57 105.07 53 1157.6 10 168.64 
Wine & 
Beer 
24 362.00 12 300.00 1 25.00 
Oil Milling 20 455 113 1820.1 61 1051.37 
F&VP 
Sector 
133 2331 249 4164.1 54 1012.31 
Consumer 
Industries 
114 2001.00 173 2889.8 87 1450.28 
Fisheries 9 193.10 27 575.8 16 345.70 
Dairy 67 1424.21 60 1192.0 26 448.17 
Meat & 
Poultry 
20 455.10 9 164.46 2 33.00 
 

78 
 
F&VP Sector 
 
During 2012-13, the Ministry has released financial assistance of Rs. 10.12 crore 
to 54 fruits & vegetable processing units in the form of 1st / 2nd installments. 
 
Consumer Industries 
 
As per allocation of b usiness, Ministry of Food Processing Industries has been 
allocated the work relating to planning,  development and control of, and 
assistance to, industries relating to bread, oilseeds, meals (edible), breakfast 
foods, biscuits, confectionery (including cocoa processing and chocolat e 
making), malt extract, protein isolate, high protein food,  weaning food and 
extruded food product (including other ready-to-eat foods). 
 
The bakery industry is among the few processed food segments whose 
production has been increasing steadily in the country in the last couple of years. 
Bakery products include bread, biscuits, pastries, cakes, buns, rusk etc. This 
activity is  mostly concentrated in the unorganized sector. Bread and biscuits 
constitute the largest segment of consumer foods. Bread  manufacturing is 
reserved for the small scale sector. Out of the total production of bread, 40% is 
produced in the organized  sector and the remaining 60% in the unorganised 
sector. There are around 60,000 bakeries, 20,000 traditional food units and  
several pasta food units. 
 
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries provides financial assistance in 
consumer industries Sector under the Scheme of  Technology 
Upgradation/Establishment/Modernization of FPIs. The Scheme has been 
decentralized w.e.f. 1st April 2007. 
 
In 2010-11, assistance worth Rs. 94.32 crore has been provided to 437 units .  In 
2011-12, assistance worth Rs. 179.29 crore has been provided to 1157 units.  In 
2012-13 (up to 31.12.2012), assistance worth Rs. 97.30 crore (excluding MM-IV) 
has been provided to 643 units. 
 
The broad status of different segments of the processed food sector is 
given below: - 
 
A. Horticulture Based Industries (Fruit & Vegetable Processing Industries) 
 
The utilization of fruits and vegetables for processing is estimated to be around 
2% of the total production. 
 
In order to give fresh impetus to processing of fruits and vegetables, Government 
has allowed under I.T. Act 100%  deduction of profit for first five years and 25% 
deduction for another five years for new upcoming F & VP units. 
 

79 
 
In 2012-13 (upto 31.12.2012), 54 fruits & vegetables processing units have been 
assisted. 
 
 
B. Meat and Meat Processing 
 
Consumption of meat & meat products and consumers preference to these 
products is gradually increasing. Production  of meat i s governed under local by -
laws as slaughtering is a state subject and local health authorities control  
Slaughter houses.  Processing of meat food products is licensed under Meat 
Food Products Order, (MFPO), 1973 which  was hitherto being implemented by 
the Directorate of Marketing & Inspection (DMI) and subsequently by Ministry of  
Food Processing Industries w.e.f. 19.03.2004. This subject has been transferred 
to Ministry of Health & Family Welfare  and administered by Food Standards and 
Safety Authority of In dia.  During the year 2012 -13, 2 units have been assisted 
(up to 31.12.2012). 
 
C. Dairy Processing 
 
India ranks first in the world in terms of milk production.  The growth rate of milk 
production over the past three decades has been about 4% against the growth 
rate of 2% in  India‟s population. This has been possible due to various schemes 
of milk production enhancement undertaken by the  Central and State 
Governments. About 35% milk produced in India is processed. 
 
To increase the share in global trade mil k-processing level requires to be 
increased and commercialization of traditional Indian milk products requires to be 
enhanced. During the year 2011-12 financial assistance to 60 milk & dairy sector 
amounting to Rs. 11.92 crore has been released.  During the year 2012-13 (up to 
31.12.2012), financial assistance to 26 milk & dairy sector amounting to Rs. 4.48 
crore has been released. 
 
D. Cereal-based Consumer Food Industry 
 
As per Allocation of Business Rules, Ministry of Food Processing Industries has 
been allocated the work relating to  planning, development and control of, and 
assistance to, industries relating to bread, oilseeds, meals (edible), breakfast  
foods, biscuits, confectionery (including cocoa processing and chocolate 
making), malt extract, protei n isolate, high  protein food, weaning food and 
extruded food product (including other ready-to-eat foods). 
 
 The bakery industry is among the few processed food segments whose 
production has been increasing steadily in the country in the last couple of years. 
Bakery products include bread, biscuits, pastries, cakes, buns, rusk etc. This 
activity is  mostly concentrated in the unorganized sector. Bread and biscuits 
constitute the largest segment of consumer foods. 

80 
 
 
Bread manufacturing is reserved for the smal l scale sector. Out of the total 
production of bread, 40% is produced in the  organized sector and the remaining 
60% in the unorganised sector. There are around 60,000 bakeries, 20,000 
traditional food units and several pasta food units. 
 
The Ministry of Fo od Processing Industries provides financial assistance in 
consumer industries Sector under the  scheme of technology 
upgradation/modernization/expansion. The Scheme has been decentralized 
w.e.f. 1stApril 2007.  
 
In 2011-12, 173 consumer food processing units have been assisted. 
 
During the year 2012 -13 (up to 31.12.2012) financial assistance to 87 food 
processing units relating to consumer  industries amounting to Rs. 14.50 crore 
has been provided. 
 
E. Fish Processing 
 
Considerable infrastructure facilities for processing of marine products have been 
developed over a period of 50 years. However, a large number of processing and 
freezing units are required to realize the potential of the sector. 
 
During the year 2011 -12 financial assistance to 27 fish processi ng industries 
amounting to Rs. 5.75 crore has been released. 
 
During the year 2012 -13 (up to 31.12.2012), financial assistance to 16 fish 
processing industries amounting to Rs. 3.45 crore has been released. 
 
F. Modernization of Grain Milling Industry, Oil & Pulses 
 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries had discontinued entertaining proposals 
for assistance in the Grain Milling Sector  (Comprising Rice Milling, Flour Milling, 
Pulse Milling) and Oil Milling since 6 th February, 2009 . The Indian Institute of 
Crop Processing Technology (formerly Paddy Processing Research Centre) 
supported by the Ministry continues to provide technical assistance to Industry. 
 
During the year 2011 -12, financial assistance to 613 grain processing units 
amounting to Rs. 84.02 Crore has been provided. During the financial year 2012-
13 (up to 31.12.2012) financial assistance to 361 rice milling units, 25 pulse  
milling units and 10 flour milling units have been extended amounting to  
Rs. 4877.56 lakhs, Rs. 318.78 lakhs and Rs. 168.64 lakhs respectively.  
 
 
 
 

81 
 
Oil Milling Sector: 
 
Oilseeds and edible oils are two of the most sensitive essential commodities. 
India is one of the largest producers of  oilseeds in the world and this sector 
occupies an important position in the agricultural economy and accounting for the 
estimated production of 28.21 million tonnes of nine cultivated oilseeds during 
the year 2007-08. India contributes about  6-7% of the world oilseeds production. 
Export of oilmeals, oilseeds and minor oils has increased from 5.06 million Tones 
in the financial year 2005 -06 to 7.3 million tons in the financial year 2006 -07. In 
terms of value, realization has gone up  from Rs. 5514 crore to Rs. 7997 crore. 
India accounted for about 6.4% of world oilmeal export. 
 
The Ministry of Fo od Processing Industries provides financial assistance in 
Edible Oil Milling Sector under the scheme of  technology 
upgradation/modernization/expansion. The scheme has been decentralized 
w.e.f. 1st April 2007. 
 
During the financial year 2011 -12, Ministry ha s released grants -in-aid of  
Rs. 18.20 crore to 113 units for Setting  up/Modernization/Expansion of edible oil 
milling industries, under the decentralized pattern of the scheme. 
 
During the year 2012 -13 (up to 31.12.2012), financial assistance to 61 oil milling 
industries amounting to Rs. 10.51 crore has been released. 
 
 
(iii) SCHEME FOR QUALITY ASSURANCE, CODEX STANDARDS  AND 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AND OTHER PROMOTIONAL ACTIVITIES 
 
 
3.38 The objectives of the Scheme is to motivate Food Processing Industries for 
adoption of food safety and quality assurance mechanisms, to prepare them to face the 
global competition in international trade in post -WTO, to enable adherence to stringent 
quality in hygiene norms, to enhance product acceptance by overseas buyers, to keep 
Indian Industry technologically abreast of international best practices and that the end 
product/outcome/findings of R&D work to benefit Food Processing Industries.  
 
 
 
 

82 
 
(a) Quality Assurance 
 
3.39 The Scheme would cover the following activities: 
 
a. Total Quality Management (TQM) 
b. Promotion of Quality Assurance/Safety Concept 
c. Strengthening of Codex Cell 
d. Setting up/Upgradation of Quality Control Laboratories 
e. R&D Programmes for FPI 
f. Other Promotional Activities 
 
Budgetary allocations under the Scheme are as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
 
2012-13 35.00 31.91 20.88* 
2013-14 35.00 - - 
* Upto 31.12.2012 
 
Plan fund utilization under the Scheme during 2010-11 was Rs. 16.37 crore. Plan 
fund utilization under the Scheme was Rs. 31.63 crore during 2011 -12 and Rs. 20.665 
crore during 2012-13 (up to 31.12.2012). 
 
3.40 When asked about the  details of  the achievements of the Scheme, for each 
component, the Ministry informed that t he physical and financial achievements for each 
of the components during the 11th Plan and during 2012-13 as under: 
a. Performance during 11th Plan: 
 
Scheme Components  Physical Achievement (New 
project assisted) 
Financial 
Achievement  
(Rs. Lakh) 
R&D projects assisted  50  #2392.00 

83 
 
Labs assisted  29  #5153.00 
Units assisted for 
HACCP/ISO  
29  232.00 
Promotional Activities  **478  2495.0 
Total  10272.00 
# Includes grant released towards ongoing projects (2
nd
 & 3
rd
 installment). 
**National/International exhibitions /fairs participated /assisted, Studies/ 
Surveys/Feasibility Reports, Workshops/Seminars assisted/ commissioned, and 
international interactions made by the Ministry.  
 
b. Progress during 2012-13 as on 25.03.2013: 
 
Scheme Components  Physical Achievement 
(New project assisted) 
Financial 
Achievement  
(Rs. Lakh) 
R&D  38 *1167.74 
Lab  6  #1264.59 
HACCP/ISO 22000, etc.  5  93.11 
Promotional Activities  44  **192.56 
Other Expenditure  309.00 
Total 3027.00 
* Includes grant released towards ongoing projects (2 nd & 3 rd installment) and 
funds transferred to SERB for implementation of the Scheme.  
# Includes grant released towards ongoing projects (2 nd installment) and funds 
transferred to ICAR for implementation of the Scheme. 
** Includes expenditure under budget heads „Advertising & Publicity‟, „Other 
Administrative Expenditure‟ and Professional Services‟ of the scheme.  
 
 
3.41 In case of R&D projects, there is at present no provision under the scheme for 
assistance for filing of patents and for commercialization of the research output.  Hence, 
the outcome of the projects assisted by this Ministry is not known. This is being 
addressed in the 12 th Plan with addition of provision under the scheme guidelines for 
assistance for filing and obtaining of patents in respect of the projects assisted by this 

84 
 
Ministry.  A provision is also being added in the 12 th Plan for monitoring and revi ew of 
the projects assisted under the scheme through a Programme Management Agency 
(PMA). In case of HACCP, grant -in-aid is released on reimbursement basis after the 
unit concerned has obtained the requisite HACCP/ISO certification. 
 
3.42 When the Committee pointed out that the Ministry have not been able to fully 
utilize the allocated funds during 2012 -13, the Ministry stated that t he BE  2012-13 for 
the scheme is Rs. 35.00 crore and the RE 2012-13 is Rs. 31.91 crore. While the BE 
allocation for grant -in-aid for individual projects under the scheme has been fully 
utilized, there has been savings under the heads – „Advertising & Publicity‟, 
„Professional Services‟ and „Grant-in-aid to State Governments‟ resulting in reduction of 
allocation in the RE. The allocation in BE 2012 -13 had been provided on the basis of 
anticipated expenditure keeping in view certain activities and events which have not 
fructified and hence, the allocation under these heads has been reduced in the RE. The 
savings have been re -appropriated to other schemes where there was additional 
requirement of funds.  
(b) Codex Alimentarius 
 
3.43 Codex Alimentarius Commission is an international body constituted by Food and 
Agriculture Organisation (FAO) and World Health Organisations ( WHO) with an 
objective to protect health of consumer and to ensure fair practice in the food trade.  
Codex prescribes international standards for safety and quality of food as well as good 
manufacturing practices, guidelines to protect health of the consumers. 

85 
 
3.44 When asked to elaborate the extent of international standards for safety and 
quality of food as well as good manufacturing  practices, guidelines to protect health of 
the consumers in our country are being strictly followed, the Ministry in their written 
reply stated that the international standards for food products are not mandatory for the 
Food Business Operators (FBOs) in the country. However, every FBO in the country 
has to follow and comply with the Food Safety & Standards Act, 2006 and Rules and 
Regulations, 2011 made thereunder.  
3.45 The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) have been 
established under Food Safety & Standards Act, 2006. As per Section 29 of FSS Act, 
2006, the Food Authority and the State Food Safety Authorities shall monitor and verify 
that the relevant requirements of law are fulfilled by FBOs at all stages of business. 
FSSAI is also harmonizing the national standards with international standards such as 
Codex where appropriate.  
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
3.46 The scheme for infrastructure development i s one of the major schemes of 
the Ministry envisaging infrastructure and common facilities used in particular by 
small and medium enterprises to enhance the  value addition  of the products .   
The scheme has three components (i) Mega Food Park (ii) Cold -Chain Value 
Addition and Preservation of Infrastructure and (iii) Establishment of New / 
Modernization of existing Abattoirs.  During Twelfth Five Year Plan, the scheme 
has been modified with regard to enhanced financial assistance in the component 
of scheme.  A sum of Rs. 184.00 crore was provided for the financial year 2012-13.  
The expenditure for the fiscal gone by was Rs. 123.60 cr ore.  Against the 

86 
 
projected allocation of Rs. 503 crore, the BE for the year 2013-14, is Rs. 247 crore.  
As the schemes are pro ject oriented and not State or area specific, the grant for 
financial assistance extended, is based on viable project proposals received from 
the entrepreneurs or organizations.  There have been drastic shortfalls  in the 
achievement, in all the three schemes, for the reasons which are not convincing.    
MEGA FOOD PARK 
3.47 The Committee note that the scheme of Mega Food Park (MFP) was 
conceived to provide a mechanism for bringing together farmers, processors, 
retailers, linking agricultural production to the market, so as ensure maximum 
value addition, minimise wastage, increase farmers’ income and create 
employment opportunities.  During Eleventh Plan per iod, as against allocation of 
Rs. 1575 crore, the actual expenditure was just 217.25 cr ore. As many as 30 Mega 
Food Parks were approved in three phases i.e. 10 in Phase -I, 5 in Phase -II and 15 
in Phase-III.  As against this, 13 projects have been accorded final ap proval, 17 
projects accorded in-principle approval.  In the financial year, 2012 -13 as against 
the budget estimates of Rs. 86 cr ore, an expenditure of Rs. 62.75 crore incurred.  
For the year 2013 -14, the financial projections have been to the tune of Rs. 270 
crore.  Comprising of Grant -in-Aid for 10 Mega Food Park (Phase -I), 5 Mega Food 
Park (Phase-II) and 15 Mega Food Park (Phase -III) with allocation of 105, 85 and 
75, respectively.  Rs. 5 crore have been proposed for other activities of Project 
Management Agency charges, publicity etc.  As against the projected allocation 
of Rs. 270 crore, the BE for the year 2013 -14 is Rs. 110 crore.  Though a Mega 
Food Park Project is required to be completed within a span of 30 months from 

87 
 
the release of first instal lment, the fastest progressing project was implemented 
in four years.  The Committee find that in  almost all the projects, which are 
operational and those under implementation, the progress has been far away 
from satisfactory.  The contention of the Government that the past Food Parks 
did not come up due to inability of the States to contribute their share of equity 
and thus private sector  was roped in, did not yield desired impact on the 
implementation of the scheme.  The Committee feel that the leadership and 
proactive role expected from the Ministry to enlist private sector support for 
important Mega Food Park scheme has been wanting, as a large number of parks, 
have not started commercial production. In the opinion of the Committee, there 
are major shortcomings in the planning and implementation of Mega Food Park 
Schemes.  The mid-term evaluation of the scheme revealed major deficiencies in 
the implementation.  However, the mid course correcti ve action undertaken by 
the Government, did not impact significantly and improved the pace of progress.   
The Committee, therefore, desire that a critical apprai sal of the scheme may be 
undertaken and corrective measures put in place immediately.   
The Committee also note that the Mega Food Park project was launched 
with much f an-fare with a presumption that each MFP will cater to 30 -35 food 
processing units, benefit 6000 farmers directly and 25000 to 30000 producers 
indirectly.  Further, it was expected to bring about investment to the tune of  
Rs. 75 – 100 crore in common facil ities and another Rs. 225 – 250 crore in 
processing and ancillary units.  The Committee have reasons to believe that the 
assumptions were highly unrealistic and inflated to garner support for the 

88 
 
scheme.  Taking these assumptions on their face value, the Committee would like 
to be apprised of the actual gain realised of each component as against those 
envisaged w.r.t. setting up of Mega Food Parks in the country.  The socio -
economic benefit studies of the Mega Food Park may also be undertaken so as to 
assess the benefits, reach and penetration of the scheme.   
SCHEME FOR COLD CHAIN, VALUE ADDITION AND PRESERVATION OF 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
3.48 To encourage setting up of cold -chain facilities and backward and forward 
linkages in the agriculture supply chain in the country and to provide integrated 
and complete cold chain and preservation infrastructure facilities, without any 
break, from the farm -gate to the consumer, the Ministry launched this plan 
scheme during Eleventh Plan.  Under the scheme the projects are financed for 
integrated cold -chain infrastructure development.  The initiatives were aimed at 
filling the gap in the supply chain, strengthening of cold -chain infrastructure, 
establishing value additions with infrastructure facilities like sorting, grading, 
packing and processing of horticulture including organic produce, marine, dairy 
and poultry.  Out of 79 projects approved for financial assistance, the Ministry 
issued approval for 74 projects and another 9 project proposals cancelled.  The 
progress of the projects is pathetic, as only 8 projects started commercial 
production.  Although 18 months was the scheduled time of completion, which 
was subsequently raised to 24 months, on case to case basis, most of the 63 
projects under implementation have incurred time overruns.  The Committee is of 
the opinion that there exist major deficiencies in the formulation and 

89 
 
implementation of the projects.  The Committee while like to be apprised of time 
overrun of each of the project , also  desire that Ministry of Food Pr ocessing 
Industry should strengthen their monitoring mechanism so as to minimise 
slippages in the execution of the projects.   
The Committee note that the Working Group of the Planning Commission 
recommended continuation of the scheme during Twelfth Five Y ear Plan and also 
proposed an allocation of Rs. 700 crore for the purpose.  140 new projects are 
proposed to be taken up during Twelfth Five Year Plan period.  Further, the 
scheme for non-horticulture projects is to be merged with one of the components 
of Central Sponsored Scheme – the National Mission on Food Processing.  The 
cold-chain project for horticulture projects is to be implemented through National 
Horticulture Board.  Taking into consideration the past performance of the 
project, the Committee wo nders as to how the Government would be able to 
realize the highly ambitious target of new 140 proposals for implementation.  The 
Committee would like the Government to take pro -active actions so as to ensure 
that bottlenecks / deficiencies noticed in the past projects, do not come in way of 
implementation of new projects.  
3.49 The availability of uninterrupted power , 24x7, is pre -requisite and an 
important conditionality for operating cold storage chain successfully.  The 
shortage of power, in various par ts of the country both in qualitative and 
quantitative terms, especially in rural areas, constraint the development of cold 
storage infrastructure.  The Committee note that the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industry in coordination with Ministry of New and R enewable Energy (MNRE) 

90 
 
have undertaken demonstration projects using bio-mass / solar hybrid system for 
generation of electricity.   Some of the State Governments have been advised to 
take up cold -chain pilot project based on the technologies developed by the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.  While the Committee wishes to promote 
the use of non -conventional sources of energy (NCS E) for the development of 
cold storage infrastructure, they would first like to be apprised of the outcome of 
these demonstration projects before dwelling upon the subject further.  
IRRADIATION FACILITY 
3.50 The Committee note that food Irradiation facilit y is one of the components 
under Cold -Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure plan scheme, 
for infrastructure development.  The scheme has since subsumed in the National 
Mission for Food Processing, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, in the Twelft h Plan.  
Under this modern, cutting edge technology, food is subjected to ionizing energy 
or radiation which strengthens food conservation, improves food hygiene, help in 
extension of shelf -life, enhance safety by killing food borne pathogens and 
parasites, destroy insects, pests in stored products and fruits.  The Committee 
further find that Grant -in-Aid @ 50% of the total cost of plant and machinery and 
technical civil work in general areas and 75% for North -Eastern States and 
difficult areas subjected to maximum of Rs. 10 crore is extended to implementing 
agencies for various components of cold -chain including irradiation.  The 
Ministry have approved four irradiation projects, of which one, with project cost 
of Rs. 17.73 crore has commenced commercial pro duction and rest are under 
various stages of implementation.  The conflicting scientific evidence and 
literature available, world over are conflicting and mixed and tend to promote and 

91 
 
denounce the use of irradiation for food processing.  Despite concerns expressed 
by various consumer / interest groups, globally over safety and security issues, 
irradiated food is permitted in more than 50 countries.    In the interest of public 
health, the Committee would like to tread with caution and desire that matters 
such as irradiation dosages, food labelling, standards and other safety and 
security parameters of irradiation food, be assessed, monitored and regulated, 
before the facility is open on a large commercial scale.   Concurrently, the Govt. 
should also educate  the masses about irradiation food and step up publicity 
campaign before embarking upon this scheme on a larger pedestal.      
SCHEME FOR SETTING UP / MODERNIZATION OF ABATTOIRS  
3.51 The Committee note that the Plan scheme for establishing new abattoirs 
and modernizing the existing abattoirs was undertaken during Eleventh Plan 
period with an aim to provide facilities for scientific and less painful slaughter, 
chilling, rendering plant affluent treatment plant, better hygiene, safety and retail 
cold-chain m anagement.  The Committee further note that as against Plan 
allocation of Rs. 828 crore, the expenditure was Rs. 39.54 crore only.  Further of 
10 approved abattoir projects, only 2 were completed and rest are under various 
stages of implementation, though the time line prescribed for completion of the 
projects were 18 months each.  The Committee further note that there has been 
enormous time overrun of the projects.  As many as 8 projects were approved 
way back in the year 2008.  Delay in the approval of th e scheme, local agitation 
and objection of local people over land, delay in appointment of consultants and 
also inordinate time taken in completing tender relating formalities, were some of 

92 
 
the reasons assigned for delay in execution of the projects.  The Committee 
further note that the scheme has been upscaled to cover 25 new projects and 
modernisation of existing 25 abattoirs with a total project cost of Rs. 330.84 crore, 
during Twelfth Five Year Plan.   The Committee are concerned to note the 
inordinate delay in the implementation of the projects included in the Eleventh 
Plan, which have now slipped to 12 th Plan.  In the opinion of the Committee, there 
are some fundamental deficiencies in the project formulation and its 
implementation thereof.  The Commit tee would like the Government to take 
proactive steps to ensure that the projects of Eleventh Plan period which are 
continuing in the Twelfth Plan are not delayed any more.  At the same time, the 
Committee also recommend that Govt. should step up their mon itoring 
mechanism to ensure that the larger mandate assigned to the Ministry due to 
additional proposals in their kitty do not under -perform for want of efficient 
monitoring mechanism.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in the matter. 
SCHEME FOR TECHNOLOGY UP -GRDATION / ESTABLISHMENT / 
MODERNIZATION OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRY 
3.52 The Committee note that the scheme for technological up -gradation, 
establishment, modernization of food processing industry promotes latest 
technology in the preservation of perishable commodities including horticultural 
produce processing.  The scheme envisages financial assistance for setting up of 
new processing units as well as technological up -gradation and expansion of 
existing units in the country.   Consumer industries which include bakery 
industry; fruit and vegetable processing units; fish, meat and dairy processing; 
rice, pulse milling, oil milling and flour milling sector, alcoholic, beverages etc. 
are some of the unorganised highly employable i ndustries which are availing 

93 
 
benefit under the scheme.  During Ninth Plan period, as against budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 600 crore, the utilisation under the scheme was 583.55 crore, 
which makes the scheme as one of the most popular plan scheme of the Mini stry.  
During this period, Government assisted 3229 food processing units. The 
Committee further find that the scheme has now been subsumed in the National 
Mission on Food Processing (NMFP) with effect from 2012 -13 as a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme.  As such , no new proposals are being accepted with effect 
from 1.4.2012 under the scheme for the Central sector.  Hitherto, the applications 
received and sanctioned by respective State / UT Government under NMFP, the 
Union Government is sanctioning the old cases p rior to 31.3.2012.  Despite 
wiping off the past liabilities, as many as 2926 cases with committed liabilities of 
around Rs. 700 crore is still remains as an outstanding.  The Committee desire 
that Government should approach the Planning Commission and Mini stry of 
Finance to ensure that adequate budgetary provisions are made in the scheme so 
as to ensure that the past committed liability is wiped out at the earliest.   
BOTTLING/PACKAGING OF SUGARCANE JUICE 
3.53 The technology to bottle and tetra -pack tender coconut water, has 
revolutionised its usage amongst consumers.  Another commodity, with equal 
promising returns, in the opinion of the Committee , is juice extracted from 
sugarcane.  The Committee desire that M inistry of Food Processing Industry 
should undertake R&D work, so as to develop appropriate technologies for the 
bottling / package of sugarcane juice.  If developed, this will go a long way in 
serving the interest of the food processing sector.  
SCHEME FOR QUALITY ASSURANCE, CODEX STANDARDS AND RESEARCH 
AND DEVELOPMENT AND OTHER PROMOTIONAL ACTIVITIES 
3.54 The objective of the scheme is to motivate food processing industries for 
adoption of food safety and quality assurance mechanisms such as total quality   
 
 

94 
 
 
management including ISO-22000, ISO-14000, the Hazardous Analysis and Critical 
Control Points (HACCP), Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) and Good 
Hygienic Practices (GHP).  The scheme also enables the food processing industry 
to face the global competition in Intern ational trade post -WTO, product 
acceptance by overseas buyers, keep Indian industry technological abreast of 
International post -WTO and R&D works to benefit the industry in terms of 
products and process development, improved packaging value addition and 
leading to innovative products and processes with commercial values.  The 
Committee find that performance under the scheme has been somewhat tardy.  
During Eleventh Plan period, as against the outlay of Rs. 250 crore, the 
expenditure was only 131.07 crore.  For the Twelfth Plan, an allocation of Rs. 290 
crore has been proposed for the scheme.  The budgetary allocation for the year 
2012-13 was Rs. 31.91 crore against which, expenditure incurred was Rs. 22.23 
crore (upto December 2012).  A provision of Rs. 32 c rore has been proposed for 
the year 2013 -14.  Lack of technology dissemination and commercialization, 
mechanism of disbursement of funds, are some of the areas of concern observed 
under R&D projects.  The Committee are pained to note that in case of R&D 
projects, no provision exists under the scheme, for assistance for filing of 
patents and commercialization of research output.  The Committee take this 
seriously and desire that adequate provisions may be made for the purpose in the 
R&D sector.    
 
  

95 
 
The Committee further find that International standards for food products 
are not mandatory for the food business operators in the country.  However, they 
are to comply with the provision of Food Safety and Standards Act and Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder.  Further, Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India is harmonising the National Standards with International standards such as 
codex wherever appropriate.  The Committee desire that National standards be 
evolved and aligned with International standar ds so that food processing sector 
is not denied opportunity to compete in the International market. 
  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
25 April, 2013                                    Chairman, 
05 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)                                     Committee on Agriculture  
 

Annexure-I 
Scheme wise Outlay & Expenditure during 11th Plan, 2012-13 & BE for 2013-14 for the Ministry of Food Processing Industries(Rs. in crores) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Scheme/Project/ 
Programme 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
  Proposed 
allocation 
BE RE Actual 
Exp 
Proposed 
allocation 
BE RE Actual 
Exp 
Proposed 
allocation 
BE RE Actual 
Exp 
Proposed 
allocation 
BE RE Actual 
Exp 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
1 Scheme for 
Infrastructure 
Development 
100.00 90.00 15.00 14.79 464.00 90.00 42.20 48.28 538.70 
 
135.00 73.81 72.94 724.40 
 
137.50 120.80 118.09 
2 Scheme for 
Technology 
Upgradation/ 
Establishment 
and 
Modernization 
of Food 
Processing 
Industries 
150.00 72.00 113.50 119.30 150.00 90.00 91.50 96.87 165.00 60.00 82.51 82.49 165.00 81.00 106.00 105.67 
3 Scheme for 
Upgradation of 
Quality of Street 
Food 
25.00 0.90 0.90 0.72 60.00 4.50 5.40 1.93 34.00 8.00 0.003 0.00 34.00 1.00 0.1 0.00 
4 Scheme for 
Quality 
Assurance, 
Codex Standards 
and 
Research & 
Development and 
other 
Promotional 
Activities 
75.00 18.00 19.30 15.12 54.70 18.00 19.00 17.37 51.00 30.00 
 
32.08 
 
29.07 
 
51.00 38.00 
 
31.13 
 
31.32 
 
5 Scheme for 
Human Resource 
Development 
20.00 09.00 4.50 4.21 15.00 4.50 5.70 5.96 9.00 9.00 
 
 
9.50 
 
 
9.46 
 
 
9.00 10.50 
 
 
10.77 
 
 
11.11 
 
 
6 Scheme for 
Strengthening of 
Institutions 
72.00 35.10 26.10 26.51 126.95 54.00 53.50 52.71 308.36 64.00 92.08 83.59 308.36 132.00 127.50 128.66 
7 Lump sum 
provision for 
North East 
including Sikkim 
 (25.00) (20.00) (4.11)  (29.00) (24.20)  123.00 34.00 29.00 18.50 123.00 40.00 40.00 38.50 
 Total 442.00 250.00 200.00 182.00 870.65 290.00 242.00 223.12 1229.06 340.00 290.00 277.55 1229.06 400.00 400.00 394.75 

97 
 
 
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
Scheme/Project/ 
Programme 
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
  Proposed 
Allocation 
BE RE Actual 
EXP. 
Proposed 
Allocation 
BE RE Actual EXP. 
(upto 
31.12.2012) 
Proposed 
allocation 
BE 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1 Scheme for  
Infrastructure 
 Development 
887.12 300.00 189 170.170 510.00 
 
191.00 184.19 
 
123.79 
 
503.00 
 
247.00 
2 Scheme for 
Technology 
Upgradation/ 
Establishment 
and  
Modernization 
of Food 
Processing 
Industries 
216.00 98.00 185.47 179.220 200.00 100.00 186.46 99.32 325.00 165.00 
3  Scheme for 
Upgradation of 
Quality of Street 
Food 
35.00 5.00 0.00 0.00 - - - - - - 
4 Scheme for 
Quality 
Assurance, 
Codex Standards 
and  
Research & 
Development 
and other 
Promotional 
Activities 
67.00 45.00 
 
43.52 40.031 50.00 35.00 31.91 22.43 46.50 35.00 
 
5 Scheme for 
Human Resource 
Development 
25.00 
 
 
15.00 
 
 
14.50 13.680 06.00 04.00 04.00 03.12 4.00 4.00 
 
 
6 Scheme for 
Strengthening of 
Institutions  
260.75 132.50 117.510 
 
115.580 115.00 80.00 68.12 43.28 80.53 75.00 
7 Lump sum 
provision for 
North East 
including Sikkim 
 60.00 55.00 31.080       
8 NMFP     319.00 250.00 185.32 181.44 350.00 182.00 
 Total 1490.87 600.00 550.00 518.970 1200.00 660.00 660.00 473.38 1309.30 708.00 

            Annexure-II  
Implementation Status of 30 Mega Food Parks 
S 
No. Name  
Project 
cost   
(` Cr.) 
Date of in-
principle 
approval  
Date of 
Final 
Approval  
Amount 
of grant 
approved   
(Cr.) 
Amount 
of grant 
released  
( Cr.) 
Actual 
expenditure  
 
(Cr.) 
1. 
Srini Food Park 
Pvt. Ltd., Andhra 
Pradesh 
116.94 16.12.2008 27.03.2009 50.00 45.00  105.25 
2. 
Patanjali Food & 
Herbal Park Ltd, 
Uttarakhand 
95.08 16.12.2008 27.03.2009 50.00 30.00  62.11 
3. 
North East Mega 
Food Park Ltd., 
Assam 
75.98 16.12.2008 27.03.2009 50.00 30.00 29.91 
4. 
Jharkhand Mega 
Food Park Pvt. 
Ltd., Jharkhand 
113.95 16.12.2008 27.03.2009 50.00 15.00 13.78 
5. 
Tamil Nadu Mega 
Food Park Ltd., 
Tamil Nadu 
133.45 16.12.2008 16.03.2010 50.00 5.00 10.78 
6. 
Jangipur Bengal 
Mega Food Park 
Pvt. Ltd., West 
Bengal 
132.71 16.12.2008 16.03.2010 50.00 30.00 50.91 
7. 
M/s Integrated 
Food Park Pvt. 
Ltd., Kolar, 
Karnataka 
144.33 03.08.2010 27.03.2011 50.00 15.00 31.36 
8. 
M/s International 
Fresh Farm 
Products (India) 
Ltd., Ferozpur, 
Punjab 
130.38 03.08.2010 25.05.2011 50.00 15.00 39.79 
9. 
M/s Keventer Food 
Park Infra Ltd., 
Bhagalpur, Bihar 
153.96 29.04.2011 30.11.2011 50.00 5.00 3.07 
10. 
M/s Sikaria Infra 
Projects Pvt. Ltd., 
Agartala, Tripura 
87.45 29.04.2011 30.11.2011 50.00 15.00 11.29 
11 M/s Anil Mega 
Food Park Pvt. 
Ltd., Vadodara, 
141.07 29.04.2011 13.01.2012 50.00 5.00 24.53 

99 
 
Gujarat 
12. 
M/s MITS Mega 
Food Park Ltd., 
Rayagada, Orissa 
80.17 29.04.2011 16.04.2012 50.00 5.00 3.08 
13. 
M/s, Madhya 
Pradesh Mega 
Food Park Ltd. 
161.75 10.10.2011 27.08.2012 50.00 5.00 13.56 
14. 
M/s Paithan Mega 
Food Park Ltd., 
Aurangabad, 
Maharashtra 
120.76 05.04.2011 
“In principle” approval was accorded on 05.04.2011. 
The SPV is yet to fulfill the criteria related to 
possession of requisite land. The submission of SPV 
was considered in the IMAC meeting dated 
12.11.2012. Clarifications on the land issues have 
been sought from Govt. of Maharashtra. Response 
awaited 
15. 
M/s Aditya Birla 
Nuvo Ltd., 
Sultanpur, Uttar 
Pradesh 
168.65 24.09.2010 
„In principle‟ approval was accorded on 24 -09-2010. 
The SPV has been granted extension of time till 30 -
09-2012 for fulfillment of prescribed conditions for 
final approval. A show cause notice was issued for 
cancellation of the project on account of non -
fulfillment of prescribed conditions for final approval. 
The SPV has sought further extension of time till 31 -
03-2013 which is under consideration. 
16. 
M/s Sindhu Farms 
Mega Food Park 
Pvt. Ltd., Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh 
124.91 06.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded.  
17. 
M/s Goenka 
Infrastructure Pvt. 
Ltd., 
Abhishekhpakkam, 
Puducherry 
149.89 06.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
18. 
M/s Chhattisgarh 
Agro Mega Food 
Park Ltd., Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh 
129.65 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
19. 
M/s Greens Food 
Park India Pvt. 
Ltd., Pulwama, 
Jammu & Kashmir 
81.02 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
20. 
M/s Soma New 
Towns (P) Ltd., 
Sirsa, Haryana 
147.08 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
21. 
M/s Green Tech 
Mega Food Park 
Pvt. Ltd., Ajmer, 
Rajasthan 
113.11 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 

100 
 
22. 
M/s Godavari 
Mega Aqua Park 
Pvt. Ltd., West 
Godavari, Andhra 
Pradesh 
119.12 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
23. 
M/s Pristine 
Logistics & 
Infraprojects Pvt. 
Ltd., Khagaria, 
Bihar 
142.98 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
24. 
M/s Gujarat Agro 
Infrastructure 
Mega Food Park , 
Surat, Gujarat 
108.30 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
25 
M/s Poliyan Mega 
Food Park Pvt. 
Ltd., Una, 
Himachal Pradesh 
97.63 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
26 
M/s Satara Mega 
Food Park Pvt. 
Ltd., Satara, 
Maharasthra 
132.26 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
27 
M/s Huma Coastal 
Mega Food Park 
Pvt. Ltd., Ganjam, 
Odisha 
117.05 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
28. 
M/s Himalayan 
Organic Mega food 
Park Ltd., South 
Sikkim, Sikkim 
80.37 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
29. 
M/s Himalayan 
Food Park Pvt. 
Ltd., Udham Singh 
Nagar, 
Uttarakhand 
124.52 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
30. 
M/s Bengal Mega 
Food Park Pvt. 
Ltd., Jalpaiguri, 
West Bengal 
113.90 21.09.2012 “In-principle” approval has been accorded. 
 
  

101 
 
Annexure-III 
 
 
 


102 
 
 


103 
 
 


104 
 
 


105 
 
 


106 
 
 


107 
 
APPENDIX-I 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
**** 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 03 April, 2013 from 1450 hours to 1630 
hours in Room No. „53‟, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Jyoti Mirdha -   Acting Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA   
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
5.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
6.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
7.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
8.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
  
                                    RAJYA SABHA 
 
9.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
10.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
11.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
12.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri R.S. Kambo   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.H. Rao   - Deputy Secretary 
 
  

108 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES  
 
          S.No.       NAME OF THE OFFICER              DESIGNATION 
     
                  PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
 Shri D. Banerjee   Joint Adviser (Industry) 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FOOD TECHNOLOGY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP  
AND MANAGEMENT (NIFTEM) 
 
Shri Ajit Kumar   Director-cum-Vice Chancellor 
 
2. In the absence of Chairman, the Committee chose Dr. Jyoti Mirdha,  MP (Lok 
Sabha) to act as Chairperson for the Sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
3. Thereafter, the Acting Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and representatives of the Ministry of Food  Processing Industries, Planning 
Commission and National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and 
Management (NIFTEM) to the Sitting.  
 
1. Shri Rakesh Kacker  Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Pujari AS&FA 
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad Meena Joint Secretary (Parliament) 
4. Dr. U. Venkateswarlu  Joint Secretary 
5. Smt. Anuradha Prasad Joint Secretary 
6. Smt. Kiran Puri Joint Secretary 
7. Shri Gajendra Bhujabal Economic Advisor 

109 
 
4. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Secretary made a power point 
presentation briefly highlighti ng the activities / achievements made by the Ministry 
during the Eleventh Plan Period and preceding Financial Year. The proposed outlay for 
Twelfth Plan, including various schemes to be taken up was also discussed.  The 
Committee, thereafter, took oral evi dence of the representatives of Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry.  
5. The Acting Chairperson and members of the Committee raised queries on 
several schemes/projects of the Ministry and desired progress made thereunder.  The 
Demands for Grants of the ongoing Fiscal and proposed projection for Financial Year 
2013-14 was also discussed.  The witnesses replied, thereto. 
6. The Acting Chairperson, thereafter , thanked the witnesses for appearing before 
the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by them.  She also 
directed them to furnish information on points on which the Ministry could not clarify 
during the Sitting, to the Committee Secretariat by 08 April, 2013.  
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
  

110 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 25th April, 2013 from 1500 hours to 1540  hours 
in Committee Room „E‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
         PRESENT 
 Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
6.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
8.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
9.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
10.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
  
                  RAJYA SABHA 
11.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
12.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
13.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
14.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
   
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
     2. Shri T.H. Rao  - Deputy Secretary 

111 
 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
The Committee, thereafter, took up the draft Report for consideration and adoption on 
Demands for Grants (2013-2014) relating to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the abov e draft Report with some 
modifications.  They also authorized the Chairman to finalize the above Draft Report in the 
light of the factual verification got done by the concerned Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries and present them to the Parliament.   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
 