      
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2012-2013) 
 
 
THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
APRIL, 2012/, VAISAKHA, 1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
33 

THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
 
         (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
                   (2012-2013) 
 
 
                     Presented to Lok Sabha on     25. 04.2012 
                    Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on   26.04.2012 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
APRIL, 2012/, VAISAKHA, 1934 (Saka) 
 
  


COA No. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
        
         
 
 
Price:  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
© 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………                      (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………..            (v) 
ABBREVIATIONS.………………………………………………………..            (vii) 
   
CHAPTER I     IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS   1 
   
CHAPTER II   OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS                                                                     3 
             
 (i) Introductory                                                                                     3 
(ii)  Analysis of Demands      5 
 (iii) Annual Plan 2012-13       6 
 (iv) Plan Allocation       9 
 (v) Preparation for the Twelfth Plan              12 
  
CHAPTER III   SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS                18 
 
  (A) Scheme For Infrastructure Development             18 
 
 (i)  Mega Food Parks                20 
 (ii) Cold Chain, Value-Addition and Preservation  Infrastructure  27 
 (iii) Establishment of new/modernization of existing abattoirs      30 
 
(B) Scheme for Technology Upgradation, Establishment and       33 
Modernisation of Food Processing Industries    
 
 (C) Schemes for Upgradation of Quality of Street Food           35
  
 
(D) Scheme for Quality Assurance, Codex Standards and 
 Research and Development and other Promotional Activities 36 
 
(E) Scheme for Strengthening of Institutions          37 
 
 (F) New Schemes                                                                                 40 
     
ANNEXURE 
 
Scheme wise Outlay and Expenditure during Eleventh Plan and Budget  
Estimates for 2012-13 for the Ministry of Food Processing Industries   ….
     
                                    
          APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the 27th  Sitting of the Committee held on 11 April, 2012  ..... 
 
II. Minutes of the 30th  Sitting of the Committee held on 23 April, 2012  .....   
 
(i) 
    
 

COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-12) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS  
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
11.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12.  Shri Premdas  
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
15.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
16.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
17.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
18.  Shri Laxman Tudu 
19  Shri D. Venugopal 
20.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
21.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
*23.  Vacant 
$24.  Vacant 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
^26.  Vacant 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 ____________________________________________________________ 
$   Vice Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on   
             his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 02 April, 2012. 
       ^   Vice Shri Vinay Katiyar who  ceased to be  the  Member  of  the  Committee  on  
             his  retirement  from  Rajya  Sabha  on  02  April,  2012. 
 *    Vice Shri Narendra Budania who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on  
              his  retirement from Rajya Sabha on 03 April, 2012. 
  
 (iii) 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

 
INTRODUCTION 
         
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-third Report on 
the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Committee u nder Rule 331 E(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha considered t he Demands for Grants  (2012-13) of 
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, which were laid on the table of the House 
on 27 March, 20 12.  The Committee took  evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries and the Planning Commission  at their Sitting 
held on 11 April, 2012.    The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers 
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries and Planning Commission  for 
appearing before the Committee and for furnishing the information that the 
Committee desired in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants (2012 
– 13) of the Ministry.  
 
3. The Report was  considered and adopted  by the Committee at their S itting 
held on   23 April, 2012.  
 
4. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of each Chapter. 
 
 
         
            
 
 
NEW DELHI;                           BASUDEB ACHARIA 
23 April, 2012                                   Chairman, 
03 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)                                     Committee on Agriculture
  
 
 
 
(v)  

ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AIDC Assam Industrial Development Corporation 
AIEEE All India Engineering Entrance Examination 
AICTE All India Council of Technical Education 
BE Budget Estimate 
CCEA                     Cabinet Committee on Economic  Affairs 
CSS 
DPR          
         
Centrally Sponsored  Scheme 
Detailed Project Report   
EFC 
EoI               
HRD  
HUPA 
IICPT 
MFP 
MFPI  
NDC 
NEDFI 
NIFTEM 
 
NMFP  
NOC  
PSUs 
Expenditure Finance Committee 
Expression of Interest 
Human Resource Development 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology 
Mega Food Park 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
National Development Council 
Northeast Development Finance Corporation Ltd 
National Institute of Food Technology and 
Entrepreneurship 
National Mission on Food Processing 
No Objection Certificate 
Public Sector Undertakings 
R & D Research and Development 
SME      
SNAs  
SPV  
WTO     
Small and Medium Enterprises 
State Nodal Agencies 
Special Purpose Vehicles 
World Trade Organization 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 
  

CHAPTER – I 
IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Twenty-fifth Report of the Committee on Ag riculture on Demands for 
Grants 2011 -12 of Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 29 August, 2011. The Report contained 
16 Recommendations. 
1.1 On the basis of Action taken Notes  furnished by the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries in respect of the Recommendations contained in the Twenty-
fifth Report, the Committee presented their Thirtieth  Report to Speaker, Lok Sabha 
on 16 February, 2012.The Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 27 March, 2012. After analyzing the Action Taken Notes 
furnished by the Ministry , the Committee commented on the action taken by the 
Government in the context of Recommendations at Para Nos.  2.16, 2.18, 2.20, 3.28, 
3.29, 3.30, 3.31, 3.33, 3.34 and 3.36  of the Twenty-fifth Report. The Analysis further 
revealed that out of 16 Recommendations contained in the Twenty-fifth Report of the 
Committee,13 Recommendations (81.25%) have been accepted by the Government . 
For the remaining 03 Recommendations  (18.75%) t he final replies of the 
Government are still awaited. 
1.2 In terms of Directi on 73 A  of the Directions by  Speaker, Lok Sabha, the 
Minister concerned is required to make a Statement in Lok Sabha about the status of 
implementation of Recommendations contained in the original Report of the 
Committee within six months of the said Report to Parliament. However, a Statement 
under Direction 73 A in the context of the Twenty -fifth Report is yet to be made by 

the Minister of F ood Processing Industries. The s ix months time frame stipulated for 
the purpose elapsed on 28 February, 2012. 
1.3 It may be pertinent to mention here that in the past, in the context of Fifth and 
Ninth Reports of the Committee too the Statements under Direction 73 A were made 
after more than a year and ten months respectively on 22 March, 2011.In both the 
cases, the Statements were found to be deficient in several respects and the Ministry 
were asked to get the revised and updated Statements made. Accordingly, the 
revised and updated Statements under Direction 73 A in the context of both the 
Reports were made by the Minister on 6 September, 2011. 
1.4 The Committee are very disappointed to note that the  Ministry have 
faltered, time and again in adhering to Direction 73 A of Direction by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha. Not only have they not adhered to the stipulation of 
getting the Statement made within s ix months of presentation of the Report in 
the context of the Twenty-fifth Report of the Committee, their past record in the 
matter is also not worth mentioning. The Statement under Direction 73 A in the 
context of two previous Repor ts of the Committee viz the Fifth and Ninth ones 
was made after more than a year and ten months respectively on 22 
March,2011. Due to several deficiencies in these Statements, the Ministry were 
advised to get revised and updated Statements made in the context of both the 
Reports. Finally, the Minister made the revised and updated Statements  on 6 
September, 2011.The Committee strongly disapprove this continuing non - 
adherence to a Direction by the Speaker, Lok Sabha and desire that the 
Statement under Direction 73 A in respect of the Twenty-fifth Report be made 
in the Second Half of the ongoing Budget Session without fail. 

CHAPTER – II 
 
OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
Introductory 
 
 Agricultural development is crucial to India‟s overall progress which can be 
achieved by intensifying agricultural and allied activities as well as by diversification 
and commercialisation of agriculture.  A strong and dynamic food processing sector 
plays a vital role in diversification and commercialisation of agriculture, enhances 
shelf life , ensures value addition to agricultural produce, generates employment, 
enhances income of farmers and creates market for exports of agro products. 
 
2.2 The Country in this year of surplus, is facing a major issue of ensuring 
remunerative prices to the farmers for their produce. There is no denying the fact that 
greater opportunities can be created for adding income of farmers and employment if 
the surplus production of cereals, fruits, vegetables, milk, fish meat and poultry etc. 
are processed and marketed both inside and outside the Country. 
 
2.3 Due to very low levels of food processing capability, huge losses are incurred 
in spite of India‟s leading position in the comity of nations as a producer of several 
agricultural, animal husbandry and dairy products. Because of these very reasons,    
the share of India‟s export of processed food in global trade is only 1.5% at present. 
Even, within the Country, share of processed fruits and vegetables is much less 
when compared to other agricultural products such as milk (35%) and marine 
products (26%). More importantly, the lack of processing and storage of fruits and  

vegetables results in huge post harvest losses. A developed food processing 
industry would not only reduce wastages, but would also fetch enhanced income to 
farmers, which is another problem before the agriculture sector at present. 
 
2.4 The Committee have been informed that there are many constraints which the 
food processing industry sector is facing, viz. non -availability of adequate critical 
infrastructural facilities, like cold chain, packaging and grading centres, lack of 
adequate quality control and testing infrastructure, inefficient supply chain, etc.. 
 
2.5 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries are concerned with formulation 
and implementation of the policies and plans for the food processing industries within 
the overall national priorities and objectives. The Ministry were set up in July, 1988 to 
give an impetus to development of food processing sector in the Country.  
Subsequently, on 15 October, 1999 they were made a Department and brought 
under the Ministry of Agriculture.  They were again notified a s the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries on 6 September, 2001. 
 
2.6 According to the Ministry, they act as a catalyst for bringing in greater 
investment into this sector, guiding and helping the industry, and creating a 
conductive environment for healt hy growth of the food processing industry.  Within 
these overall objectives, the Ministry aims at: 
 . Better utilization and value-addition of agricultural produce. 
. Minimising wastage at all stages in the food processing chain by 
development of infrastru cture for storage, transportation and 
processing of agro-produce. 
 

. Induction of modern technology into the food processing industries. 
. Encouraging R&D in food processing for product and process 
development. 
. Providing policy support, promotional initiatives and facilities to promote 
value added exports. 
. Create the critical infrastructure to fill the gaps in the supply chain from 
farm to consumer. 
 
Analysis of Demands 
 
2.7 Demand No. 45 pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries for 
the Fiscal 2012-13 was presented to the Lok Sabha on 27 March 2012. 
 
 The Table below reflects the Demands in brief: 
(Rs. In crores) 
Sl. 
No. 
Section 
 
 
Plan Non-Plan Total 
1. Revenue    
Voted 660.00 10.54 670.54 
 Charged -- -- -- 
2. Capital    
 Voted -- -- -- 
 Charged -- -- -- 
 Grand Total   670.54 
 
 It may be noted that a sum of Rs.670.54 crore has been allocated to the 
Ministry for the ongoing Financial Year. The break -up in the Revenue Section is 

Rs.660.00 crore on the Plan side and Rs.10.54 crore  on the Non -Plan side. There 
are no allocations under Capital Section either on the Plan side or Non-Plan Side. 
  
In comparison of RE 2011-12, the allocation of the Ministry for BE 2012 -13 is 
given in the Table below: 
Section RE 2011-12 BE 2012-13 
 Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
Revenue 550.00 10.09 660.00 10.54 
Capital -- -- -- -- 
  
 It may be noted that o n the Plan side the allocation to the Ministry is             
Rs. 660.00 crore which is 20% higher  than their RE 2011-12 allocation of Rs. 550.00  
crore. On the Non -Plan side, this year‟s allocation of Rs. 10.54 crore is marginally 
higher than last year‟s allocation of Rs. 10.09 crore. 
 
Annual Plan 2012-13 
 
2.8 The Ministry have informed that they sought Rs. 1200.00 crore for Annual 
Plan 2012 -13 but they have been allocated Rs. 660.00 crore only.  When asked 
about the reasons behind this drastic reduction in the allocation for the year 2012 -13 
by the Planning Commission and to what extent would this shortfall  lead to pruning 
or staggering of the vari ous Schemes, they replied that Eleventh Plan allocation for 
the Ministry of Food Processing Industri es was approved as  Rs. 4031.00 crore 
based on the report of the Working Group.  As most of schemes of the Eleventh Plan 
were new initiatives, hence approval  of the scheme s could be obtained towards 
middle of 2008 – 09.  Actual progress in the schemes was possible only in the third 

and fourth year of Eleventh Five Year Plan.  The pace of utilization during 2010 –11 
has shown significant improvement over earlier  years.  Hence, Ministry have worked 
out realistic scheme-wise requirement for year 2012 –13  and submitted their Annual 
Plan proposal with full justification.  It was further stated that the Ministry have made 
all efforts but Rs. 600.00 crore has actually been allocated.  As regards the extent to 
which various schemes of the Ministry would be required to be pruned due to 
curtailing of funds is concerned, proportionate reduction against the actual 
requirement has been made in all the Plan schemes.  Ministry will not be able to take 
up projects to the envisaged targets due to pruning down of the budget provisions.  
 
2.9 When queried about the less allocation to the Ministry in spite of the fact that 
the food processing sector had a lot of potential to contribute to economy the 
representative from the Planning Commission stated  during the Oral Evidence held 
on 11 April, 2012: 
 
“Sir, the Planning Commission is fully seized with the importance of food 
processing sector.  I will give a small introduction ab out how we are 
approaching towards the Twelfth Plan.  In the Twelfth Plan, we have already 
finalised one manufacturing plan with the objective of inducing growth to the 
manufacturing sector.  The final version of the manufacturing plan is already 
uploaded in our website.  It is a part of the Twelfth Plan.  In the Plan itself, we 
have identified and we have placed food processing sector as an important 
sector, as a focus sector.  We have jotted down action lines on the basis of 
working group recommendations under the chairmanship of Secretary, Food 
Processing.  
 Coming back to the specific issue of this lower allocation, we are 
constrained with the availability of resources.  Within the availability of 
resources, the Planning Commission has other priorities a lso on the health 
sector, on the social sector, on the education sector.  After allocating 
resources on those priority and focus sectors, the remaining amount is 
allocated to the industry.  Within the industry, definitely we are giving prime 
focus to small  scale industries and food processing sector.  In fact in the 
Twelfth Plan, we are fully seized with its importance.  You have rightly 
appreciated the power of this sector in reducing the wastage.  Sir, the 
Planning Commission has started the chapter with that observation, with your 
observation.  You have rightly pointed out that this is the sector, apart from 
value addition and employment creation, reduction of wastage only can arrest 

the food inflation. I have been directed to tell that the Planning Commi ssion 
will give priority to this sector.  It is giving priority to this sector to the extent 
the resources are available”.   
 
 
 
2.10 Elaborating further, the witness stated : 
 
„Sir, it should not be right to observe that we are not paying attention to this  
sector.  We are constraint with the resources.  Only because of resource 
constraint we could not provide what we have allocated.  That also sometimes 
had fallen short of year -wise allocation.  But coming back to this year‟s 
allocation one thing I will hum bly submit that if we go by the RE, there is an 
increase of 20 per cent.  It is 550 to 660.  It is clearly 20 per cent.  First logic is 
resource constraint.  Second logic is that this Ministry is making a big transit to 
launch a major scheme of national mi ssion.  This being a Centrally sponsored 
Scheme, the shift from Central Scheme to Centrally sponsored Scheme and 
involvement of States.  That itself involves certain steps.  That is like 
preparatory activities and approval process.  It will take one minute  to explain 
the approval process.  It is approved by the Finance Ministry, then our Deputy 
Chairman, then internal Planning Commission then full Planning Commission 
and the NDC.  NDC also mentions about launching of new CSS.  Then the 
States are involved t heir consent for their share; providing their share and 
their activities are to be synchronised.  That itself has a gestation time and 
that has been taken care of by us that the Scheme will not be fully functional 
in the first half of present year.  And ab ove all, we are yet to give final 
estimation of resource availability during the Twelfth Plan not to talk of sector -
wise distribution.  I will personally make available your views to our Deputy 
Chairman so that the sector receives due weightage in allocation.   
 
Plan Allocations 
 
2.11 The following are the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actuals 
during the five years of the Eleventh Plan and BE for the current Fiscal: 
 

 (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Acutal expenditure 
 
Eleventh Plan  
250.00 
 
200.00 
 
182.00 2007-08 
2008-09 290.00 242.00 223.12 
2009-10 340.00 290.00 277.15* 
2010-11 400.00 400.00 266.38# 
2011-12 600.00 550.00 364.01@ 
Total 1880.00 1132.00 948.65 
Twelve Plan  
660.00 
 
- 
 
- 2012-13 
* Upto 31.01.2010 
#  Upto 31.01.2011 
@ Upto 31.01.2012  
 
 Scheme wise Outlay & Expenditure during 11 th Plan & Budget Estimates for 
2012-13 for the Ministry of Food Processing Industries is annexed. 
 
2.12 It may be noted that the approved Outlay for Eleventh Plan was of the tune of 
Rs. 4031.00 crore . However, the actual Allocation for the Eleventh Plan is Rs.1880 
crore only, which is about 47% of the approved Outlay for Eleventh Plan. When 
asked about the efforts made by the Ministry to persuade Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance to allocate app roved Outlay of Eleventh Plan to 
them, the Ministry stated that they had tried to convince t he Planning Commission 
about their  requirement. Minister of Food Processing Industries has also taken up 
the issue with Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance from time to time.  
The recommendations contained in the Reports of Committee on Agriculture have 
also been communicated from time to time to the Planning Commission and Ministry 
of Finance. 
  

2.13 Further, the Secretary of the Ministry during the course of Oral Evidence on 
11 April, 2012 stated, regarding the lower allocation and still lower expenditure: 
“Sir, it is true that the estimate that we had given to the Planning Commission 
of Rs. 1200 crores, that has been reduced to Rs. 660 crores.  But I would just 
like to mention two or three things.  Although the financial allocation has been 
reduced, but whenever we have gone for upscaling or expansion of any of our 
schemes, whether it was the Mega Food Park last year or the Cold Chain tha t 
we have got now or for the aba ttoirs where we have got recommendation only 
for the EFC, we have still to get Cabinet app roval.  Our scheme of work has 
not been reduced.  Similarly for the new initiatives, the National Mission on 
Food Processing by which we hope to greatly expand the reach of the food 
processing schemes, we have made a provision of Rs. 250 crore. This 
scheme was not there in the earlier years.  So, for this also we had received 
approval of both the Planning Commission and the Finance Ministry so that in 
January itself we could communicate to the States; they could take advance 
action”. 
 
“.......I would also l ike to mention that while we did mention Rs. 1200 crore, 
these were based on certain assumption. For example, we assumed that all 
the 39 cold chain projects which were approved last year, they will all come 
up.  But we have now seen that out of these 39, i n the case of 9 individual 
projects, they have missed their first deadline.  They were supposed to give 
their request for first instalment within 9 months of the date of approval.  So, 9 
schemes have defaulted on them and we have given them show cause notice.  
As we go along the implementation, Rs. 1200 crore was an optimistic 
forecast.  Maybe, when we go on a realistic basis, we may land up at Rs. 900 
or Rs. 1000 crore.   Fortunately this Ministry is a small Ministry.  Our budget 
requirement is small.  So,  to find Rs. 200 or Rs. 300 crore additional at the 
Revised Estimate stage or at the supplementary stage, I am quite confident 
that given the importance that the Planning Commission and Finance Ministry 
have given to our sector, the way they have supported  all our proposals for 
expansion, we will be able to find this money.  So our plan is that we will 
continue to implement our schemes with full zest and enthusiasm.  And once 
we are able to show progress, we will go back to the Planning Commission 
and the Finance Ministry”.    
 
2.14 When asked about the reduction from BE to RE in each and every year 
barring 2010 -11, the Secretary of the Ministry informed the Committee during the 
Oral Evidence:- 
“Sir, the bulk of the expenditure of this Department is on the subsidy schemes.  
The expenditure depends upon the receipt of proposals in a complete shape 
which meet our guidelines.  So the problem has been that whatever is our 
estimate of the number of applications that we will receive, the actual has 

been less except , as you rightly pointed out, in the year 2010 -11 where the 
RE was kept the same as BE and the actual expenditure was very close to the 
RE level.  2010 -11 was our best year in the last 5 years.  As I had mentioned 
in my opening presentation itself, our performance this year, that is in 2011-12 
has certainly been lower than 2010 -11 especially in the North East.  So the 
bulk of our shortfall in the RE has been in the North East.  But if we look at the 
reduction from BE to RE, the bulk of our reduction has tak en place in the 
scheme for infrastructure because in Mega Food Park, Cold Chain and mostly 
in abettors the number of proposals, the progress that we expected the 
schemes to make during the year, that progress was not there.  So, despite 
our best efforts, d espite our holding periodic reviews, giving guidance to the 
entrepreneurs, the actual performance has been lower than what was 
originally estimated.  This is the main reason”.   
 
 
2.15 In response to a subsequent query regarding the reasons extended by 
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for the reduced all ocations, the Ministry 
submitted that the Planning Commission has allocated resources to various 
Ministries after taking into consideration the resource available for the year 2012 -13 
and demands of v arious Ministries/Departments.  Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries has been allocated 10% higher allocation during the year 2012-13 over the 
budgetary provision of 2011-12. 
  
Preparation for the Twelfth Plan 
 
2.16 The Eleventh Five Year Plan has conclu ded on 31 March, 2012 and the 
Twelfth Plan has commenced w.e.f. 1 April, 2012.  The Eleventh Plan was 
characterised by inordinate delay i n its finalisation. In fact the  Eleventh Plan 
Document was released in June, 2008 i.e. in the Second Year of the Plan. 
Consequently the entire chain of planning and approvals went into disarray.  The 
implementation proper of the various Schemes by the ministries/d epartments could, 
therefore, gather full momentum only from third year onwards.  When asked as to 
what all was being done in order to avoid the kind of delays that took place in 
Eleventh Plan in a post evidence written submission, it was stated that the National 

Development Council (NDC) in its 56 th meeting held on October 22, 2011 approved 
the Approach Paper of th e Twelfth Plan (2012 -17) with „Faster, Sustainable and 
More Inclusive Growth‟ as the broad objective.  The Twelfth Plan Period is from 
01.04.2012 to 31.03.2017 and has commenced from April 1, 2012. 
 
2.17 The Twelfth Plan is being finalized by the Planning Commission and the same 
may take a few months.  In the meantime, budgetary allocations for the Annual Plan 
(2012-13) i.e. the first year of Twelfth Plan have been made for the ministries and 
departments, taking into consideration their priorities and thrus t in the Twelfth Plan, 
which were extensively deliberat ed in the related Twelfth Plan w orking groups and 
the concerned steering c ommittees.  It was further submitted that incidentally, the 
Eleventh Plan was approved by NDC in course of the first year of El eventh Plan (in 
its 54th meeting held on 19.12.2007). 
 
2.18 It is a well known fundamental of Economics that all projects require an 
optimal level of funding within the prescribed time frame to be viable and cost -
effective.  The Committee, therefore, desir ed to know that if financial cuts are made 
extensively and without any consideration for time frame, how did the Planning 
Commission think the proposed Schemes could be implemented successfully and 
also that such Schemes would deliver optimally. 
 
2.19 The Committee were informed in a post -evidence reply that it is true, as 
observed that adequate finances within a certain timeframe are one of the important 
elements for delivery of optimal outcome in case of a Scheme or project. 
 Due to various constraint s, prominent among them being the constraint in 
availability of resources and the need to meet the funding requirements of the 

flagship Schemes of the Government in the health, education and other social 
sectors, fund allocations to the various Ministries/ Departments have to be done after 
careful deliberations based on available information regarding performance.  The 
need for additional funds for implementing various programmes and projects are 
considered by the Ministry of Finance at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage depending 
on their financial and physical progress. 
Food Processing Sector 
  
2.20 Due to rapid strides made in the Agriculture and Allied Sectors, India 
has not only achieved self -sufficiency and food security but there is now a 
situation of surplus in some of the agriculture and allied –sector products.  
Inspite of this, the universal a vailability of the agriculture and allied products 
has not shown any improvement.  This unfortunate situation obtains mainly 
due to the fact that there is a severe lack of food processing facilities and 
infrastructure in the supply chain from the farm -gate to the consumers.  This 
results in substantial post harvest crop losses and also restricted supply 
because of short shelf life of these products.  Due to these handicaps, apart 
from the gaps in availability, in so far as consumers are concerned, the 
farmers are also deprived of adequate remuneration because of their low 
holding capacity.  The Committee have been, therefore, emphasizing in their 
successive Reports about the need for infusion of sufficient amount of capital 
in the food processing industry se ctor so that it is able to contribute optimally 
to the Indian economy.   
 
2.21 During the course of the Eleventh Plan the funding of the Ministry left a 
lot to be desired.  However, appreciating the fact that the Eleventh Plan was 

beset with inordinate del ays in approvals and clearances of Schemes leading 
to the fund flow not being optimized, the Committee had expected that the 
Ministry will get its due atleast in the Twelfth Plan.  Disappointingly, as the 
subsequent narrative will prove, the Planners and t he Government are yet to 
realize the true potential of the food processing industry sector and therefore, 
the genuine requirements of funds of the Ministry have been summarily 
treated.        
 
Analysis of Demands 
 
2.22 The Committee find from Demand No. 45  pertaining to the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries that for ongoing financial year  viz. 2012-13, a sum 
of Rs. 670.54 crore has been allocated to the Ministry.  The entire allocation is 
in the Revenue Section.   Out of this, Rs. 660.00 crore has been  allocated on 
the Plan Side which is 20% more than the RE figure of Rs. 550.00 crore in the 
year gone by.  On the Non -Plan Side, the Ministry have been allocated Rs. 
10.54 crore which is slightly higher than the last year‟s allocation of Rs. 10.09 
crore.  The allocation of the Ministry needs to be seen in the context of the 
Outlay of Rs. 1200.00 crore sought by them for Annual Plan 2012 -13.  One of 
the reasons for the drastic scaling down of the Ministry‟s proposal is their not 
so good spending record durin g the Eleventh Plan.  However, the Committee 
are aware that the Ministry, at best, can only be partially blamed for their 
financial performance in the Eleventh Plan.  The fact is that due to delays in 
planning and approvals, actual progress in the Schemes was possible only 
from the Third year of the Eleventh Plan.  The actual reason, therefore, for the 
Ministry not having their way with the allocation for Annual Plan 2012 -13 

appears to be that the Twelfth Plan Outlay is yet to be decided upon, hence, 
the allocation has been made as a stop gap and ad-hoc measure without going 
into the merits of the Ministry‟s requirements.  Since, an opportunity for 
enhancement of allocations would now arise only at the RE stage, which is still 
far off, the Committee feel tha t the problem of paucity of funds with the 
Ministry can be attended to by synergizing, wherever feasible, some of their 
Schemes with such other Schemes of other Ministries/Departments like RKVY 
of the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, where the St ates would 
have the discretion of utilising the funds for Centrally Sponsored Schemes of 
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries also. 
  
2.23 During the Eleventh Plan out of the approved Outlay of Rs. 4031.00 crore 
only Rs. 1880.00 crore could come the way of the Ministry.  This is hardly 47% 
of the approved Outlay.  Resultantly, the implementation of various Schemes 
either suffered or was staggered.  In both the eventualities, the ultimate 
sufferer was the developmental process.  The Committee strongly differ with 
the point of view of the Planning Commission, as conveyed to them during the 
Oral Evidence by the representative of the Commission, who stated that within 
the availability of resources the Commission had other priorities - the Health 
Sector, th e Social Sector, the Education Sector, etc.  The Commission, 
somehow, do not realize that with a little bit of handholding at this juncture, the 
contribution of the food processing industry sector to the economy can 
generate sufficient resources to contrib ute in a lasting manner to all these 
priority Sectors.    
  

2.24 In fact during the course of the examination of the Demand for Grants of 
the ongoing Fiscal, a question was put by the Committee to the Planning 
Commission.  They were asked that in view of t he well known fundamental 
economics that all projects require optimal level of funding within the 
prescribed timeframe to be viable and cost effective.  Therefore, how did the 
Planning Commission expect the proposed Schemes could be implemented 
successfully and would deliver optimally if financial cuts are made extensively 
and without any consideration for timeframe.  The Planning Commission had 
while concurring with the view of the Committee stated that adequate finances 
within a certain timeframe is one o f the important elements for delivery of 
optimal outcome for a Scheme or a Project.  The Committee expect that this 
convergence of views will definitely result in timely release of enhanced 
allocations for the Ministry of Food Processing Industries.                    
 
2.25 Before concluding on this aspect, the Committee would like to point out 
a major deficiency in the data submitted to them by the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries.  The Committee observed that at several places 
expenditure performance as on 31 January of that year has been furnished to 
them even for the Fiscals gone by.  The Committee are sure that the Ministry 
would be having the final figures for these years viz.  2009-10 and 2010 -11.   
The Committee while expressing their disapprov al of this practice adopted by 
the Ministry, desire that such mistake should not recur in future.  
  

CHAPTER – I I I 
 
SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS 
 
   (A) Scheme for Infrastructure Development 
 
The objective of the Scheme for Infrastructure Development is to provide 
infrastructure and common facilities which enhance value addition for use by small 
and medium enterprises, The Scheme has three components Viz. (a) Mega Food 
Parks (b) Cold Chain, Val ue Addition and Preservation Infrastructure and                
(c) Establishment of new/ Modernisation of existing Abattoirs. The budgetary 
allocation for the Scheme during the Eleventh Plan and current Fiscal of Twelfth Plan 
is as given in the table below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
 
2007-08 90.00 15.00 14.79 
2008-09 90.00 42.20 48.28 
2009-10 135.00 73.81 72.94* 
2010-11 137.50 120.89 88.67# 
2011-12 300.00 109.00 96.50@ 
2012-13 191.00 - - 
         *Till 31.01.2010 
  #Till 31.01.2011 
 @Till 31.01.2012 
  
 
 When asked about the circumstances necessitating drastic reduction at RE 
stage in all the five completed years of Eleventh Plan, the Ministry submitted the 
following written submission:  
 
(I)  During the year 2007 – 08, the EleventhPlan was not approved.  Therefore, 
expenditure was limited only to the extent of spillover liability of the 10 th Plan 
Infrastructure Development schemes, hence expenditure was low.   

(II)  During 2008 – 09, the Eleventh  Plan was approved in the middle of the 
financial year.  The projects under three components of the scheme could 
be approved towards the end of the financial year.  Therefore, only First 
instalment could be released to some of the approved projects. 
(III)  In the year 2009 – 10 and 2010 – 11, pace of expenditure on Mega Food 
Park Scheme was slow because in large number of projects, land matters, 
financial closure, etc., took long time to resolve the issues. During this 
period, further upscaling of cold chain  was not approved hence the 
expenditure in cold chain also was slow.  In modernization of abattoirs, land 
related issues, site disputes and local problems of municipal bodies resulted 
into slow progress. 
(IV)  In 2010 – 11, as pace of implementation had pi cked up, the extent of 
reduction at RE stage was very low.   In 2011 – 12, the BE was curtailed 
because upscaling of Mega Food Park Scheme was only partly allowed.  
The upscaling of cold chain could be approved in the First quarter of  
2011 – 12.  Projects  started drawing their eligible grant from the middle of 
the year.  Upscaling of abattoir component could not be approved.   
(V) Further it may be seen that in successive years, the pace of expenditure on 
Infrastructure Scheme is showing a steady rising trend. 
(VI) Ministry have spent Rs. 170.17 crore against RE provision of Rs. 189 crore 
till 31.03.2012. 
  
When asked about the proposal to ensure that the allocated amount of Rs. 191 
crore is fully utilized in 2012 -13 and thereby funds escape pruning at RE s tage the 
Ministry replied that as regards plan to utilize BE provision of Rs. 191.00 crore in 
2012–13 is concerned, following measures will ensure not only utilization of allocated 
amount of Rs. 191.00 crore but Ministry will be able to utilize furthermore  and hence 
will ask for additional allocation at supplementary stage.  
(I) 15 new Mega Food Parks have been approved by the Government 
which are going to be approved during the course of year.  Some of 
these projects will require first tranche of first installment. 

(II) Several issues pertaining to first and second phase projects have been 
resolved and pace of expenditure has substantially improved.   
(III)  The cold chain projects approved in second phase are in full scale 
implementation.  Government has recently approved additional 30 
projects.  These projects will require substantial additional funds. 
    (IV) Ministry have also proposed for upscaling of the abattoir scheme.  EFC 
has recommended the proposal and the same is being placed before 
the CCEA.  This will result in additional 50 abattoir projects. 
 
3.2 The following information was furnished in writing by the Ministry to a query 
about component-wise reasons for the reduced allocations: 
 
(i) Mega Food Park 
 
During the Eleventh Plan, provisions hav e been made for 30 Mega Food 
Parks, out of which, 10 Mega Food Parks have been taken up during the first phase. 
EFC approved the upscaling of Scheme to take up 5 more projects during Eleventh 
Plan. This had been approved by CCEA in its meeting held on 18 November, 2010. 
 
3.3 When asked about the status of the Mega Food Parks approved in the first 
phase the Ministry replied that in Patanjali Herbal Mega Food Park, 9 units have 
become functional apart from the common facilities.  Similarly, in Srini MFP, the 
common facilities are functional also one unit has become functional and 
construction is in progress in other two units. The parks have not become fully 
functional as issues relating to lands, change of land use, provision of sub lease, 
financial closure and trust deficit in stakeholders are causing delays.    
About all the Ten Mega Food Parks the Ministry replied in writing that i t is 
difficult to indicate the time frame by which all 10 Mega Food Parks approved in the 
first phase will become fully function al.  Ministry are closely reviewing the 

performance and trying to resolve issues by taking them up with the State 
Governments, financial institutions and other Stakeholders. 
 
3.4 When asked whether any Mega Food Park Project has been proposed by the 
Ministry in the North-Eastern Region and other remote and hilly areas of the Country.  
The Ministry replied that one  Mega Food Park has been approved in the first phase 
to be set up in Nalbari in Assam.  Construction work of the same is going on.  So far 
over Rs . 21 crore has been spent.   In the second phase, Ministry have further 
approved setting up of a Mega Food Park in Tripura.  Construction on the same has 
also commenced.  In first phase, Patanjali Herbal MFP has been approved to be set 
up in Haridwar in Uttarakhand.   
Ministry have further received proposals for setting up of MFP in Jammu & 
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and other NE States.  These proposals are under 
process. 
 
3.5 When asked about the proposed fund allocations to Mega Food Parks during 
the course of the Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The Ministry replied that for the Fiscal year 
2012-13 it is Rs. 86 crore and for the remainder of the XIIth Plan this is yet to be 
finalized. 
 
3.6 When asked about the delays in operationalisation of Mega Food Park in fir st 
phase and the revision of completion schedule from two years in phase one to four 
years in phase two the Ministry replied that i n the first Phase the Government had 
approved 10 Mega Food Park Projects in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttrakhand, West 
Bengal & Assam in September, 2008. Scheme Guidelines were formulated and EOI 
was invited in October, 2008. Following the prescribed procedure „in principle‟ 

approval was accorded to 10 pro jects on 16 -12-2008. Out of the 10 projects 
accorded „In Principle‟ approval, only 5 Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) of the States 
of Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Uttrakhand, Maharashtra and Assam could meet the 
prescribed conditions to whom final approval was  accorded on 27 -03-2009. 
Subsequently, the SPV of Maharashtra withdrew from the project stating its inability 
to implement it. Later on the SPV of U.P. also withdrew from the Scheme and the 
SPV of Punjab and Karnataka could not meet the prescribed conditio ns for final 
approval. In case of all these four States, „in principle/final approval‟ had to be 
cancelled and rebidding process had to be initiated for selection of suitable SPVs.  
 Although, prescribed timeline for implementation of the project is 24 months 
from the release of first installment none of the approved projects could meet this 
deadline largely due to the reasons stated below:- 
 
i. Financial Closure of the Project (Sanction of Term Loan):  
In case of some projects, sanction of term loan by Banks has taken more than 
a year which caused severe delay in commencement of project implementation. 
Financial closure (sanction of term loan) is also a critical milestone for the project for 
availing Second tranche of first installment of approved grant assistance. Thus, due 
to delay in financial closure, some of the approved projects could not avail this grant 
even after more than a year since final approval.  
ii  Land related issues 
In several projects issues related to land ( like permission for sub leasing, transfer of 
land, details of the lease agreement between the SPV and the State Agency giving 
the land) have held up the implementation of the project. 

 To expedite the matters pending with various S tate Governments, the Ministry 
have been taking up the matter with the State Government, from time to time. Also 
for effective monitoring of the progress, Review Meetings at the level of Secretary 
involving the SPVs and representatives of the State Governm ents are held 
periodically. Based on the discussions in the review meetings, further follow up 
actions are initiated by the Ministry, in a time bound manner. In spite of proactive role 
of the Ministry, the implementation has been delayed due to the reasons  stated 
above. 
 No such decision for the revision of timeline for completion of the project has 
been taken by the Ministry so far.  However, projects have been delayed beyond the 
period of 24 months and extensions are given wherever warranted. 
 
3.7 In respo nse to a query regarding status of implementation of Mega Food 
Parks in North East India, the Secretary replied: 
“About North-East you had asked some questions, so far as Mega Food Parks 
is concerned, as you have rightly mentioned, there are two Mega Food Parks 
which have come up or coming up – one in Assam and the other is in Tripura. 
In Assam, the major problem was in land. At the time when the project was 
approved, AIDC had given the land and when it went for financial clearance, 
NETFI has raised the obj ection that the land was still in the name of 
subsidiary and that process took a lot of time. So, only in the last week of 
March, the NETFI has released their loan of Rs.2.7 crore and we have 
released Rs.13.5 crore, which the Park is entitled for  under ou r guidelines. 
We have actually worked very closely with the Government of Assam in 
resolving the land issue and in getting this fund released. In the case of 
Tripura, their request has come for the second tranche of instalment of Rs.10 
crore. There are som e minor defects in their proposal, and we hope that very 
soon we will able to release this money to Tripura. We definitely wants these 
projects to move fast and we are very closely monitoring them.  
  
We have to release the funds based on our guidelines and at each 
stage, we insist that the promoters spend a certain sum of the money which is 
equivalent to our share, because only then we can ensure that our money is 
properly utilized. This is common for the whole country and it is not for the 
North-East alone. 
  

Finally, you had mentioned about the cold chain, we had sanctioned 
four schemes for the North-East, out of which only one in Mizoram had shown 
sufficient progress, that we could release the first instalment to them. In the 
other two projects, becaus e of lack of progress, we could not release the 
money. Our Economic Advisor, who is looking into this, has gone to Guwahati; 
she had met all the four promoters; we are there to help and guide them 
  
In fact in the Twelfth Plan also, we are planning under t he National 
Mission to have some special provisions for the North -East so that we can 
have better utilization.  This is a matter which we are also very concerned and 
we will continue to make efforts to improve the utilization of money in the 
North-East”.  
 
Implementation of Budget Announcements (2011-12) 
3.8 The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2011-12 stated that to address the 
problems relating  to bottlenecks in retailing capacity and inadequate availability of 
vegetables and fruits despite their gr owing production, during 2011 -12 approval is 
being given to set up 15 more Mega Food Parks. The status thereof indicated that  
CCEA at its meeting held on 25 October, 2011 approved setting up of 15 new Mega 
Food Parks in addition to ongoing projects. 
When  queried about the action taken during the interregnum  between the 
Finance Minister„s Statement and 25 October, 2011 the Ministry informed that 
immediately after budget announcement, EFC note was prepared and sent for 
comments for all concerned Ministries  / Departments on 04.05.2011.  After obtaining 
comments of various Departments proposal was considered by EFC in its meeting 
dated 22.07.2011.  
Based on the recommendations of EFC, draft CCEA note was prepared and 
circulated as per the laid down procedure on 24.08.2011 and after seeking 
competent authority approval, CCEA note was placed for consideration of the CCEA 
on 25.10.2011.  Thus, from February 2011 to October 2011, the observance of the 

procedure took time.  Ministry has very closely followed up to ensure approval at the 
earliest. 
 Regarding the action taken consequent upon CCEA approval in October, 
2011, the Ministry have issued EOI notice on 21.11.2011 fixing February, 2012 as 
the last date for submission of the proposals. 
 To a pointed query about  the roadmap for making these 15 new Mega Food 
Parks fully operational it was submitted by the Ministry that 63 proposals have been 
received in furtherance of the EoI notice which are being appraised by the Project 
Management Agencies. It is likely that in -principle approval to eligible proposals will 
be accorded by the month of July, 2012. These projects will take 3 -4 years in normal 
circumstances for getting fully operational. 
3.9 When asked about the problems besetting the Mega Food Parks Scheme 
scrutiny, Ministry of Food Processing Industries stated during Oral Evidence on 11 
April, 2012: 
“In the case of MFPs, out of 30, the approval was given in three phases. The 
first phase was for 10; the second was for 5 and the last phase was for 15, 
which was appro ved only in October -November last year, by the CCA. As I 
had mentioned earlier, for these new 15, we hope to finalize the proposals by 
July of this year. Coming back to the earlier 15, the major difficulty that we are 
facing are land-related issues – either there is some litigation problem in land 
or there is problem in permission of sub -lease or there is some other issue. In 
the year 2011 -12, we made major progress in 3 -4 projects‟ land. One is 
Assam. In the case of Assam, the problem was that the land whi ch was 
leased to MFP was leased by the Assam Industrial Development Corporation, 
AIDC, a wholly owned subsidiary called Assam Synthetics. Assam Synthetics 
was the actual owner of the land. For certain reasons this approval of land 
from Assam Synthetics to AIDC took two years. We had constantly followed it 
up with the State Government and finally we got the transfer done; the NOC 
was issued and only in March, the North Eastern Development Finance 
Institution, NEDFI, were able to give them the land, and we we re able to give 
them the second instalment. 
In Jharkhand, the land was given by the RIADA, the State Industrial 
Development Organization; and they had given the land on the condition that 
you cannot sub-lease the land. Once again we pursued it at every level in the 

Government and it took us two year s; and late last year, the Cabinet finally 
approved the amendment to the lease condition so that they could sub -lease. 
If you would appreciate, in the case of MFPs, the company that is developing 
it, will have to lease the land to the food processors who w ill take up individual 
units in the food park. So, sub-leasing has to be permitted.  
Similarly, in the case of Karnataka, there were some issues of land; 
some problems were there. Finally only earlier this year, we were able to 
resolve these problems. In s ome cases, there have been problems in the 
banks clearing the financial approval. This was one of the reasons why the 
project in West Bengal took considerable time, in Jhangipur. These are the 
kinds of problems. We review them constantly; we are in touch w ith the State 
Governments. Apart from the amendment in the guidelines that we have 
made, one of the things as I mentioned, is that, before we give final approval, 
now we are going to insist that the approvals should come from the financial 
institutions so that only projects which are very clear and firm will be given 
final approval. We hope this will improve the pace of implementation”. 
 
 Elaborating further on the remedial steps being taken, the witness added: 
„One more step that we have taken is, as per the guidelines, there is a 
representative of the Government of India who is nominated on the Board of 
the MFP Company. In practice, our officers have found it very difficult to get 
away fro the headquarters and go and attend the Board meetings at short 
notice in different parts of the country. Moreover, since many of these issues 
involve the State governments also, we find it would be more appropriate that 
there is a representative of the State Governments on the Boards of these 
companies so that there is b etter coordination between the State Government 
and the implementation agencies. We have taken a decision on that‟. 
3.10 When asked about the representation of the State Governments on MFP 
Board‟s as on date the Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing Industries replied:- 
“No, except in projects where the State Government has an equity 
participation like in the case of Assam  where they have come in because they 
are participating in the equity and another project was in Orissa which we 
have cleared recently – one of the Orissa PSUs, infrastructure dev elopement 
company, is going to provide equity; they will have nominees. But if the State 
Government does not give representatives, the Government of India nominee 
will be the State Government representative. We have written to all the State 
Governments recently; we have asked them to nominate their representatives 
of the State Government. We hope that this step, along with our National 
Mission on Food, which will involve the State Governments in our schemes, 
will also help in faster implementation of the projects”.  

 
3.11 When asked about financial implications in respect of each of the Mega Food 
Park and other relevant details the Ministry replied that as regards financial 
implication, each Mega Food Park is elig ible for grant in aid @ 50% of the eligible 
project cost, subject to a maximum of Rs. 50 crore (75% for North Eastern and 
Himalayan States).  The projectwise admissible amount of grant in aid will, however, 
be worked out while according the final approval to the projects. 
(ii) Cold Chain, Value-Addition and Preservation Infrastructure 
 
3.12 The objective of this component of Scheme for Infrastructure development is 
to provide integrated and complete cold chains and preservation facilities without any 
break, from farm gate to the consumer.    
During the Eleventh Plan, Ministry has approved 49 projects.  10 projects 
were approved in 2008 – 09. Out of this, 8 projects are into commercial production.  
39 projects have been approved in 2011 – 12 which are at diff erent stages of 
implementation.  In view of the „in -principle‟ approval accorded by the Planning 
Commission for further upscaling the scheme, EFC has recommended for upscaling 
the scheme to take up 30 additional projects amounting to grant in aid of Rs. 23 1 
crore.  The concurrent evaluation of this scheme has reported substantive increase 
in shelf life, reduction in wastages and value addition. 
The Working Group on Food Processing Industries in its Report has 
recommended for continuation of the Cold Chain, Value Addition & Preservation 
Infrastructure Scheme for horticulture produce during the Twelfth Plan as Central 
Sector Scheme. The Working Group has also recommended that for non -horticulture 
produce, this component will form part of the proposed Centrally  Sponsored Scheme 

of National Mission on Food Processing.  The Working Group has recommended for 
taking up 140 new projects during Twelfth Plan. 
3.13 When asked why no projects were approved in 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 the 
Ministry replied that the proposal of the Ministry for setting up 30 projects in Eleventh 
Plan was considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting 
held on 19 March, 2008. The EFC recommended implementation of 10 integrated 
Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure projects in the first phase.  
EFC further recommended that a review will be carried out after one year, once 
these projects achieve some progress by way of financial closure and starting of 
construction activity.  Further decision on upscaling wil l be taken once these models 
are demonstrated to be successful. Based on the progress of implementation of 10 
projects in first phase, EFC in its meeting held on 15.4.2010 has recommended 
further upscaling of the scheme to take up additional projects to th e extent of 
Eleventh plan outlay of Rs. 210.00 crore.  The recommendations of EFC were 
approved by Hon‟ble Finance Minister and the same was communicated to the 
Ministry by Department of Expenditure on 11.6.2010.  In furtherance of the approval 
by the Fina nce Minister, the Ministry issued an Expression of Interest and received 
164 proposals.  Out of this, only 39 proposals were approved in April, 2011.  As 
such, no proposal was approved during 2009 -10 and 2010-11.  Regarding the status 
of the remaining two projects approved in 2008-09 the Ministry replied that out of the 
remaining 2 projects approved in 2008 -09, the project of M/s. Ascon Agro is likely to 
commence commercial production in April, 2012 and that of M/s. Atharvass Traders 
is likely to start comm ercial production in May, 2012. The delay in implementation of 
the project of M/s. Atharvass is due to change of location & that of M/s. Ascon Agro 
is due to labour unrest.  

3.14 When asked to furnish the details regarding the extent of reduction in 
wastages and value addition as brought out by the concurrent evaluation the Ministry 
replied in writing that t he concurrent evaluation conducted by IL&FS CDI (Project 
management Agency)  did not quantify reduction in wastages and value addition. 
However, the agency has indicated that the impact of first phase of the projects is 
substantive value addition, reduction in wastage and enhancement in farmers 
income.  The integrated cold chain will improve the shelf life and quality while 
reducing huge wastages and ensuring its supply to distant domestic and international 
market at competitive price.  An efficient cold chain would result in enhanced round 
the year availability with reduced cost of intermediation including that of distribution 
and would thereby prom ote increased consumption. The Ministry are planning to 
conduct another evaluation shortly to measure the impact of 49 projects currently 
implemented/being implemented by them. 
 Regarding the roadmap for taking up 140 new projects in the Twelfth Plan the 
Ministry replied that the number of new projects can be firmed up only after the 
Budget for Twelfth Plan is finalized.  For the year 2012 -13, 30 new projects are 
expected to be approved by June, 2012. 
(iii) Establishment of new/Modernisation of existing Abattoirs 
3.15 This component aims at providing facilities for scientific and less painful 
slaughtering, chilling, rendering plant, effluent treatment plant, drainage, better 
hygiene, safety and retail cold chain management. Ten Projects were approved for 
the first phas e of this component.  Proposal for upscaling this component of the 
Scheme is under consideration.  The current status of first phase projects  and their 
likely dates of completion is as under:- 

Status of Abattoirs Project 
 
Sl . 
No. 
Name of 
Executor State 
Total 
Project 
Cost  
(Rs. in 
lakhs) and 
scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Total 
Amount 
Sanctioned 
(Rs. in 
lakhs) 
Total 
amount 
disbursed 
till date  
(Rs.in 
lakhs) 
Likely date 
of 
Completion 
1  Dimapur 
Municipal 
Council 
Nagaland 2288 1437.50 1402.17 Completed 
2  Ahmednagar 
Goat 
Federation 
Co-op Ltd 
Maharashtra 2352 851.02 851.02 Completed 
3  Greater 
Hyderabad 
Municipal 
Corporation 
A.P. 3284 
30.4.2010 
1478.98 591.59 2012-13 
4  Municipal 
Corporation, 
Shimla  
H.P. 1966 
30.4.2010 
1142.00 114.20 2012-13 
5  Kolkata 
Municipal 
Corporation 
West 
Bengal 
2845 
30.4.2010 
1287.34 128.73 2012-13 
6  Jammu 
Municipal 
Corporation 
J&K 2300 
30.4.2010 
1500.00 150.00 2013-14 
7  J&K Sheep 
and Sheep 
products 
Development 
Board, 
Srinagar 
J&K 2800 
25.9.2010 
1410.00 141.00 2013-14 
8  Municipal 
Corporation, 
Patna 
Bihar 2638 
30.4.2010 
1097.21 109.72 2013-14 
9 Municipal 
Corporation, 
Ranchi 
Jharkhand 1867 
30.4.2010 
864.595 86.46 2013-14 
10 Modern 
Abattoir at 
Majhitar, East 
Sikkim 
Sikkim 926.36 
17.11.2011 
616.72 - 2013-14 
 
3.16 The Committee desired to know about the details of abattoirs to be 
modernized/newly established in the Twelfth Plan period. In response the Ministry 

replied that a s per recommendation received at the EFC meeting held on 
28.02.2012, the proposal for setting  up new abattoirs/ modernization of existing 
abattoirs is being sent to CCEA for approval. This proposal is expected to fund 
approximately 25 new abattoirs and modernize 25 existing Abattoirs (at a cost of Rs. 
240.25 Crores) as well as complete eight runni ng projects (at a cost of Rs. 74.83 
Crores) and Project management Agency fees of Rs. 15.75 Crores. Each of these 
projects is likely to be completed in 18 months. However, small projects for 
modernization are likely to be completed in 12 months. The scheme  as on date is 
under consideration of CCEA. 
 
3.17 When asked about the reasons for inordinate delays in completion of 08 
Abattoirs out of 10 projects the Ministry stated in a post-evidence submission that the 
following are the reasons for delay in executio n of the projects of modernization of 
abattoirs:- 
  
(i) The Eleventh Plan was approved quite late and hence the scheme was 
approved in 2009. 
(ii) Delay in allocation of land for Abattoirs by State Government due to local 
agitations and objections of local people. 
(iii) Delay in appointment of Project Management Consultant by the Project 
Promoters. 
(iv)  Delay in tender process by the Project Promoters for turnkey contactor. 
(v) Lack of availability of Technical Expertise.  
 
3.18 Asked further on what grounds upscaling of the compo nent is being 
considered when even the first phase projects are incomplete  and how it will be 
ensured that the deadlines are not staggered any further the Ministry intend to 
ensure that the deadlines are not staggered any further by engaging more Project 

Management Agencies to monitor the proposed 25 new abattoirs and modernization 
of 25 existing abattoirs. Apart from this, the Ministry regularly take review meetings to 
ensure that the deadlines are adhered to and delays are controlled.  the Ministry 
replied in writing that the upscaling is being considered on the following grounds:-  
1. India is one of the leading producers of fruits and vegetables, milk, meat, 
marine products and many other agricultural commodities in the world.  
2. By-products utilization and w aste disposal are important activities of the meat 
sector.  
3. Among the meat producing sector, poultry is one of the fastest growing 
segments. India has ample resources when it comes to poultry sector.   
4. Nearly 3600 municipal slaughterhouses exist in country  catering to domestic 
market. But these are generally antiquated and lack modern equipments, 
proper sanitation and hygienic, lack facilities for scientific slaughtering of 
animals and for production of clean, wholesome meat of high quality, which is 
required for domestic consumption and exports. Due to this, issues of 
availability of hygienic meat is important to domestic consumers as well as for 
exports. 
5. The meat and poultry processing sector when organized on scientific lines, 
can generate much larger emp loyment in rearing of animals and value added 
processing of meat/ poultry and utilization of slaughterhouse by -products for 
allied industries. This would serve the dual purpose of improving family 
incomes allied industries and also making available protein  diets locally in the 
villages. Poor quality meat and unhygienic conditions are major areas of 
concern in the domestic meat industry. There is a great potential to increase 
India‟s export provided quality of products and consistency of supply in 
maintained. 
6. Ministry of Food Processing Industries has received an overwhelming 
response from the State Governments for setting up of new and 
modernization of existing Abattoirs in different parts of the country.  
(B) Scheme for Technology Upgradation, Establishment and Modernisation 
 of Food Processing Industries 
 
3.19 The objectives of the Scheme for Technology, Upgradation, Establishment 
and Modernisation  of FPI are to increase the level of processing, reduction of 
wastage, value addition, enhance the income of farmers as well as increase exports 
thereby resulting in overall economic development. Budgetary allocations under the 
Scheme are as under: 

(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
 
2007-08 72.00 113.50 119.30 
2008-09 90.00 91.50 96.87 
2009-10 60.00 82.51 82.49* 
2010-11 81.00 106.00 105.67 
2011-12 98.00 185.47 137.76@ 
2012-13 100.00     -     - 
* Upto 31.03.2010, @ Upto 31.01.2012 
 
It may be noted that Revised Estimates during the five years of the Eleventh 
Plan are showing an increase over respective Budget Estimates. The Actual 
Expenditure during the years 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 are even higher than respective 
REs.  
The Scheme for Technology Upgradation, Establishment, Modernisation of Food 
Processing Industries has been subsumed under National Mission for Food 
Processing from 1 April, 2012 onwards.  In response to query regarding the 
applications pending with the Min istry and how they proposed to liquidate the 
pendency, the Ministry replied that  on 31 March 2012, there are 2613 applications 
pending for disbursal of grant. It is expected to liquidate the pendency by 2013 -14 
subject to availability of funds. 
 
3.20 The Ministry in response to a query as to why sufficient fund allocations for 
the above mentioned Scheme are not made at the BE stage, have stated that 
allocation of funds at the time of formulation of Annual Plans are decided by the 
Planning Commission.   This  Ministry have been requesting for high allocation of 
funds for the Scheme. At the time of formulation of the Eleventh Plan, the Ministry 
sought Rs.1492.00 crore for the Scheme. However, only Rs.600.00 crores was 
approved as allocation for the entire Eleve nth Plan.  Even during the annual plan 
finalization during the individual years, insufficient funds were provided by the 

Planning Commission, resulting in huge backlog.  Additional funds had to be 
provided by the Ministry subsequently through supplementary  grants /re -
appropriation every year.  
 
 
(C) Scheme for Upgradation of Quality of Street Food 
 
3.21 A new Scheme for „Upgradation of quality of Street Food‟ was proposed in the 
Eleventh Plan. The Scheme has two components Viz. “Safe Food Town and the 
Food Street”. The Scheme is aimed at improving the quality of street food being 
served and laying down standards. This Scheme has not been approved by Ministry 
of Finance.  
 
3.22 In response to a query as to why the Ministry have not accorded their 
approval to the Scheme and the reason for discontinuation in the Twelfth Plan the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries replied that they have contemplated Plan 
Scheme for “Upgradation of Quality of Street Food” during Eleventh Five Year Plan. 
This was initiated in t he context of new Food Safety & Standards Act, 2006 to take 
care of the concerns of street food vendors and to address safety & hygiene issues 
of street food.  However, the scheme was not supported by Planning Commission 
and the Department of Expenditure.  The Working Group on Food Processing 
Industries for the Twelfth Plan, in its draft report, has felt that Upgradation of quality 
of street food may be more appropriately handled by Department of Housing & 
Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA).  Thus, MFPI have forwarded the copy of the draft 
guideline and the final version of the CCEA Note prepared by them to Department of 
HUPA for suitable consideration. The Department of HUPA has prepared a draft 

Note for the Cabinet proposing introduction of the Street Vendor s (Protection of 
Livelihoods and Regulation of Street Vending) Bill, 2012 which has been supported 
by this Ministry. 
 
(D) Scheme for Quality Assurance, Codex Standards and Research and 
Development and other Promotional Activities. 
 
3.23 The objectives of the above mentioned Schemes are to motivate Food 
Processing Industries for adoption of food safety and quality assurance mechanisms, 
to prepare them to face the global competition in international trade in post WTO, to 
enable adherence to stringent quality  in hygiene norms, to enhance product 
acceptance by overseas buyers, to keep Indian Industry technologically abreast of 
international best practices and that the end product/outcome/findings of R&D work 
to benefit food processing Industries sector. Budgetary allocations under the Scheme 
are as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
 
2007-08 18.00 19.30 15.12 
2008-09 18.00 19.00 17.37 
2009-10 30.00 32.08 29.07* 
2010-11 38.00 31.40 21.61# 
2011-12 45.00 43.52 22.62 
2012-13 35.00 - - 
* Upto 31.03.2010, # Upto 31.01.2011 
 
3.24 In response to a query as to why the Ministry have not been able to fully utilize 
the allocated funds in all the five years of Eleventh Plan, the Ministry replied that BE / 
RE was proposed as per Eleventh Plan projections, but the Scheme for Eleventh 
Plan was approved during the middle of 2008 -09. Hence, the actual expenditure was 
attributed to committed liabilities as well as new proposals as per Tenth Plan 
guidelines (which were much lower than the Eleventh Plan). Also the shortfall was 
due to non -receipt of sufficient number of eligible and viable proposals from general 

and NE areas. However, 2010 -11 RE was fully utilized. In 2012 -13, the actual 
expenditure is likely to be closer to the RE. 
 (E) Scheme for Strengthening of Institutions 
3.25 The objective of the Scheme for Strengthening of Institutions are to strengthen 
Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology, State Nodal Agencies(SNA), setting 
up of National Meat  and Poultry and Processing Board, setting up of National Wine 
Board and setting up of National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and 
Management(NIFTEM). Budgetary allocations under the Scheme are as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
 
2007-08 35.10 26.10 26.51 
2008-09 54.00 53.50 52.71 
2009-10 64.00 92.08 83.59* 
2010-11 132.00 127.50 128.66# 
2011-12 132.50 117.50 98.42@ 
2012-13 80.00 - - 
*Upto 31.03.2010, #Upto 31.01.2011 @ upto 31-01-12 
 
In response to a query about the reasons for under utilization of budgetary 
allocations during last year, the Ministry replied that, the shortfall in utilization of 
budgetary allocation under this Scheme was due to the fact that land was not made 
available to the Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology (IICPT) on account of 
some ongoing legal matter.    Out of the total allocation of Rs. 80 crores during the 
year 2012 -13, the major allocation i.e. Rs. 58 cores is for NIFTEM.   The annual 
allocation will be utilized for design development and procurement of equipment for 
research labs, IT work in research lab, pilot plant and remaining portion of library, 
academic and administrative blocks, etc.   With the first academic session in offing 
during the ye ar, the Institute is likely to have a host of activities requiring sufficient 
budgetary assistance.    

 During the year 2012-13, the lower budgetary allocation has been proposed 
as per requirement of the Scheme.  
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and 
Management(NIFTEM) 
 
3.26 National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management 
(NIFTEM) is being set up as an Institute of global excellence in education and 
research in the areas of food technology. The Institute is being set up at Kundli, Distt. 
Sonepat, Haryana. CCEA had approved setting up of the Institute in 31.08.2006 at 
an estimated cost of Rs. 244.60 crore. CCEA in its meeting held on 28.04.2011 
approved the Revised Cost Estimate of Rs. 479.94.  
3.27 NIFTEM has missed deadlines regarding start of academic co urses for two 
years in running new. The Committee, therefore, wanted to know the present status 
of the Institute. In response the Ministry informed that the infrastructural facilities for 
commencement of first academic session with B. Tech (Food Technology  and 
Management) & M.Tech Courses have been completed. The required Faculty has 
also been recruited. The Institution is fully geared to commence first academic 
session from July, 2012 onwards.  UGC constituted an expert committee to make on 
the spot assess ment of the facilities in the NIFTEM campus based on the 
AICTE/UGC norms. The expert committee visited the campus on 28-29 March, 2012. 
The committee has submitted its report to the UGC and after this is examined and 
approved by the Govt. of India NIFTEM w ill be granted De Novo deemed to be 
university status. As soon as this approval is received admission of students in the 
first academic year will be made from AIEEE examination conducted by CBSE.  In 
the meanwhile short term training courses have started, Action is also being taken to 
start the other activities like Consultancy, SME, Upgradation, etc. 

3.28 Elaborating futher in the matter Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries stated during the Oral Evidence:-  
“As I have mentioned earlier, NIFTE M in terms of the approval we have taken 
from Cabinet, will be a deemed university and for that purpose we require 
approval from the Ministry of HRD which in turn gives it on the basis of 
recommendation of UGC.  And, because NIFTEM is a technical institute  
giving degrees in Food Technology and Management, we also require the 
recommendation of the AICTE.  We were hoping that we will complete this 
process last year itself but given the kind of formats and the kind of 
procedures that AICTE and UGC have we have  taken time to complete this 
process.  The major difficulty we faced was in getting adequate faculty.  
Although, we have selected most of the faculty but some of them are 
likely to join only after they complete current academic year in their current 
assignments.  This was one of the sticking points between us and the UGC.  
That is why, the visit of the Expert Committee was delayed.  But I had 
mentioned that we have been able to finalise the selection of almost all our 
academic staff, which are required imme diately as also minimum required as 
per the AICTE regulations.  They are higher than the UGC regulations.  So, 
we will automatically satisfy the UGC regulations also.  So because of this it 
has taken time.  As I had mentioned, on 28 th March team came and v isited 
where I had also interaction with them.  We are quite hopeful that we will get 
the approval.  But, of course, till that approval come, we cannot start the 
courses”.   
 
3.29 Queried further as to whether the infrastructure of the Institute has been 
completed, the Secretary replied during the Oral Evidence: 
“It is not fully complete.  It will take another year or so.  But it is enough for the 
first year courses.  Right now, we only have the first year courses.  There was 
never any problem with regard t o the physical infrastructure.  The only 
problem was with the faculty.  Since, the physical infrastructure is partly ready, 
we are making use of it by having short -term courses.  We are also using the 
faculty for certain consultancy purposes to provide con sultancy to industry.  
We are drawing up plans for assistance to small and medium enterprise.  So, 
we are making use of the faculty and the physical infrastructure to the extent 
we can.  But certainly the biggest chunk of our plan and activities is to star t 
the B.tec and M.tec courses.  We do hope that we will get the approval of the 
AICTE, UGC and the Ministry so that we can start these in July or in August 
this year”.   
 
 
 

(F)      New Schemes 
3.30 When asked about the New Schemes introduced in 2011 -12 and to be 
introduced in Twelfth Plan, the Ministry stated that the S cheme for „Upgradation of 
Quality of Street Food‟ was allocated Rs.5.00 crore in 2011 – 12, but was not 
implemented as the same was not supported by the Ministry of Finance and the 
Planning Commission.  As stated previously in this Report, based on the 
recommendations of the Twelfth Plan Working Group, Ministry have requested 
Department of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA) to consider 
implementation of this Scheme.  HUPA has inti mated that this is being considered.  
Three new Schemes are envisaged for the Twelfth Plan:- 
(i) National Mission on Food Processing. 
(ii) Innovation Fund Scheme. 
(iii) Venture Capital Fund. 
 
3.31 Asked about the salient features of  the New Scheme viz. National Mission for 
Food Processing the Ministry and the improvements that it will bring the Ministry 
informed the Committee that t he NMFP is being implemented by States from 
1.4.2012 for continuing schemes of Eleventh Plan. All the schemes under proposed 
NMFP will be cen trally sponsored scheme (CSS).This new scheme will bring the 
following improvements: 
 
(i)    Decentralized approach: It has been realized that Ministry‟s next leap 
forward in terms of ensuing requisite growth impetus and value addition to the 
sector can only be achieved through a process of effective decentralization by 
inviting all the States and UTs for implementation of its schemes through 
National and State Food Processing Mission. 

(ii)   Greater role of State/UT:  The Mission would facilitate in having flexibility in 
the selection of beneficiaries, location of projects etc. for the development of 
food processing sector in the State. 
(iii)   Better outreach: National Mission on Food Processing is likely to reach out 
to a much larger number of beneficiarie s through State Mission for better 
coverage across the States/UTs.   
(iv)   Effective Supervision and Monitoring: The proposed NMFP will ensure 
better implementation, supervision & monitoring and management of all the 
programmes intended for beneficiaries for the food processing sector. 
 
Scheme for Infrastructure Development 
3.32 The Scheme for Infrastructure Development is the most important 
Scheme of the Ministry.  It consists of three components viz. (i) Mega Food 
Parks, (ii) Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation of Infrastructure and 
(iii) Establishment of New/Modernisation of Existing abattoirs.  The Scheme 
was allocated a sum of Rs. 752.50 crore for the Eleventh Plan but actually a 
sum of Rs. 360.70 crore only was released.  The much referred de lays in 
planning and approvals and the consequent delayed releases of funds, etc. 
played their part in the sub -optimal performance of the Scheme.  The 
Committee find that a sum of Rs. 191.00 crore has been allocated for the 
Scheme for 2012 -13 and the Minis try have taken several positive measures to 
ensure that not only the allocated funds are spent but additional demands are 
raised for better physical achievements during the year.  The Committee 
expect the Ministry to deliver on their promise during the Fiscal.    
 
Mega Food Parks 
3.33 A sum of Rs. 86.00 crore has been allocated for the Mega Food Parks 
(MFPs) Component of the Scheme for Infrastructure Development.  Ten MFPs 

were to be set -up during the first phase.  The prescribed timeline for the 
project is  24 months from the date of release of first installment.  The 
Committee are unhappy to note that none of the ten MFPs have been able to 
adhere to this timeline.  All the ten Projects have not only missed this timeline 
by significant periods, none of them seems to be anywhere near full 
opertionalisation even now.  The Committee had noted in their previous 
Reports that the Food Park Scheme which was the precursor of the MFPs had 
also failed miserably due to several shortcomings in planning and 
implementation.  They had, therefore, asked the Ministry to tread with extra 
caution on the implementation of the MFP Component.  However, a critical 
appraisal of the Scheme in its extant form is yet to be done and shared with the 
Committee.  In the meantime problems wh ich could not be foreseen by the 
Ministry are cropping up putting brakes on the timely implementation of these 
projects.  The Committee, therefore, desire that a critical appraisal of the 
Component be done without any further delay and correctives be put i n place 
immediately.  This acquires added urgency as the Ministry are moving towards 
decentralization of their Schemes in the Twelfth Plan and course correction at 
this juncture would be in the interest of both the Component and the public 
monies involved.    
 
Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure  
 
3.34 The Committee note that during the Eleventh Plan 49 projects had been 
approved under this Component.  Out of these 8 out of 10 projects that were 
approved in 2008 -09 are into commercial  production.  The remaining 39 
projects which were approved in the last year of the Plan (2011 -12) are at 

various stages of implementation.  For the Twelfth Plan the working group of 
Planning Commission has recommended for taking up of 140 new projects.  
However, pending finalization of the Twelfth Plan the situation is in a flux.  
Based on the contours of Plan, the Ministry intend to take up 30 new projects 
in 2012-13.  The Committee also note that as per the recommendations of the 
working group the assist ance under this Component in the Twelfth Plan for 
horticulture produce will be under Central Sector Scheme and for non -
horticulture produce this Component will form part of a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme.  Since the exact arrangements of this bifurcation are  yet to be 
formalized, the Committee desist from commenting on it.  However, they hope 
that the process will be completed at the earliest so that further action for 
implementation of this Component is taken without any further loss of time.  
 The Committee also note that a concurrent evaluation of Component by 
a project management agency has reported substantive increase in shelf life, 
reduction in wastages and value addition.  However, the agency has not 
quantified these achievements of the Component.  The  Committee find it very 
surprising as to how this important aspect has been missed in the evaluation 
and they would like to know whether this aspect was a part of the terms of 
reference of the evaluation.  Even otherwise, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry should obtain the relevant data from the said project management 
agency on the basis of which it has come to these conclusions and share it 
with the Committee. 
 
 
 

Establishment of new/Modernisation of existing Abattoirs 
3.35 Establishment of new/modernization of abattoirs is a Component of the 
Scheme Infrastructure Development.  This Component aims at providing 
facilities for scientific and less painful slaughtering, chilling, rendering plant, 
effluent treatment plant, drainage, better hyg iene, safety and retail cold chain 
management.    In the first phase of the Component, ten Projects were 
approved with completion schedules ranging between April, 2010 and 
September, 2010 except for the Project in Sikkim which was scheduled for 
completion in November, 2011.  The Committee, however, find that eight of 
these ten projects are yet to be completed.  While the likely date of completion 
of three of them is now indicated as 2012 -13 in case of the remaining five 
projects, it has been indicated as 20 13-14.   Apart from the delays in planning 
and approvals taking their toll of this Scheme, the delays in allocation of land 
for abattoirs by State Governments due to agitations/objections by local 
people, lack of availability of technical expertise, proced ural delays, etc.  have 
also contributed to this staggering of timelines of various projects.   The 
Ministry now propose to have 50 more such projects during the XIIth Plan 
however the final approval is awaited.  To ensure that the future projects under 
this Component are not delayed like the projects of first phase, the Ministry are 
considering more project management agencies for the new projects and other 
corrective meaures.  But in the absence of formal approval this is only a 
futuristic contemplation.  There are almost 3600 slaughter houses in the 
Country in generally antiquated conditions, lacking modern equipment, proper 
sanitation and hygiene.    The lack of facilities for scientific slaughtering not 
only is a cruelty on animals but also affects the quality of meat and other 

products.  The Committee are of the considered view that this Component of 
the Scheme for Development of Infrastructure can go a long way in improving 
the existing situation.  They, therefore, recommend that the modalities 
preparatory to the implementation of Scheme in the Twelfth Plan be completed 
with due promptitude to facilitate its expeditious implementation.     
 
Scheme for Technology Upgradation, Establishment and Modernisation of 
Food Processing Industries 
 
3.36 The objecti ves of the Scheme for Technology, Upgradation, 
Establishment and Modernisation are to increase the level of processing, 
reduction of wastage, value addition, enhance the income of farmers as well as 
increase exports thereby resulting in overall economic development.    
 This is one of the Schemes of the Ministry where they have always 
drawn higher allocations at the RE stage by their good performance.  In the 
year 2007 -08 the BE figure of Rs. 72.00 crore was hiked to Rs. 113.50 crore 
while the actual expend iture was still higher at Rs. 119.30 crore.  During the 
year 2008-09 against the BE amount of Rs. 90.00 crore, the RE figure was Rs. 
91.50 crore and the actual expenditure was in the range of Rs. 96.87 crore.  In 
2009-10 against BE allocation of Rs. 60.00 crore, the RE allocation was more 
than 33% higher at Rs. 82.51 crore and the actual expenditure was Rs. 82.49 
crore (upto 31 March, 2010).  In the next Fiscal, the BE amount of Rs. 81.00 
crore was hiked to Rs. 106.00 crore at the RE stage and the actual ex penditure 
was Rs. 105.67 crore.  In the last year of the Eleventh Plan viz. 2011-12, the BE 
of Rs. 98.00 crore was almost doubled to Rs. 185.47 crore at RE stage and the 
actual expenditure upto 31 January, 2012 has been clocked at Rs. 137.76 crore.  

One more aspect that needs to be highlighted in the context of this Scheme is 
that from 1 April, 2012 onwards this Scheme has been sponsored under the 
National Mission for Food Processing.  It would hence forth be implemented as 
a Centrally Sponsored Schem e.  The Committee, however, note that as on 31 
March, 2012, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries are having a pendency 
of 2613 applications for disbursal of grants under this Scheme.  The 
Committee strongly feel that the change in the modalities of t he Scheme ought 
not hinder the settlement of such a huge number of applications pending with 
the Ministry.  They, therefore, recommend the Planning Commission/Ministry 
of Finance that while allocating funds for this Scheme during the various 
stages of this  Fiscal they should ensure additional funds to the Ministry for 
settling the applications pending with them.  
 
Scheme for Upgradation of Quality of Street Food 
3.37 The Scheme for „Upgradation  of quality of Street Food‟ was proposed in 
the Eleventh Plan. The Scheme has two components Viz. “Safe Food Town and 
the Food Street”. The Scheme is aimed at improving the quality of street food 
being served and laying down standards.  However, the Scheme was not 
supported by Planning Commission and the Department of Expenditure.  The 
Committee have been given to understand that the working group on food 
processing industries for the Twelfth Plan, in its report, has felt that 
upgradation of quality of stre et food may be more appropriately handled by 
Department of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA).  Thus, MoFPI have 
forwarded the copy of the draft guideline s and the final version of the CCEA 
Note prepared by them to Department of HUPA for suitable c onsideration. The 

Department of HUPA ha ve prepared a draft Note for the Cabinet proposing 
introduction of the Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihoods and Regulation of 
Street Vending) Bill, 2012.  The Committee expect the Ministry to pro-actively 
coordinate with the Department of HUPA so that their concerns in the matter 
are duly co-opted in the Bill.  
Scheme f or Qual ity Assurance, Codex Standards and Research a nd 
Development and other Promotional Activities. 
 
  
3.38 The objectives of the above mentioned Schemes are to motivate Food 
Processing Industries for adoption of food safety and quality assurance 
mechanisms, to prepare them to face the global competition in international 
trade in post WTO, to enable adherence to  stringent quality in hygiene norms, 
to enhance product acceptance by overseas buyers, to keep Indian Industry 
technologically abreast of international best practices and that the end 
product/outcome/findings of R&D work to benefit food processing industries 
sector.   
 Under this Scheme the Ministry have not been able to utilize allocated 
funds in the Eleventh Plan.  The Ministry have attributed the delayed approvals 
as also non -receipt of eligible and viable proposals for this under utilization. 
The Committee are concerned about the continues under utilization under the 
Scheme and feel that it needs to be critically analysed so that atleast now 
when we are entering in the Twelfth Plan suitable course corrections are 
undertaken in the Scheme to make it more appealing and effective so that 
earmarked allocations are fully utilized in future.   
 
 

 
 
 
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management 
(NIFTEM) 
 
3.39 National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and 
Management (NIFTEM) is being set up as an Institute of global excellence in 
education and research in the areas of food technology. The Institute is being 
set up at Kundli, District Sonepat, Haryana. 
 The establishment of NIFTEM which is a part of the Scheme for 
Strengthening of Institutions has been beset with several problems for quite 
sometime now.  The Committee have commented on Ministry‟s performance in 
so far as NIFTEM is concerned in several  of their previous Reports.  The 
Institute has missed deadlines regarding the start of academic courses during 
the last two years due to inept planning and lack of foresight.  Even now they 
are awaiting the grant of de novo deemed to be University status f rom the 
UGC/the Ministry of Human Resource Development.  The way NIFTEM matters 
have been handled in the past by the Ministry, the Committee are not sure 
whether they would be able to start admissions for various academic courses 
in the Institute even in July this year.  The Committee would like the Ministry to 
appreciate the fact that because of delays in establishment and 
operationalisation of this Institute of immense importance several students 
have missed an opportunity to seek education in some of the  frontier areas in 
food technology during last two -three years.   The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend the Ministry should now act in mission mode to complete 
the remaining formalities pertaining to the establishment and 

operationalisation of the I nstitute without any further delay so that atleast 
admissions in various academic courses commence in July this year.  
 
New Schemes         
3.40 The Committee note that the Ministry is embarking on an ambitious 
National Mission on Food Processing  during the Twelfth  Plan.  Though, the 
details of the Mission are yet to be formalized, it is being implemented by 
States from 1 April, 2012 for the continuing Schemes of the Eleventh Plan.  All 
the Schemes under the proposed Mission will be Centrally Spon sored 
Schemes.  The Committee further note that this new Scheme will be 
characterized by a decentralized approach, which provides for a greater role of 
States/UTs, better out reach and effective supervision and monitoring.  The 
Ministry have been, hitherto, implementing their Schemes as both the planners 
and the executors.  Consequently, their meager resources and manpower were 
stretched beyond limits, thereby, affecting their performance.  The proposed 
new Mission with the characteristics mentioned above will provide the Ministry 
a welcome relief and enable them to focus on their primary role as a planners.  
Leaving the execution part to the State Governments, who are better equipped 
for the purpose, as they have direct interface with the users/stakeholders .  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that all necessary formalities concerning 
the Mission be completed post haste and its implementation started in right 
earnest.    
 
NEW DELHI;                          BASUDEB ACHARIA 
23 April, 2012                                 Chairman, 
03 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)                                       Committee on Agriculture 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Scheme wise Outlay & Expenditure during 11 th Plan & Budget Estimates for 2012-13 for the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
 
 
Sl.
No. 
Name of 
the 
Scheme/
Project/ 
Program
me 
Eleventh Plan 2007-08 2008-09 
  Propo
sed 
Alloc
ation 
(whol
e 
Plan) 
Appr
oved 
Outla
y 
(whol
e 
Plan) 
Act
ual 
exp. 
(1st 
Fou
r 
year
s) 
% 
of 
act
ual 
Ex
p. ( 
1st 
fou
r 
yea
r) 
Prop
osed 
alloc
ation 
B
E 
RE Act
ual 
Ex
p 
Short
fall/ 
Exce
ss, if 
any, 
with 
reaso
ns 
Prop
osed 
alloc
ation 
BE RE Act
ual 
Ex
p 
Short
fall/ 
Exce
ss, if 
any, 
with 
reaso
ns 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
1 Scheme 
for  
Infrastru
cture 
 
Develop
ment 
3160.
00 
2613.
00 
239.
11 
9.1
5 
100.0
0 
90.
00 
15.
00 
14.
79 
* 464.0
0 
90.
00 
42.
20 
48.
28 
 
2 Scheme 
for 
Technolo
gy 
Upgrada
tion/ 
Establish
ment and  
Moderni
zation 
of Food 
Processin
g 
Industrie
s 
600.0
0 
600.0
0 
399.
80 
66.
6 
150.0
0 
72.
00 
113
.50 
119
.30 
 150.0
0 
90.
00 
91.
50 
96.
87 
 
3  Scheme 
for 
Upgrada
tion of 
Quality 
of Street 
Food 
178.0
0 
178.0
0 
2.65 1.4
8 
25.00 0.9
0 
0.9
0 
0.7
2 
 60.00 4.5
0 
5.4
0 
1.9
3 
*** 

  
4 Scheme 
for 
Quality 
Assuranc
e, 
Codex 
Standard
s and  
Research 
& 
Develop
ment and 
other 
Promotio
nal 
Activities 
354.0
0 
250.0
0 
81.7
7 
32.
70 
75.00 18.
00 
19.
30 
15.
12 
** 54.70 18.
00 
19.
00 
17.
37 
** 
5 Scheme 
for 
Human 
Resource 
Develop
ment 
100.0
0 
65.00 30.5
8 
47.
04 
20.00 09.
00 
4.5
0 
4.2
1 
** 15.00 4.5
0 
5.7
0 
5.9
6 
Targ
et 
Achi
eved 
6 Scheme 
for 
Strength
ening of 
Institutio
ns  
424.0
0 
325.0
0 
251.
96 
77.
52 
72.00 35.
10 
26.
10 
26.
51 
 126.9
5 
54.
00 
53.
50 
52.
71 
 
7 Lump 
sum 
provision 
for North 
East 
including 
Sikkim 
(481.
60) 
(403.
10) 
--   (25.
00) 
(20.
00) 
(4.1
1) 
**  (29.
00) 
(24.
20) 
 ** 
 Total 4816.
00 
4031.
00 
100
5.77 
25 442.0
0 
250
.00 
200
.00 
182
.00 
 870.6
5 
290
.00 
242
.00 
223
.12 
 

Sl.
No. 
Name of 
the 
Scheme/
Project/ 
Program
me 
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
  Prop
osed 
alloc
ation  
BE RE Act
ual 
Ex
p.  
Shor
tfall/ 
Exce
ss, if 
any, 
with 
reaso
ns  
Prop
osed 
alloc
ation  
BE RE Act
ual 
Ex
p.  
 
Shor
tfall/ 
Exce
ss, if 
any, 
with 
reaso
ns  
Prop
osed 
Alloc
ation 
BE RE Actu
al 
EXP
.31-
01-
12  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
1 Scheme 
for  
Infrastru
cture 
 
Develop
ment 
538.7
0 
 
135
.00 
73.
81 
72.
94 
 724.4
0 
 
137
.50 
120
.80 
118
.09 
 887.1
2 
300
.00 
189 96.6
5 
2 Scheme 
for 
Technolo
gy 
Upgrada
tion/ 
Establish
ment 
and  
Moderni
zation 
of Food 
Processi
ng 
Industrie
s 
165.0
0 
60.
00 
82.
51 
82.
49 
 165.0
0 
81.
00 
106 105
.67 
 216.0
0 
98.
00 
185
.47 
137.
81 
3  Scheme 
for 
Upgrada
tion of 
Quality 
of Street 
Food 
34.00 8.0
0 
0.0
03 
0.0
0 
*** 34.00 1.0
0 
0.1 0.0
0 
 35.00 5.0
0 
00 0.00 
4 Scheme 
for 
Quality 
Assuran
ce, 
Codex 
Standar
ds and  
Research 
& 
Develop
ment 
and 
other 
Promoti
onal 
Activitie
s 
51.00 30.
00  
 
32.
08 
 
29.
07 
 
 
** 
51.00 38.
00  
 
31.
13 
 
31.
32 
 
Targ
et 
Achi
eved 
 
67.00 45.
00 
 
43.
52 
22.8
16 

5 Scheme 
for 
Human 
Resource 
Develop
ment 
9.00 9.0
0 
 
 
9.5
0 
 
 
9.4
6 
 
 
Targ
et 
Achi
eved 
9.00 10.
50 
 
 
10.
77 
 
 
11.
11 
 
 
Targ
et 
Achi
eved 
25.00 
 
 
15.
00 
 
 
14.
50 
8.77 
6 Scheme 
for 
Strength
ening of 
Institutio
ns  
308.3
6 
64.
00 
92.
08 
83.
59 
 308.3
6 
132
.00 
127
.50 
128
.66 
 260.7
5 
132
.50 
117
.50 
 
95.4
7 
7 Lump 
sum 
provisio
n for 
North 
East 
includin
g Sikkim 
123.0
0  
34.
00 
29.
00 
18.
50 
** 123.0
0  
40.
00 
40.
00 
38.
50 
**  60.
00 
55 12.8
2 
 Total 1229.
06 
340
.00 
290
.00 
277
.55 
 1229.
06 
400
.00 
400
.00 
394
.75 
 1490.
87 
600
.00 
550 361.
53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
61 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
 
 
  

 
 
2 
 
  
 