 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
                 
        
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                              
                                 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
              
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-third Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2011-2012)} 
 
 
          
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
  
 
         
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2013/Phalguna,1934 (Saka) 
42 

 
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-third Report 
of the Committee on Agriculture (2012-2013) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   26.02.2013 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  26.02.2013 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2013/Phalguna,1934 (Saka) 


 
COA No. ..... 
 
 
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
            
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
© 2013 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by 

 
<CONTENTS> 
                   PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ……………………………………………………            1  
     
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ………………….               14    
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies ………………………….    33 
   
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………………    34 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………………….     38 
    
 
APPENDIX 
Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee held  
on 22 February, 2013……………………………………….   39    
   
                                   ANNEXURE 
I  Impact assessment of 10 cold chain projects approved  
in 2008-09 by M/s. IL& FS CDI…………………………………. 41 
  
II  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-third Report  
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2011-2012)……………………………………………………… 48 
 
 
(i)

 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2012-13) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
30.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(iii)  

 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (201 2-2013) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Forty-second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-third Report of the Committee on 
Agriculture (2011-12) on Demands for Grants (201 2-13) pertaining to Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Thirty-third Report of the Committee was presented to the Lok Sabha 
on 25 April, 2012 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 26 April, 2012. The 
Action Taken Replies on the Report were received from the Government on 17 
July, 2012. 
 
3. The Report was considered and ad opted by the Committee at their Sitting 
held on 22 February, 2013. 
 
4. An analysis of the action t aken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-third Report of the Committee is given 
in Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
                           
NEW DELHI                     BASUDEB ACHARIA 
22 February, 2013                                                                    Chairman, 
03 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)                                Committee on Agriculture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
  

 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Thirty -third Report of 
the Committee on Agriculture (2011 -12) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries which was presented to Lok Sabha on 25 
April, 2012 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 26 April, 2012 respectively. 
1.2 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries  have furnished Action Taken 
Replies in respect of all the 1 6 Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Report. These have been categorized as under: 
 Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Recommendation Nos. 1.4, 2.23, 2.24, 2.25, 3.32, 3.33, 3.34, 3.35, 
3.36, 3.37, 3.38, 3.39 and 3.40  
 Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:  
Recommendation Para No.: Nil  

 
 Observations / Recommendations in respect of which action taken 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee:  
Recommendation Para No.: 2.20, 2.21 and 2.22 
 
 Observations / Rec ommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited:  
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in  Chapter-I and Final 
Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of 
this Report be furnished to them within a period of three months.  
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
STATEMENT UNDER DIRECTION 73A OF SPEAKER, LOK SABHA 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.4) 

 
 
1.5 The Committee were highly disappointed to note that the Ministry have 
faltered, time and again in adhering to Direction 73 A of Direction by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha  as n ot only had they not adhered to the stipulation of getting the 
Statement made within six months of presentation of the Report in the context of 
the Twenty-fifth Report of the Committee, their past record in the matter was also 
not worth mentioning. The Statement under Direction 73 A in the context of two 
previous Reports of the Committee viz the Fifth and Ninth ones was made after 
more than a year and ten months respectively on 22 March,  2011 and due to 
several deficiencies in these Statements, the Minister had to make the revised 
and updated Statements on 6 September, 2011  in the context of both the 
Reports on the advice of the Committee .  Strongly disapproving this continuing 
non- adherence to a D irection by the Speaker, Lok Sabha  the Committee had 
desired that the Statement under Direction 73 A in respect of the Twenty -fifth 
Report be made in the Second Half of the ongoing Budget Session (2012) 
without fail.  
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Note, the G overnment stated that t he Minister has 
laid the Statement in the context of the Twenty Fifth Report in the Parliament in a 
comprehensive and updated manner on 8 May, 2012 in Lok Sabha and on 11 
May,2012 in Rajya Sabha. Ministry ha ve noted the observation s of the 
Committee for strict compliance in making of Statements under Direction 73 A of 
the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 

 
1.7 The Committee take note of the fact of compliance with their instant 
Recommendation.  They also expect the Ministry to invariably stick to their 
assurance about timely Statements under Direction 73A of Speaker, Lok 
Sabha on the implementation status of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Reports of the 
Committee.   
FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 2.20 and 2.21) 
  
1.8  The Committee had observed that inspite of having ac hieved self -
sufficiency in food grain production and food security , the universal availability of 
the agriculture and allied products ha d not shown any improvement. This 
unfortunate situation was mainly due to the fact that there is a severe lack of food 
processing facilities and infrastructure in the supply chain from the farm -gate to 
the consumers , resulting in substant ial post harvest crop losses and gaps in 
availability, in so far as consumers are concerned  as also depriving of the 
farmers adequate remuneration because of their low holding capacity. Having 
further observed that during the course of the Eleventh Plan the funding of the 
Ministry left a lot to be desired , as there were inordinate delays in approvals and 
clearances of Schemes leading to the fund flow not being optimized, the 
Committee had hoped that the Ministry will get their due atleast in the Twelfth 
Plan. They were, however, disappointed that the Planners and the Government 
are yet to realize the true potential of the food processing industry sector and 

 
therefore, the genuine requirements of funds of the Ministry have been 
summarily treated.  
 
1.9 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that t o infuse 
sufficient amount of capital in the food processing industry sector, Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries has launched a New Centrally Sponsored Scheme - 
National Mission on Food Processing  (NMFP) during 12 th Plan w.e.f 1.4.2012 
through States / UTs. This would be decidedly a paradigm shift in the Ministry‘s 
approach and is driven by the need to make food processing truly a national 
initiative. This would give a great b oost to the sector and  help to infuse more 
capital in different parts of the food processing industry. 
1.10 The other schemes notably the Infrastructure Schemes (Mega Food Park, 
Cold Chain & Abattoir) are also being exp anded and continued in the XII Plan. 
This would also help to infuse more capital in the food processing sector. 
1.11 They have further stated that the concern of the Committee on inadequate 
allocation to the Food Processing Sector has been brought to the notice of the 
Planning Commission vide D.O. letter No. 1 -24/2012-PC dated 19.06.2012. The 
Planning Commission has been requested to suitably enhance the allocation for 
the various programmes of the Ministry during 12 th Plan keeping in view the 
observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee.  
1.12 The Committee are not convinced by the reply of the Ministry on this 
very fundamental issue.  Changing the mode of funding from the hitherto 

 
Central Scheme to a Centrally Sponsored Scheme is not going to make 
much of a difference to the food processing ind ustry sector in so far as 
infusion of funds is concerned.  Simil arly, continuing with the ongoing 
schemes, viz. Mega Food Parks, Cold Chain and Abattoir, etc. with shoe -
string budgets is also not going to change the fortunes of the sector.  What 
is required is a strong and liberal dose of funds to expand the base of the 
food processing industry sector on a pan -India basis so as to ensure that 
the farmgate to consumer chain is shortened and adequately protected to 
eliminate the colossal post harvest crop los ses and remunerative 
simultaneously ensure returns to the farmer for his toil and investment.  
The Committee desire the Government to revisit the matter accordingly and 
report to them within three months of presentation of this Report.  
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS  
(Recommendation Para No. 2.22) 
1.13 Noting that the Ministry have been allocated Rs. 660 crore for 2012 -13 
against a sum of Rs. 1200 crore sought by them and apart from various other 
reasons a major reason for the Ministry not having their way with the allocation 
for Annual Plan 2012 -13 appeared to be that the Twelfth Plan Outlay was yet to 
be decided upon, hence, the allocation had been made as a stop gap and ad-hoc 
measure without going into the merits of the Ministry”s requirements.  
 
1.14 Further not ing that s ince, an opportunity for enhancement of allocations 
would now arise only at the RE stage, which is still far off, the Committee had felt  

 
that the problem of paucity of funds with the Ministry can be attended to by 
synergizing, wherever feasible, some of their Schemes with such other Schemes 
of other Ministries/Departments like Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana  of the 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, where the States would have the 
discretion of utilising the funds for Centrally Sponsored Sc hemes of the Ministry 
of Food Processing Industries also.  
 
1.15 The Ministry  in their Action Taken Note have stated that they have 
launched a Centrally Sponsored Scheme namely the National Mission on Food 
Processing (NMFP) which will be implemented through the State/UT 
Governments. This will enable the States to synergize the resources wherever 
feasible with other Centrally Sponsored Schemes like  RKVY/NHM and State/UT 
Government schemes. The Infrastructure Development Programme of the 
Ministry like Mega Food Parks, Integrated Cold Chain will be modified to achieve 
synergies with the schemes of the Ministry of Agriculture and other Departments. 
 
1.16 The Committee note with satisfaction that the Ministry have, in 
pursuance of their Recommendation, appreciated the need for synergy of 
the various Schemes being implemented by them with Schemes of other 
Ministries/Departments to improve funds availability to the food processing 
industry sector.  What, however, disappoints the Committee no end is the 
fact that apart from expressing their willingness to implement the 
Recommendation they have done precious little in the direction of the 

 
implementation proper.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the requisite 
synergisation of various Schemes of the Ministry and those of other 
Ministries/Departments be carried out in a time bound manner and with due 
promptitude as we are already at the fag end of the first fiscal of the Twelfth 
Plan.   
(Recommendation Para No. 2.23 and 2.24) 
1.17 Noting that d uring the Eleventh Plan out of the approved Outlay of Rs. 
4031.00 crore only Rs. 1880.00 crore could come the way of the Ministry  and 
resultantly, the implementation of  various Schemes either suffered or was 
staggered and in both the eventualities, the ultimate sufferer was the 
developmental process,  the Committee strongly differed with the point of view of 
the Planning Commission that within the availability of resources the Commission 
had other priorities - the Health Sector, the Social Sector, the Education Sector, 
etc. and had felt that  the Commission, somehow, d id not realize that with a little 
bit of handholding at this juncture, the contribution of the food processing industry 
sector to the economy can generate sufficient resources to contribute in a lasting 
manner to all these priority Sectors.  Furthermore, the Committee, in view of the 
Planning Commission concurring with the well known  fundamental of economics 
that all projects require optimal level of funding within the prescribed timeframe to 
be viable and cost effective had hoped that this convergence of view s will 
definitely result in timely release of enhanced allocations for the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries.  

 
1.18 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that t he concern 
of the Committee on inadequate allocation to the Food Processing  Sector has 
been brought to the notice of the Planning Commission vide D.O. letter No. 1 -
24/2012-PC dated 19.06.2012. The Planning Commission has been requested to 
suitably enhance the allocation for the various programmes of the Ministry during 
12th Plan keeping in view the observations of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee. 
 
1.19 The Committee note  with satisfaction that their concerns regarding 
inadequate allocation of funds to the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries have been conveyed to the Planning Commission.  They expect 
the Commission to take cognizance of their instant Recommendation as 
also the pressing need to give an urgent boost to the food processing 
industries sector and allocate sufficient funds to the Ministry in the Fiscal 
2013-14. 
 
Mega Food Parks  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.33)      
 
1.20 Unhappy to note that none of the ten MFPs have been able to adhere to 
the operationalisation timeline of 24 months and yet a critical appraisal of the 
Scheme in its extant form had not been done and shared with the Committee and 
in the meantime problems which could not be foreseen by the Mini stry are 

 
cropping up putting brakes on the timely implementation of these projects , t he 
Committee had desired that a critical appraisal of the Component be done 
without any further delay and correctives be put in place immediately  as the 
Ministry are movin g towards decentralization of their Schemes in the Twelfth 
Plan and course correction at this juncture would be in the interest of both the 
Component and the public monies involved.  
 
1.21 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that the Ministry 
have appointed a Programme Management Agency (PMA) for assisting the 
Ministry in implementation of the Mega Food Park Scheme. So far, the Ministry 
has approved 15 Mega Food Park Projects out of which final approval has been 
accorded to 12 projects .  At the time of up -scaling of the Scheme in the 3 rd 
phase, a concurrent evaluation of the projects under implementation was done 
by the PMA. The findings of concurrent evaluation were incorporated in the 
proposal for up-scaling of the Scheme and placed before CCEA.  
 
1.22 With a view to have a critical appraisal for more effective implementation 
of the Scheme, the Ministry ha ve engaged an independent professional agency, 
viz. M/s Centre for Market Research and Social Develop ment for evaluation of 
the Scheme. The agency has been asked to submit the report by July, 2012. On 
submission of the report, necessary corrective steps and follow up action will be 
taken by the Ministry.  

 
1.23 The Committee are happy to note that at la st the need to have a 
critical appraisal of Mega Food Parks Scheme has dawned upon the 
Ministry.  An independent professional agency has been engaged  to 
evaluate the Scheme of Mega Food Parks.  The Committee are confident 
that the report of the agency will get the full attention of the Ministry and 
necessary course correction s in the implementation of the Scheme will be 
carried out on top priority basis.  The Committee would also like to be 
furnished with a copy of the report at the earliest.     
COLD CHAIN, VALUE ADDITION AND PRESERVATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.34) 
1.24 Taking note of the fact that a concurrent evaluation of Cold Chain, Value 
Addition and Preservation Infrastructure Component by a project management 
agency had reported substantive increase in shelf life, reduction in wastages and 
value addition  without the agency having quantified these achievements of the 
Component, the Committee had found it very surprising as to how this important 
aspect has been missed in t he evaluation and desired to know whether this 
aspect was a part of the terms of reference of the evaluation.  They had  also 
desired that the Ministry should obtain the relevant data from the said project 
management agency on the basis of which it has come  to these conclusions and 
share it with the Committee.   
 
1.25 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that  Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries awarded the evaluation to M/s IL&FS CDI to assess 

 
the impact of 10 cold chain projects approve d in 2008 -09. The scope of work 
involves individual evaluation of 1 0 projects approved in 2008 -09. The finding of 
the impact assessment of individual project is enclosed at Annexure-I. In the 
evaluation study, the TOR did not cover the assessment on increase in shelf life 
and the agency has already finalized its study and submitted the report. 
However, the Ministry has again undertaken the evaluation of cold chain projects 
and M/s Center for Market Resear ch and Social Development  Pvt. Ltd. is 
undertaking the evaluation study.  The suggestion of the Committee has been 
incorporated in the terms of reference of this evaluation study.   
1.26 The Committee find  it inexplicable as to how the Ministry failed to 
include assessment of increase in shelf life, reduction in wastage, value 
addition, etc. in the terms of reference of the evaluation study.  They also 
find it implausible as to how the evaluation agency als o came to its 
conclusions about substantive increase in the s helf life, reduction in 
wastages and value addition, if it did not evaluate these factors suo motu.  
The evaluation study, as such, also reveals that in several cases they have 
reflected only the  intended benefits or surmises based on inputs from the 
owners of the facilities.  The Committee hope that the Ministry will ensure 
that the ongoing fresh study would be more indepth and purposeful and 
they would be able to take corrective measures of last ing impact in 
pursuance, thereof.   The Committee would like a copy of the new 
evaluation study to be furnished to them. 
 

 
SCHEME FOR QUALITY ASSURANCE, CODEX STANDARDS AND 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AND OTHER PROMOTIONAL ACTIVITIES  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.38) 
1.27 Noting that t he objectives of the Schemes are to motivate Food 
Processing Industries for adoption of food safety and quality assurance 
mechanisms, to prepare them to face the global competition in international trade 
in post WTO, to enable adher ence to stringent quality in hygiene norms, to 
enhance product acceptance by overseas buyers, to keep Indian Industry 
technologically abreast of international best practices and that the end 
product/outcome/findings of R&D work to benefit food processing i ndustries 
sector.  Further noting that under this Scheme the Ministry have not been able to 
utilize allocated funds in the Eleventh Plan due to delayed approvals as also non-
receipt of eligible and viable proposals for this under utilization , the Committee 
concerned about the continuous underutilization under the Scheme had felt that it 
needed to be critically analysed so that atleast now when we are entering in the 
Twelfth Plan suitable course corrections are undertaken in the Scheme to make it 
more appeal ing and effective so that earmarked allocations are fully utilized in 
future.  
 
1.28 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that i n order to 
ensure better and more effective utilization of funds under the Scheme for Quality 
Assurance, Codex Standards and Research & Development and other 
Promotional Activities, this Ministry has decided to entrust implementation of the 

 
R&D component of the scheme to Science and Engineering Research Board 
(SERB), under the Ministry of Science and Technology and  the Food Testing 
Laboratory component of the scheme to Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) under the Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research  
and Education (DARE). This arrangement will come with effect from 01.04.2012; 
proposals received upto 31.03.2012 will be dealt with by the Ministry.  
  
1.29 Under the revised arrangement , funds will be placed by MFPI with the 
SERB and ICAR for R&D and Laboratory Schemes, respectively and these 
organizations will evaluat e, decide upon funding of individual proposals, monitor 
the progress and give periodical reports to MFPI on the progress of the Scheme. 
MFPI will nominate one representative on the respective Committees of SERB 
and ICAR that will evaluate the individual pr oposals. MFPI will also ensure 
monitoring of implementation of the scheme. This arrangement has the benefit of 
getting better projects and promoting proper outcome of the scheme.  
  
1.30 The revised arrangement is under implementation during the financial year      
2012-13.  
 
1.31 The Committee note  that with a view to implement their 
Recommendation the Ministry have taken a slew of measures to make the 
Scheme for Quality Assurance, Codex Standards and Research and 
Development more professional and effective.  The implementation of R&D 

 
component of t he Scheme has been handed over to the Science and 
Engineering Research Board (SERB) under the Ministry o f Science and 
Technology and the Food Testing Laboratory Component has been 
entrusted to Department of Agriculture Research and Education  
(DARE)/ICAR und er the Ministry of Agriculture.  Under this arrangement 
which is effective from this F iscal onwards funding would b e the 
responsibility of the Ministry while evaluation, decision about funding, 
monitoring progress, etc. will be of SERB and ICAR.  The Commi ttee would 
like the Ministry to keep a close watch on this nascent arrangement and 
report to them about the outcome at the conclusion of the ongoing Fiscal.    
 
 

 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS. 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 1.4)   
 The Committee are very disappointed to note that the Ministry have 
faltered, time and again in adhering to Direction 73 A of Direction by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha . Not only have they not adhered to the stipulation of getting the 
Statement made within six months of presentation of the Report in the context of 
the Twenty-fifth Report of the Committee, their past record in the matter is also 
not worth mentioning. The Statement under Direction 73 A in the context of two 
previous Reports of the Committee viz the Fifth and Ninth ones was made after 
more than a year and ten months respectively on 22 March, 2011. Due to several 
deficiencies in these Statements, the Ministry  were advised to get revised and 
updated Statements made in the context of both the Reports. Finally, the Minister 
made the revised and updated Statements on 6 September, 2011.The 
Committee strongly disapprove this continuing non - adherence to a Direction by 
the Speaker, Lok Sabha and desire that the Statement under Direction 73 A in 
respect of the Twenty -fifth Report be made in the Second Half of the ongoing 
Budget Session without fail.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 
The Ministry has laid the Twenty Fifth Report in the Parliament in a 
comprehensive and updated manner on 08.05.2012 in Lok Sabha and on 
11.05.2012 in Rajya Sabha. Ministry has noted the observations of the 
Committee for strict compliance in making of state ments under direction 73 A of 
the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
 
                                              Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para  No. 1.4 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 2.23)   
 During the Eleventh Plan out of the approved Outlay of Rs. 4031.00 crore 
only Rs. 1880.00 crore could come the way of the Ministry. This is hardly 47% of 
the approved Outlay. Resultantly, the implementation of various Schemes either 
suffered or was staggered. In both the eventualities, the ultimate sufferer was the 
developmental process. The Committee strongly differ with the point of view of 
the Planning Commission, as conveyed to them during the Oral Evidence by the 
representative of the Commission, who stated that within the availability of 
resources the Commission had other priorities - the Health Sector, the Social 
Sector, the Education Sector, etc. The Commis sion, somehow, do not realize 
that with a little bit of handholding at this juncture, the contribution of the food 

 
processing industry sector to the economy can generate sufficient resources to 
contribute in a lasting manner to all these priority Sectors. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 This view of the Committee has been communicated to the Planning 
Commission vide D.O. letter No. 1-24/2012-PC dated 19.06.2012.  
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
   Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 2.24)   
  In fact during the course of the examination of the Demand for Grants of 
the ongoing Fiscal, a question was put by the Committee to the Planning 
Commission. They were asked that in view of the well known fundamental 
economics that all projects require opti mal level of funding within the prescribed 
timeframe to be viable and cost effective. Therefore, how did the Planning 
Commission expect the proposed Schemes could be implemented successfully 
and would deliver optimally if financial cuts are made extensively and without any 
consideration for timeframe. The Planning Commission had while concurring with 
the view of the Committee stated that adequate finances within a certain 
timeframe is one of the important elements for delivery of optimal outcome for a 

 
Scheme or a Project. The Committee expect that this convergence of views will 
definitely result in timely release of enhanced allocations for the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The concern of the Committee on inadequate allocat ion to the Food 
Processing Sector has been brought to the notice of the Planning Commission 
vide D.O. letter           No. 1 -24/2012-PC dated 19.06.2012. The Planning 
Commission has been requested to suitably enhance the allocation for the 
various programm es of the Ministry during 12th Plan keeping in view the 
observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
 
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
                                           Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.4 of Chapter – I this  
Report. 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 2.25)   
Before concluding on this aspect, the Committee would like to point out a 
major deficiency in the data submitted to them by the Ministr y of Food 
Processing Industries. The Committee observed that at several places 
expenditure performance as on 31 January of that year has been furnished to 
them even for the Fiscals gone by. The Committee are sure that the Ministry 
would be having the final  figures for these years viz. 2009-10 and 2010 -11. The 

 
Committee while expressing their disapproval of this practice adopted by the 
Ministry, desire that such mistake should not recur in future. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Ministry has updated the data relating to expenditure performance in 
respect of all the Schemes uptil 31 st March. It is regretted that final figures could 
not be given during the previous meeting of the Hon’ble Committee on 
Agriculture. 
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
  

 
Scheme for Infrastructure Development  
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.32)   
 The Scheme for Infrastructure Development is the most important Scheme 
of the Ministry. It consists of three components viz. (i) Mega Food Parks, (ii) Cold 
Chain, Value Addition and Preservation of Infrastructure and (iii) Establishment of 
New/Modernisation of Existing abattoirs. The Scheme was allocated a sum of 
Rs. 752.50 crore for the Eleventh Plan but actually a sum of Rs. 360.70 crore 
only was released. The much referred delays in planning and approvals and the 
consequent delayed releases of funds, etc. played their part in the sub -optimal 
performance of the Scheme. The Committee find that a sum of Rs. 191.00 crore 
has been allocated for the Sc heme for 2012 -13 and the Ministry have taken 
several positive measures to ensure that not only the allocated funds are spent 
but additional demands are raised for better physical achievements during the 
year. The Committee expect the Ministry to deliver on  their promise during the 
Fiscal.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The performance is being regularly monitored and it is expected that the 
funds will be fully utilised in the current financial year. 
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
MEGA FOOD PARKS  
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.33)   

 
 
  A sum of Rs. 86.00 crore has been allocated for the Mega Food Parks 
(MFPs) Component of the Scheme for Infrastructure Development. Ten MFPs 
were to be set-up during the first phase. The prescribed timeline for the project is 
24 months from the date of release of first installment. The Committee are 
unhappy to note that none of the ten MFPs have been able to adhere to this 
timeline. All the ten Projects have not  only missed this timeline by significant 
periods, none of them seems to be anywhere near full opertionalisation even 
now. The Committee had noted in their previous Reports that the Food Park 
Scheme which was the precursor of the MFPs had also failed miser ably due to 
several shortcomings in planning and implementation. They had, therefore, 
asked the Ministry to tread with extra caution on the implementation of the MFP 
Component. However, a critical appraisal of the Scheme in its extant form is yet 
to be don e and shared with the Committee. In the meantime problems which 
could not be foreseen by the Ministry are cropping up putting brakes on the 
timely implementation of these projects. The Committee, therefore, desire that a 
critical appraisal of the Component  be done without any further delay and 
correctives be put in place immediately. This acquires added urgency as the 
Ministry are moving towards decentralization of their Schemes in the Twelfth 
Plan and course correction at this juncture would be in the inte rest of both the 
Component and the public monies involved.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

 
 The Ministry has appointed a Programme Management Agency (PMA) for 
assisting the Ministry in implementation of the Mega Food Park Scheme. So far, 
the Ministry has approve d 15 Mega Food Park Projects out of which final 
approval has been accorded to 12 projects.  At the time of up -scaling of the 
Scheme in the 3 rd phase, a concurrent evaluation of the projects under 
implementation was done by the PMA. The findings of concurre nt evaluation 
were incorporated in the proposal for up -scaling of the Scheme and placed 
before CCEA.  
 
 With a view to have a critical appraisal for more effective implementation 
of the Scheme, the Ministry has engaged an independent professional agency, 
viz. M/s Centre for Market Research and Social Development for evaluation of 
the Scheme. The agency has been asked to submit the report by July, 2012. On 
submission of the report, necessary corrective steps and follow up action will be 
taken by the Ministry.  
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.23 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
 
COLD CHAIN, VALUE ADDITION AND PRESERVATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.34)   

 
The Committee note that during the Eleventh Plan 49 projects had been 
approved under this Component. Out of these 8 out of 10 projects that were 
approved in 2008 -09 are into commercial production. The remaining 39 projects 
which were approved in the last year of the Plan (2011 -12) are at various stages 
of implementation. For the Twelfth Plan the working group of Planning 
Commission has recommended for taking up of 140 new projects. However, 
pending finalization of the Twelft h Plan the situation is in a flux. Based on the 
contours of Plan, the Ministry intend to take up 30 new projects in 2012 -13. The 
Committee also note that as per the recommendations of the working group the 
assistance under this Component in the Twelfth Pla n for horticulture produce will 
be under Central Sector Scheme and for non -horticulture produce this 
Component will form part of a Centrally Sponsored Scheme. Since the exact 
arrangements of this bifurcation are yet to be formalized, the Committee desist 
from commenting on it. However, they hope that the process will be completed at 
the earliest so that further action for implementation of this Component is taken 
without any further loss of time.  
The Committee also note that a concurrent evaluation of Comp onent by a project 
management agency has reported substantive increase in shelf life, reduction in 
wastages and value addition. However, the agency has not quantified these 
achievements of the Component. The Committee find it very surprising as to how 
this important aspect has been missed in the evaluation and they would like to 
know whether this aspect was a part of the terms of reference of the evaluation. 
Even otherwise, the Committee desire that the Ministry should obtain the relevant 

 
data from the said project management agency on the basis of which it has come 
to these conclusions and share it with the Committee.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Ministry of Food Processing Industries awarded the evaluation to M/s 
IL&FS CDI to assess the impact of 10 cold chain projects approved in 2008 -09. 
The scope of work involves individual evaluation of 10 projects approved in 2008-
09. The finding of the impact assessment of individual project is enclosed at 
Annexure-I. In the eva luation study, the TOR did not cover the assessment on 
increase in shelf life and the agency has already finalized its study and submitted 
the report. However, the Ministry has again undertaken the evaluation of cold 
chain projects and M/s Center for Marke t Research and Social Development Pvt. 
Ltd. is undertaking the evaluation study. The suggestion of the Committee has 
been incorporated in the terms of reference of this evaluation study.   
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
                                           Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.26 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW/MODERNISATION OF EXISTING ABATTOIRS  
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.35)   

 
 Establishment of new/modernization of abattoirs is a Component of the 
Scheme Infrastructure Development. This Component aims at providing facilities 
for scientific and less painful slaughtering, chilling, rendering plant, effluent 
treatment plant, drainage , better hygiene, safety and retail cold chain 
management. In the first phase of the Component, ten Projects were approved 
with completion schedules ranging between April, 2010 and September, 2010 
except for the Project in Sikkim which was scheduled for co mpletion in 
November, 2011. The Committee, however, find that eight of these ten projects 
are yet to be completed. While the likely date of completion of three of them is 
now indicated as 2012 -13 in case of the remaining five projects, it has been 
indicated as 2013 -14. Apart from the delays in planning and approvals taking 
their toll of this Scheme, the delays in allocation of land for abattoirs by State 
Governments due to agitations/objections by local people, lack of availability of 
technical expertise, p rocedural delays, etc. have also contributed to this 
staggering of timelines of various projects. The Ministry now propose to have 50 
more such projects during the XIIth Plan however the final approval is awaited. 
To ensure that the future projects under t his Component are not delayed like the 
projects of first phase, the Ministry are considering more project management 
agencies for the new projects and other corrective meaures. But in the absence 
of formal approval this is only a futuristic contemplation. There are almost 3600 
slaughter houses in the Country in generally antiquated conditions, lacking 
modern equipment, proper sanitation and hygiene. The lack of facilities for 
scientific slaughtering not only is a cruelty on animals but also affects the qual ity 

 
of meat and other products. The Committee are of the considered view that this 
Component of the Scheme for Development of Infrastructure can go a long way 
in improving the existing situation. They, therefore, recommend that the 
modalities preparatory t o the implementation of Scheme in the Twelfth Plan be 
completed with due promptitude to facilitate its expeditious implementation.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The proposal for up -scaling of the Scheme of Setting up of New 
Abattoirs/Modernization of Existing Abattoirs at a cost of Rs. 330.84 crores to 
fund approximately 25 new abattoirs and modernize 25 existing Abattoirs (at a 
cost of Rs. 240.25 Crores) as well as complete ten running projects (at a cost of 
Rs. 74.83 Crores) and Programme Management Agency fe es of Rs. 15.75 
crores, has been recommended by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its 
meeting held on 28.02.2012. The Draft Note for CCEA has been approved by the 
Finance Minster and is ready for submission for approval of CCEA. This is a 
Central Sector Scheme to be implemented in the first two years of the 12th Five 
Year Plan. 
It is also submitted that the scheduled date for completion of Sikkim 
Abattoir project is May 2013 in place of November 2011 as mentioned in para 
3.35 of the Report. 
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
  

 
SCHEME FOR TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION, ESTABLISHMENT AND 
MODERNISATION OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES  
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.36)   
 The objectives of the Scheme for Technology, Upgradation, 
Establishment and Mode rnisation are to increase the level of processing, 
reduction of wastage, value addition, enhance the income of farmers as well as 
increase exports thereby resulting in overall economic development.  
This is one of the Schemes of the Ministry where they hav e always drawn higher 
allocations at the RE stage by their good performance. In the year 2007 -08 the 
BE figure of Rs. 72.00 crore was hiked to Rs. 113.50 crore while the actual 
expenditure was still higher at Rs. 119.30 crore. During the year 2008 -09 against 
the BE amount of Rs. 90.00 crore, the RE figure was Rs. 91.50 crore and the 
actual expenditure was in the range of Rs. 96.87 crore. In 2009 -10 against BE 
allocation of Rs. 60.00 crore, the RE allocation was more than 33% higher at Rs. 
82.51 crore and th e actual expenditure was Rs. 82.49 crore (upto 31 March, 
2010). In the next Fiscal, the BE amount of Rs. 81.00 crore was hiked to Rs. 
106.00 crore at the RE stage and the actual expenditure was Rs. 105.67 crore. In 
the last year of the Eleventh Plan viz. 2011-12, the BE of Rs. 98.00 crore was 
almost doubled to Rs. 185.47 crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure upto 
31 January, 2012 has been clocked at Rs. 137.76 crore. One more aspect that 
needs to be highlighted in the context of this Scheme is that f rom 1 April, 2012 
onwards this Scheme has been sponsored under the National Mission for Food 
Processing. It would hence forth be implemented as a Centrally Sponsored 

 
Scheme. The Committee, however, note that as on 31 March, 2012, the Ministry 
of Food Proce ssing Industries are having a pendency of 2613 applications for 
disbursal of grants under this Scheme. The Committee strongly feel that the 
change in the modalities of the Scheme ought not hinder the settlement of such a 
huge number of applications pending  with the Ministry. They, therefore, 
recommend the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance that while allocating 
funds for this Scheme during the various stages of this Fiscal they should ensure 
additional funds to the Ministry for settling the applications pending with them.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
           During 2012-13 BE of Rs. 100.00 crores has been provided for Scheme 
for Technology Upgradation /Establishment/ Modernization of Food Processing 
Industries towards committed liabilities prior to 31.3.2012.  
 
The scheme for Technology Upgradation/Establishment/ Modernization of 
Food Processing Industries has been subsumed in the New Centrally Sponsore d 
Scheme-National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP) being implemented 
through States/UTs during 12 th Plan w.e.f 1.4.2012.The Planning Commission 
has approved BE of              Rs. 250.00 crores for NMFP for ongoing/continuing 
components (including the abo ve scheme) as per 11 th Plan guidelines for 
implementation in 2012-13.  
        

 
It is proposed to seek Rs. 175 crores as additional funds to meet the 
committed liabilities/pending cases against the above scheme i.e. scheme for 
Technology Upgradation/ Establ ishment/Modernization of Food Processing 
Industries. 
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
  

 
SCHEME FOR UPGRADATION OF QUALITY OF STREET FOOD  
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.37)   
The Scheme for “Upgradation  of quality of Street Food ‟  was proposed in 
the Eleventh Plan. The Scheme has two components Viz. “Safe Food Town and 
the Food Street”. The Scheme is aimed at improving the quality of street food 
being served and laying down standards. However, the Scheme was not 
supported by Planning Commission and the Department of Expenditure. The 
Committee have been given to understand that the working group on food 
processing industries for the Twelfth Plan, in its report, has felt that upgradation 
of quality of street  food may be more appropriately handled by Department of 
Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA). Thus, MoFPI have forwarded the 
copy of the draft guidelines and the final version of the CCEA Note prepared by 
them to Department of HUPA for suitable cons ideration. The Department of 
HUPA have prepared a draft Note for the Cabinet proposing introduction of the 
Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihoods and Regulation of Street Vending) Bill, 
2012. The Committee expect the Ministry to pro -actively coordinate with the 
Department of HUPA so that their concerns in the matter are duly co -opted in the 
Bill.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Scheme prepared by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries for 
upgradation of quality of street food was not supported by the P lanning 

 
Commission and Department of Expenditure.  The Working Group on Food 
Processing Industries for 12 th Plan also felt that upgradation of quality of street 
food may be more appropriately handled by the Ministry of Housing & Urban 
Poverty Alleviation ( MOHUPA).  Accordingly, the draft guidelines along with 
CCEA note on the Scheme was sent to MOHUPA by the Ministry vide D.O. letter 
No. 1/3/2009 -Street Food dated 21.10.2011 from Secretary MFPI to Secretary 
MOHUPA requesting for suitable consideration on the issue. 
Subsequently, MOHUPA drafted the “The Street Vendors” (Protection of 
Livelihood & Regulation of Street Vending) Bill 2012.  This Ministry has 
supported the draft Cabinet Note on the “The Street Vendors” (Protection of 
Livelihood & Regulation of St reet Vending) Bill 2012, as the proposal would help 
regulation and improving the quality of street food. 
 
MOHUPA has again been reminded vide D.O. letter No. 1/3/2009 -Street 
Food dated 13th July 2012 from Secretary MFPI to Secretary MOHUPA. 
 
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
 
SCHEME FOR QUALITY ASSURANCE, CODEX STANDARDS AND 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AND OTHER PROMOTIONAL 
ACTIVITIES.  
 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.38)   

 
The objectives of the above mentioned Schemes are to motivate Food 
Processing Industries for adoption of food safety and quality assurance 
mechanisms, to prepare them to face the global competition in international trade 
in post WTO, to enable adherence to stringent quality in hygiene norms, to 
enhance product acceptance by  overseas buyers, to keep Indian Industry 
technologically abreast of international best practices and that the end 
product/outcome/findings of R&D work to benefit food processing industries 
sector.  
 
Under this Scheme the Ministry have not been able to uti lize allocated funds in 
the Eleventh Plan. The Ministry have attributed the delayed approvals as also 
non-receipt of eligible and viable proposals for this under utilization. The 
Committee are concerned about the continues under utilization under the 
Scheme and feel that it needs to be critically analysed so that atleast now when 
we are entering in the Twelfth Plan suitable course corrections are undertaken in 
the Scheme to make it more appealing and effective so that earmarked 
allocations are fully utilized in future.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In order to ensure better and more effective utilization of funds under the 
Scheme for Quality Assurance, Codex Standards and Research & Development 
and other Promotional Activities, this Ministry has decided to entru st 
implementation of the R&D component of the scheme to Science and 

 
Engineering Research Board (SERB), under the Ministry of Science and 
Technology and the Food Testing Laboratory component of the scheme to Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) un der the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE). This arrangement 
will come with effect from 01.04.2012; proposals received upto 31.03.2012 will be 
dealt with by the Ministry.  
  
 Under the revised arrangement, fun ds will be placed by MFPI with the 
SERB and ICAR for R&D and Laboratory Schemes, respectively and these 
organizations will evaluate, decide upon funding of individual proposals, monitor 
the progress and give periodical reports to MFPI on the progress of th e Scheme. 
MFPI will nominate one representative on the respective Committees of SERB 
and ICAR that will evaluate the individual proposals. MFPI will also ensure 
monitoring of implementation of the scheme. This arrangement has the benefit of 
getting better projects and promoting proper outcome of the scheme.  
  
The revised arrangement is under implementation during the financial year 2012 -
13.  
 
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.31 of Chapter – I this 
Report. 

 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FOOD TECHNOLOGY ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
AND MANAGEMENT (NIFTEM)  
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.39)   
 National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management 
(NIFTEM) is being set up as an Institute of global excellence in education and 
research in the areas of food technology. The Institute is being set up at Kundli, 
District Sonepat, Haryana.  
The establishment of NIFTEM which is a part of the Scheme for Strengthening of 
Institutions has been beset with several problems for quite sometime now. The 
Committee have commented on Ministry ‟ s performance in so far as NIFTEM is 
concerned in several of their previous Reports. The Institute has missed 
deadlines regarding the start of academic courses during the last two years due 
to inept planning and lack of foresight. Even now they are awaiting the grant of 
de novo deemed to be University status from  the UGC/the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development. The way NIFTEM matters have been handled in the 
past by the Ministry, the Committee are not sure whether they would be able to 
start admissions for various academic courses in the Institute even in July this 
year. The Committee would like the Ministry to appreciate the fact that because 
of delays in establishment and operationalisation of this Institute of immense 
importance several students have missed an opportunity to seek education in 
some of the fron tier areas in food technology during last two -three years. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry should now act in 

 
mission mode to complete the remaining formalities pertaining to the 
establishment and operationalisation of the Institut e without any further delay so 
that atleast admissions in various academic courses commence in July this year.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Ministry of HRD has granted  ‘deemed university’ status under ‘de 
novo’ category to the Institute o n 08/05/2012. Co nsequently, the I nstitute has 
released advertisements on 10/05/2012 inviting applications from students for 
admission for the 2012-2013 academic session starting from August 2012. 
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
 
NEW SCHEMES  
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.40)   
 The Committee note that the Ministry is embarking on an ambitious 
National Mission on Food Processing during the Twelfth Plan. Though, the 
details of the Mission are yet to be formalized, it is being implemented by States 
from 1 April, 2012 for the continuing Schemes of the Eleventh Plan. All the 
Schemes under the proposed Mission will be Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The 
Committee further note that this new Scheme will be characterized by a 
decentralized approach, which pro vides for a greater role of States/UTs, better 
out reach and effective supervision and monitoring. The Ministry have been, 
hitherto, implementing their Schemes as both the planners and the executors. 

 
Consequently, their meager resources and manpower were s tretched beyond 
limits, thereby, affecting their performance. The proposed new Mission with the 
characteristics mentioned above will provide the Ministry a welcome relief and 
enable them to focus on their primary role as a planners. Leaving the execution 
part to the State Governments, who are better equipped for the purpose, as they 
have direct interface with the users/stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that all necessary formalities concerning the Mission be completed 
post haste and its implementation started in right earnest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MFPI) has launched a new 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) - National Mission on Food Processing 
(NMFP) during the 12 th Plan (2012-13) to be implemented through States /UTs. 
The basic objective of NMFP is decentralization of implementation of Ministry’s 
schemes, which will lead to substantial participation of State Governments/UTs. 
The NMFP contemplates establishment of a National Mission as well as 
corresponding Missions in the State and District levels. The NMFP is likely to 
improve significantly the Ministry’s outreach in terms of planning, supervision and 
monitoring of assistance through this Scheme.  
This scheme will be implemented as a new centrally sponsored scheme in 
the ratio of 75 (GOI):25 (States); 90(GOI):10 (NE States) and UTs - 100% by 
GOI.    Allocation of funds to the States/UTs would be based on their population 
(50%) and Area (50%) and Minimum base/floor rat e /amount @ Rs. 2.00 crore 

 
for States and Rs. 1.00 crore for UTs. States will have flexibility to take up new 
schemes not envisaged in the guidelines or deviate from the NMFP guidelines 
with prior approval of the National Food Processing Development Counci l 
(NFPDC).  
         Planning Commission has conveyed “in -principle” approval for taking up 
preparatory activities/advance action by States/UTs for implementation of NMFP 
during 12th Plan, subject to concurrence of Department of Expenditure.  
Department of  Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has also conveyed 
approval for transferring funds amounting to Rs. 51 crores for taking up 
preparatory activities / advance action by States / UTs for implementation of 
NMFP and also making budget provisions of Rs. 12 cror es in aggregate 
corresponding to the proposed allocation for preparatory activities / advance 
action by States / UTs. 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on 18.5.2012 
has recommended the  launching of a new Centrally Sponsored Scheme – 
National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP) during 12 th Plan w.e.f 1.4.2012 
(2012-13). EFC also recommended for placing the above proposal of NMFP 
before CCEA for their consideration and approval with a total cost of Rs. 320 
crore for 2012-13, of which GOI share would be Rs. 250 crores and States share 
Rs. 70 crores. The CCEA note is expected to be placed shortly before the CCEA 
for its consideration.  
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 

 
  

 
CHAPTER –III 
 
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-  NIL -  

 
CHAPTER –IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR  
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 2.20)   
  Due to rapid strides made in the Agriculture and Allied Sectors, India has 
not only achieved self-sufficiency and food security but there is now a situation of 
surplus in some of the agriculture and allied –sector products. Inspite of this, the 
universal availability of the agriculture and allied products has not shown any 
improvement. This unfortunate situation obtains mainly due to the fact that there 
is a severe lack of food processing facilities and infrastructure in the supply chain 
from the farm-gate to the consumers. This results in substantial post harvest crop 
losses and also restricted supply because of short shelf life of these products. 
Due to these handicaps, apart from the gaps in availability, in so far as 
consumers are concerned, the farmers are also deprived of adequate 
remuneration because of their low holding capacity. The Committee have been, 
therefore, emphasizing in their successive Reports about the need for inf usion of 
sufficient amount of capital in the food processing industry sector so that it is able 
to contribute optimally to the Indian economy. 
 

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
To infuse sufficient amount of capital in the food processing industry 
sector, Ministry of Food Processing Industries has launched a New Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme - National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP) during 12 th 
Plan w.e.f 1.4.2012 through States / UTs. This would be decidedly a paradigm 
shift in the Ministry‘s approach and is driven  by the need to make food 
processing truly a national initiative. This would give a great boost to the sector 
and help to infuse more capital in different parts of the food processing industry. 
The other schemes notably the I nfrastructure Schemes (Mega Food Park, 
Cold Chain & Abattoir) are also being expanded and continued in the XII Plan. 
This would also help to infuse more capital in the food processing sector. 
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 2.21)   
  During the course of the Eleventh Plan the funding of the Ministry left a lot 
to be desired. However, appreciating the fact that the Eleventh Plan was beset 
with inordinate delays in approvals and clearances of Schemes le ading to the 
fund flow not being optimized, the Committee had expected that the Ministry will 
get its due atleast in the Twelfth Plan. Disappointingly, as the subsequent 
narrative will prove, the Planners and the Government are yet to realize the true 
potential of the food processing industry sector and therefore, the genuine 
requirements of funds of the Ministry have been summarily treated.  
 

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The concern of the Committee on inadequate allocation to the Food 
Processing Sector has been brought to the notice of the Planning Commission 
vide D.O. letter No. 1 -24/2012-PC dated 19.06.2012. The Planning Commission 
has been requested to suitably enhance  the allocation for the various 
programmes of the Ministry during 12 th Plan keeping in view the observations of 
the Parliamentary Standing Committee.  
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS  
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 2.22)   
 The Committee find from Demand No. 45 pertaining to the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries that for ongoing financial year viz. 2012-13, a sum of 
Rs. 670.54 crore has been allocated to the Ministry. The entire allocation is in the 
Revenue Section. Out of this, Rs. 660.00 crore has been allocated on the Plan 
Side which is 20% more than the RE figure of Rs. 550.00 crore in the year gone 
by. On the Non -Plan Side, the Ministry have been allocated Rs. 10.54 crore 
which is slightly higher than the last year ‟ s allocation of Rs. 10.09 crore. The 
allocation of the Ministry needs to be seen in the context of the Outlay of Rs. 
1200.00 crore sought by them for Annual Plan 2012 -13. One of the reasons for 
the drastic scaling down of the Ministry’s proposal is their not so good spending 

 
record during the Eleventh Plan. However, the Committee are aware that the 
Ministry, at best, can only be partially blamed for their financial perf ormance in 
the Eleventh Plan. The fact is that due to delays in planning and approvals, 
actual progress in the Schemes was possible only from the Third year of the 
Eleventh Plan. The actual reason, therefore, for the Ministry not having their way 
with the allocation for Annual Plan 2012 -13 appears to be that the Twelfth Plan 
Outlay is yet to be decided upon, hence, the allocation has been made as a stop 
gap and ad-hoc measure without going into the merits of the Ministry ‟ s 
requirements. Since, an opportunit y for enhancement of allocations would now 
arise only at the RE stage, which is still far off, the Committee feel that the 
problem of paucity of funds with the Ministry can be attended to by synergizing, 
wherever feasible, some of their Schemes with such o ther Schemes of other 
Ministries/Departments like RKVY of the Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation, where the States would have the discretion of utilising the funds for 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries also.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Ministry has launched a centrally Sponsored Scheme namely the 
National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP) which will be implemented through 
the State/UT Governments. This will enable the States to synergize the 
resources whereve r feasible with other Centrally Sponsored Schemes like 
RKVY/NHM and State/UT Government schemes. The Infrastructure 
Development Programme of the Ministry like Mega Food Parks, Integrated Cold 

 
Chain will be modified to achieve synergies with the schemes of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and other Departments. 
 
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
  

 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 - NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           
NEW DELHI                              BASUDEB 
ACHARIA 
22 February, 2013                                                                Chairman, 
03 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)                             Committee on 
Agriculture. 
 

 
 

 
APPENDIX  
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 2 2 February, 2013 from 1000 hours to 
1025 hours in Room  No. ‘62’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
                            LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe  
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan  
4.  Shri Premdas Katheria  
5.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi  
6.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra  
7.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha  
8.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana  
9.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
10.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
11.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan  
12.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao  
13.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini  
14.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari  
15.  Shri S. Thangavelu  
 
SECRETARIAT 

 
1. Shri P.C. Koul  -  Director 
2. Shri T.H. Rao  -  Deputy Secretary 
2. At the outset the  Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee, then, took up Memorandum No. 06 regarding draft 
Report on action t aken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty -third Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries. 
*3. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***   
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report s without any 
modifications.  
*5. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***   
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
______________________________________________________________________________
__ 
* Matter not related with this Report 
  

 
Annexure-I 
Impact assessment of 10 cold chain projects approved  in 2008 -09  
by M/s. IL& FS CDI. 
 
Project Names Project impact as mentioned in the report 
submitted on 29.10.2010 
Atharvass Traders Private Limited  Not given as the project was at a very early 
stage of implementation  
Ascon Agro Products Exporters & 
Builders Pvt. Ltd 
Establishment of a cold chain facility at 
Dhaniakhali, is expected to have an impact on 
various stakeholders by reduction in wastages of 
the produce. The promoters expect that setting 
up collection centers close to production hub 
and providing pre -cooling facilities will help 
about 4500 farmers in reducing their wastages. 
Further, providing MA storage will increase the 
shelf life of the p roducts, their marketability, and 
hedge farmers against losses. Farmers will have 
greater access to larger market and hence 
obtain better price for their produce. Moreover, 
the project will also generate employment for 
both skilled and un -skilled manpower,  directly 
and indirectly.  
 

 
However, the impact assessment of project in 
terms of better prices for farmers, increased 
production & productivity, reduced wastages and 
employment can be done after the project is 
operational for a considerable period of time . At 
this stage, these may be considered as the 
intended benefits from the project. 
Biolife Foods Pvt. Ltd.  Not given. 
Creamline Dairy Products Ltd  
 
Employment generation:  
i. The promoters have claimed to create 
additional employment for 1500 persons 
in the organized sector.  
ii. Increase in value addition:  
 
The project has brought 1.44 lakh litres milk per 
day into organized industry and it is expected to 
reach 3.89 lakh litres per day at full capacity. 
 
Farm Fresh Banana The project has potential of providing immense 
help in improvement of banana value chain in its 
catchment area. Promoters said that on farm 
processing, sorting- grading, and better handling 
of products have reduced the wastages and 

 
increased the shelf life  of products. The 
promoters have also suggested that due to 
these interventions, realization of farmers from 
banana cultivation has increased significantly. 
On the employment aspect, the project has 
provided jobs to around 250 persons at value 
added center s and collection centers Women 
constitutes majority of the workforce (150 out of 
250 are women). The indirect employment is 
expected to be more than 1000 at various points 
of value chain in next couple of years. 
Freshtrop Fruits Ltd The promoters informed  that the prices of 
Totapuri mangoes and white guava from this 
area have increased after the project. The 
availability of processing facilities in the vicinity 
of production area has opened the market for 
processing grade products and farmers are able 
to r ealize differential pricing for various product 
grades. This project has benefited the farmers 
from this area.  
 
However, the impact assessment of project in 
terms of better prices for farmers, increased 

 
production & productivity, reduced wastages, 
and employment can be done after the project is 
operational for a considerable period of time. At 
this stage, these are the intended benefits from 
the project. 
Ganga Dairy Ltd. At present, the direct employment provided by 
the project is close to 100, from 10 operational 
collection centers. As the project progresses, all 
the collection centers along with value added 
centers and distribution become operational, the 
direct employment is expected to be about 1200. 
The total expected indirect employment 
generated from the project can be more than 
5000 in various districts of Bihar.  
 
Milk producers of this area have been benefitted 
by the project. Now, farmers have more options 
for se lling their produce compared to earlier 
scenario when COMFED has near monopoly on 
organized milk procurement in North Bihar. 
Hi-Tech Frozen Facilities Private 
Limited 
Establishment of a cold chain facility is expected 
to have beneficial impact on various 
stakeholders by generating additional 

 
employment, increasing income of the farmers, 
increasing value of the produce, and reducing 
wastages. It is expected that more than 3000 
farmers and traders will be benefited by the 
project.  
 
However, a real impact as sessment of project in 
terms of better prices for farmers, increased 
production & productivity, reduced wastages and 
creation employment can be done only after the 
project is operational for a considerable period 
of time. At this stage, these are the inten ded 
benefits from the project. 
Jhunsons Chemicals Private 
Limited 
Irradiation technology increases the shelf life of 
food products by exposing it to ionizing radiation 
for destroying microorganisms, bacteria, viruses 
or insects that might be present in th e food. Its 
main applications include sprout inhibition, delay 
of ripening, increase of juice yield, and 
improvement of re -hydration. Irradiated food 
does not become radioactive, but in some cases 
there may be subtle chemical changes. 
Therefore, irradiation technology adds significant 

 
value by way of ensuring hygienic food products 
to end- customers at a reasonable price.  
 
The impact of project in terms of prices, 
production, wastages and employment would be 
fully ascertained only after the project is 
operational for a considerable period of time. At 
this stage, acceptability of the irradiation 
technology in food industry is quite low. The 
promoters are trying to increase awareness for 
the technology which may help in increasing 
their market base. Regarding  the employment, 
about 75 -120 people shall be employed 
depending upon the capacity utilization of the 
plant. It is estimated that the direct employment 
generation potential may go up to 200 -250 once 
the plant achieves 80 percent or more capacity 
utilization 
Suri Agro Fresh Private Ltd The setting up of an integrated cold chain facility 
in Haryana is likely to add value to the existing 
supply chain of fruits and other perishables. It 
shall benefit both the farmers and the traders by 
reducing product wastages by providing cold 

 
storage facilities. Setting up of CA storage at the 
project site will increase the shelf life of the 
products, their marketability and hedge farmers 
risk against price fluctuation. It is envisaged that 
farmers will have greater access to bigger 
markets and hence obta in better price for their 
produce. This, in turn, will significantly increase 
farmers income and they will have better 
incentives to produce good quality products. 
Moreover, the project will also generate 
employment for both skilled and un -skilled 
manpower, directly and indirectly. Overall, the 
project will have an impact on more than 2000 
farmers. 
 
 (Letter No.6-03/2012-Parl dated 16th July, 2012) 
  

 
ANNEXURE II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE THIRTY-THIRD REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13) PERTAINING TO MINISTRY 
OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations               16 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Para Nos. 1.4, 2.23, 2.24, 2.25, 3.32, 3.33, 3.34, 3.35, 3.36, 3.37,  
3.38, 3.39 and 3.40. 
 
Total           13 
Percentage                          81.25%
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Total                   NIL 
Percentage                               0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos.  2.20, 2.21 and 2.22    
Total             03  
Percentage             
 18.75% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Total            NIL 
  
Percentage                    0% 
 
 