 -1- 
      
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITIES FOR DEVELOPMENT OF 
FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES-AN EVALUATION 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2011/ BHADRAPADA, 1933 (Saka) 
21 

 -2- 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
  
 
INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITIES FOR DEVELOPMENT OF 
FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES-AN EVALUATION 
 
 
         Presented to Lok Sabha on             23.08.2011 
     Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  23.08.2011 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2011/ BHADRAPADA, 1933 (Saka) 
 

 -3- 
 
COA No. 244 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
         
© 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 

 -4- 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (2010-11)              (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (2009-10)              (v) 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………           (vii) 
 
ABBREVIATIONS……………………………………………………………….    (ix) 
 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTORY                1 
 
       
CHAPTER II MEGA FOOD PARKS        13 
     
 
CHAPTER III INTEGRATED COLD CHAIN AND PRESERVATION        54 
INFRASTCTURE  
           
    
CHAPTER IV  SETTING UP OF NEW ABATTOIRS/      66 
MODERNISATION OF EXISTING ABATTOIRS      
 
 
ANNEXURES   
 
I. Details of potential clusters in Food Processing Sector             79 
 
II. Details of grant-in-aid disbursed to Mega Food Parks             83 
 
III. Position of SPVs                    84 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I.   Minutes of the 3rd Sitting of the Committee (2009-10) held on    86 
 16 September, 2009. 
 
II.  Minutes of the 19th Sitting of the Committee (2009-10) held on   88 
17 February, 2010. 
 
III. Minutes of the 9th Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held on   91 
22 November, 2010. 
 
IV. Minutes of the  37th  Sitting of the Committee (2010-11) held    93 
on 11 August, 2011. 
  
 
(i) 

 -5- 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
 (2010-2011) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhary  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. 
23. 
Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
Shri Narendra Budania  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri A. Elavarasan  
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 
(iii) 

 -6- 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 -7- 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
 (2009-2010) 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhry  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
^22. 
23. 
Shri Narendra Budania 
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24. 
$25.            
Shri A. Elavarasan 
Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
        *31.           Shri Khekiho Zhimomi          
 
*   Vice Shri Khekiho Zhimomi who ceased to be the Member of the Committee 
on his  retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 April, 2010 and Smt. B. Jayashree 
nominated on 2 July, 2010. 
^  Vice Shri Narendra Budania who  ceased to be the Member of the Committee 
on his  retirement from Rajya Sabha on 4 July, 2010. 
$  Vice Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi who ceased to be the Member of the 
Committee on his  retirement from Rajya Sabha on 4 July, 2010. 
 
(v)

 -8- 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty-first Report on „Infrastructural Facilities for Development of Food 
Processing Industries – An Evaluation‟. 
2. The Committee (2009-10), taking into consideration the appalling 
state of food processing industry sector in the Country and the pressing 
need to ensure remunerative prices to the farmers for their produce, 
had selected this subject for detailed examination an d Report to 
Parliament.  The Committee (2009 -10) were briefed on the subject by 
the representatives of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries on 16 
September, 2009 and took their Oral Evidence at the Sitting held on 17 
February, 2010. The Committee on Agriculture (2010 -11) decided to 
continue the examination of the Subject and took further Oral Evidence 
of the representatives of the Ministry on 22 November, 2010. The 
Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries for appearing before them and furnishing the 
information, the Committee desired in connection with the examination 
of the subject. 
3. The Committee also wish to express their sincere thanks to their 
predecessor Committee for the significant c ontribution made by them in 
the examination of the subject.  The Report was considered and adopted 
by the Committee at their Sitting held on 11 August, 2011. 
 
4. For facility of reference the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of each Chapter 
of the Report. 
           
NEW DELHI;                 BASUDEB ACHARIA 
17 August, 2011                            Chairman, 
26 Sravana,1933 (Saka)                       Committee on Agriculture  
                                              (vii) 

 -9- 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AEZs Agricultural Export Zones 
AIDC Assam Industrial Development Corporation Ltd. 
APEDA                      
 
Agricultural & Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority 
APSIDC                          Andhra Pradesh State Industrial Corporation Ltd. 
ASIDC Assam Small Scale Industrial Development 
Corporation Ltd. 
BE Budget Estimate 
CA       Control Atmosphere 
CIP                                 Chloro-Iso-Propenyle 
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EEZ Exclusive Economic Zone 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
EoI 
ETP 
Expression of Interest 
Effluent Treatment Plant 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
HSIIDC 
 
Haryana State  Industrial and Infrastructural 
Development Corporation Ltd 
IFW Integrated Finance Wing 
IICPT Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology 
IQF Individually Quick Frozen 
MFP 
MFPCCC 
Mega Food Parks 
Mega Food Park Co-Ordination Committee 
MoFPI Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
 
 
(ix)

 -10- 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 (x)  
 
 
 
MTA Mid Term Appraisal 
 
NER North Eastern Region 
NHM  National Horticulture Mission 
NIFTEM National Institute of Food Technology 
Entrepreneurship and Management 
 
PAC Project Approval Committee 
PAIC Punjab Agro Industries Corporation Ltd. 
PMA Project Management Agency 
PPC Primary Processing Centres 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
R & D Research and Development 
RE Revised Estimate  
SIDBI        Small Industries Development Bank of India 
SIDCO      Small Industries Development Corporation Ltd. 
SME’s           Small and Micro Enterprises 
SNAs State Nodal Agencies 
SPV  Special Purpose Vehicle 
SSI Small Scale Industries 
UCs 
UPSIDC 
Utilization Certificates 
Uttar Pradesh Small Industries Development 
Corporation Ltd. 

 -11- 
 
  
CHAPTER – I 
  
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries was set up in July, 
1988 to give impetus to the development of food processing sector in 
the Country. Subsequently,  on 15 October, 1999 it was made a 
Department and brought under the Ministry of Agriculture. It was again 
notified as Ministry of Food Processing Industries on 6 September, 2001. 
 
1.2 The Ministry have informed the Committee that the major issue 
facing the Country is ensur ing remunerative prices to the f armers for 
their produce. If the surplus production of cereals, fruits, vegetables, 
milk, fish, meat and poultry, etc. are processed and marketed both 
inside and outside the Country there will be greater opportunities for 
adding to the income of farmers an d employment. Thus, a strong and 
dynamic food processing sector plays a vital role in diversification and 
commercialisation of agriculture, enhances shelf life, ensures value 
addition to agricultural produce, generates employment, enhances 
income of farmers and creates markets for export of agro foods.   
 
1.3 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries have stated that they 
are concerned with formulation and implementation of the policies and 
plans for the food processing industry sector within the overall n ational 
priorities and objectives.  They act as a catalyst for bringing in great 
investment into this sector, guiding and helping the industry, and 
creating a conducive environment for healthy growth of the food 
processing industry sector.   
 

 -12- 
Within these overall objectives, the Ministry aims at: 
 . Better utilization and value-addition of agricultural produce. 
. Minimising wastage s at all stages in the food processing 
chain by development of infrastructure for storage, 
transportation and processing of agro-produce. 
. Induction of modern technology into the food processing 
industries. 
. Encouraging R&D in food processing for product and process 
development. 
. Providing policy support, promotional initiatives and facilities 
to promote value added exports. 
. Create the critical infrastructure to fill the gaps in the supply 
chain from farm to consumer. 
1.4  The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that India 
produces 110 million tonnes of milk annually and occupies first position  
in the world in production of milk.  India produces 150 million tonnes of 
fruits and vegetables which makes India second largest producer of 
vegetables and fruits.  India produces annually 485 million livestock 
(largest), 230 million tonnes food -grain (third largest), 7.0 million  
tonnes of fish  (3rd largest), 489 million poultry and 45,200 million eggs. 
India‟s agricultural production base is strong but at the same time 
wastage of agricultural produce is massive.  Processing level is very low 
i.e. around 2.2% for fruits & vegetab les compared to countries like USA 
(65%), Philippines (78%) and China (23%); 26% for marine, 6% for 
poultry and 20% for buffalo meat, as against 60 -70% in developed 
countries.  The share of India‟s export of processed food in global trade 
is presently 1.5 % only. Even, within the Country, the share of fruits 
and vegetables processed is much less when compared to other 
agricultural products such as milk (35%) and marine products (26%). 
The enormity of losses due to lack of processing and storage facilities i n 
the Country can be gauged from the fact that as per conservative 
estimates 35% of the fruits and vegetables valued at more than 

 -13- 
Rs.50000 crore are lost every year in the absence of suitable processing 
and storage facilities.  
 
1.5 A developed food proces sing industry sector would thus, not only 
reduce wastages, but also increasingly fetch remunerative income to 
farmers, which is another problem confronting the agriculture sector at 
present. The Ministry have informed that as a result of the initiatives 
taken by them during last 4 -5 years, the sector is growing at an 
average rate of 13.5% a s compared to 7 -8% growth rate of industry 
sector as a whole. The processing level has gone up by 6% from 20% to 
26%. The quantum of wastage of perishables has gone down 
considerably from 35% to 30%. When queried about the details of the 
studies based on which these figures have been arrived at and the 
particulars of data base indices used for  these studies, the Ministry 
replied that the data relating to the growth rate of  the food processing 
sector as well as the processing level and quantum of wastage of 
perishables,  is only an estimation based on regular discussions with the 
stakeholders with the secondary data generated by such stakeholders as 
the basis. 
 
1.6  It has f urther been stated that the food processing industry 
sector has been facing constraints like non -availability of adequate 
critical infrastructural facilities, like cold chain, packing and grading 
centres, lack of adequate quality control and testing infras tructure, 
inefficient supply chain, shortage of processable varieties of farm 
produce, seasonality of raw material, high inventory carrying cost, high 
taxation, high packaging cost, affordability and cultural preference for 
fresh food. 
 
1.7  When queried about the very low levels of food processing in the 
Country, the Ministry in their written submission stated that the same 
was due to low access of credit for farmers, as well as small and 

 -14- 
medium food processors. Among st the various measures taken by the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries to ensure liberal access of credit 
to the above groups include requesting Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to 
create a vertical in the Bank‟s Reporting System for monitoring the 
credit flow to the micro, small and medium foo d processors. When 
asked about the details of the proposal of the Ministry to RBI and their 
response in the matter, the Ministry stated that  no formal proposal was 
sent by the Ministry to RBI for creation of a separate vertical for the 
Sector. However, the  matter was discussed in a meeting taken by 
Secretary of the Ministry on 12 August, 2009 with representatives of 
Ministry of Finance, RBI and financial institutions/bankers. The meeting 
was called to discuss means to increase the flow of credit to the Sect or 
and it‟s monitoring. In the meeting, RBI informed that credit above 
Rs.2.00 lakhs is already maintained in the Basic Statistical Return 1A. 
Apart from this, half-yearly monitoring of data and advances to the food 
processing sector is already being done by the RBI.  
 
1.8 The Ministry have further stated that they  have requested the 
Indian Banks Association that District Food Processing Plan be prepared 
as a part of District Credit Plan by each Bank. Besides, the Ministry have 
also identified that a strategy of „Adoption of Small and Micro enterprise 
food processing clusters by Banks‟ is most crucial for growth and 
development of SMEs in this sector. When queried about the present 
status of the District Food Processing Plan and the p rogress made with 
regard to strategizing „Adoption of Small and Micro enterprise food 
processing clusters by Banks, the Ministry in their written reply have 
stated that the preparation of the District Food processing Plan, as part 
of the District Credit Plan by each Bank was disc ussed in the meeting 
taken by Secretary of the Ministry with the financial institutions, RBI 
and Ministry of Finance on 12 August, 2009. In the meeting, it was 
decided that the issue would be examined in greater detail by a smaller 

 -15- 
committee of the partici pants in the meeting. In the meeting, the need 
to identify special food processing clusters for credit disbursement was 
also discussed.  The Ministry have written to a number of banks urging 
them to adopt such a policy for credit flow to the Sector. Based upon 
the response received, the Ministry have identified a list of potential 
clusters that can be adopted (Annexure-1). 
 
1.9 The Ministry have informed that based on a study to suggest a 
road map for the growth of Food Processing Sector, a Vision Document 
suggesting a strategy  and action plan for Food Processing Sector in 
India namely Vision 2015 was prepared and adopted by the 
Government. The adopted Vision 2015 provides for enhancing the level 
of processing of perishable from 6% to 20%, enhancing value a ddition 
from 20% to 35% and increasing India‟s share in global food trade from 
1.5% to 3% by the year 2015. To achieve these targets, an investment 
of Rs. one lakh crores was estimated by year 2015, out of which Rs. 
10,000  crores was to come from Governme nt. Accordingly, the Ministry 
formulated its 11 th Plan Schemes to attract the required investment in 
the sector. 
 
1.10 When asked how the Government envisaged this investment of 
Rs. one lakh crore and from where and in what manner do they expect 
the investments to the tune of Rs. 45000/ - crore each come from both 
the private sector and the financial sector and Rs. 10000/ - crore from 
the Government sector , the Ministry in a detailed note stated that the 
investment target of Rs. one lakh crore was envisaged b y the Ministry 
on the basis of the projections/assessments given in the Vision 2015 
document. The food processing sector is highly fragmented sector apart 
from being dominated by the un -organised sector. As such, the data 
pertaining to the quantum of funds  actually raised from the three 
sectors, is not available with the Ministry. The Ministry is in the process 

 -16- 
of hiring an agency for the creation of an extensive food processing 
information system that would capture such data on a real-time basis. 
 
Schemes For Infrastructure Development 
 
1.11 As stated previously in th is Report a major factor coming in the 
way of agro/food processing in the Country is inadequate infrastructure.  
Infrastructure development has, therefore, been identified as a thrust 
area for intervention by the Ministry.  In order to address the problems 
of infrastructural constraints in the food processing industry sector, the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries had implemented a Scheme for 
Infrastructure Development during Tenth Plan comp rising of the 
following components to address different aspects of food processing 
related infrastructure :- 
 > Food Parks 
 > Integrated Cold Chain Facility 
 > Packaging Centre 
 > Value Added Centre 
 > Irradiation Facilities 
 > Setting up/Modernisation of Abattoir 
 
1.12 The Committee have been informed that in the Eleventh Plan, the 
Scheme of Infrastructure Development has three components namely, 
(a) Mega Food Parks, (b) Integrated Cold Chains and Preservation 
Infrastructure, (c) Modernization and Setting -up of Abattoirs as a new 
Scheme. The Scheme was approved by Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs (CCEA) on 11 September, 2008.  To begin with, in all three 
components of the Scheme only partial number of projects were allowed 
to be taken up in the first p hase and subsequent expansion is taking a 
long time.  The progress made in respect of each of the above three 
Schemes is  further discussed in the succeeding Chapters of this Report. 
 

 -17- 
1.13 The Committee note with concern the appalling state of 
food processi ng sector in the Country. In spite of an exclusive 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries, functioning at the Union 
Government level for more than  two decades now, the levels of 
food processing are abysmally low when compared with other 
countries.  And ye ar after year, the benefits of a strong 
agriculture production base are being frittered away with 
monotonous regularity due to lack of storage and processing 
infrastructure.  The gravity of the situation can be realized from 
the fact that the post harvest losses of fruits and vegetables are 
as high as 35 per cent, valuing more than Rs.50000 crore per 
annum.  Th is is due to the sad fact that the processing levels of 
fruits and vegetables are a mere 2.2 per cent as compared to 
USA (65 per cent), Philippines ( 78 per cent) and China (23 per 
cent).  In case of the marine products, poultry and buffalo meat 
where processing levels are as high as 60 -70 per cent in 
developed countries, we are able to process hardly 26 per cent, 
6 per cent and 20 per cent respectively . With such a pathetic 
situation obtaining in the food processing sector, our export 
share of processed food in the global trade is at an abysmal level 
of around 1.5 per cent.   
 
1.14 Another serious drawback of the low food processing 
capabilities is that  the farmers of the Country in spite of toiling 

 -18- 
ceaselessly, are not able to derive the full benefits of the 
plethora of schemes of the Government meant for them, as most 
of what they produce, does not get a remunerative price and is 
lost tragically in the absence of adequate storage and processing 
facilities.  The Committee are highly disappointed to find that 
while the Government has focused on strategies to increase the 
production of food grains, fruits, vegetables, marine , meat, 
poultry, dairy products and other consumables, they have 
singularly failed to ensure that the increase in production of 
these items should have had a matching creation of storage and 
processing facilities.  The result of this myopic view of the 
Government is that while the farmer  of the Country has kept his 
side of the promise by stellar contributions towards food grain 
production and food security of the Country, the lack of 
infrastructure for storage and processing of food grains and 
other items is resulting in a colossal damage s in terms of post 
harvest loss thereby putting paid to the efforts of our farmers.  
As will be proven by the subsequent narrative in this Report, the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries have been suffering from 
a serious lack of vision and an inertia i n discharging their 
responsibilities. Resultantly not much attention has been paid to 
enhancement of the infrastructural facilities for development of 
food processing industry sector in the Country. 
  

 -19- 
1.15 The Committee had been informed by the Ministry du ring 
the course of their examination of this Subject that their 
initiatives of the last 4 -5 years have led to average growth rate 
of the Sector climbing to 13.5 per cent.   The processing levels 
have gone up from 20 per cent to 26 per cent.  The quantum of  
waste of perishables have gone down from 35 to 30 per cent.  
The Committee, however, cannot but, consider the se 
achievements of the Ministry with a pinch of salt, as their 
estimation is based merely on ‘regular discussions’ with 
stakeholders.  Arriving at conclusions on such important matters 
on the basis of mere discussions throws a lot of light on the 
sanctity of the data flaunted in support  and speaks v olumes on 
the manner of working of the Ministry in charge of the ‘Sunshine’ 
sector of the Indian econo my.  The glaring absence of an 
information system for compiling data and indices pertaining to 
the food processing industry sector in the Country, inspite of the 
Ministry being in existence for two decades now, also reflects 
poorly on the planning and mana gement capabilities of the 
Ministry.    
 
1.16 Be it their Vision 2015 Document or their intended proposal 
for creation of a vertical in the reporting system of Reserve Bank 
of India for monitoring credit flow to the marginal, small and 
medium food processo rs or their proposal to the Indian Banks 

 -20- 
Association that a district food processing plan be worked out by 
each bank, all  smack of a non -serious and ad hoc approach 
towards ensuring the much needed changes in the extant food 
processing industry sector.  In case of the Vision 2015 a massive 
sum of Rs.1 lakh crore has been worked out as the requirement 
for food processing industry sector in the Country upto 2015 
without any comprehensive studies or access to scientific data 
base pertaining to the sector.  
 
1.17 In like manner, the Ministry has assumed their 
responsibility to have ended in regard to creation of a vertical in 
the reporting system of Reserve Bank of India for monitoring 
credit flow to the marginal, small and medium food processors 
once this matt er was discussed by the Secretary of the Ministry 
with the representatives of Ministry of Finance, Reserve Bank of 
India and financial institutions/banks way back on 12 August, 
2009.  The Ministry also felt that they had fulfilled their 
responsibility in regard to the district food processing plan being 
prepared as a part of district credit plan by each bank once it 
was discussed with the representatives of Indian Banks 
Associations during the meeting of 12 August, 2009 mentioned 
above.  
 

 -21- 
1.18 In the considered opinion of the Committee the extant low 
levels of food processing in the Country, among other things, are 
also due to the low access to credit for farmers as well as small 
and medium food processors.  They, therefore, recommend that 
rather than contin ue to derive solace from the meeting of 12 
August, 2009, the Ministry should immediately get down to the 
task of preparing cogent proposals both in regard to creation of 
vertical in the reporting system of the Reserve Bank of India as 
also for inclusion of  district food processing plan in the district 
credit plan by banks.  They should, thereafter, take up these 
proposals in right earnest with the Reserve Bank of India and 
Indian Banks Association with a view to fructify them in a highly 
time bound manner.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the results of the efforts of the Ministry on these aspects.   
 
1.19 The Committee are of a firm view that the Ministry cannot 
achieve much in their mandated role and responsibility with 
such an approach.  The fo od processing industry sector in its 
present state cannot be expected by any stretch of imagination 
to be able to plug the colossal post harvest crops losses 
occurring year after year in the Country.  The Ministry have to, 
instead, pull up their socks and get down to the task of creation 
of infrastructure facilities for the food processing industry sector 
in the Country on a war footing basis, to ensure that the hard 

 -22- 
labour put in by the Country’s farming community does not go 
down the drain due to their fa ilure to create sufficient storage 
and processing infrastructure facilities in the Country 
expeditiously.    
   
1.20 The Committee have taken note of the fact that in the 
Tenth Plan the Scheme of Infrastructure Development included 
components like Food Park, Integrated Cold Chain Facility, Value 
Added Centre, Packaging Centre, Irradiation Facilities and 
Setting-up/Modernization of Abattoirs.   In the Eleventh Plan the 
Infrastructure Development Scheme has been remodeled as a 
new Scheme and consists of only three components viz. Mega 
Food Parks, Integrated Cold Chain and Preservation 
Infrastructure and Modernization and Setting -up of Abattoirs.  
The new Scheme has been examined and commented upon in 
the succeeding Chapters.  
 
 
 
 
 

 -23- 
CHAPTER-II 
 
MEGA FOOD PARKS 
  
The Mega Food Parks component of the Scheme for Infrastructure 
Development slated for implementation during Eleventh Five Year Plan, 
aims to provide a mechanism to bring together farmers, processors and 
retailers and link agricultural production to the m arket so as to ensure 
maximising value addition, minimising wastages, increasing farmers‟ 
income and creating employment opportunities in rural sector.  Mega 
Food Parks envisage a well -defined agri/horticultural -processing zone 
containing state -of-the-art processing facilities with support 
infrastructure and well-established supply chain.  Primarily this Scheme 
is meant to facilitate establishment of integrated value chain, with 
processing at the core and supported by requisite forward and backward 
linkages. 
 
2.2 The objectives of the Scheme are as follows: 
 
(a) Provide state-of-the-art infrastructure for food processing in 
the Country in selected clusters to be identified in a demand 
driven manner. 
(b) Ensure value addition of agricultural commodities including 
poultry, meat, dairy, fisheries, etc. 
(c) Establish a sustainable raw material supply chain for each 
cluster 
(d) Facilitate induction of latest technology. 
(e) Address issues of small farm size and small and medium 
nature of processing industries through a cluster approa ch 
with stakeholders managing the supply chain. 

 -24- 
(f) Provide an institutional mechanism for producers, 
processors, and retailers to work together to build the 
supply chain. 
 
2.3 The salient features of this Scheme are as follows: 
 
 A cluster -based approach would  be adopted taking into 
consideration existing NHM Cluster and AEZs promoted by 
APEDA. A detailed techno feasibility study and DPR would be 
undertaken to map the supply chain, identify potential 
investors, estimate project cost and its potential to exploit  
economies of scale. 
 The techno feasibility study and detailed project report 
would analyse raw material availability, seasonality, existing 
supply chain, infrastructure need and gap assessment. It 
would be aimed at ensuring value addition of agricultural 
commodities including poultry, meat, dairy, fisheries etc. 
Appropriate product mix would be chosen based on 
availability of raw material in the identified clusters to 
ensure minimum of 200 days of working of Mega Food Park. 
 The Scheme proposes to establish  an efficient and 
sustainable supply chain. Based on techno feasibility study, 
potential locations for collection centres and primary 
processing centres would be mapped, which would be 
supported by cold chain infrastructure to reduce wastages 
and check qua lity deterioration. Strong backward linkages 
would be established by involving farmer 
groups/traders/commission agents and attempts would be 
made to federate them into an appropriate structure, 
including possibility of a producer company. 
 Scheme of Mega Fo od Park would be pre -marketed after a 
detailed techno feasibility study of clusters either identified 

 -25- 
by MOFPI or on the basis of proposals submitted by 
potential investors. 
 The ownership and management of the Mega Food Park 
would vest with a Special Purpo se Vehicle in which 
organised retailers, processors, service providers etc. may 
be the equity holders or there may be an anchor investor 
along with its ancillaries. SPV will be structured to ensure 
control of the SPV by industry stakeholders. The farmers 
organisations will be encouraged to participate in the SPV. 
The Government agencies may also be shareholders in SPV 
upto a maximum of 26%. 
 The project also envisages providing power, water, road, 
ETP etc. and it would be part of the responsibility of the 
management of the park. 
 The Scheme proposes to engage a professionally managed 
organisation, which has intensive experience in project 
management and development as PMA (Project 
Management Agency). PMA appointed by MFPI would assist 
in carrying out feasibili ty studies, appraisal of project 
proposals submitted under the Scheme by SPVs and 
monitoring of the projects. 
 
2.4 It is observed that the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) in its meeting held on 11 September, 2008 had approved 
establishment of ten Mega Food Parks initially out of thirty Mega Food 
Parks proposed under the Infrastructure Development Scheme for Mega 
Food Parks during Eleventh Plan period.  Subsequently, the proposal for 
up-scaling of the Scheme had been considered by the Expenditur e 
Finance Committee which has recommended for taking up five more 
such projects during the remaining period of the Eleventh Plan. Note for 
CCEA is under circulation for seeking comments.  In response to a query 
as to why the number of Mega Food Parks has b een reduced from thirty 

 -26- 
to ten, the Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing Industries during the 
course of Oral Evidence on 22 November, 2010 submitted as under: 
 
“I would like to submit that allocation of overall Plan 
Allocation of Rs.1,575 crore for thirty Food Parks was the outlay in 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  However, when the schemes were 
prepared and when they went up for final approval at the highest 
level of the Government, the EFC had proposed in -between that 
only ten of the Food Parks should be  set up and that after seeing 
the progress up to a certain point, the number should be 
expanded”.  
 
2.5 When queried whether any review was undertaken later, he 
added: 
  
“Yes. We had gone to EFC again about two months back where 
the position of the each of  the Mega Food Park with all the details 
was explained to EFC.  After going through all these, a decision 
was taken that five new Food Parks should be immediately 
allowed, which was also part of the hon. Finance Minister‟s Budget 
speech.  Based on that, th ose five Parks have been approved only 
on the 18 th of this month.  We are getting the minutes and the 
approvals after which in full readiness we will start the exercise 
once again”. 
 
2.6 The Ministry furnished the following statement highlighting budget 
allocation and expenditure incurred under this Scheme during the first 
four years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan:- 
                 (Rs. in crore) 
Year  BE RE Actual  
2007 – 08 - - - 
2008 – 09 50.00 28.00 27.63 
2009 – 10 70.00 23.93 18.49  
2010 – 11 77.50  - 51.69 
(Exp. Upto 30.9.10) 
  
2.7 When asked about the reasons for substantial mismatches 
between BE, RE and Actual during 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, the 

 -27- 
representatives of the Ministry clarified during Oral Evidence on 22 
November, 2010: 
  
“For Mega Food Pa rks, the BE for the last three years have been 
Rs.50 crore in 2008 -09 Rs.70 crore in 2009 -10, Rs.79 crore in 
2010-11.  The Revised Estimate in 2008 -09 was Rs.28 crore 
against which we could spend Rs.27.63 crore.  As mentioned, this 
was effectively the last  month‟s performance in the year 2008 -09 
after final approvals were given to the projects.  Thereafter, in  
2009-10, BE of Rs.70 crore was set aside for Mega Food parks, 
which was reduced drastically to Rs.23.93 crore at RE stage 
against which we spent Rs. 18.49 crore.  This money was actually 
spent in the initial advances given to the remaining parts.  That 
means, we first start by giving an advance of ten per cent of the 
total eligible assistance, which is approximately Rs.5 crore.  So, 
the first two years  performance actually are those figures where 
initial amount was given. This year, we have budget of Rs.77.50 
crore with another Rs.1.5 crore for miscellaneous expenditure.  
The net BE is Rs.79 crore.  We have proposed an RE of Rs.113 
crore this year because out of these Rs.79 crore, we have already 
spent Rs.51.69 crore.  That means, more than 66 per cent of the 
current year‟s budget has already been spent and we are 
expecting that some more cases will come up so that the RE 
proposed is at Rs.113 crore.  This is about the Mega Food Parks”. 
 
2.8 Regarding the pattern of assistance the Ministry submitted that 
the feasibility studies have indicated that on an average, the project 
cost of a Mega Food Park would be about Rs.150 crore. Based on it, the 
pattern of financial assistance from Government is as under: 
 
(a) Financial assistance (grant -in-aid) @ 50% of the project 
cost in general areas and 75% for NE Region & difficult 
areas (North East including Sikkim and J&K, Himachal 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand) subject to max imum of Rs.50 
crore for creation of common Infrastructure facilities and 
facilities for backward and forward linkages. 
(b) Project Management Fee@ 5% of the grant to meet the 
cost of engaging Project Management Agency (PMA) at 

 -28- 
apex level to assist the Ministry  and also domain 
consultancies for SPV. 
 
2.9 On the status of implementation of Mega Food Parks, the Ministry 
stated that operational guidelines were issued on 21 October, 2008. In 
accordance with the procedure laid down under the above Scheme 
guidelines, „in-principle‟ approval was accorded for setting up of 10 MFPs 
in the following States: Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, Punjab, North -East (Assam), Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand and West Bengal.  
 
2.10 The Ministry further state d that after scrutinizing the DPRs of the 
projects in respect of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, North -
East (Assam), Uttarakhand, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal, final approval 
was given to approve Special Project Vehicles of these States and 
grants-in-aid of 40% of the total, consisting of first and second 
installment, were released in the case of Andhra Pradesh & Uttarakhand 
and 10% (first installment) to each of the other 4 States. As regards 
other 4 Mega Food Parks, namely Karnataka, Punjab, Mahara shtra and 
Uttar Pradesh, the Special Purpose Vehicles (SPV) have asked for time 
to submit the DPRs. The details of grant -in-aid disbursed to Mega Food 
Parks are at Annexure- II.  In a different context the Committee were 
informed by the Ministry that the M FPs in Karnataka, Punjab, 
Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh could not progress further due to 
various shortcomings.  The projects have, therefore, been cancelled and 
the process has begun afresh.  
 
2.11 When enquired as to why the grant releases for some projects are 
far less as compared to respective total expenditure whereas grant 
releases for some projects are much above the total expenditure 
incurred, the Ministry informed that in case of the MFPs in Uttarakhand, 
Jharkhand and Andhra Pradesh expenditure is more than the amount of 

 -29- 
grant released. The expenditure figures also include share of SPV apart 
from grant amount.  In case of West Bengal and Tamil Nadu  figures are 
being obtained and construction at site is yet to gear up.  The latest 
position in the matter is at Annexure- III.     
 
2.12 On being queried about the efforts made by the Ministry to 
provide backward and forward linkages in Mega Food Parks, the Ministry 
replied that guidelines of the Scheme provide for a network of primary 
processing centres and collection centres in catchment area of Mega 
Food Park for ensuring linkage of farmers produce to the industries 
coming up in the Mega Food Park.  The Ministry have taken the initiative 
of forming the Mega Food Park Coordination Committee (MFPCC) for 
each of the Mega Food Parks. The MFPCC has been formed for 6 Mega 
Food Parks. The Chairman of MFPCC shall be District Collector of the 
districts where the Mega Food Park projects are currently being 
implemented. This Committee shall have representation from  other 
relevant departments like Department of Agriculture and Horticulture, 
State Agriculture Universities, Agriculture Technology Management 
Agency, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, Department of Industries and the farmer 
bodies.  The MFPCC shall provide necessary  support and assistance to 
concerned SPVs in developing strong backward linkages in the 
catchment area of the project. The Ministry have also worked out a 
detailed Media and Investment Promotion Plan for both promotion of 
Scheme as well as investment promo tion in case of each of the 
approved projects. Under this initiative, the Ministry intend to organize 
workshops for development and strengthening of backward linkages and 
bankers‟ meet for each project at the project location. In addition, the 
Ministry hav e also planned to assist the SPVs in organizing Investors‟ 
Meet at the project location to encourage potential investors for setting 
up units in the Park. It is also proposed to attach focus on MSME sector 
to assist them setting up units in the Plug and Pl ay facilities proposed to 
be developed in the Parks. 

 -30- 
2.13 The Committee have been informed that the ownership and 
management of the Mega Food Park would vest with a Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV) in which organized retailers, processors, service providers 
etc. may be the equity holders or there may be an anchor investor along 
with its ancillaries.  SPV will be structured to ensure control of the SPV 
by industry stakeholders.  The farmer organizations will be encouraged 
to participate in the SPV.  The Governm ent agencies may also be 
shareholders in SPV upto a maximum of 26 per cent. 
 
2.14 When asked whether the Government/or any of their agency(ies) 
are shareholder in any of these Parks, it was stated that the Mega Food 
Park is to be implemented by an SPV whic h shall be a body corporate to 
be registered under Indian Companies Act 1956.  The PSU or any 
Government Body can join the SPV, but the share holding in such case 
will not be more than 26% to ensure the private sector character of 
SPV. Out of the 10 approv ed projects, 2 PSUs / Government Body have 
participated in the SPV of North East Mega Food Park in Nalbari, Assam; 
1 in Jangipur, West Bengal and 2 in Feroz epur, Punjab.  The name and 
percentage of shareholding pattern of them as under: 
 
Assam 
(i) AIDC :   22% 
(ii) ASIDC :    1% 
   West Bengal    
 
West Bengal State Food Processing & Horticulture Deptt.:     11% 
          
   Punjab  
 (i) SIDBI:       26% 
 (ii) PAIC :       11%    

 -31- 
2.15 In the case of Punjab, there are two public sector companies – the 
SIDBI which h as 26 per cent participation and PAIC which has 11 per 
cent stake.  Together, it is 37 per cent. On being pointed out that this 
was above the cap of 26%, the Secretary of the Ministry clarified during 
the further Oral Evidence on 22 November, 2010 as under: 
  
“It is only in the principal stage that SIDBI was shown as 
having 26 per cent.  When the final project comes for 
approval, we can ensure that the share of all the two of 
them remains 26 per cent.  We will have to look at it since it 
has been pointed out to us”.  
 
2.16 For developmental aspects of food processing Industries in States, 
communication and power are also to be taken into consideration.  But, 
there is lack of these basic amenities in small and hilly States.  In 
developmental activities, a hil ly State is always getting neglected in 
agricultural sector.  In response to a query raised for extension of 
development works relating to Mega Food Park in small and hilly States 
specially North -Eastern States including Sikkim, the witness clarified 
during the Oral Evidence on 22 November, 2010 as noted below : 
 
“So far as the overall approach to North -East is concerned, 
my Ministry is constantly trying – since we feel and 
everyone from the North-East also says that food processing 
is one of the most impor tant activity for many of the North -
Eastern States – to ensure that the ten per cent grant of the 
total amount which is to be spent as per the Government 
policy, we should be able to spend.  Our performance in the 
past has been less than satisfactory.  But , I can assure you 
that our performance over a period of the last two -three 
years will show a definite increase in actual expenditure in 
the area.  It is our constant endeavour to spend more and 
more money and to encourage”. 
 
 
 
 
 

 -32- 
2.17 He further added: 
 
“We are planning to start a regional centre in Guwahati of 
the Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology (IICPT) – 
one of our national level research -cum-other centres.  A lab 
also is proposed to be opened in that area.  So, all the 
uncovered areas in t he North -East will have a linkage to 
their food testing laboratory.  For example, when we took 
up the scheme of abattoirs, although the so -called 
reservation was only 10 per cent money, we found that 
abattoir is a scheme which needs special attention in th e 
North-East area. 
Out of the 10 which were approved, two of them are 
from the North Eastern area.  So, at least about Rs.15 crore 
worth of subsidy for each of the project will flow to that 
area”. 
 
2.18 Regarding a query on the problems, like lack of commu nication, 
transportation facilities and economic blockades in North -Eastern hilly 
regions, he submitted: 
 
“I want to assure the Member that whatever regional 
centres are there, the actual basic activity will be State -
wise.  When we go to impart information or organize camps, 
it is by definition has to be in the field area where there are 
farmers located so that the north east will be getting what is 
due to them”. 
 
2.19 On the specific question of the laying down of inbuilt systems for 
efficient waste management in Mega Food Parks, the Ministry stated in a 
subsequent written reply that at the time of submission of Detailed 
Project Reports, the SPV is required to submit a plan of waste disposal 
comprising provision for effluent treatment plant and solid waste 
disposal system. Some of the Parks which are at developed stage of 
project implementation like Mega Food Park at Haridwar have already 
developed solid waste management by establishing Bio Gas plant. Most 
of the Parks are at developing stage. Once they deve lop they will also 
develop similar waste management system. Moreover, every project is 
required to meet a statutory requirement of obtaining clearance from 

 -33- 
the State Pollution Control Board. Such a mandatory requirement takes 
care of the waste management system in respect of every project. 
 
Food Park Scheme 
 
2.20 While examining the Mega Food Parks Scheme, the Committee 
also analysed its predecessor Scheme viz. Food Park Scheme. The 
Scheme of Food Parks which was under implementation during Eighth to 
Tenth Plan Period, envisaged to make available common infrastructure 
facilities for the Food Processing Industries, especially, SMEs. The 
Scheme provided for a grant of upto 25% of the project cost subject to 
a maximum of Rs.4.00 crore in general areas. The Mini stry have so far 
approved 56 Food Parks for assistance. Out of 56 Food Parks approved 
during  Eighth to Tenth Plan Period, 20 Food Parks have been funded 
fully, 34 have been funded partially which are at different stages of 
progress and 2 Food Parks have n ot been provided any assistance as 
they did not show any progress in project implementation. 
 
2.21 During oral evidence on 17 February, 2010, the Secretary, 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries further informed the Committee: 
 
“About 56 odd parks were ap proved – two in the Eighth 
Plan; 39 in the Ninth Plan; and 15 in the Tenth Plan. The 
Scheme of Food Park has evolved from the Scheme of 
industrial parks since the industrial raw -material is available 
more through the organized means. Their basic concept wa s 
that we will have an area of 30 acres where we will provide 
roads, electricity, water, facilities of ETP and some common 
facilities  of even cold chain and we will have a food park. 
So, the industrial park – that was in our mind – was 
converted into Food  Park. it had a chequered performance. 
Only 18 out of the 56 parks could claim full reimbursement.”  
  
2.22 As substantial amount of public money was involved in the 
Scheme of Food Park, the Committee examined some of them in details.  

 -34- 
The succeeding parag raphs provide an illustrative insight into the way 
this Scheme has been implemented by the Ministry over three 
successive Plans.  
 
2.23 Food Park at Saha, Ambala :- In case of the Food Park at Saha, 
Ambala approved by the Ministry in 2001 -02 it is found th at out of 
Rs.293 lakh released by the Ministry Rs.146.50 lakh is still lying in the 
Bank. It was further found that the bank has been asked to return the 
money alongwith interest accrued. When queried about the date of 
release of the money and the date when the  Ministry wrote to the bank 
to return the money alongwith accrued interest, it was stated that first 
installment of Rs.146.50 lakhs was released to the IDBI Bank, Surya 
Kiran Building, Kasturba Gandhi Road, New Delhi on 4 January, 2002 
which was disb ursed to the implementing agency on 21 March, 2003. 
The Second installment was released on 27 March, 2003.  The Ministry 
wrote to the bank to return the unspent balance alongwith accrued 
interest vide its letter dated 28 August, 2008. The bank was requeste d 
to refund the money along with interest as per the rate prevailing at 
that time. A reply from the bank is still awaited.  When further asked 
about status as on 30 November, 2010 the Ministry stated that e ntire 
amount of approved grant of Rs.293.00 lakhs have been released by 
them.  In the latest Progress Report, it has been  informed that  
Haryana State Industrial & Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd. 
(HSIIDC) has developed Food Park at Saha over an area of 70 acres.  
The infrastructure developmen t work in the Food Park has been 
completed and all 196 plots have been allotted.  The Corporation has 
acquired approximately 251 acres in the second phase which is to be 
developed for extension of Food Park and the existing Industrial Growth 
Centre at Saha. 
2.24 Food Park at Kuppam, Andhra Pradesh  :- The Committee 
have been informed that in case of Food Park at Kuppam, Chittoor, 
Andhra Pradesh, approved in 2000 -01, a sum of Rs. 200.00 lakh was 

 -35- 
released out of the approved grant of Rs. 400.00 lakh.  The rele ase of 
the Third installment is held up because the conditionality of 75% of the 
appraised cost being spent has not been met.  The matter has been 
taken up with the Implementing Agency for latest progress report, CA 
certificate, etc. When asked how many times have the Ministry taken up 
the matter of latest progress report, CA certificates, etc. during the last 
five years, it was stated that the Ministry  have taken up the matter of 
latest progress report 7 times during the last five years on the dates 
mentioned below: 
(i) 18.7.2005 
(ii) 21.12.2005 
(iii) August 2006 
(iv) 17.11.2006 
(v) 28.01.2008 
(vi) 10.11.2008 
(vii) 5.02.2009 
 
2.25 When further queried about status as on 30 November, 2010 the 
Ministry stated that a gainst approved grant of Rs.400.00 lakhs, 
Rs.200.00 lakhs have been released so  far. Utilization Certificate for the 
grant amount released to the Implementing Agency and Progress Report 
as on March 2010 have been received.  However, the condition 
regarding expenditure of 75% of the Promoters contribution is yet to be 
achieved.  Ministry have taken up the issue of slow progress with 
APSIDC. 
 
2.26 Food Park at Chaygaon, Kamrup, Assam  :- In case of the 
Food Park at Chaygaon, Kamrup, Assam, a sum of Rs.175.00 lakh has 
been released out of the approved grant of Rs.350.00 lakh.  The case 
for further release of Rs.55.50 lakh is held up because the IFW wanted 
year-wise expenditure on the Project since 6 April, 2005.  The Ministry 

 -36- 
have accordingly sought the relevant documents on 31 December, 
2008. In response to a query about the delay in rele ase of grants and 
its consequential effect on the operationalisation of the Park and asked 
as to when did the IFW point out the requirement of year -wise 
expenditure on the project since 6 April, 2005, the Ministry replied that 
although the project was appr oved in 2000 -01, the Implementing 
Agency had approached the Ministry to approve change of project 
location from Sonapur to Chaygaon as the original site was not free 
from encumbrances and the soil was hard and rocky. The Ministry 
considered the request for  change of location and approved it on 4 
October, 2002. As the grant is disbursed back -ended and implementing 
agency has to arrange finances in lieu of grant from other sources, any 
delay in release of grant would naturally affect the progress and 
operationalisation of the project.  The Ministry are making all out efforts 
to expedite disbursement of grant due. IFW asked for year -wise 
expenditure with effect from 6 April, 2005 onwards in December, 2008.  
The information was called for by IFW due to the reaso n that clear 
picture of expenditure on common facilities was not reflected in CA 
certificate submitted by the implementing agency. When further asked 
about status as on 30 November, 2010 the Ministry stated that a gainst 
the approved grant of Rs.350.00 lakh s, First installment of Rs.175.00 
lakhs has been released by the Ministry.  Against approved project cost 
of Rs.496.00 lakhs, expenditure incurred on the project is Rs.265.49 
lakhs and over 80% of civil work is completed.    
2.27 Food Park at Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh :- It was noted that 
a sum of Rs.200.00 lakh has been released by the Ministry as first 
installment for the Food Park at Village Teadesara, Rajnandgaon, 
Chattisgarh.  The entire amount is lying as unspent in the Bank.  In 
order to expedite the  process, the Ministry have taken up the matter 
with the Secretary, Industry and Chief Secretary, Government of 
Chattisgarh, etc.  However, no progress has been achieved.  The 

 -37- 
Ministry have also issued a letter to the bank requesting to return the 
grant am ount with interest on 25 June, 2003. About the sequence of 
events, the Ministry informed that first installment of grant of Rs.200.00 
lakh was transferred on 18 February, 2002 to UCO Bank.  The said 
amount was released as per the guidelines prevailing at that time as per 
which First installment used to be released to the bank as soon as the 
PAC approved the proposal.  However, actual disbursement to 
implementing agency was subject to fulfillment of requisite conditions of 
physical and financial progress.  T he implementing Agency was 
requested vide letter dated 9 December, 2002 to furnish physical and 
financial progress report.  Since the response was not forthcoming, a 
review meeting was fixed on March 2003 in which the Implementing 
Agency could not attend d ue to its pre-occupation on account of budget 
session.  The meeting was rescheduled on 21 July, 2003, which was 
attended by the Implementing Agency.  In the meeting it was decided 
that the Implementing Agency will furnish the requisite documents by 
18 August, 2003.  As the said report was not received by due date, a 
D.O. reminder from the then Joint Secretary was addressed to the 
Principal Secretary, Government of Chhattisgarh, followed by a reminder 
dated 2 May, 2005 by the Secretary to the Chief Secretary .  Since it did 
not elicit any result, a DO letter was than sent by MOS, FPI to Chief 
Minister on 17 August, 2005.  Subsequent reminders were sent by JS to 
Principal Secretary on 25 May, 2006 and on 22 January, 2007.  Since no 
report was received, it was f inally decided to recall the grant from the 
bank vide letter dated 12 June, 2007.  The concerned bank is UCO 
Bank, Pension Bada Branch, Raipur, Chhattisgah.  In spite of several 
reminders no reply has since been received from the bank.  However, 
they have been reminded from time to time.  Last correspondence has 
been addressed to Chairman and Managing Director, UCO Branch on 15 
January, 2010 from the Secretary. When further asked about status as 
on 30 November, 2010 the Ministry stated that  against approved  
amount of grant of Rs.400.00 lakhs, Rs.200.00 lakhs have been 

 -38- 
released so far. Chhattisgarh State Industrial Corporation Ltd. vide their 
communication dated 27 July, 2010 informed that the issue of returning 
the amount of first installment released to the m has been submitted to 
their Board of Directors and requested to keep the matter pending  till 
the decision of Board Directors.   It was further stated that since, this 
park is not progressing hence Ministry are trying hard to get back the 
amount released. 
2.28 Food Park at Rai, Sonipat, Haryana  :- In regard to the Food 
Park at Rai, Sonepat, Haryana, the Committee were informed that the 
said Park costing Rs.5220.22 lakh was approved in 2001 -02.  Out of the 
approved grant of Rs.400.00 lakh, a sum of Rs.200.00 lakh has already 
been released.  About the status of the Park, the Committee found that 
the Progress Report in the instant case is awaited and the Ministry have 
issued a letter on 5 September, 2008 asking for the same alongwith 
necessary documents for r elease of the next installment.  When queried 
the Ministry informed that t he proposal for grant of Rs.400.00 lakh was 
approved in the Project Approval Committee Meeting held on  
22 February, 2002. First installment of grant was released in 2 tranches 
of Rs.44.00 lakhs on 28 March, 2002 and Rs.156.00 lakhs on 9 April, 
2002. HSIIDC vide its letter dated 18 February, 2009 has informed 
about the progress in the Food Park and the expenditure incurred till 31 
December, 2008. They have also furnished the utilizatio n certificate of 
the first installment of grant. When further asked about status as on 30 
November, 2010, the Ministry stated that a gainst approved grant of 
Rs.400.00 lakhs, Rs.200.00 lakhs have been released so far.  As per the 
latest Progress Report, HSI IDC has developed 223 plots of different 
sizes in this Food Park. The corporation has acquired approximately 382 
acres in the second phase which is to be developed for extension of 
Food Park and Industrial area. 
2.29 Food Park at Khunmoh, Srinagar, J&K :- It was found that the 
Food Park at Khunmoh, Srinagar, J&K was approved in 2000 -01 and a 

 -39- 
Grant-in-aid of Rs.400.00 lakh was approved for this Project whose total 
cost is Rs.725.82 lakh.  A sum of Rs.300.00 lakh has been released for 
the Park.  Out of this a mount Rs.100.00 lakh is lying in the bank as 
unspent balance.  However, when the bank was asked by the Ministry to 
inform about the accrued interest they have been informed that the 
Food Park has closed the account with the Branch.  The Ministry  have 
taken up the matter with the Implementing Agency for clarification.  In 
response to the subsequent queries of the Committee, the Ministry 
informed that the Grant was approved by PAC in its meeting held on 21 
December, 2000. First installment of Rs.200.00 lakh was sanctioned on 
26 February, 2001 and released on 12 April, 2001. Second installment 
of Rs.100.00 lakh was sanctioned on 24 March, 2003.  In the sanction 
letter dated 24 March, 2003, the bank was instructed not to release the 
amount to implementing agency  until they receive further instruction 
from the Ministry. The release is subject to fulfillment of prescribed 
condition regarding physical progress, UC of earlier installment of grant 
and requisite percentage of expenditure by the implementing agency. 
Since requisite documents were not received, it was decided to hold a 
review meeting on 26 September, 2003 with J&K SIDCO. Thereafter, 
the matter was taken up with J&K SIDCO from time to time to expedite 
the submission of documents/information.    Ministry wr ote to J&K Bank 
for refund of Rs.100.00 lakh with interest accrued since 24 March, 2003, 
vide letter dated 24 August, 2008. The Ministry vide letter dated 29 
June, 2009 again requested the bank for refund of grant.  J&K Bank vide 
letter dated 15 July, 2009  intimated about closure of the account. 
Ministry vide letter dated 7 September, 2009 sought clarification from 
the Implementing Agency. The Implementing Agency vide their letter 
dated 9 March, 2010 has intimated that before closure of the account, 
the grant amount of Rs.100.00 lakh was withdrawn by them which has 
been spent on the project. The project is under progress and since the 
amount have been utilized by the implementing agency for development 
of the project, it is proposed to regularize the release  of this amount 

 -40- 
after obtaining the UC of earlier grant released. When further asked 
about status as on 30 November, 2010, the Ministry stated that a gainst 
approved grant of Rs.400.00 lakhs, Rs.300.00 lakhs have been released 
so far.  However, J&K Bank had  released the last installment of 
Rs.100.00 lakhs to the Implementing Agency viz., J&K SIDCO without 
instruction from the Ministry.  The regularization of the same is under 
consideration.  
2.30 Food Park at Sopore, Baramulla, J&K :- In regard to the Food 
Park at Sopore, Baramulla, J&K which was approved in 2002 -03 at a 
project cost of Rs.948.30 lakh, a sum of Rs.400.00 lakh has been 
approved as grant -in-aid.  Out of this Rs.200.00 lakh has already been 
released for the Project.  For the release of further g rant the 
Implementing Agency has been requested on 14 January, 2009 to 
furnish the requisite documents such as Utilisation Certificate, Proof of 
expenditure of 75 per cent of the promoters contribution, etc. The 
Ministry informed in response to later queries of the Committee that the 
PAC in its meeting held on 16 September, 2000 approved grant-in-aid of 
Rs.400.00 lakhs for Sopore Food Park. First installment of Rs.200.00 lakh 
was sanctioned on 27 September, 2002 and released on 26 February, 
2004. The release of Rs.200.00 lakh to J&K SIDCO was made subject to 
completion of formalities by the Implementing Agency. Implementing 
Agency has submitted the progress report and other requisite 
documents on 24 April, 2009 for release of next installment. When 
further a sked about status as on 30 November, 2010, the Ministry 
stated that a gainst approved grant of Rs.400.00 lakhs, Rs.200.00 lakhs 
have been released so far.  For consideration of release of next 
installment of grant, a detailed  physical inspection report has  been 
called for from the State Nodal Agency. 
2.31 Food Park at Jammu  :- It is noted that the Ministry have 
released a sum of Rs.273.00 lakh, for the Food Park at Jammu, J&K 
which was approved in 2001-02.  Out of this Rs.273.00 lakh, an amount 

 -41- 
of Rs.13.50 lakh are lying in the bank as unspent balance.  It is further 
noted that the Ministry have issued a letter on 22 August, 2008 to the 
bank asking it to return the grant amount alongwith the interest. The 
Ministry informed that grant of Rs.346.00 lakh was approved by the PAC 
in its meeting dated 15 March, 2002. First installment of Rs.173.00 lakh 
was sanctioned on 28 March,2002 which was released to the 
implementing agency on 30 April, 2002. Second installment of 
Rs.100.00 lakh was sanctioned on 17 March, 200 3, out of which 
Rs.86.50 lakh was released to the implementing agency on 26 May, 
2003 commensurate with the physical and financial progress in the 
project. Rs.13.50 lakh is still lying with the Indian Oversees Bank. Since 
the release of Rs.86.50 lakh on 26 May, 2003 efforts are being made by 
the Ministry for obtaining requisite documents for release of balance 
grant but no response has since been received form the implementing 
agency. As no response was received form implementing agency and 
the grant of amo unt Rs.13.50 lakh was lying with the bank for a long 
time, Ministry finally decided to recall the unspent balance with interest 
accrued there from Indian Oversees Bank vide letter dated 22 August, 
2008. The response of the bank is still awaited. When furth er asked 
about status as on 30 November, 2010 the Ministry stated that a gainst 
approved grant of Rs.346.00 lakhs, Rs.273.00 lakhs have been released 
so far.  An amount of Rs.13.50 lakhs has been lying with the Bank as 
unspent balance.  The Bank has been  r equested to return the amount 
with interest.  Response of the Bank is awaited. 
2.32 Food Park at Bagalkot, Karnataka  :- The Food Park at 
Bagalkot, Karnataka  was approved in 2000 -01 and had been provided 
with the first installment of Rs.200.00 lakh as gran t-in-aid by the 
Ministry.  The entire amount is lying in the bank as unspent balance.  
When the Implementing Agency was asked to return the amount 
alongwith the interest  it has informed the Ministry about the funds 
being released.  It has been stated that  release was made without the 

 -42- 
Ministry‟s approval and the bank has been asked to inform about 
Ministry‟s written permission for release of the funds. When asked to 
clarify further the Ministry submitted that f irst installment of `200.00 
lakh was released to the bank on 30 July, 2001 with specific instructions 
to the bank that it will disburse the money to the Implementation 
Agency only after further instruction from the Ministry. Since Ministry 
have not issued any letter to the bank to disburse the grant, i t is 
understood that the amount released to the bank was lying in the bank 
as unspent balance. Letter asking for return of grant and along with 
accrued interest was issued on 28 August, 2008 to the bank with a copy 
to the implementing agency.  Food Karnata ka Ltd., the implementing 
agency, in response to Ministry‟s letter dated 28 August, 2008 informed 
vide their letter dated 25 September, 2008 that it has spent the grant 
amount in the project on land leveling and procurement of plant and 
machinery along wit h some common facilities like cold storage. In 
response to the above letter of Food Karnataka Ltd., Ministry called for 
the clarification from the bank on 5 February, 2009. Response from the 
bank is awaited. When further asked about status as on 30 Novembe r, 
2010, the Ministry stated that a gainst approved grant of Rs.400.00 
lakhs, First installment of  Rs.200.00 lakhs has been released so far.  
Detailed Progress report and other requisite documents are awaited for 
consideration of release of next installment of grant. 
 
2.33 Food Park at Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh  :- The Food Park at 
Ghaziabad, U.P. which had been approved in 1999 -2000 had been 
released an amount of Rs.271.00 lakh as grants -in-aid.  They were 
further informed that the Food Park ran into problem s due to non -
payment of bank loan.  UPSIDC also cancelled the land lease.  The Bank 
has taken over the land as it was mortgaged.  A legal battle is going on.  
The Ministry have issued letters to SNA, etc. to resolve the matter, 
however, with no results.   The last letter was issued on 22 November, 
2006. The Ministry stated that f irst installment of Rs.75.00 lakh was 

 -43- 
released on 8 March, 2000 and Second installment of Rs.75.00 lakh was 
released on 29 November, 2000.  The Third installment of Rs.61.00 lakh 
was released on 13 February, 2001.  The Fourth installment was 
released on 9 October, 2001.  As per guidelines, for disbursement of 
grant, no collateral security is required unlike disbursement of term loan 
from banks, however, a surety bond is obtained from  the beneficiary 
before releasing the grant. The surety bond is available with Ministry. 
Grant amount of Rs.271.00 lakh has been spent in the project by the 
implementing agency. A letter was issued by the Ministry to Managing 
Director, Wise Industrial Park , the Implementing Agency of the Food 
Park at Ghaziabad to send detailed report on the project indicating 
financial status on hearing that an inspection was carried out by the 
officials of Department of Horticulture and Food Processing, Government 
of Uttar Pradesh in the premises of Wise Industrial Park Ghaziabad. It 
was also indicated that premises of the Food Park were under the 
control of M/s. Global Trust Bank, because of the huge liability on 
account of the promoters. Further, Uttar Pradesh Industrial 
Development Corporation has also delineated their share of land from 
the project. On not receiving any response from the Implementing 
Agency and also not attending the review meeting held on 5 September, 
2002 at Delhi, MOS, FPI had written on 17 October, 2 002 to Chief 
Minister of Uttar Pradesh for reviewing the progress of Food Park in UP 
including one at Ghaziabad. It is from a letter of UPSIDC dated  
21 March, 2003, the Ministry came to know that the Agro Park could not 
make any progress due to the disput e amongst the private promoters. 
Uttar Pradesh Industrial Development Corporation also cancelled the 
lease of the land to Wise Industrial Park, Ghaziabad and took over land 
as well as the assets on it. In another letter dated 28 February, 2003, 
Global Trust Bank Ltd., informed the Ministry that they have taken over 
possession of the mortgaged property on 2 December, 2002.  UPSIDC, 
which is also a co -promoter of the company, has invoked provision 
under their lease agreement for their re -entry without intimat ing the 

 -44- 
bank. The bank have protested the act of the UPSIDC.  Ministry took up 
the case separately with the Wise Industrial Park Ltd., UPSIDC and 
Global Trust Bank Ltd., seeking the status of the project in detail vide 
letter dated 24 February, 2003 and a meeting was convened in the 
Ministry on 9 July, 2003.   The Managing Director, Wise Industrial Park 
Ltd., vide his letter dated 12 September, 2003 had informed that this 
company has no access to the Food Park as Global Trust Bank has taken 
over the land an d assets of the Park. When further asked about status 
as on 30 November, 2010 the Ministry stated that a gainst approved 
grant of Rs.395.00 lakhs, Rs.271.00 lakhs have been released so far. 
Entire approved amount of Rs.395.00 lakhs have been released in thi s 
case. The project has suffered a set back due to legal issues. 
2.34 Food Park at Dankuni, Hooghly, West Bengal :- In case of 
Dankuni Food Park, Hooghly, West Bengal, approved in 1996 -97, the 
first installment of Rs.75.00 lakh was released on 25 September , 1996.  
However, the Implementing Agency has not been able to procure the 
land from the State Government so far.  A communication has been 
issued by the Ministry on 22 September, 2008 to treat the project as 
closed.  Elaborating further, the Ministry info rmed that the Food Park at 
Dankuni was approved by PAC in the year 1996-97. The project remains 
unimplemented as the original promoters viz M/s Modular Food Parks 
Ltd. could not acquire the requisite land and mobilize funds for 
implementing the project. Th e Ministry had released an amount of 
Rs.75.00 lakhs, which has been reported to be utilized for water supply 
works. The Ministry have been calling for a revival plan for the project 
from the State Nodal Agency. Ministry has also taken up the issue with 
the State Government at the level of Chief Secretary for coming up with 
the revival plan for the project.  In the review meeting held on  
8 November, 2005, it was noted that a proposal has been submitted by 
M/s. Keventer Project Ltd. for implementing the proj ect and it was 
decided that the State Government may propose a restructured 

 -45- 
proposal along with the recommendations for the implementation / 
revival of the project.   Subsequently, M/s. Keventer Projects Ltd. made 
a presentation in the Ministry regarding r evival and implementation of 
the Food Park. The Ministry is awaiting a formal proposal from the State 
Government in this regard for revival of the project.  The scheme of 
Food Parks has since been discontinued after 10 th Plan. In the 11 th Plan 
the scheme has been revamped based on the recommendations after its 
evaluation. Now the DPR is accepted and project is approved only when 
the implementing agency is in the possession of land and has a clear 
title in its name along with its conversion of land use for i ndustrial 
purposes and other approvals obtained for setting up of food processing 
industries. To safeguard the grant amount, implementing agency is 
required to enter into an agreement with the Ministry and the grant is 
transacted through a Trust & Retentio n Account so that it is utilized for 
the specific project and cannot be diverted.    When further asked about 
the status of the project as on 30 November, 2010, the Ministry stated 
that a gainst approved grant of Rs.400.00 lakhs, Rs.75.00 lakhs have 
been released so far.  In the meantime, the Implementing Agency has 
also been changed.  To salvage the project and expedite its 
implementation, a meeting was taken by the Chief Secretary, Govt. of 
West Bengal in the presence of Secretary of Ministry of Food Proce ssing 
Industry on 20 September, 2010 at Kolkata for discussing various issues 
along with revival of Food Park at Dankuni.  In a different context the 
Committee were informed that the Ministry were in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance to find out a solution to the outstanding financial 
liabilities, etc.  
 

 -46- 
Mega Food Park Scheme 
 
2.35 The Mega Food Parks Scheme is a new Plan Scheme 
introduced by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries in the 
Eleventh Plan.  The Scheme envisages the Mega Food Park a s a 
mechanism to bring together farmers, processors and retailers.  
The Park would virtually act as a bridge between the agricultural 
production and the market to ensure maximum value addition, 
minimum wastage, increased income levels of the farming 
community, as well as creation of additional employment 
opportunities in the rural areas.  The Mega Food Parks are to be 
established in selected clusters to be identified in a demand 
driven manner.  These Parks would be, according to the Ministry, 
well-defined a gri/horticultural-processing zones containing 
state-of-the-art processing facilities with support infrastructure 
and well established supply chains complete with backward and 
forward linkages. The Committee note that the pattern of 
financial assistance for  a Mega Food Park that costs about 
Rs.150 crore is in the form of grant -in-aid @ 50% of the project 
in general areas and 75% for NE Region (NE including Sikkim) 
and difficult areas (J&K, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand) 
subject to a maximum of Rs.50 crore  for creation of common 
infrastructure facilities and facilities for backward and forward 
linkages.  Apart from this there is a provision of Project 

 -47- 
Management fee @ 5% of the grant to meet the cost of engaging 
Project Management Agency at apex level to as sist the Ministry 
and also domain consultancy for Special Purpose Vehicle to be 
created for the purpose.  
 
2.36 The Committee further note that the Ministry had proposed 
30 Mega Food Parks for the Eleventh Plan and sought an 
allocation of Rs.1575 crore for  the purpose.  Though the 
Eleventh Plan commenced on 1 April, 2007, the CCEA approved 
the proposal of Mega Food Parks only on 11 September, 2008 i.e. 
almost one and a half year into the Eleventh Plan.  Considering 
perhaps the track record of the previous s uch Scheme of the 
Ministry viz. Food Parks, the CCEA approved setting up of only 
10 Mega Food Parks in the first phase.  The erstwhile scheme of 
Food Parks has also been analysed in the later half of this 
Chapter. The Committee are constrained to observe t hat due to 
the inordinate delay in approval of the Scheme by the 
Government, the Ministry could obviously make no headway in 
the Scheme during the First Year of the Eleventh Plan (2007-08).   
During the Second Year also, since the approval came only 
halfway through, on 11 September, 2008, the Scheme could not 
be implemented with full vigour.  As a result, the BE of Rs.50 
crore, which in itself is a modest sum, was almost halved to 
Rs.28 crore and the Ministry spent as much during the remainder 

 -48- 
of the Fiscal .  During the next year, the BE of Rs.70 crore was 
again reduced to Rs.23.93 crore i.e. almost one third of BE and 
the Ministry could spend Rs.18.49 crore out of this reduced RE. 
From the deposition of the Secretary of the Ministry, the 
Committee cannot bu t conclude that the drastically reduced BE 
was presented as a fait accompli to the Ministry.  Consequently, 
they could not go beyond disbursing the initial tranche of  
Rs.5 crore or so each to some of the SPVs.  The Committee 
further note that in the Fourt h Year of the Plan, the BE of 
Rs.77.50 crore has been hiked to Rs. 113 crore at the RE stage 
and the Ministry have assured the Committee about utilizing the 
entire amount.   
 
2.37 On the front of physical achievements of the Scheme the 
Committee find that in principle approval was accorded for 
setting-up of 10 MFPs in Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karantaka, 
Maharashtra, Punjab, Assam, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand and West Bengal.  The Committee have been 
informed that the ownership and management of  the Mega Food 
Park will vest with a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) in which 
organized retailers, processors, service providers may be the 
equity holders or anchor investors along with its ancillaries.   
The Committee have been further informed that after 
scrutinizing the DPRs of the projects in respect of Andhra 

 -49- 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Assam, Uttarakhand, Tamil Nadu and West 
Bengal, the Ministry have given final approval for SPVs of these 
States.  Grants -in-aid amounting to 40% of the total, consisting 
of first and second installments have been released to SPVs of 
Andhra Pradesh and Uttarakhand.  For the remaining four States 
first installments of 10% each have been released.  It is, 
however, a matter of great concern that the SPVs in Karnataka, 
Punjab, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh initially asked for time to 
submit DPRs and finally these projects had to be cancelled due 
to various shortcomings noticed in their proposals by the 
Ministry.  Now that the process for bidding, etc. has begun ab-
initio, the Committee exhort the Ministry to draw lessons from 
their failed experience and finalise the SPVs in these four States 
expeditiously and with due care so that no further time is lost in 
the planning and finalisation process.  The Committee would 
prefer that these fou r MFPs are also processed alongwith the 
five additional ones, for which permission has recently been 
granted to the Ministry by the Government so that the 2 -3 
precious years lost by the SPVs in these four States are recouped 
to the extent possible.  
 
2.38 The Committee note with satisfaction the initiative of the 
Ministry to form Coordination Committee for each of the Mega 
Food Park.  They have been told that each Coordination 

 -50- 
Committee headed by the administrative head of the district will 
also have repres entatives of other relevant department like 
Agriculture, Horticulture, State Agriculture Universities, ATMA, 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras, Industries, etc. and the farmers bodies.  
The MFPCC shall provide necessary support and assistance to 
concerned SPVs in deve loping strong backward linkages in the 
catchment area of the project.  The Committee feel that the 
MFPCC can provide the much needed guidance, assistance and 
handholding to the SPVs, if they function in the right sprit.  
However,  they exhort the Ministry to ensure that the tripartite 
structure viz. the Ministry, the SPV and the MFPCC, which 
consists of State Departments and Agencies, should not result in 
procedural delays and communication gaps leading to the MFPCC 
being rendered into another exercise in r ed-tapism.  The 
Committee, therefore recommend the Ministry to ensure that the 
mandate of the MFPCC is clearly cut out  and they act as a 
vibrant and proactive interface for the SPV with various agencies 
involved with the MFP projects.   
 
2.39 Amongst the various conditionalities pertaining to SPVs the 
Committee note that the Government agencies may also be 
share holders in SPV upto a maximum of 26%.  The Committee’s 
analysis of the share holding patterns of the 6 SPVs in progress, 
however, indicated that a t least in case of the SPV in Punjab 

 -51- 
wherein SIDBI has a share holding of 26% and PAIC, another 
PSU has 11% share holding, the norm of maximum 26% has 
been breached as the Government share holding adds upto 37%.  
In this context the assertions of the Secre tary of the Ministry 
during Oral Evidence before the Committee that it was only at 
principal stage that SIDBI was shown as having 26 per cent 
holding and the Ministry will ensure at the time of final approval 
that the combined holding of SIDBI and PAIC doe s not cross the 
26 per cent limit is not convincing.  His further admission during 
the Oral Evidence that the Ministry will have to look into it since 
it has been pointed out by the Committee, goes on to prove that 
the Ministry have not done their homework  in a professional and 
proper manner while processing the MFP proposals.  Otherwise, 
such situations would not have occurred.  Nonetheless, the 
Committee desire that with a view to ensure that the share 
holdings and/or other relevant conditionalities are n ot breached 
or violated, the Ministry should go through each and every 
ongoing and proposed SPV and revert to the Committee with 
factual position and the details of action taken, wherever called 
for. 
 
2.40 The Committee also find that the Mega Food Parks S cheme 
has not made much headway in the North East (including 
Sikkim) and difficult areas (Himachal Pradesh, J&K and 

 -52- 
Uttarakhand).  Only two MFPs are under implementation in the 
States of Assam and Uttarakhand in these areas.   This is neither 
commensurate with the immense food processing potential of 
these areas nor is in consonance with the policy of preferred 
treatment to these areas in planning and developmental process.  
The Committee are of the unwavering opinion that for the faster 
mainstreaming of th ese regions their development has to be 
attended to on priority and through out of the box solutions.  
And for that purpose the Ministry ought to go even beyond the 
parameters on which similar activities are being encouraged in 
other areas of the Country.  For instance, if finding SPVs in the 
private sector in these areas is a bit difficult due to the 
prevailing circumstances, they recommend that the Ministry 
should seriously reconsider allowing share holding beyond 26 
per cent to the Government entities in  the SPVs to ensure for 
MFPs in these regions so as to facilitate creation of credible and 
viable SPVs and to ensure the implementation of MFPs Scheme 
in these areas in a big way.   
 
FOOD PARK SCHEME   
 
2.41 The examination of the implementation of the MFP  has 
revealed that the Food Park Scheme was the predecessor of the 
ongoing Mega Food Park Scheme.  The Food Park Scheme was 
operational in Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Plans.  Related as, the 

 -53- 
Scheme is with the development of food processing sector in the 
Country, the Committee also analysed this Scheme in detail 
during their current examination.  In all 56 parks were approved 
for being set-up.  2 of them were approved in the Eighth Plan, 39 
in the Ninth Plan and the remaining 15 were approved in the 
Tenth Plan.   The basic concept of these Food Parks was to 
provide roads, electricity, water, ETP facilities and some 
common facilities of even Cold Chain in an areas of 30 acres.  
The Committee note that the Food Park concept was essentially 
based on the Scheme of In dustrial Parks. As per the own 
admission of the representative of the Ministry, the Food Park 
Scheme had a chequered performance.   However, their 
examination further reveals that hardly 18 out of 56 Food Parks 
were able to claim the entire amount of financial assistance.  The 
Committee analysed eleven out of these 56 Food Parks.  In 
almost all cases, one thing came out very clearly that the 
Ministry displayed a total lack of commitment and 
professionalism in implementing this Scheme.  In almost all 
cases m onies were disbursed, but there was no follow -up.  
Consequently, an impression of laissez-faire was created with no 
accountability.  In some cases the banks, where the grant -in-aid 
amounts were deposited by the Ministry, released the monies to 
the parties without the permission of the Ministry and without 
the necessary requirements being complied with by the parties 

 -54- 
concerned and in certain cases against their express 
instructions.  However, the Ministry remained blissfully 
unconcerned for  years together.  In fact they were  spurred into 
action only when the examination of the Subject by the 
Committee commenced and updates were sought on the status 
of these Food Parks. 
 
2.42 In the case of the Food Park at Saha, Ambala the Ministry 
approved a sum of Rs.2.93  lakh as assistance.  Out of this, they 
stated a sum of Rs.146.50 lakh was released to the 
Implementing Agency and the second installment of same 
amount was lying in the bank, who had been asked to return the 
same with interest accrued thereon to the Minis try.  However, 
when the Committee probed further, it transpired that while the 
first installment of the financial assistance was released to the 
Implementing Agency by the bank on 21 March, 2003, the 
second one was released a few days later on 27 March, 20 03.  
The Ministry’s letter to the bank to return the second installment 
alongwith interest accrued was sent almost five and a half years 
later to the bank on 28 August, 2008.  The reply of the bank is 
still awaited. In their update on the status of the cas e the 
Ministry merely stated that the entire amount of assistance of 
Rs.293.00 lakh has been released by them and the infrastructure 

 -55- 
work in the Park has been completed, which is far from 
convincing.     
 
2.43 The Food Park at Chaygaon, Kamrup was approved  in   
2000-01 initially for being set -up in Sonapur.  On the request of 
the Implementing Agency, the Ministry agreed to change of 
location to Chaygaon on 4 October, 2002.  Out of the approved 
assistance of Rs.350 lakh, a sum of Rs.175 lakh has been 
released to the Implementing Agency.  However, the next 
tranche of Rs.55 lakh is held up as the IFW noticing some 
inadequacies in the CA’s certificate, in December, 2008 sought 
year-wise expenditure on the project since 6 April, 2005.  Even 
as on 30 November, 201 0, the matter stands as it is, showing 
clearly the non -seriousness of the Ministry to sort out this 
matter by taking some initiative.  While another Food Park at 
Rajnandgaon, Chattisgarh fully reflects the way the Ministry 
have virtually abdicated their re sponsibility towards 
implementation of this important Scheme.  The first installment 
of assistance amounting to Rs.200 lakh was transferred by the 
Ministry to UCO Bank on 18 February, 2002.  The actual 
disbursement of this amount was subject to fulfillment  of 
requisite conditions of physical and financial progress by the 
Implementing Agency.   In the first instance the Ministry 
informed the Committee that the entire amount is lying unspent 

 -56- 
in the bank.  The Ministry had issued a letter to the bank 
requesting them to return the grant amount with interest on 25 
June, 2003.  From 2002 onwards the Ministry have been 
intermittently pursuing the feedback from Chattisgarh 
Government at different levels but to no avail.  After 25 June, 
2003, the Ministry again decid ed inexplicably, to recall the grant 
from the bank on 12 June, 2007.  No reply had been received 
from the bank till the Committee took up the matter though even 
their CMD had been addressed in the matter.  However, after the 
Committee began examining the m atter, Chattisgarh State 
Industrial Development Corporation Ltd.   wrote back to the 
Ministry on 27 July, 2010 that the issue of returning the amount 
of first installment had been submitted to their Board of 
Directors and that the matter be kept pending ti ll a decision by 
the Board.  As the updated position in this case the Ministry have 
stated that as the park is not progressing hence they are trying 
hard to get back the amount released. The Committee cannot 
justify the years and years of inaction by the M inistry on any 
pretext.  Its very unfortunate that till they enquired about the 
matter the Ministry didn’t even know that the money released 
was not in the bank but with the Implementing Agency.  The 
Committee desire that the matter should at least now be 
pursued with the State Government at sufficiently senior level 
bringing out all the facts so that the refund is afforded alongwith 

 -57- 
interest due.  They further desire a thorough probe into this 
matter and responsibility be fixed for inaction on persons 
concerned. 
 
2.44 Similarly, the case of the Food Park at Rai, Sonepat further 
confirms the poor performance of the Ministry in implementing 
this Scheme.  A sum of Rs.200 lakh was released to 
Implementing Agency in two tranches of Rs.44 lakh (on 28 
March, 2002) and Rs.156 lakh (on 9 April, 2002).  It was only on 
5 September, 2008 that the Ministry asked HSIDC, which is the 
Implementing Agency, for the Progress Report alongwith 
necessary documents for release of the next installment.  HSIDC 
informed the Ministry about six months later on 18 February, 
2009 about the progress in the Food Park and expenditure 
incurred upto 31 December, 2008.  The status as on 30 
November, 2010 as furnished to the Committee was that against 
the approved grant of Rs.400 lakh, a sum of Rs.200 lakh has 
been released till then.  Furthermore, HSIDC has already 
developed 223 plots of different sizes in this Food Park and they 
have also acquired another 382 acres for the second phase 
which is to be developed for extension of Food Park and 
industrial area.  The Committee fail to understand as to what the 
Ministry have been doing for nine years after having released 
the initial assistance of Rs.200 lakh by 9 April, 2002.  It is really 

 -58- 
incomprehensible as to why the second installment of Rs.200 
lakh was not released to HSIDC inspite of the fact that they 
furnished the Progress Report and relevant documents to the 
Ministry way back on 18 February, 2009.  More so, when the 
Ministry did not report anything amiss in regard to this Food 
Park to the Committee.  
 
2.45 In the case of Food Park at Khunmoh, Srinagar, J&K, the 
Ministry approved a sum of Rs.400 lakh.  Out of this, a sum of 
Rs.200 lakh was released to JKSIDC, the Implementing Agency 
on 12 April, 2001.  The second installment of Rs.100 lakh was 
sanctioned of 24 March, 2003. In the sanction letter the Ministry 
had instructed the bank not to release the amount to the 
Implementing Agency until further instructions.  This amount, 
according to the initial information furnished by the Ministry to 
the C ommittee was lying as unspent balance in the bank.  
However, when probed further, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that they wrote to the J&K Bank for refund of Rs.100 
lakh with interest accrued since 24 March, 2003 on 24 August, 
2008.  On 29 June, 2009  they again made a similar request to 
the Bank.  In response the Bank informed them on 15 July, 2009 
that the Food Park had closed the account with the Branch in 
question.  The Ministry then sought clarification from the 
Implementing Agency on 7 September, 2009.  The Implementing 

 -59- 
Agency has intimated, very surprisingly on 9 March, 2010 that 
they have withdrawn the balance amount of Rs.100 lakh from 
the bank before closing their account. This admission 
incidentally coincides with the examination of the Subje ct by the 
Committee.  The last update by the Ministry states that against 
the approved grant of Rs.400 lakh, Rs.300 lakh has been 
released so far and the last tranche of Rs.100 lakh, which was 
released by J&K Bank without instructions from the Ministry is 
being considered for regularization.  Nothing can be more 
reflective of the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry as a 
custodian of public money. This sort of careless functioning in 
their strong opinion needs to be properly inquired and remedial 
action taken expeditiously to avoid recurrence of such events in 
future. 
 
2.46 In the case of Food Park at Sopore, Baramullah, J&K while 
the first installment of Rs.200 lakh has been released on 26 
February, 2004, the reminder seeking progress report with a 
view t o release the remaining Rs.200 lakh, as per information 
furnished by the Ministry, has been sent to the Implementing 
Agency more than five years later on 24 April, 2009.  As on 30 
November, 2010 when the status update was sought by the 
Committee, the position hadn’t moved a bit. Their observation in 

 -60- 
the preceding paragraph is equally applicable here. They desire 
to be apprised of the latest status at the earliest.  
 
2.47 For the Food Park at Jammu, the Ministry sanctioned an 
amount of Rs.346 lakh on 15 Marc h, 2002.  First installment of 
Rs.173 lakh was released on 30 April, 2002.  The second 
installment of Rs.100 lakh was sanctioned on 17 March, 2003 
out of which Rs.86.50 lakh was released on 26 May, 2003 and 
the remaining Rs.13.50 lakh is lying unspent in I ndian Overseas 
Bank. Since, the release of Rs.86.50 lakh on 26 May, 2003 the 
Ministry are making efforts to obtain requisite documents for 
release of balance grant but there has been no response from 
the Implementing Agency.  Efforts of the Ministry to rec all the 
balance from India Overseas Bank through a communication 
dated 22 August, 2008 have also elicited no response.  As per 
the information furnished by the Ministry to them there seem to 
have been no development beyond 22 August, 2008.   They 
desire to be informed of the current status in the matter.      
 
2.48 About the Food Park at Bagalkot, Karnataka, initially the 
Ministry took the stand before the Committee that they had 
provided the first installment of Rs.200 lakh for the project on 
30 July, 2001  and the entire amount is lying unspent in the 
bank.  The bank had been told not to release the money to the 

 -61- 
Implementing Agency viz. Food Karnataka Ltd. till the Ministry 
issued instructions in writing to the bank.  For years the 
Ministry’s understanding continued to remain on the same plane.  
On 28 August, 2008 the Ministry issued a letter to the bank to 
return the grant alongwith the interest accrued.  A copy of this 
Communication was also endorsed to Food Karnataka Ltd. who 
informed the Ministry on 25 S eptember, 2008 that they had 
spent the grant amount on land leveling and procurement of 
plant and machinery alongwith some common facilities like cold 
storage.  Alarmed by this development the Ministry called for a 
clarification from the Bank on 5 February , 2009  whose response 
is still awaited.   
 
2.49 Yet another Food Park at Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh was 
approved in 1999 -2000, for which the Ministry has released a 
sum of Rs.271 lakh as grant-in-aid between 8 March, 2000 and 9 
October, 2001.  This was done  on basis of a surety bond from 
Wise Industrial Park, the Implementing Agency.  The Food Park 
ran into problem due to non payment of bank loan.  UPSIDC also 
cancelled the land lease and the bank took over the land 
mortgaged to it, leading to litigation.  I n one of their  Post 
Evidence Replies submitted in response to the questionnaire of 
the Committee dated 8 December, 2010, the Ministry informed 
the Committee as an update that ‘out of the approved grant of 

 -62- 
Rs.395 lakh, Rs.271 lakh have been released so far .  Entire 
approved amount of Rs.395 lakh has been released in this case.  
The Project has suffered a set back due to legal issues’.   The 
entire chain of events makes it abundantly clear that Ministry 
have at no point of time bothered to follow -up this cas e, in 
which substantial amount of public funds were invested, with 
any degree of seriousness and alacrity .  The Committee would 
also like to be informed about the exact amount released for the 
Food Park as the update from the Ministry is as confusing as t he 
way they have tackled the implementation of this Food Park.   
 
2.50 The State of affairs as narrated above, though not 
exhaustive, is indicative of malaise underneath the fact that 
during three successive Five Year Plans, the Ministry didn’t 
implement t he Scheme of Food Parks with any degree of 
professionalism and purposefulness.  In all these cases, a policy 
of drift and lack of direction is clearly visible.  The Committee 
have no reservations in concluding that the Ministry even failed 
to ensure that v ast sums of monies, of which they were 
custodian were spent properly and accounted for. While 
condemning, unequivocally, the performance of the Ministry in 
the implementation of the Food Park Scheme,  the Committee 
would also like to add that implementation of all these 56 Food 
Parks should be enquired into in a time bound manner and a 

 -63- 
comprehensive report on the utilization of grants-in-aid provided 
by the Ministry to each of them and their status as of now should 
be prepared and submitted to the Committee  alongwith the 
Action Taken Replies of the Ministry to this Report.  As they have 
been given to understand in a different context that the Ministry 
is now exploring ways and means in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance to settle this long outstanding  matter, the 
Committee desire that the outcome of such consultations may 
also be shared with them in entirety in the context of all the 56 
Food Parks at the earliest.   Parallelly, they also desire the 
Ministry to request the Ministry of Finance to enquire  in a time 
bound  manner into the non -chalant attitude of the Public   
Sector Banks in fulfilling their duties as custodians of public 
monies at their disposal in violation of the express and written 
instructions of the Ministry of Food Processing Industri es in 
releasing funds to the implementing agencies in all these cases. 
They further desire to be apprised of the outcome thereof. 
  

 -64- 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
INTEGRATED COLD CHAIN AND PRESERVATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
  
 The Ministry have informed the Committee that to e ncourage 
setting up of cold chain facilities and backward linkages in the Country 
and to provide integrated and complete cold chain and preservation 
infrastructure facilities without any break, from the farm gate to the 
consumer, they have launched a Plan Scheme during Eleventh Five Year 
Plan to provide financial assistance to project proposals received from 
public/private organizations for integrated cold chain infrastructure 
development. 
 
3.2 The Scheme for Cold Chain and Preservation Infrastructure was 
approved by the Finance Minister  on 21 August, 2008 in line with the 
recommendations of the Expenditure Finance Committee. The EFC of 
the Ministry of Finance had considered the proposal of Scheme in its 
meeting held on 19 March, 2008 and recommended for imp lementation 
of 10 integrated cold chain, value addition and preservation 
infrastructure projects in the first phase.  The Ministry have informed 
the Committee that keeping in view the successful implementation of 10 
cold chain projects, the Competent Authority has approved up-scaling of 
the Scheme to take up additional projects including smaller cold chain 
for assistance.  Accordingly, revised guidelines of the Scheme have also 
been issued.  
  
3.3 The salient features of the Scheme according to the Ministry  are 
as follows: 
(i) The scope of components of Integrated  Cold Chain, Value 
Added Centre and Irradiation Facilities has been broadened to 

 -65- 
allow flexibility in project planning.  The Scheme has the following 
components: 
(a) Minimal Processing Centre at th e farm level and this 
centre is to have facility for weighing, sorting, grading 
waxing, packing, pre -cooling, cold storage, normal 
storage and IQF. 
(b) Mobile pre-cooling vans and reefer trucks. 
(c) Distribution hubs with CA chambers/cold 
storage/Variable Humidity Chambers, Packing facility, 
CIP Fog treatment, IQF and blast freezing. 
 (d) Irradiation facility.   
(ii) Horticulture produce also to be included for support under 
Integrated Cold Chain Facilities. 
(iii) Value addition Centres may also include inf rastructural 
facilities including multi-line processing/collection centres, etc. for  
horticulture including organic produce, marine, dairy, meat and 
poultry, etc. 
(iv) Irradiation facilities may also cover warehousing, cold 
storage facilities etc. for sto rage of raw material and finished 
products for efficient utilization of the facility. 
 
3.4 To avail financial assistance, any two of the components from (a), 
(b) and (c) above are required to be set -up by the units.  Considering 
the functional nature of th e facility, Irradiation facility can be treated as 
a stand alone one for the purpose of availing grant.   
 
3.5 The objectives of the Scheme, as stated previously are to provide 
integrated and complete cold chain and preservation infrastructure 
facilities without any break, from the farm gate to the consumer. Pre -
cooling facilities at production sites, reefer vans, and mobile cooling 
units also need to be assisted under the I ntegrated Cold Chain projects. 
Integrated cold chain and preservation infrastructure  can be set up by 
individuals or groups of entrepreneurs with business interest in cold 

 -66- 
chain solutions and also by those who manage supply chain. They will 
enable linking groups of producers to the processors and market 
through well equipped supply chain and cold chain. 
 
3.6 Under this Scheme the Ministry provides financial assistance 
(grant-in-aid) of 50% of the total cost of plant and machinery and 
technical civil works in General areas and 75% for NE region and 
difficult areas (North East including Sikk im and J& K, Himachal Pradesh 
and Uttarakhand) subject to a maximum of Rs.10 crore under this 
Scheme. 
 
3.7 When asked about the specific efforts made to strengthen the 
already established cold storages in the Country during the years, this 
Scheme has been in vogue, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
informed that to strengthen the cold chain infrastructure in the Country, 
Government is operating several Plan Schemes under which financial 
assistance is provided for setting up of cold storages/ cold c hain 
facilities, etc.  The Ministry have Plan Scheme for Cold Chain, Value 
Addition and Preservation Infrastructure during the Eleventh Plan to 
provide financial assistance to project proposals received from 
public/private organizations for cold chain infrastructure development.   
 
3.8. Dwelling upon the progress of the Scheme, Secretary, Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries stated during the Oral Evidence held on 17 
February, 2010 as under: 
 
“The best performance has been in the scheme of cold chain.  We  
have started, as I said, 10 in the year 2008-09.  We had approved 
these.  Sir, eight out of these 10 have reached a stage where 
more than 70 -80 per cent of the construction work and order of 
the machine have been completed.  I am very confident that by 

 -67- 
December of the coming year eight of them will be fully completed 
and they will start increasing the processing amount further.”   
 
3.9 On being queried about the BE, RE and Actual during the last four 
years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  The following inf ormation has 
been furnished to the Committee by the Ministry: 
 
                                        (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual 
2007 – 08 - - - 
2008 – 09 17.50 10.00 9.68* 
2009 – 10 39.81 43.50 43.50 
2010 – 11 27.50 - 8.32 
* Rs. 8.23 cr. was for new cold chain projects. 
 
3.10 The Ministry stated that Eleventh Plan allocation for the Scheme is 
Rs.210 crore.  MFPI had approved 10 integrated cold chain projects 
during financial year 2008-09 in line with recommendations of EFC. The 
total project cost of 10 projects is Rs.220.42 crore, out of which private 
investment is Rs.133.48 core and Government grant is Rs.86.94 crore.  
MFPI have released Rs.60.057 crore as grant -in-aid towards 1 st/2nd/3rd 
installment to these projects till 30 September, 2010. 
 
3.11 When the Committee desired to know the reasons for lower 
allocation of funds by the Ministry it was stated that the Working Group 
for Eleventh Plan has recommended for setting up of 30 cold chain, 
value addition and preservation infrastructure project s with an outlay of 
Rs.210 crore. As per recommendations of EFC, in first phase, 10 
projects were approved in the financial year 2008 -09 in which the total 
amount of grants -in-aid involved is Rs.86.94 crore. So far Rs.60.057 
crore has been released out of which Rs.8.31 crore have been released 

 -68- 
during current year and Rs.19.40 crore, are likely, to be released in the 
remaining period of current financial year (2010-11). 
 
3.12 In response to a query as to whether the Ministry will be able to 
utilise fully the allocated/approved amount during the Eleventh Plan the 
Ministry informed that in furtherance of Expression of Interest (EOI) 
issued by the Ministry seeking project proposals for setting up 
Integrated Cold Chain infrastructure, an overwhelming response has  
been received in the form of 163 such proposals. The Ministry is of 
considered view that the component of cold chain, value addition and 
preservation infrastructure has been extremely successful. 
Overwhelming response of stakeholders and successful implem entation 
of 1 st phase clearly indicate the potential of growth of cold chain 
logistics. It is, therefore, proposed that Eleventh Plan allocation for this 
component may be enhanced from Rs.210 crore, separate proposal to 
that effect is being included in Ann ual Plan proposals for the year  
2011-12. 
 
3.13 When asked why the Ministry have further spent only Rs.8.32 
crore upto October, 2010 the Secretary stated during further Oral 
Evidence on 22 November, 2010 stated as under: 
  
“This year the budget estimate is  Rs 27 crore and we have spent        
Rs.9 crore till now and Rs.18 crore are still required to complete 
the proposals which are already in hand and where work is going 
on.  Only the final report takes slightly longer because it has to 
complete all formali ties.  As we know physically since work is at 
80 per cent and 90 per cent stage, this will all come and for the 
new cold chains, we have asked for Rs.35 crore.  What we want to 
submit is that although the cold chain takes less time, in fact, we 
need only the initial two installments in the first year.  So, in case 
any increase is given to us, it can help us initiate a larger number 

 -69- 
of projects where it can be filled up then by the allocations for 12th 
Plan because we are hoping this will be one of the conti nued 
schemes in the 12th Plan.  That is the situation. 
 Regarding expenditure, this year it is not an issue at all.  We are 
confident of completing 100 per cent expenditure”. 
 
3.14  The  Committee observed that although there are a large number 
of cold storages in the Country, but these are not being modernised and 
as a result the capacity of these cold storages is much less.  In response 
to a query in this regard the Secretary, MoFPI informed the Committee 
during Oral Evidence on 22 November, 2010 as stated below: 
 
“The cold chain part does not include any scheme for increasing 
the capacity of the existing cold storage. Now the Ministry of 
Agriculture has prepared a report on the cold chain management. 
So, basically that has become the main document based o n which 
we should take further action. For the 12 th Plan, we will have a 
closer look at this and in addition to our own cold chain concept , 
what can be done to identify some specific solutions to some 
areas and see which agency  can  implement can be consi dered. 
As of today, our scheme is basically to set up the large scale 
chains with connections right from the farm level up to the central 
point and further”.   
 
3.15 Queried further about the efforts made by the Ministry to develop 
infrastructure for cold chains in North Eastern and hilly regions, keeping 
in view the topography and climatic conditions prevalent in these 
regions, the Ministry in their written reply stated that t o encourage 
setting up of cold chain facilities in the Country including North Ea stern 
and hilly regions, they are operating a Plan Scheme for Cold Chain, 
Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure during the Eleventh Plan 

 -70- 
to provide financial assistance to project proposals received from 
public/private organizations for cold chain  infrastructure development. 
The scheme envisages financial assistance in the form of grant -in-aid @ 
50% of the total cost of plant and machinery and technical civil works in 
general areas and 75% for North Eastern Region and difficult areas 
subject to a maximum of Rs.10.00 crore. This special provision for North 
Eastern and hilly States has been made in view of difficult topography, 
climatic conditions and higher cost of construction/transportation. The se 
initiatives are aimed at filling the gaps in the su pply chain, 
strengthening of cold chain infrastructure, establishing value addition 
with infrastructural facilities like sorting, grading, packaging and 
processing for horticulture including organic produce, marine, dairy, 
poultry, etc..  The Ministry have  issued Expression of Interest (EOI) for 
inviting proposals from all states including North Eastern and hilly 
States. In furtherance of EOI issued by the Ministry seeking project 
proposals for setting up Integrated Cold Chain infrastructure, an 
overwhelming response has been received in the form of 163 such 
proposals. Out of that, 36 proposals have been received from North 
Eastern (13 nos.) and hilly States (23 nos.). The proposals are under 
scrutiny and will be considered as per guidelines of the Scheme. 
 
3.16 The Committee have further been informed that cold storages are 
not available in small villages, remote and hilly areas. So it becomes 
crucial for small and marginal farmers to supply their agricultural 
produce to cold storages. The agricultural produ ce being perishable, get 
spoiled and wasted. The representative of the Ministry further stated 
during evidence on 22 November, 2010 that meanwhile they do not help 
standalone proposals for refrigerated trucks. 
 
 
 
 

 -71- 
3.17 The Committee are of the view that one of the biggest bane 
of the agriculture and allied sectors in the Country is the colossal  
amount of post harvest crop losses.  As mentioned previously in 
this Report, a conservative estimate pegs these losses in fruit 
and vegetables sector alone at Rs.50000 crore per annum.   The 
Committee have time and again pointed out the need for 
attending to this serious problem on a war footing.  
Unfortunately, however, their recommendations, on this aspect, 
in the past have failed to spur the Government into taking  action 
with the requisite alacrity.  The Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries have, in the Eleventh Plan, come up with a holistic 
Integrated Cold Chain and Preservation Infrastructure Scheme 
to fill up this void to some extent and the Committee are 
appreciative of their initiative.  The Scheme envisages financial 
assistance to public/private organizations for integrated cold 
chain infrastructure development with a view to provide 
integrated and complete cold chain and preservation 
infrastructure facilities without any break from the farmgate to 
the consumer.  The Scheme consists of a minimal processing 
center at the farm level with facility for weighing, sorting, 
grading, waxing, packing, pre -cooling, cold storage, normal 
storage and IQF; mobile pre -cooling vans and reefer trucks; 
distribution hubs with C.A. Chambers/cold storage/variable 

 -72- 
humidity chambers, packing facility, CIP fog treatment, IQF and 
blast freezing; and Irradiation facility. 
 
3.18 The Committee note that under this Scheme grant -in-aid of 
50% of the total cost of plant and machinery and technical civil 
works in general areas and 75% for NE Region and difficult 
areas (NE including Sikkim and J&K, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand) subject to a maximum of Rs.10 crore is provided 
by the Ministr y. As in the case of the other two Schemes of the 
Ministry for infrastructure development, this Scheme also was 
approved quite late into the Eleventh Five Year Plan  i.e. in 
August, 2008.  Further,  like in case of the other two Schemes, 
the Government appro ved only 10 projects in the first phase 
against the Eleventh Plan Working Group recommendation of 30 
projects. The similarity doesn’t end here.  As in case of the 
other two Schemes, no funds were earmarked for the first year 
of the Eleventh Plan because of  the delay in approval of the 
Scheme.  Furthermore, while the Eleventh Plan allocation for the 
Scheme was worked out at Rs.210 crore the reduction in the 
number of project from 30 to 10 at the time of approval in 
August 2008 meant that the requirement of f unds was also 
drastically pruned down to Rs.86.94 crore.  The delays in 
approval, planning and implementation have also resulted in the 
10 odd projects approved in the first phase  to have continued 

 -73- 
well into the Fourth year of the Eleventh Plan without bei ng 
completed.   
 
3.19  The Committee strongly feel that the Government 
needlessly curtailed the number of projects to be assisted under 
this Scheme to 10, given the fact that the Ministry had received 
an overwhelming 163 proposals under the Scheme.  In the ir 
considered opinion this is one Scheme, which though introduced 
belatedly, has the potential of making a significant dent in the 
post harvest crop losses incurred by the country year after year.  
The Government should, therefore, have been appreciative o f 
this fact and they ought to have gone out of way to entertain as 
many proposals as possible out of the 163 applications.  At the 
least, they ought to have continued with the Eleventh Plan 
Working Group’s modest recommendation for 30 projects.  
Unfortunately, however, this has not been done.  Resultantly, 
four years of the Eleventh Plan have been exhausted on an even 
less than modest a target.  The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Government to seriously apply themselves towards curbing the 
massive amount of post harvest crop losses by reworking on the 
financial requirements of the Integrated Cold Chain and 
Preservation Infrastructure Scheme with renewed vigour.  Not 
only should sufficient funds be allocated for this Scheme at the 
RE stage of 2011 -12 to giv e it the necessary fillip, allocations 

 -74- 
should be substantially hiked for the Scheme in the Twelfth Plan 
to ensure coverage of maximum number of workable proposals. 
They would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this 
direction at the earliest.          
 
3.20  Coming to the specific merits of the Scheme, the 
Committee find that it is yet to be synergised with the existing 
system of cold storages. As of now the Scheme is basically 
meant to set up large scale, standalone chains with connections 
right from  farm level up to the consumer.  The Committee 
further find that the Ministry of Agriculture have prepared a 
report on the cold chain management and the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries intend to take further action with the said 
Report as the basis.   The Committee feel that the stand alone 
approach of the Ministry vis -à-vis this Scheme is not going to 
yield the desired results.  They, therefore, desire that the 
Scheme should be fitted in the broader picture of the cold chain 
management in the Country,  as brought out in the report of the 
Ministry of Agriculture, so that the problem of post harvest crop 
losses is tackled in a holistic and comprehensive manner.  The 
Committee would also like the Ministry to explore the possibility 
of creating interface be tween their Scheme and the Rural 
Godowns Scheme of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation) in this very context.     

 -75- 
3.21 Before concluding on this matter, the Committee would 
also like to comment on a minor but significant aspe ct.  The 
Ministry, as of now do not have any provisions for assisting 
standalone proposals for refrigerated trucks.  During the further 
Oral Evidence of the Ministry on 22 November, 2010 their 
representative had, however, conceded about the utility of such  
refrigerated trucks in efficient management of the cold chain.  
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to make suitable 
provisions in the Scheme for grant of financial assistance to 
standalone proposals of refrigerated trucks to give further 
impetus to their Scheme without much delay.   
       

 -76- 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
SETTING UP OF NEW ABATTOIRS/MODERNISATION OF 
EXISTING ABATTOIRS 
  
 The Ministry have stated that hygienic and scientific slaughtering 
and optimum utilization of by-products are the most important issues in 
the Indian meat industry today.  Quality and hygiene levels in the wet 
market are low due to imperfect bleeding, primitive and crude 
slaughtering and de -feathering techniques, lack of infrastructure 
facilities like water, electricity and facili ties for handing carcass/flaying, 
cross contamination in slaughter and improper handling during carriage.  
These result in tremendous waste of meat, contamination/deterioration 
of meat and also avoidable cruelty to the animals during the whole 
process.  Th e qualitative and quantitative capacities of the abattoirs 
need to be upgraded and these are required to be linked with 
commercial processing of meat, both for domestic consumption and 
exports besides discouraging unauthorized slaughtering. 
  
4.2 The Ministry have further stated that during the Eleventh Plan, the 
Ministry has launched a comprehensive Scheme for setting up of new 
Abattoirs and modernization of Existing Abattoirs across the Country. It 
aims to upgrade qualitative and quantitative capacities o f abattoirs, 
which will be linked, with commercial processing of meat, both for 
domestic consumption and exports.   
 
4.3 The objectives of the Scheme are : 
 . Scientific and hygienic slaughtering of the animals. 
 . Stunning, causing least pain to the cattle/ minimizing  
transportation of animals. 
 . Better chilling facility to prevent microbial activity in 
slaughtered animals. 

 -77- 
 . Better hygiene, safety and retail cold chain management. 
.     Better forward linkage facilities for finished meat and meat 
products. 
 
4.4 The Ministry  have stated that the proposal for setting up of 50 
Abattoirs was forwarded to the EFC after obtaining comments from 
related Ministry/Department. EFC in its meeting held on 19 March, 2008 
had recommended that in the first phase, 10 project s will be taken up 
for implementation. CCEA approved the Scheme in its meeting held on    
26, February, 2009 where it was approved to set up 10 Abattoirs. 
 
4.5 About the contours of the Scheme, the Ministry have informed the 
Committee that financial assist ance (grant-in-aid) would be provided at 
50% and 75% of cost of plant & machineries and technical civil work in 
general and difficult areas respectively, subject to maximum of Rs.15 
crore for each project.  Technical Consultancy fee @5% of grant will be 
provided to meet cost of engaging Technical Consultancy firms at apex 
level to assist the Ministry.   
 
4.6 The representative of the Ministry clarifying further on the Scheme 
stated during the Oral Evidence on 17 February, 2010 as under:   
 
“the second schem e is the Abattoirs modernization.  For the first 
time in this Country the issue of meat processing and clean meat was 
taken up during the Plan.  Nine abattoirs were approved in 2008 -09, 
and one was approved immediately thereafter.  We have also released 
the minimum amount of first installment by way of an advance of 10 per 
cent.  The second installment is a back -ended installment, which 
depends upon the performance and money will flow after they have 
spent the required money.  So, this year has gone and we are very 
closely monitoring the progress of each of these.  I am very confident 
that all of them are going to come for the second installment, that is, 

 -78- 
after completing 30 per cent of the work.  They will be coming in the 
next 3 -5 months.  Further, the sch eme has also become popular as 
many of the Municipal Corporations have realized its importance that 
the  Government has come forward to share 75 per cent of the cost in 
the difficult areas and 50 per cent in other areas.  We already have 
more than 26 appli cations pending with us for expansion of this 
programme also”.     
 
4.7 The following statement highlighting the BE, RE and Actual 
Expenditure during the first four years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan 
has been furnished by the Ministry: 
           (Rs. in crore) 
Year  BE RE Actual 
2007 – 08 - - - 
2008 – 
09 
89.80* 42.00* 10.94 
2009 – 
10 
134.80* 66.61 8.86 
2010 – 
11 
26.39 32.96 8.38 upto 19.11.2010 
*Total fund of infrastructure (excluding NER and major head 3601 and 3602) 
 
4.8 The Committee on observing  that the RE for the years 2008 -09 
and 2009-10 was just half of the BE of these two years and the Actual  
expenditure during the two years put together was still much lower at 
Rs.19.80 crore desired to know he reasons for the same.  In response 
the Secretary of the Ministry submitted during the further Oral Evidence 
on 22 November, 2010 as under: 
 
“we must accept that on the financial front only when the project 
comes to a certain stage, we can show performance.  Only in 
three cases out of ten, we have on -going projects where activities 

 -79- 
are taking place on the field -money which is being asked for is 
being given and physical checking is being done.  Rest of them, 
while two or three, with the constant efforts, come to the stage 
when activity will start.  There  are still three or four projects 
where land and locations problems have not been solved”. 
 
4.9 He further added: 
 
“Abattoirs Scheme was sanctioned in the month of August, 2008 
(in 2008-09) for the first time in the Eleventh Plan.  That was the 
second year of the Eleventh Plan which was almost coming to an 
end when the scheme was sanctioned.  That is why, we could not 
do anything in 2007 -08 and 2008-09 also, we could approve only 
nine projects in which we released the first installment of ten per 
cent of the approved subsidy amount  to enable them to start the 
work.  Later on when they go ahead with the work and on the 
basis of work done, we release the installments and it becomes a 
back-ended grant-bank ended subsidy”. 
 
 
4.10 When queried about the reasons for decrease in expenditure year 
after year, the Ministry replied that the main reasons for this downward 
trend in expenditure incurred are non -clearance of project site, 
opposition/agitation from locals, elections, improper selection process of 
consultants/contractors, etc. They further stated that there were non -
clearance of site at some places due to opposition/agitation from the 
locals because this was hurting their religious sentiments. In response 
to a query whether the Ministry had taken into conside ration   this 
prospect while finalizing a location for the project during Detailed 
Project Report (DPR), the Ministry informed that they have taken into 
consideration all the necessary factors while finalizing a location for the 
project on the basis of sub mission of Detailed Project Report (DPR) 

 -80- 
which is forwarded by the State Government .  However, the issue of 
non-clearance of site due to opposition/agitation from the locals because 
of their religious sentiments getting hurt arose during the 
implementation of the project.  
 
4.11 During the course of Oral Evidence on 17 February, 2010 a 
representative of the Ministry added: 
 
  
“You may also remember that all the abattoirs have been closed 
down after a verdict of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India 
because al l of them are polluting the atmosphere. The other 
aspect of them was first you modernize them and then run the 
same. As a result, this project has come before us. Our effort is to 
make the places a proper one at which the animals are to be 
slaughtered and b eing slaughtered and all this is being done 
keeping in view of the consumption of  mea t of a goat or so. You 
have rightly said that people are protesting these at some of the 
places. As I said earlier tha t they opposed thes e because people 
were not aware o f the modern abattoirs. The y thought if this is 
installed the situation will deteriorate. As I s aid, we deputed our 
experts to S himla and Hyderabad. When they  talked people 
there, they were convinced. Even people in Kolkata have tired to 
understand the si tuation and have assured that they will soon 
start work there. 
 
The local people are not aware of the modern abattoirs, so it was 
necessary to convince them. After that they came to know that 
this will neither pollute the water nor it will create foul smal l or 
even the kite will find any meant lying in open. We are making 
efforts to open up these abattoirs outside the city limits. There are 
some problems as how much land is available with the Municipal 
Corporation and as to where the same is available. But we want to 
open up these outside the city so that people do not face any of 
problem”.  
 
 
 
 
 

 -81- 
4.12 Existing abattoirs which are not modernized emit their waste 
without treatment which creates problems for the people living in the 
adjoining areas. When asked about the measures co -opted in the new 
Scheme of things for the treatment of residual left as waste after 
slaughtering of animals in the abattoirs, the representative of the 
Ministry submitted during the further Oral Evidence on 22 November, 
2010: 
“In the modern projects, water or blood from abattoirs will not 
flow without treatment.  There will be a Effluent Treatment Plant, 
for treatment of the unpurified water.  This is an important part of 
the “Modern Slaughter House Project”.  The other waste residual 
like meat or bones, will also be processed through Rendering Plant 
Technique.  We sanction the projects only when they have both 
Effluent Treatment Plant and Solid Treatment Plant”. 
 
4.13 The Ministry in their post -evidence submission further stated that 
the Effluent Treatment Plants and Rendering Plants are now compulsory 
part of the modernized slaughter-houses that are being set up under the 
Abattoir Scheme, a part of Scheme of Infrastructure Development of the 
Ministry. 
 
4.14 The representative of the Mi nistry further clarified about the 
problems face by the meat industry sector during the further Oral 
Evidence held on 22 November, 2010 as follows: 
 
“Another biggest problem in this sector is that we have not done 
much in the meat sector in our Country.  So, we have lack of good 
consultants.  We have lack of good vendors who can provide good 
equipment.  We have hardly one or two equipment manufacturers 
who are there.  There are not good equipment manufacturers.  
So, vendor development is also a big issue wh ich we have to 
tackle”. 

 -82- 
4.15 The Committee note that lack of hygienic and scientific 
slaughtering and optimum utilization of by products are the two 
most serious problems besetting the Indian meat industry.  
There is tremendous wastage of meat, contaminat ion/ 
deterioration of meat due to primitive and crude slaughtering 
techniques, lack of infrastructure like electricity and water, lack 
of facilities for handling carcass /flaying, cross contamination 
during slaughter, as well as improper handling during ca rriage.  
The primitive slaughter techniques also lead to avoidable cruelty 
to the animals.  The Committee further note that with a view to 
bring qualitative and quantitative changes in the capacities of 
the abattoirs, the Ministry have launched during the Eleventh 
Plan the Scheme for setting up of New Abattoirs and 
Modernisation of Existing Abattoirs.  The new Scheme has some 
notable objectives including scientific and hygienic slaughtering 
of animals; minimizing transportation of animals and stunning to 
cause least pain to the animals to be slaughtered; better chilling 
facility to prevent microbial activity in slaughtered animals; 
better hygiene safety and retail cold chain management; and 
better forward linkage facilities for finished meat and meat 
products.  
  
4.16 The Committee find that though the Ministry had proposed 
setting up of 50 abattoirs under the Scheme during the Eleventh 

 -83- 
Plan to the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), the EFC, in its 
meeting on 19 March, 2008, recommended only 10 projects for  
being taken up for implementation in the first phase.  The 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) also endorsed 
the stand of the EFC and approved only 10 abattoirs in the first 
phase in its meeting held on 26 February, 2009.  Under the 
Scheme, grant-in-aid is to be provided at 50 per cent and 75 per 
cent of cost of plant and machineries and technical and civil 
work in general and difficult areas respectively, subject to a 
maximum of Rs.15 crore for each project.  The technical 
consultancy fee at the rate of 5 per cent of the grant will also be 
provided to meet the cost of engaging technical consultancy 
firms at apex level to assist the Ministry.  
  
4.17 The Committee are, however, constrained to observe that 
this very useful Scheme of the Ministry has  not been able to 
acquit itself in the desirable manner because of the fault of the 
planners and the Government.  The EFC recommended the 
Scheme much after the Eleventh Plan commenced (1 April, 
2007) on 19 March, 2008. The CCEA finally approved the Scheme 
almost one year later on 26 February, 2009 and that too to  set 
up only 10 abattoirs.  Consequently, the implementation proper 
of this important Scheme has gone totally haywire.  No funds 
were obviously allotted during the first fiscal of the Eleventh 

 -84- 
Plan i.e. 2007-08. In the second year of the Plan viz. 2008 -09  a 
sum of almost Rs 90 crores was approved as Budget Estimate for 
the Scheme. This was reduced by more than half to Rs.42 crore 
[total fund for infrastructure (excluding NER and major head 
3601 and  3602)] at the Revised Estimate stage.  The actual 
expenditure was hardly one fourth of even this drastically 
pruned revised estimate at Rs.11 crore approx.  In 2009 -10 the 
situation worsened further when the BE of almost Rs.135 crore 
[total fund for infra structure (excluding NER and major head 
3601 and 3602)] was again reduced by more than 50 per cent to 
almost Rs.67 crore and the actual expenditure did not touch 
even Rs.9 crore mark.  In 2010 -11 the BE of Rs.26.39 crore was 
revised to Rs.32.96 crore at RE stage however, till 19 November, 
2010 a sum of Rs.8.38 crore only had been spent.  In short, the 
delay in planning and approval stages of the Scheme has led to a 
severe stunting of the Scheme at the implementation stage.  
  
4.18 Further, Out of a sum of Rs.251 crore plus allocated upto 
the Fourth Year of the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the Ministry have 
been able to actually spend  barely 10 per cent of the sum i.e. 
Rs.28 crore (approx.).  The Committee find this totally 
inexplicable and unacceptable, a way of  planning and 
management. The modernization of the existing abattoirs and 
setting up of a state -of-the-art abattoirs is a pressing 

 -85- 
requirement, if the much needed improvements in the meat 
industry sector in India are to be ushered in.  They, therefore, 
strongly recommend that this Scheme should not be starved of 
funds any further.  Not only should funds be  provided in 
sufficient measure  during the Twelfth Plan for the purpose but 
even in the last year of the Eleventh Plan i.e. the ongoing Fiscal, 
the Scheme should be provided funds on priority basis at the RE 
stage to somewhat make up for the abysmally slow pace of 
implementation of this Scheme in the first four years of the 
Eleventh Plan.   
 
4.19 Another reason for this decline in expenditure, year after 
year is of the Ministry’s own making.  These projects have been 
beset with problems like non-clearance of project site, improper 
selection proc ess of consultants/contractors, opposition/ 
agitation from/by locals, to name a few.  The Committee firmly 
believe that none of these problems is insurmountable.  The 
Ministry have stated that they have taken into consideration all 
factors while finalizing a location for the project on the basis of 
submission of Detailed Project Report (DPR) forwarded by the 
State Gove rnment.  This, however, does not convince the 
Committee.  In all likelihood some lacunae is there in the DPR 
received through the concerned State Government or the 
procedure adopted by the Ministry to evaluate the DPR, which is 

 -86- 
ultimately leading to non -clearance of project sites.  The entire 
issue, therefore, needs to be revisited by the Ministry, so that 
the future projects are not bogged down due to this non -
justifiable reason.  In so far as the non -clearance of project site 
due to opposition from/agitat ion by the locals is concerned, the 
Committee feel that this issue can be sorted out if handled 
properly at the DPR stage itself in consultation with the State 
Governments.   
 
4.20 They have been apprised by the Ministry that in the modern 
projects water a nd blood is treated in an effluent treatment 
plant before flowing out.  Likewise, other residual wastes like 
meat and bones are also processed through rendering plant 
technique in solid treatment plant .  In fact only those projects 
which have both the effl uent treatment plant and solid 
treatment plant are sanctioned by the Ministry.  If that be the 
case, what is perhaps lacking and causing people in the 
adjoining areas to agitate is that sufficient efforts have not been 
put in by the Ministry or the impleme nting authorities to create 
awareness about these attributes of the abattoirs being 
modernized or new ones being set up.  Peoples reaction, 
hitherto, has been based on what is their general perception 
about the various problems and difficulties created by the ill 
maintained slaughter houses in the vicinity.  Once they are 

 -87- 
educated about the inherently eco -friendly nature of the modern 
abattoirs, things can be sorted out to mutual satisfaction.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should ta ke 
a lead in this direction by devising suitable media/awareness 
campaign for the purpose with the active involvement of local 
bodies.  
 
4.21 The Committee note with concern that meat industry 
sector, inspite of the importance being accorded to it of late,  
suffers from almost a total lack of equipment vendors.  There are 
hardly one or two equipment manufacturers.  There is also a lack 
of good consultants due to the equipment industry being 
virtually non -existent.  In such circumstances, the Committee 
wonder as to how the Ministry intend to implement their much 
touted modernisation programme.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that this is one area where the Ministry will 
have to do a lot of hand holding for now, and till the availability 
of equipment manufacturers, vendors and consultants comes 
upto certain respectable levels.  Not only would the existing 
abattoir owners and the prospective ones require to be guided in 
their respective ventures, identification of sources of equipment, 
suitable incentiv es for their import, etc. would also have to be 
taken care of by the Ministry in consultation with the National 
Meat Board.  The Committee desire that a blue print be worked 

 -88- 
out by the Ministry in this regard without any delay, so that the 
course correctio n and new inputs are co -opted in the Scheme, 
well before the commencement of the Twelfth Plan.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Ministry in this regard alongwith the views of the planners and 
the Government, thereupon, at the earliest.            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                           BASUDEB ACHARIA 
... August, 2011                                   Chairman, 
…Bhadrapada 1933 (Saka)                                    Committee on Agriculture  

 -89- 
 
ANNEXURE- I 
Details of potential clusters in Food Processing Sector 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Product City/State 
1. Cashew  processing Udupi Karnataka, Goa, Kollam 
Kerala, Pudukottai, Palasa 
Andhra Pradesh 
2. Milk products Meerut, Uttar Pradesh, 
Puducherry, Hanuman Garh 
Distt. Rajasthan, Deesa, 
Banaskantha, Dindigul, Ferozpur 
3. Rice mill Burdwan West Bengal, Krishna, 
East Godavari, Vijaywada, West 
Godavari Andhra Pradesh, 
Sahajanpur, UP, Hanuman Garh 
Distt. Rajasthan, Kota Raj., 
Dhamtri, Hojai Nagoan Assam, 
Tarikere Taluk, Gwalior, Raipur, 
Ganjam Orissa 
4. Starch  & Sago Salem, Tamil Nadu 
5. Mango pulp Chittoor Andhra Pradesh, 
Dharamapuri 
6. Bakery & Confectionary Puducherry 
7. Marine foods Vizag Kakinada, Kakinada 
Andhra Pradesh 
8. Dal mills Gulburga Gadagh belt Karnataka 
and Nanded Maharashtra 
Hanuman Garh Distt. Rajasthan, 
Indore MP 

 -90- 
9. Papad, pickles, chips, 
processing of cereals 
grading, packing and 
attta making, processing 
of fruit & veg. grading, 
packing, dehydration, 
juice & jam making, 
processing of poultry bird 
and meat vig., eg g 
power, consumer packing 
of eggs, retail dressing 
 Tumkur, Mysore and 
Chamarajanagar 
10. Oil processing Shree Madhopur, Rajasthan, 
Hojai Nagoan Assam, 
Virudunagar 
11. Fruits &Veg. Pratapgarh, UP 
12. Flour Mills Sahajanpur, UP, 
Mahadevpapura, Bangalore 
Urban, Hanuman Garh Distt. 
Rajasthan, Kota Rajasthan 
13. Fruits processing Bulsar, Gujrat, Chittoor, Andhra 
Pradesh 
14. Poha Navasari, Gujarat 
15. Mfr, of Pickle, Jam, Jelly, 
Cherry 
Hathras, Agra, UP 
16. Processing of grapes & 
wine mfg. 
Chekaballapur, Karnataka 
17. Coconut processing Hosadurga, Janakal, Holalkere, 
Hiriyur Chitradurga Karnataka 
18. Tamarind, Mango & veg. 
Processing 
Shanarpatti, Natham, Nilakottai, 
Dindigul, Tamil Nadu 
19. Mfr. Of Jam, Squash, Thrissur, Kerala 

 -91- 
Masala Powers, Pickles 
20. Edible oil & oil cake, moth 
& mogar, rasagulla, 
bhujia & namkeen, 
papad, grain milling and 
all types of spices and dal 
mills 
Bikaner Distt. Rajasthan 
21. Bakery products Hanuman Garh Distt. Rajasthan 
22. Extraction of edible oil Ajmer & Tonk, Rajasthan 
23. Dhaniya, edible oil Kota Division, Rajasthan 
24. Edible oil Alwar & Bharatpur Distt., 
Rajsthan 
25. Potato/Veg., products Deesa, Banaskantha 
26. Isabgol/mukhwas/cumin Sidhpur, Patan 
27. Ready-to-eat namkin & 
confectionary items 
Odhav, Ahmedabad 
28. Pulse processing Dhamtari 
29. Onion dehydration  Mahuva, Gujurat 
30. Mango processing Dharmapura, Tamil Nadu 
31. Cotton seed oil  Dhule Maharashtra 
32. Grain milling and grain 
based products 
South 
33. Alcoholic beverages North 
34. Tomato paste& fast food Central 
35. Meat and seafood 
processing 
West 
36. Banana processing Trichy 
37. Fish processing Ramnad 
38. Turmeric Erode 
39. Coffee curing and jiggery 
making units 
Chikmagalur Taluk 

 -92- 
40. Indore namkeen & snaks Indore 
41. Oil solvent plants  Katni & Morena 
42. Kesar Mango Aurangabad 
43. Grape & Rasin Nasik 
44. Pomegranate processing Pune 
45. Grape and onion Satara 
46. Alphonso mango Thane 
47. Grapes packing Nasik Maharashtra 
48. Agri milling Jabalpur-Satna-Katni MP 
49. Fish/prawn processing West Godavari Andhra Pradesh 
50. Rice Shelling Sangrur, Barnala, Ferozpur, 
Mukatsar, Mansa 
 
 
 

 -93- 
ANNEXURE- II 
Details of grant-in-aid disbursed to Mega Food Parks 
S 
No. 
Name  
Project 
cost   
(Rs Cr.) 
Date of  
inprinciple 
approval  
Date of 
Final 
Approval  
Amount of 
grant 
approved   
(Rs Cr.) 
Amount of 
grant 
released  
(Rs Cr.) 
Actual 
expen-
diture  
(Rs Cr.) 
1. 
Patanjali 
Food & 
Herbal Park 
Ltd 
95.08 16.12.2008 27.03.2009 50.00 30.00  38.00 
2. 
Srini Food 
Park Pvt 
Ltd. 
126.54 16.12.2008 27.03.2009 50.00 30.00  42.00 
3. 
North East 
Mega Food 
Park Ltd. 
75.98 16.12.2008 27.03.2009 50.00 5.00 3.00 
4. 
Jharkhand 
Mega Food 
Park Pvt Ltd 
113.95 16.12.2008 27.03.2009 50.00 5.00 4.58 
5. 
Tamil Nadu 
Mega Food 
Park Ltd 
133.45 16.12.2008 16.03.2010 50.00 5.00 1.50 
6. 
Jangipur 
Bengal 
Mega Food 
Park Pvt 
Ltd. 
111.04 16.12.2008 16.03.2010 50.00 5.00 2.60 
7. Punjab 153.40 03.08.2010 
DPR to be submitted within six months of in-
principle approval 
8. Karnataka 130.00 03.08.2010 
9. 
Mahara-
shtra 
120.00 03.08.2010 
10. 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
168.65 24.09.2010 
 
 

 -94- 
ANNEXURE- III 
Position of Special Purpose Vehicles 
S.N 
 
 
State 
 
 
Status of SPV 
formation 
 
Status of 
Financial Closure 
 
Construction Activity 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPV has been 
incorporated and 
registered in the 
name of M/s  
Srini Food Park 
Pvt. Ltd.  
The project has 
achieved its 
financial closure. A 
consortium of State 
Bank of India,  
Chittoor and Bank 
of Maharashtra has 
sanctioned a term 
loan of `50.00 Cr. 
The construction of 
various components of 
basic enabling 
infrastructure   as well as 
core processing facilities 
has already commenced 
and is under various 
stages of development.  
The integrated aseptic 
pulping line in park has 
commenced operation. 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jharkhand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPV has been 
incorporated and 
registered in the 
name of M/s 
Jharkhand Mega 
Food Park Private 
Limited.  
The project has 
achieved its 
financial closure. 
Allahabad Bank, 
Ranchi has 
sanctioned terms 
loan of `33.00 Cr. 
Land development at the 
site of CPC is completed 
and construction of 
boundary wall is 
progressing. 
International 
Construction Company 
(ICCO) has been 
awarded the work for 
basic infrastructures like 
land development, 
internal roads etc. 
The SPV is expected to 
float tenders for civil 
work and plant and 
equipments for other 
components of basic 
enabling infrastructure. 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uttrakhand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPV has been 
incorporated and 
registered in the 
name of M/s 
Patanjali Food & 
Herbal Park Pvt. 
Ltd. (PFHPPL).  
The project has 
achieved its 
financial closure. 
State Bank of India, 
Br. Haridwa r has 
sanctioned term 
loan of Rs.22.00 Cr. 
Work towards land 
development, road, 
water, power, ETP etc 
has been completed. The 
construction of certain 
other components of 
basic enabling and core 
processing facilities are 
nearing completion.  
PFHPL has alrea dy 
allotted plots to Patanjali 
Ayurved Ltd and Divya 
Plastochem for 
processing and 
packaging facility 
respectively. The 
processing unit of 
Patanjali Ayurved Ltd. 
has already commenced 
operations. 

 -95- 
4 
 
 
 
North East 
(Assam) 
 
 
 
SPV has been 
incorporated and 
registered in the 
name of M/s 
North East Mega 
Food Park Pvt. 
Ltd. (NEMFPPL).  
The project has 
achieved its 
financial closure. 
NEDFi has 
sanctioned term 
loan of Rs.9.00 Cr. 
for the project. 
Construction work has 
started. Tenders of over 
Rs.30.00 Cr. awarded. 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tamil Nadu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The company is 
registered as M/s 
Tamil Nadu Mega 
Food Park Ltd  
The project has 
been accorded Final 
Approval in 
March‟2010 and 
SPV is now 
expected to 
proceed for 
financial closure. 
The proposed term 
loan component as 
per means o f 
finance is Rs.56.00 
Cr. 
The SPV is now expected 
to proceed for 
construction activities at 
the park after completion 
of tendering process. 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
West 
Bengal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The SPV has 
been 
incorporated as 
M/s Jangipur 
Bengal Mega 
Food Park Pvt. 
Ltd  
The pr oject has 
been a ccorded final 
approval in March, 
2010 and SPV is 
now expected to 
proceed for 
financial closure.  
The proposed term 
loan component as 
per means of 
finance is Rs.30.52 
Cr. 
The SPV has obtained 
the permission of 
conversion of land use. 
The SPV is now expected 
to proceed for 
construction activities at 
the park after completion 
of tendering process. 
7 
 
 
Karnataka 
 
 
SPV has been 
incorporated as 
M/s Capital Foods 
Ltd., 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The SPVs have initiated the process of DPR 
preparation, conversion of land use and other 
pre-operating activities. 
8 
 
 
 
Maharashtra 
 
 
 
 
SPV has been 
incorporated as 
M/s Temptation 
Foods Ltd., 
9 
 
 
 
 
Punjab 
 
 
 
 
SPV has been 
incorporated as 
M/s International 
Farm Fresh 
Product (India) 
Ltd., 
10 
 
 
 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
SPV has bee n 
incorporated as 
M/s Aditya Birla 
Nuva Ltd. 

 -96- 
 
 
 