 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-2010) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION) 
              
 
IMPACT OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE ON AGRICULTURE 
AND ALLIED SECTORS IN INDIA  
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 of the Committee on Agriculture (2008-2009)} 
 
         
        
 
TENTH  REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
May, 2010 / Jyaistha, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 

 
 
  
TENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-2010) 
          
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
         
         
         
IMPACT OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE ON AGRICULTURE 
AND ALLIED SECTORS IN INDIA  
  
         
Action Taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-seventh Report 
 (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2008-2009) 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on    17.06.2010 
Presented to Lok Sabha on        
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on      
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
May, 2010 / Jyaistha, 1932 (Saka) 

 
 
  
 
COA No. 233 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2010 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
  
CONTENTS 
                   PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1  
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………    14 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..    28 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….    34 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….    35 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
held on 17 May, 2010         44 
    
                                   ANNEXURE 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-seventh Report               
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2008-2009)           46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2009-2010) 
 
 Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
  
MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhry  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Shri Narendra Budania  
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24. Shri A. Elavarasan  
25. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
*31. 
 
Vacant 
 
 
 __________________________________________________________________________________ 
* Vice Shri Kheikiho Zhimomi who ceased to be a member of the Committee 
on his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 April, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (2009 -2010) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Tenth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Forty -seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Agriculture (200 8-2009) on „ Impact of Global Climate Change on Agriculture and 
Allied Sectors in India‟. 
2. The Forty -seventh Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2008 -2009) o n 
„Impact of Global Climate Change on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in India‟  was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25 February, 2009.  
The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Report on 15 September, 2009. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 17 May, 2010. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Governm ent on the O bservations / 
Recommendations contained in the Forty -seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Annexure. 
 
 
      
                    
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
NEW DELHI;                   BASUDEB  ACHARIA 
20  May, 2010                                                                        Chairman, 
30  Vaisakha, 1932(Saka)                           Committee on Agriculture 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 
 
  
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Forty -seventh Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2008 -2009) on „Impact of 
Global Climate Change on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in India‟ which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25 February, 2009. 
 
1.2  The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research & Education) 
have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 23 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorised as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 5, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 17, 19, 21 and 23  
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s reply: 
Recommendation Nos. 4, 6, 7, 14, 18 and 22 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Nos. - NIL  
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited : 
Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 10, 15, 16 and 20  
 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the observations/recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to 
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter 
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation.  
The Committee further desire that Action Taken notes on the observations / 
recommendations contained in Chapter -I a nd final action taken replies to the 

 
 
  
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report be furnished to them 
at an early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Role and Responsibilities of DARE / ICAR in Global Climate Change 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
 
1.5 Concerned with the various adverse effects of global warming, the Committee 
had asked the Government to develop strategies at international, nationa l, local 
including Panchayat level, and do agro -climatic research work with a view to develop 
measures for containment.  They had also asked the Government to educate various 
stake-holders on this issue and for increased policy and financial support for 
agricultural research and establishment of „Green Research Fund‟.  They had also 
recommended that DARE/ICAR should develop a drought code, a flood code and a 
good weather code at the earliest alongwith a concrete, constructive and feasible 
contingency plan for all agro-climate zones.  Apart from this the Committee had also 
desired that a Compensatory Production Programme be developed expeditiously and 
with considerable attention and detailed planning based on relevant research to be 
done by DARE/ICAR for agri-allied sectors in case of natural calamities. 
 
1.6 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education), in their Action Taken Note have stated that they have a very strong 
network of research institutions located in different parts of the country which are also 
working on various aspects of climate change. Further, recently ICAR has 
established National Institute of Abiotic Stress Management at Baramati, 
Maharashtra to address the issues arising due to climate change in terms of  abiotic 
stress on agriculture .  The Ministry of Agriculture have already developed a Drought 
Code with inputs from DARE / ICAR. The suggestions of the Committee will be 
considered during the revision. Flood Code is being developed by National Disaster 
Management Authority, under the Ministry of Home Affairs. Good Weather Code will 
be prepared by DARE/ ICAR incorporating suggestions given by the Committee and 
interest of the stakeholders. 
 

 
 
  
1.7 It has been further stated that all the 25 centres of AICRP on Agrometeorology 
and a few ICAR institutes are providing weather based agro advisories (Good 
weather code) at district level twice in a week to the farming community using the 
Medium Range Weather Forecast issued by IMD and the current crop conditions. 
The necessary research back stop in the form of agroclimatic characterization, crop 
weather relationships, influence of weather on  pest/disease for preparing a good 
weather based advisories  and its successful implementations was obtained from the 
research results generated at the centres of AICRP on Agrometeorology over the last 
two decades. Utility of crop simulation models to study the impact of various climatic 
scenarios on crop productivity, development of adaptation and mitigation strategies to 
meet the threat from climate change have been carried out extensively at AICRPAM 
centres and also at different ICAR institutes. 
 
1.8 The Committee note with satisfaction that based on inputs provided by 
DARE/ICAR the Ministry of Agriculture have developed a Drought C ode. 
Likewise, the Flood Code is being developed by National Disaster Management 
Authority which functions under the Ministry of Home Affairs.  They also note 
that though the Good Weather Code is yet to be prepared by DARE / ICAR ,  
some ICAR institutes and  25 AICRP Centres are already providing weather 
based agro ad visories at district level twice a week to the farming community 
using the Medium Range Weather Forecast issued by IMD and current crop 
conditions. The Committee, however, find it disconcerting t o note the 
Department’s silence on the crucial aspect of ‘Compensatory Production 
Programme’.  Keeping in view the multiplicity of agro -climatic zones in the 
Country and the fact that natural calamities like droughts, floods, etc. affect 
some part or the o ther of the Country almost every year , a ‘Compensatory 
Production Programme’, factoring requirements of all agro -climatic zones and 
taking care of all natural calamities, is essential for successfully tackling the 
adverse effects of global warming and clim ate change.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Government  to inform them of their considered views in 
regard to developing a ‘Compensatory Production Programme, within one 
month of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.    

 
 
  
National Climate and Water Management Policies 
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 
1.9 Noting the lack of coordination and interaction between the various 
Ministries/Departments of the Central Government and the State Governments of 
Himalayan States, the Committee had recommended that  the Central Government 
should take necessary initiatives to associate the Governments of these States with 
all Schemes/programmes related to Global Climate Change, its implications and 
solutions  and help them financially and technically.   On observing th e shortcomings 
in rehabilitation of Tsunami and Kosi Flood affected people, the Committee had also 
recommended that Ministry of Agriculture and all other concerned Central 
Ministries/Departments to make coordinated efforts to find solutions to the 
floods/droughts/high temperatures/climate variations, etc. for the ultimate welfare of 
homo-environ systems of the Country. 
 
1.10 In their Action Taken Note the Department have stated that t his pertains to 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of Agric ulture and Ministry of 
Environment and Forest/ PMO as well as other Central Ministries.  They have further 
stated that the ICAR is strengthening its research activities through the Network 
Project on Climate Change during the Eleventh Plan. It has already established a 
National Institute of Abiotic Stress Management at Baramati, Maharashtra and is in 
the process of establishment of another institute dealing with Management of Biotic 
Stress.  
 
1.11 The Committee would like to make it amply clear to the Depar tment of 
Agriculture Research and Education that while recommending these measures 
in their original Report, the Committee were fully aware of the multi agency 
involvement in their implementation. Therefore, the response of the 
Department which is restrict ed merely to mentioning the names of various 
ministries/departments/agencies involved with the implementation is not only 
unfortunate but is reflective of an escapist tendency.  The least the Committee 
expected from the Department in the context of this re commendation was that 
they would convey the views of the Committee to all concerned promptly so 
that appropriate action could have been initiated by them.  Though a lot of time 
has already been wasted on the specious plea of jurisdictional constraints, the  

 
 
  
Committee desire the Department to communicate their instant 
recommendation to all concerned immediately.  They would also like the 
Department to obtain feedback in the matter from all concerned and furnish the 
same for their information alongwith their own Action on Action Taken notes.  
 
 As regards the efforts made by the Department, the Committee note that 
an Institute on Abiotic Stress Management has been established in Baramati, 
Maharashtra and another Institute on Biotic Stress Management is in the 
pipeline.  Keeping in view the fact that the climate change and its adverse 
effects are required to be tackled on a war footing with alacrity, the Department 
should make earnest endeavours to make the Institute on Abiotic Stress 
Management at Baramati fully  functional without any further delay.  The 
Institute on Biotic Stress Management should also be established, 
expeditiously after completing all relevant formalities.     
 
Awareness Campaigns on Climate Literacy and related Missions / Programmes 
among the Farmers / Commonmen 
(Recommendation Para No.3) 
 
 
1.12 Noting that most of the laws and other pro -active steps of the Government 
were not bearing optimal results due to lack of awareness amongst the target groups 
and stake -holders, the Committee had recomme nded that all the Central Ministries 
and their Departments and other Government agencies should take initiatives and 
make sincere efforts to inform, educate and propagate amongst the target groups 
and stakes -holders, climate change in all its positive and negative ramifications to 
make the Action Plan on Climate Change successful. 
 
1.13 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that the importance of 
creating awareness about the weather and the positive and negative aspects of 
climate change amo ng the farmers has been well recognized by ICAR. Through its 
coordinating projects on Agrometeorology and Dryland Agriculture, a mass 
awareness campaign on climate change was conducted during October 2008 at 37 
research centres of both the projects. Farmer s were exposed to the measurement of 
weather parameters in the observatory and their influence on agricultural crops. The 
feed back obtained from the farmers about their knowledge on importance of different 

 
 
  
weather parameters was quite interesting. About 7 0-80% of farmers have some 
knowledge on the importance of weather elements on the incidence and spread of 
pest/diseases. This programme will be continued in each year. The c urrent weather 
based agro advis ories became popular among the farming community.  T his 
awareness programme shall also benefit the farmers in understanding and managing 
the weather resources properly for sustainable agricultural production.   
 
 As a part of collaborative programme between ACIAR, ANGRAU and CRIDA 
the Agrometeorologists at CRIDA, Hyderabad have participated in training farmers of 
Warangal and Mahabubnagar districts in Andhra Pradesh during 2008 -09 seasons in 
utilizing the forecast issued by IMD and also the agro advisories for managing the 
agricultural crops efficiently for higher productivity.  From the research results of 
various centres of AICRP on Agrometeorology over the last two decades, developing 
optimum weather indices at different important crop stages that influence the overall 
productivity is in progress. These ind ices shall help in developing weather insurance 
products that protect the farmers against climatic risks such as high intensity rainfall, 
heat and cold waves, drought, etc.  At the same time all research institutions and 
SAU are being advised to take up th is awareness programme in their respective 
areas for farmers and other stake-holders. 
 
1.14 The Committee note that the Department have conducted a mass 
awareness campaign amongst farmers during October, 2008 at 37 Research 
Centres to generate awareness ab out climate change and related matters.  The 
Committee are not at all satisfied with this symbolic step of the Department.  
The rural community is to be made aware of the pros and cons of climate 
change in a highly proactive and sustained manner.  The Comm ittee also tend 
to disagree with the surmise of the Department that as per the feedback 
received on the mass awareness campaign in October, 2008 , 70% to 80% 
farmers have some knowledge on the importance of weather elements on the 
incidence and spread of pe st/diseases.  The farmers, at best have traditional 
knowledge of the local weather and related matters.  However, they are not 
aware of the cataclysmic changes that climate change can wreak not only on 
agriculture but also on their livelihood.  The need of  the hour, therefore, lies in 
unleashing a vigorous, well planned, easy to comprehend, audio -visual media 

 
 
  
blitz alongwith sustained publicity through other tools of the Government 
agricultural extension services like SAUs, ATMA, KVKs, Research Centres, etc . 
so that the message about the effects of the ongoing climate changes is 
conveyed in very unambiguous terms to the farming community without any 
further delay.     
National Policy/Action Plan to Control and Manage Water Logging problems 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
 
1.15 With a view to control the methane emissions from the water logged areas and 
marshy lands, especially in Himalayan and Indo -Gangetic Plains, the Committee had 
recommended that the Government should come out with clear -cut National Policy / 
Action Plan to check / control and manage water -logged / inundated areas, marshy 
lands for environment / climate-friendly uses.  
 
1.16 In their Action Taken Note, the Government have stated that i t is true that 
water logging is one of the main land degrada tion problems. Therefore, to reduce the 
ill effects of water logging and to improve water productivity, models for effective 
utilization of shallow water logged areas have been developed and demonstrated by 
ICAR Institutes. These models relate to secondary reservoir system for storing canal / 
rain/ seepage water for multiple uses and trenches and bed system for productive 
utilization of medium water logged areas. These systems have been demonstrated to 
farmers through various training programs organized in collaboration with State 
Water Resources, Agriculture and Fisheries Departments. At the same time, at 
WTCER, Bhubaneswar, research projects are being conducted on various drainage 
related studies.   
 At present, the Department are studying methane emissions from rice paddies. 
Non-agriculture water -logged areas and wet lands are generally monitored for 
methane emissions by Ministry of Environment and Forests and its related 
organizations. 
 
1.17 The Committee do not appreciate this status quo ist mindset of th e 
Department.  When as per their own admission, water logging is one of the 
main reasons for land degradation, the issue cannot be wished away merely on 
jurisdictional handicaps.  As the premier research organisation in the Country 

 
 
  
ICAR should rather play a more proactive role in all such matters.  From the 
professional point of view also , ICAR with their vast network of research 
institutions, dedicated pool of scientists and extension network are in a far 
better position to deal with this matter in compari son with the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to 
immediately get on to the task of developing a synergetic grid in tandem with 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the entire gamut of Climate Change 
and related matters for having time bound and result oriented solutions to this 
vexed problem.   
 
Need to develop National Policy / Action Plan to encourage farmers to grow 
alternate crops along with Paddy Crops 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
 
1.18 Noting t he substantial Methane emissions caused by paddy fields, the 
Committee had recommended that a nation-wide awareness campaign for farmers on 
watering system of paddy fields and to encourage them to grow other food crops to 
contain Methane emissions be launc hed. It was also recommended that Government 
should come out with a National Policy / Action Plan, Agro -climatic zone -wise 
suggesting / recommending alternate crop  cultivation to bring economic prosperity 
and at the same time avoid rise in global warming.   
 
1.19 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that technologies have 
been developed on efficient water management interventions in rice for reducing the 
Methane emissions. They are being popularized through network centers of All India 
Coordinated Research Project on Water Management, KVKs and Directorates of 
Extension of different State Agriculture Universities (SAUs) and State Departments of 
Agriculture. Alternate cropping systems for substituting rice based cropping system 
have been devel oped through Network Centers of All India Coordinated Research 
Project on Cropping System for various agro eco -regions of the country. These are 
being popularized through its Network Centers. 
 
1.20 The Committee note with satisfaction that alternate cropping systems for 
substituting rice based cropping system have been developed through the 
Network Centres of All India Coordinated Research Project on cropping system 
for various agro-regions of the Country and they are being popularized through 

 
 
  
the Network C entres.   Though during the course of their examination , the 
Committee were given to understand that the quantity of Methane emissions in 
paddy fields in India is far less than what had been assessed initially, however, 
keeping in view the fact that these emissions in whatever quantities add to the 
Carbon footprint, the Committee desire that the alternate cropping systems for 
substituting the rice based cropping system developed by ICAR for the various 
agro-eco regions of the Country should be popularised t hrough a vigorous 
media campaign.  All other agencies viz. KVKs, ATMA, SAUs, State Agricultural 
Extension Networks should also be roped in for the purpose.  
 
Impacts of Climate Change on Agriculture/Allied Sectors due to rise in Sea 
Level  
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 
 
1.21 It was recommended that DARE / ICAR should gear up their research efforts 
on all the pros and cons of the impact of climate change on agriculture and allied 
sectors due to rise in sea level. Development of salinity – tolerant crop culti vars 
should be given priority. The fishermen should get timely and advance forecasting 
about weather and cyclone in the high seas.  The Committee had also recommended 
that Government should give more attention towards coastal forests and mangroves 
and towards building public awareness and other extension programmes on various 
aspects of climate change in vernacular languages. 
 
1.22 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that i n order to cope 
up with the intrusion of sea waters into the low lyi ng coastal regions of the Country 
due to rise in sea level, research on development of salt resistant varieties that can 
come up well under salt  affected soils are in good progress at CSSRI, Karnal and 
also at CRRI Cuttack. Under the Network Programme on C limate Change CMRFI, 
Kochi is studying the possible impact of climate change on the migratory behaviour of 
different fish species of economic importance and also conducting experiments on 
the physiological changes that are likely to occur due to increase i n sea surface 
temperature and salinity. CMRFI, Kochi in association with Indian National Centre for 
Oceanic Information Service (INCOIS) is participating in issuing advisories to the  
fishermen on the fish abundant regions in Arabian Sea.  

 
 
  
 The Ministry of Environment Forest and few NGOs like M.S. Swaminathan 
Research Foundation ( MSSRF) have taken up mass campaign programmes among 
the people living in the coastal regions about the importance of mangroves in the 
coastal ecosystem and the need to protect the mangroves, a measure against threats 
from Tsunami, tidal waves associated with severe cyclones and increase in the mean 
sea level and subsequent inundation of low lying region. 
 
1.23 In the Statement made by the Minister in Lok Sabha under Direction 73A of 
the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha it has been further stated that DARE / 
ICAR have conducted surveys to identify villages vulnerable to sea level rise in 
coastal lan ds based on distance from High  Tide Line criteria.  Results of such 
studies will be  helpful in estimating the cost of relocating the village and sensitising 
the fishing communities on perils of rising sea.  
 
1.24 The Committee note with satisfaction that pursuant to their 
recommendation ICAR has initiated research activities on several a spects 
including impact of sea level rise on soil health, development of salt resistant 
varieties, etc. at its various institutes. It is needless to emphasise here that  
while these research activities need to be conducted on priority basis, the 
results th ereof are utilized productively and purposefully in tackling the 
problems arising out of global warming and climate change . The Committee 
also desire that the Council should complete surveys for identification of all 
villages vulnerable to the rising sea l evels on top priority basis  in a fixed time 
frame so that not only the cost of their relocation is estimated but also the 
population is sensitized about the likely implications and practical hazards of 
rise in sea-water levels.  
 
R & D on Climate Change 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 15, 16 & 20) 
 
1.25 The Committee had recommended that DARE / ICAR should expedite and 
intensify their research and development work on all the major food grains, coarse 
grains, pulses, cash crops, oilseeds, horticultural / medicinal  and aromatic plants, 
tuber and fodder crops, etc., with regard to likely negative as well as positive impacts 
of climate change and come out with remedial solutions / packages / technologies / 

 
 
  
practices which can be conveniently and feasibly practiced and  adopted by all the 
farmers / livestock producers in all the agro climatic zones of the Country.   It had also 
been recommended that comprehensive estimates of fund requirement for meeting 
climate change scenario be also worked out by ICAR.  Noting that due to lack of 
funds, the pace of ICAR research is not only unsatisfactory but also very slow. The 
Committee had recommended that Planning Commission / PM‟s Council on Climate 
Change / Ministry of Finance ought to help ICAR by providing more grant s to them. 
The Committee had also recommended that DARE / ICAR should come out with 
comprehensive estimates of costs and best management practices for making our 
agro-socio-economy climate proof as this will help the research institutions to get the 
required funding fr om the MoF / Planning Commission; help appraisal agencies to 
appropriately allocate amongst various agencies; and help the Union Government to 
negotiate India specific concerns with the various international  financial institutions / 
agencies funding climate change combating strategies. 
 
1.26 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that DARE / ICAR are 
giving more emphasis on research related to developing adaptation and mitigation 
strategies to cope up the likely effect of climate change for various agro -climatic 
zones of the Country. Decision support systems and weather insurance products for 
managing climatic risks, drought / heat resistant varieties are also being developed at 
ICAR institutes.  ICAR has already initiated work for preparing estimates of cost / 
funds required to abate the impacts of climate change. 
 
 They have further stated that ICAR has strengthened its research efforts by 
increasing the number of Centres from 14 to 23 in the Network Project on Climate 
Change and by increasi ng their budget allocation in the Eleventh Plan. At the same 
time several research institutes have intensified their efforts to develop heat / drought 
tolerant varieties.  The ICAR has also established  a National Institute on Abiotic 
Stresses at Baramati to address the challenges related to abiotic stresses. A National 
Institute of Biotic Stress Management is also proposed to be established in the 
Eleventh Plan. For additional grants, ICAR has already submitted a proposal to the 
Prime Minister‟s Council on Climate Change. 
1.27 In the Statement made by the Minister in the Lok Sabha under Direction 73A 
of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha it has been added that the two new research 

 
 
  
institutes namely National Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology and National Institute 
of Biotic Stress Management are in the process of establishment.   
  
1.28 The Committee while taking note of the fact that ICAR has already 
initiated work for preparing estimates of cost/fund s required to tackle the 
impact of climate change,  desire that this task may be accomplished with due 
promptitude and in a highly time bound manner as a lot of further action 
including negotiating India specific concerns with the various international 
financial institutions/agencies funding climate change c ombating strategies 
hinge on them.  They also recommend that the setting up of the two national 
institutes on Agriculture Bio -technology and Biotic Stress Management be 
expedited so that they are able to carry out the mandated responsibilities 
without any further loss of time.   
 
Prevention of Emissions of Higher Green House Gases (GHGs) by Food 
Processing Industries 
(Recommendation Para No.23) 
 
1.29 In view of the technologies used by the Food Processing Industry releasing 
more green house gases emission, the Committee had  recommended that DARE / 
ICAR should develop and come out successfully with modified alternative packages 
for FPI as they have an important role in finding  technological possibilities and 
developing climatic stress resistant varieties. 
 
1.30 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that in view of an 
urgent need to promote post harvest processing and value addition activities in 
production catchments, the following technologies are being promoted to reduce the 
emission of gre enhouse gases in post harvest sector, viz., (i) evaporatively cooled 
storage houses for horticultural produce, (ii) solar dryers for reducing the moisture 
content to safe storage / processing levels, (iii) using cleaning / grading / packaging in 
production catchments to significantly reduce the quantity of commodity to be 
transported to consumers and processing industry, (iv) using crop residues to 
manufacture packaging boxes and (v) using Modified Atmospheric Packaging (MAP) 
to minimize the expenditure on refrigeration and thereby reducing GHG emissions. 
R&D efforts are also being made to continuously refine these technologies. 

 
 
  
1.31 The Committee note with satisfaction that their concerns have been 
addressed to some extent by the Government.  The Technologies to reduce the 
emission of green house gases in post harvest sector viz. evaporatively cooled 
storage houses for horticultural produce; using crop residue to manufacture 
packaging boxes , using Modified Atmospheric Packaging to minimize the 
expenditure on refrigeration and thereby reducing GHG emissions; solar dryers 
for reducing the moisture conte nt to safe storage/processing levels; and using 
cleaning/grading/packaging i n production c atchments to significantly reduce 
the quantity of commodity to be trans ported to consumers and processing 
industry are being promoted by the Government. The Committee, however, 
desire that since the green house emissions are a critical aspect in climate 
change, the R&D efforts should be continued ceaselessly, with renewed vigour, 
so that green house gas emissions are reduced to the minimum.   
 
  

 
 
  
 CHAPTER II 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Role and Responsibilities of DARE/ICAR in Global Climate Change & Indian 
Scenario 
(Recommendation Para No.1) 
 
The Committee observe that there is internationally accepted fact that climate 
is changing due to increased emissions of Greenhouse gases. Increased human 
activities in the last century, especially increased fossil fuel usage, industrializa tion 
and land use changes have caused the build up of Carbon Dioxide, Nitrous Oxide, 
Methane, Hydro-Fluoro-Carbons and other greenhouse gases in atmosphere and are 
changing in the climate of the earth and causing temperature rise, heat waves, 
drought, floods, snow melt and rainfall distributions at several places.  
The Committee note that the global average of sea level rose at an average 
rate of 1.8 mm per year over 1961 to 2003 and about 3.1 mm during 1993 to 2003. 
Projected global mean annual temperature by the end of 21 st century is likely to be in 
the range of 2 to 4.50C and even the values substantially higher than 4.50C cannot be 
excluded. For Indian region, according to IPCC, projected temperature rise is 0.5 to 
1.20C by 2020; 0.88 to 3.16 0C by 2050 and 1.56 to 5.440C by 2080 depending on the 
future development. The temperature will be much higher in winter (for Rabi crops 
season) than in rainy season (Kharif crops season). 
The Committee also note that Agricultural Nitrous Oxide Greenhouse gas 
emissions are projected to increase by 35 -60% up to 2030 due to increased Nitrogen 
fertilizer use and increased animal manure production.  
The Global livestock -related Methane production is expected to increase by 
60% upto 2030. About 2.5 to 10% decrease in crop yield is projected for parts of Asia 
in 2020s and 5 to 30% decrease in 2050s compared with 1990 levels. Projected 
changes in frequency and severity of extreme climate events will have significant 
consequences for food production and food security. Small la ndholders and 
subsistence farmers, pastoralists and artisanal fisherfolk will suffer complex localized 
impacts of climate change. Food trade is expected to increase from developed to 
developing countries. In India, the agriculture sector contributes 28% of  the total 

 
 
  
Greenhouse gases, which primarily constitutes the Methane emission from paddy 
fields, enteric fermentation in ruminant animals.  
The Committee are of the view that India will suffer climate change effects of 
both, the world over changes as well as India‟s contribution to it through emission of 
Greenhouse gases. The Greenhouse gases from paddy fields can be reduced, as 
has been observed by ICAR though its studies, by changing the watering pattern of 
this crops. By developing high temperature resis tant seeds and by converting C 3 
plants to C4 plants and coastal area management. 
 The Committee also observe that the extreme rise in temperature and 
emission of Greenhouse gases will be felt only if the conditions remain the same and 
no efforts are made to mitigate these environmental gases effects. Due to increase in 
Greenhouse gases, the impact is felt in the areas of temperature rise, sea -level rise, 
time reduction in crop cycle, yield reduction, migration of fishes to other areas. Cattle 
breeding and m ilk production, poultry, irrigation problems, floods, glacier receding, 
and forests land reduction, etc. However, if the Government rises to its duties to 
develop strategies at international, national and local levels including Panchayat  
level, and do agr o-climatic zone wise research work to know the ill -effects of global 
warming in a particular region and develop measures to contain the rise in 
temperature and to reduce the emission of Greenhouse gases and farmers, self -help 
groups, fishermen and others a t village levels are educated about the measures 
required to be taken by them to offset the impacts of climate change, increased policy 
support and financial support from Government of India for agricultural research and 
establishment of „Green Research Fu nd‟ as envisaged by the Ministry of Agriculture, 
then the global warming can be contained in an effective manner.  
 The Committee strongly recommend that DARE/ICAR should develop a 
drought code, a flood code and a good weather code, at the earliest and sho uld also 
come out with concrete, constructive and feasible contingency plan for all the agro -
climate zones. While preparing drought/flood/good weather code, DARE/ICAR should 
take care that drought code has comprehensive details of all that needs to be done  
not only in human rehabilitation and relief but in terms of relief for crops, animals, etc. 
Similarly, the flood code should explain all that needs to be done in case of floods 
and good weather code should explain how to maximize crop/allied sectors 
production in the places where there is good weather. The Committee also desire 

 
 
  
that Compensatory Production Programme needed to be developed for agri -allied 
sectors in case of droughts/floods/climate aberrations, etc. should be expeditiously 
done with consider able attention and detailed planning based on 
extensive/intensive/field/anticipatory/adaptation research to be done by DARE/ICAR. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 DARE/ICAR has a very strong network of research institutions located in 
different parts of the countr y which are also working on various aspects of climate 
change. Further, recently ICAR has established an institute viz. National Institute of 
Abiotic Stress Management at Malegaon, Maharashtra to address the issues arising 
due to climate change in terms of  abiotic stress on agriculture .  The Ministry of 
Agriculture has already developed a Drought Code with inputs from DARE / ICAR. 
The suggestions of the Committee will be considered during the revision. Flood Code 
is being developed by National Disaster Mana gement Authority, under the Ministry of 
Home Affairs. Good Weather Code will be prepared by DARE/ ICAR incorporating 
suggestions given by the Committee and interest of the stakeholders. 
 All the 25 centres of AICRP on Agrometeorology and few ICAR institute s are 
providing weather based agro advisories (Good weather code) at district level twice in 
a week to the farming community using the Medium Range Weather Forecast issued 
by IMD and the current crop conditions. The necessary research back stop in the 
form of agroclimatic characterization, crop weather relationships, influence of weather 
on pest/disease for preparing a good weather based advisories  and its successful 
implementations was obtained from the research results generated at the centres of 
AICRP o n Agrometeorology over the last two decades. Utility of crop simulation 
models to study the impact of various climatic scenarios on crop productivity, 
development of adaptation and mitigation strategies to meet the threat from climate 
change have been carr ied out extensively at AICRPAM centres and also at different 
ICAR institutes. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of th e Committee please refer to Para No.8 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 

 
 
  
National Policy/Action Plan to control and mange Ever increasing Water 
Logging 
(Recommendation Para No.5) 
The Committee observe that the problem of methane emissions get 
aggravated due to various reasons, such as, (i) Water -logged areas and (ii) Marshy 
lands, apart from the industrial/agricultural pollutants, etc. The Committee further 
observe that in many  states, Irrigation Department divert the flood waters through 
canal system to low ly ing areas. The water logging/inundation make these areas 
unproductive for months together, especially in Himalayan and Indo -Gangetic Plains 
and at present there is no clear cut national policy to check and control the 
contribution of methane emissions by these ever increasing water-logged areas. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should come out 
with clear -cut National Policy/Action Plan to check/control and manage (i) Water -
logged/inundated areas; (ii) Marshy lands, for Environment/Climate-friendly uses.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 It is true that water logging is one of the main land degradation problems. 
Therefore, to reduce the ill effects of water logging and to improve water productivity, 
models for effective utilization of shallow water logged areas have been developed 
and demonstrated by ICAR Institutes. These models relate to secondary reservoir 
system for storing canal / rain/ seepage water for multiple uses and trenches and bed 
system for productive utilization of medium water l ogged areas. These systems have 
been demonstrated to farmers through various training programs organized in 
collaboration with State Water Resources, Agriculture and Fisheries Department. At 
the same time, at WTCER, Bhubaneswar, research projects are being  conducted on 
various drainage related studies.   
At present, we are studying methane emissions from rice paddies. Non -
agriculture water- logged areas and wet lands are generally monitored for methane 
emissions by Ministry of Environment and Forests and its related organization. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.17 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 

 
 
  
Need to develop National Policy/Action Plan to encourage farmers to grow 
alternate crops along with Paddy Crops 
(Recommendation Para No.8) 
 
The Committee note that agriculture sector contributes 28% in Climate 
Change and out of that Paddy/Rice  cultivation alone contributes 23% by releasing 
emitting Methane, one of the Greenhouse Gases into the environment and directly 
contributes to global warming. 
The Committee are aware that in many areas of Uttarakhand, Punjab, 
Haryana, U.P., Bihar, West Ben gal, Orissa and other paddy growing areas in the 
country, farmers are tempted to grow more and more paddy crop, even twice a year, 
because of the profit motives and has neither the back up knowledge or awareness to 
grow other alternate crops which can brin g them economic prosperity nor has any 
motivational incentives from the government to grow other than paddy crops, to avoid 
negative impacts of the paddy cultivation on environment/ climate. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Agriculture  should 
launch a nation-wide awareness campaign for the Indian farmers on watering system 
of paddy fields and also encourage them to grow other food crops to contain Methane 
emissions. The Government should come out with a National Policy/ Action plan, 
agro-climatic zone -wise suggesting/ recommending alternate crops cultivation to 
bring economic prosperity to the farmers and at the same time avoid rise in global 
warming. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Technologies have been developed on efficient water managemen t 
interventions in rice for reducing the methane emissions. They are being popularized 
through network centers of All India Coordinated Research Project on Water 
Management, KVKs and Directorates of Extension of different State Agriculture 
Universities (SAU) and State Departments of Agriculture. Alternate cropping systems 
for substituting rice based cropping system have been developed through network 
Centers of All India Coordinated Research Project on Cropping System for various 
agro eco -regions of the cou ntry. These are being popularized through its network 
centers. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 

 
 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.20 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
Need to prevent the Emission of Nitrous Oxides 
(Recommendation Para No.9) 
 
 The Committee note that by 2025 more than double inorganic fertilizers would 
be essential for producing more food. More forestlands will be converted to farmlands 
and grasslands. This would lead to more Carbon Dioxide and Nitrous Oxide (GHGs) 
emissions in the environment. Mitigation is unlikely to occur without; achieving the 
increase in food production will require more use of Ni trogen Fertilizers leading to 
further increase in N 2O emissions and there will be more increase in Methane 
emissions from enteric fermentation if livestock numbers increase in response to 
demands for milk, meat and other livestock products. ICAR, at presen t, has 
knowledge to prevent only small part of this emission by the use of nitrification 
inhibitors, slow release fertilizers and integrated nutrient management practices. 
The Committee, recommend that ICAR should intensify their research to find 
out ways and means to further prevent/ mitigate the Nitrous Oxide and Methane gas 
emissions from application of higher inorganic fertilization and enteric fermentation by 
increased number of livestock, respectively, to avoid greater harm/ damage to 
environment/ climate. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Network Programme on Climate Change functional at 23 locations has 
already initiated research on impact of climatic change variables on crop, livestock 
and fisheries. Specific examples are research on reducing the enteri c fermentation in 
the livestock through feed management, increasing fertilizer -use efficiency through 
manipulation of application and placement and reduction in N 2O losses from the 
fields using liquid fertilizers through drip irrigation. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 

 
 
  
 
‘Deep Water rice’/ ‘Boat Rice’ and developing ‘Sea Water cultivation’ as a 
science in ICAR/SAU’S 
(Recommendation Para No.11) 
 
 The Committee note that there is going to be more flooding in the Indo - 
Gangetic plains owing to Global Climate Change. From Kanyakumari to Kashmir, 
from Gujarat to Tripura, rice is the only crop which is grown everywhere: wheat 
cannot grow because of night temperatures  being very sensitive, wheat yield is a 
gamble in temperature, if the night temperature goes up, the wheat yield will come 
down. The Committee are aware that already some work is going on in the flood 
prone areas, which is called „Deep Water rice or the bo at rice‟. In Thailand, farmers 
harvest the rice on the boat and as the water level rises, the plants also grow up. 
 The Committee, therefore strongly recommend that DARE/ICAR should 
intensify their research on „Deep water rice or Boat Rice‟ and should find  out 
solutions to make Deep Water Rice varieties to be more resistant even in case these 
are submerged in muddy waters for more than two weeks. ICAR should also do 
extensive mapping for the likely flood prone areas in wake of global climate change. 
 The Co mmittee further recommend that DARE/ICAR should undertake „Sea 
Water Cultivation‟ as a science in all their concerned institutes as well as in 
curriculum of State Agricultural Universities (SAUs). 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Central Rice Research Institute, Cu ttack is actively engaged in research on 
rice growing in different ecologies including flood -prone areas covering deep and 
semi-deep submergence. For semi-deep areas (~1m submergence), this institute has 
already released rice variety „Durga‟ and some more additional varieties are awaiting 
release.   Regarding „deepwater rice varieties‟ (submergence >1m), otherwise known 
as „floating rice‟ or „boat rice‟ grown in pockets of UP, Bihar, West Bengal and Kerala, 
this institute is developing varieties using gene pool of floating rice varieties like 
„Jalmagna‟ and „Jalnidhi‟ and the efforts will be further strengthened during the 
coming years with the development of screening facilities.   While this institute per se 
do not have any research program on „sea water cu ltivation‟, Scientists of CRRI are 
also actively engaged in studies on developing rice varieties tolerant to salinity in 
coastal areas and also developing agro-technology of growing rice crop with brackish 

 
 
  
(saline) water irrigation. A research activity und er ICAR -IRRI collaborating program 
on STRASA (Stress-tolerant Rice for Africa and south Asia) is exclusively devoted to 
refining technologies in the farmers‟ fields for growing salt -tolerant rice cultivars and 
also developing alternate rice -based cropping system to enhance profitability of the 
poor farmers of this handicapped ecology. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
Dryland Agriculture & Global Warming 
(Recommendation Para No.12) 
 Since 60% of our agriculture land is rainfed, the focus should be given for 
improving the techniques for enhancing the productivity of rainfed agriculture. The 
Committee are of the firm opinion that dryland farming or rainfed agricul ture needs 
special attention to prevent the decline in agricultural produces under climatic 
changes due to temperature rise. The ICAR should develop the seeds for drought 
and pest -resistant crop varieties for rainfed area agriculture.  Methods for 
conservation of soil and water of these dryland areas should be undertaken on 
priority basis.  The Government should provide the financial support on easy terms to 
the farmers of dryland areas to invest in and adopt requisite technologies to tide over 
the impacts of climate change. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In terms of research, ICAR is strengthening its efforts to develop drought 
resistant varieties. At the same time we are advising our research institutes dealing 
with dryland agriculture such as CRIDA, CAZARI to s trengthen their efforts for 
dryland agriculture in relation to climatic changes.  
 Provision of financial support to farmers of dryland areas to investigate and 
adopt requisite technologies to tide over the impacts of climate change is the subject 
of Ministry of Agriculture/Ministry of Rural Development and other Govt. departments. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 

 
 
  
 
Need to preserve, conserve and maintain Pedigress/Local Breeds of Livestock 
(Recommendation Para No.13) 
 
 The Committee observe that there is going to be nefarious consequences of 
Global Climate Change/Warming on Indian Livestock and Milk Revolution/White 
Revolution in India which was to a large exte nt successful because of the cross -bed 
cows, the Jereys, etc.  Since, these cows are extremely vulnerable to high 
temperatures, it is feared that these cows would slowly become unproductive and 
there is nothing like returning back to normalcy for these cro ss-bred crow 
jeopardizing the success of the White Revolution in India. 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that DARE/ICAR should 
treasure our indigenous cows such as „ Sahiwsal‟, „Tharparka‟, „Rathi‟, „Ongole‟, 
„Nellore‟, etc. and buffalo breeds , like „ Badavari‟, „Murrah,‟ etc. and maintain on 
priority basis all local breeds which can withstand the heat and vagaries of the 
climate change and adapt themselves to such local situations without jeopardizing or 
compromising with the successes of our White Revolution. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Indian breeds of livestock have the capacity to withstand thermal stress 
and water scarcity. Many breeds are resilient to environmental and climatic stress by 
virtue of their genotype and the capacity to intera ct with environment. Adaptive 
mechanism to deal with heat loss are coat colour, skin pigmentation, sweat glands 
and their secretion, besides the small body size with low energy requirement for 
maintenance.  
The National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources is engaged in identification, 
evaluation, characterization and documentation of major and lesser known breeds in 
different parts of the country and characterize indigenous farm animal breeds both 
phenotypically and genetically by using molecular techniques.  Along with details on 
the breeds, the parameters on climate are also recorded. A research project is 
underway aiming to study at the gene level, the different biomolecules involved in the 
cellular response to heat stress to have an insight into the heat t olerance capabilities 
of indigenous cattle breeds Bos indicus compared to Bos taurus cattle breeds.  The 
collected information will be used for identification of livestock breeds having higher 
capacity to withstand rising temperature and develop adaptation strategies. 

 
 
  
  
To study the impact of climate change on the performance of livestock and 
poultry, a research programme under network mode with an objective to develop 
species / location specific THI parameters and the physiological responses of 
indigenous livestock species including various strains developed has been initiated 
and research on allele mining for abiotic stress in different species of indigenous 
livestock and development of molecular markers like heat shock proteins (HSP) has 
been initiated.  
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
 
Green Research Fund 
(Recommendation Para No.17) 
 
The Committee observe that there is a need to establish „Green Research 
Fund‟ for strengthening research on adaptation, mitigation and impact assessment on 
agriculture/ allied sectors, of climate change in Indian context. They strongly 
recommend that DARE/ICAR should come out with comprehensive details/blue print 
of this „Green Research Fund‟ at their earliest and place the same before the 
Planning Commission/ PM‟s Council on Climate Change for favourable consideration 
and implementation and the Committee be apprised of the outcome within three 
months from the date of presentation of this Report to the Parliament. The Committee 
are also of the view that along the main beneficiary of this „Green Research Fund‟ will 
be ICAR, yet this Fund should have ample scope and opportunities to encourage and 
inspire financially the private scie ntists/NGOs/non-governmental research 
organizations, institutions, societies, etc. through the nation to put in sincere R&D 
efforts on the impact assessment of climate change and to come out with feasible 
adaptive/mitigational remedies for the agriculture and allied sectors.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 A Concept Note on Green Research Fund has been initiated and submitted to 
all the members of the Multidisciplinary Expert Group of Climate Change constituted 
by ICAR. A draft document will be prepared soon and submitted for consideration. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 

 
 
  
 
 
Developing Capacity for Undertaking the Real Time Climatic Variability 
(Recommendation Para No.19) 
 
 The Committee note that ICAR requires to share weather data with Indian 
Metrological Department (IMD) in order to develop capacity for understanding the real 
time climatic variability on a priority basis and recommend that for achieving the 
above purpose ICAR and IMD should explore the possibility of signing an MOU in this 
regard. 
 The Committee further recommend that in order to generate the right kind of 
information/data which is critical and wanted, for the ground level beneficiaries such 
as, farmers, fisherman, livestock managers, etc. on climate variability. Scientists have 
to go to the farmers and the agriculture experts and ascertain from them about their 
actual requirements and accordingly should generate the required information on 
weather conditions. 
 The Committee also note that several ICAR institutes collect data on 
crops/livestock/fisheries response to climatic variables.  The Committee recommend 
that this data from different institutes should be compiled, streamlined and put on 
ICAR Web for greater utilization and understanding impacts of climate change by the 
farmers and other interested people. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 A d raft MoU for data sharing between ICAR and IMD is under preparation.  
ICAR has created an Agromet Databank facility and is updating it on regular basis.  A 
website www.cropweatheroutlook.erent.in has been created on which weather based 
agro advisories, crop conditions at weekly intervals, forecast for the next 4 day s, 
rainfall and temperature status over the country, crop contingency plans for various 
rainfed regions of the country are updated regularly. ICAR is compiling data on crop/ 
livestock/ fisheries response to climate variables and process to bring it in usab le 
form for the farmers and interested target groups which will be put in on its website. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 

 
 
  
 
Development of Safe Biotechnological Interventions 
(Recommendation Para No.21) 
 
The Committee observe that one of the item of the National Action Plan on 
Climate Change is use of Bio -technology. Although the Government has announced 
that it would set up National Bio -Technology Regulatory Authority, there are lot of 
controversies and concerns in this regard, particularly, on the agricultural side. There 
are serious concerns among the masses about the  safety aspects of food bio -
technology. 
The committee, therefore, strongly recommend that D ARE/ICAR should 
intensify and strengthen their research on the generation of the novel genetic 
combinations, drought, flood, salinity, sodicity and biotic stress tolerant varieties and 
at the same time they should also develop their capacity to ensure safe  and 
responsible use of bio-technology. 
Moreover, DARE/ICAR should review their performance as ICAR is yet to 
come out with their first indigenous bio -technological breakthrough in agricultural/ 
allied sectors which can be happily and economically grown by  Indian farmers to 
come out of the slavery of imposed monopoly of multinational companies selling them 
genetically modified seeds at a very high price every time they use their seeds. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
DARE/ICAR has intensified and strengthened their  research on the generation 
of the novel genetic combinations, drought, flood, salinity, sodicity and biotic stress 
tolerant varieties. A network project titled “Bioprospecting of genes and allele mining 
for abiotic stress tolerance” encompassing 35 ICAR i nstitutes, State Agricultural 
Universities, Universities and other institutions has been sanctioned by NAIP in 
March 2009. The project will soon become operational (rice, wheat, maize, chickpea, 
brassca, tomato and banana). In addition, a “Network project on Transgenics and 
functional genomics” is operational since 2006 and is extended to cover XI plan 
period. Sixteen transgenic crops expressing various agronomic traits such as 
resistance to insect pests, diseases, viruses and tolerance to abiotic stresses are 
being developed. Functional genomics and bioinformatics are being investigated in 

 
 
  
few crops. The project is also integrated with safe use of GM crops and their products 
as tested by various biosafety protocols. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
 
Prevention of Higher Green House Gases (GHGs) Emissions by Food 
Processing Industries 
(Recommendation Para No.23) 
 
The Committee observe that Food Processing Indust ry have been to a large 
extent dependent on technologies like refrigeration, cold storage, etc. which are 
abhorred by environmentalists since these technologies are productive of Green 
House Gases (GHGs). 
The Committee visualizing the negative impacts of G lobal Climate Change on 
Food Processing Industry recommend that refrigeration/ cold storage technologies 
based on emission of more GHGs in environment needed to be modified /altered to 
an extend that no or very low emissions of GHGs go in the air as pollut ants to the 
environment. The Committee further recommend that DARE/ICAR should develop 
and come out successfully with modified alternative packages for Food Processing 
Industry as they have an important role in finding technological possibilities an 
developing varieties of ago -allied produces which can sustain higher temperatures, 
drought resistant or which can sustain skewed precipitations, etc. for securing a 
healthy future for our Sun-rising Food Processing Industry. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In view of a n urgent need to promote post harvest processing and value 
addition activities in production catchments, the following technologies are being 
promoted to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases in post harvest sector, viz., (i) 
evaporatively cooled storage  houses for horticultural produce, (ii)solar dryers for 
reducing the moisture content to safe storage/ processing levels, (iii) using cleaning/ 
grading/ packaging in production catchments to significantly reduce the quantity of 
commodity to be transported to consumers and processing industry, (iv) using crop 
residues to manufacture packaging boxes and (v) using modified Atmospheric 

 
 
  
Packaging (MAP) to minimize the expenditure on refrigeration and thereby reducing 
GHG emissions. R & D efforts are also being m ade to continuously refine these 
technologies. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.31 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 

 
 
  
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S 
REPLY 
 
Need to empowers/equip the State Governments for Mainstreaming the Climate 
Change factors into various Missions/Schemes in Agriculture Sector 
(Recommendation Para No.4)  
 
 The Committee observe that Rastriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and the 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM), etc. should be actually prepared and 
implemented at th e district level and at the same time essentially require 
coordinated/integrated efforts among Ministries of Rural Development, Agriculture, 
Water Resource, Environment & Forests, Home Affairs and National Rain -fed 
Authority along with State Government. 
 The Committee further observe that agriculture constitutionally being a State 
subject, the State Governments are always reluctant to implement the national 
missions/schemes of the Centre at the grass root level for reasons, such as lack of 
funds, technology  awareness, appropriate infrastructure, man -power, proper 
guidance for practical implementation etc. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that if these national 
missions/schemes as well as National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) with 
its eight missi ons including National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture, are to 
succeed, then the Central Government Ministries/Departments concerned not only 
should develop a coordination system with State Governments‟ authorities /agencies 
involved in all such missio n but also empower them with funds, incentives, 
technological and management knowledge and skill/guidance, etc., so that, State 
level implementing authorities/agencies can handle the Climate Change/Global 
Warming related factors and implement RKVY/NFSM/NAP CC  at the district/village 
level for ultimate success of National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 This pertains largely to Centre – State relationships and to National Action 
Plan for adaptation to Climate Change being coordi nated by Ministry of Environment 
and Forest/PMO. 

 
 
  
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
Right Kind of Trees Plantation for Better Environment/Climate/Water 
Management 
(Recommendation Para No.6) 
 
 The Committee note that in many Himalayan States planting of wrong varieties 
of trees in the name of increasing forests cover are rampant in the country. Since 
climate stabilizes the forests and the forests stabilize the cl imate, vast denudation of 
forests and indiscriminate cutting of trees for human greed and needs, are causing 
greater problems of environment, climate and present day humanity as well. For 
example, in Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and most of the Himalayan region lot of 
eucalyptus, devadaru and pines have been grown in huge quantity. Pines are self -
pollinated, expanding and multiplying trees. Pines and Eucalyptus have negligible 
role in climate risk management but rather these trees are well known to cause lots of 
negative effects to the soil, water and micro -organisms of the area where these are 
grown. Similarly, in the State of Kerala, under a scheme of growing trees, the States 
authorities have bought eucalyptus, citorora and other African varieties and pl anted 
these trees, as a result, in areas such as Vynad in Kerala where a lot of water was 
there but owing to citorora and eucalyptus plantation, the water has been drained out. 
Moreover, even friendly bacteria have been reported to be missing in that soil.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Central and State Governments to 
plant only those forest trees that can generate water, oxygen, attract clouds to rain, 
maintain balance of ecology and also work as non -human climate risk managers to 
fight flood/dr ought conditions to help boost our agro -forestry economy. The Non -
glacier rivers originate from springs, which can‟t be saved without thick forest 
coverage of the areas around their source of origin. The perennial flow of water in 
these rivers can only save our forests and irrigate food crops in their catchment areas 
and keep the ill effects of warm-climate at bay. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 This pertains to Ministry of Environment and Forests. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Researc h and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 

 
 
  
Need for Interlinking of the Rivers 
(Recommendation Para No.7) 
 
The Committee note with serious concern that the majority of the people in the 
country get affected by frequent floods/ droug hts every year. These problems can be 
overcome to a greater extent by interlinking major rivers and their tributaries in the 
country and these proposals viz, „Interlinking of National Rivers‟ were envisaged 
about more than 50 years ago and even after the lapse of these proposals still remain 
pending at the cost of suffering/miseries/pains of the millions of Indian 
farmers/fisherman/commonmen year after year. 
The Committee note that National Water Development Agency established in 
1982 under the Ministry of Water Resources to carry out the work of National 
Perspective Plan for Water Resources Development comprising two components; 
namely (i) Himalayan Rivers Development; and (ii) Peninsular Rivers Development – 
to create 35 Mha of additional irrigation potent ial and generation of 34 million KW of 
hydropower, had constituted a Task Force on Interlinking of  Rivers Programme. 
Though the Task Force was wounded up after giving its recommendations on 31 st 
December 2004, however, the process of study and finalizatio n of feasibility reports 
of 16 link proposals by the affected States, is very slow and no concrete action is 
seen on the ground for interlinking of these Rivers. The earlier the interlinking 
process of rivers is completed, it will be easier to manage the f lood-waters and river-
bed erosions. 
The committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Central/State 
Governments must execute all the work related to inter -linking of national rivers and 
their tributaries to divert the excess water which causes floods, to the drought areas 
on priority basis  in the time bound manner and to overcome the problems of frequent 
floods/droughts as anticipated and already being experienced by the countrymen at 
large, owing to Global Climate Change. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 This pertains to Ministry of Water Resources. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 

 
 
  
Climate Risk Managers 
(Recommendation Para No.14) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ta sk Force at Climate Risk Managers (CRMs) in 
all the States & UTs at Districts & local panchayat levels, have potential to be the real 
saviours of the farmers, Fishermen and other rural folks alike and can play a pivotal 
role in executing National Action Plan on Climate change at grassroot level. 
 The Committee further note that the Climate Risk managers till date figure only 
at conceptual and intellectual levels and still far away from becoming a reality in a 
professional manner at grassroot level. 
 The Com mittee, therefore, unanimously recommend that since the negative 
impacts of Global Climate Change are ill -affecting and will continue to do so, more 
intensely in times to come, all the agricultural and allied sectors, it is most essential 
need of the hour to create and develop a nation -wide Task Force of Climate Risk 
Managers. These CRM‟s should be made well versed in prevalent agricultural 
practices and systems of the areas they have to work/serve in. They should be 
intensely trained in a professional mann er on a host of issues about agricultural and 
allied sector‟s activities and have practical knowledge to educate the farmers and 
local people all about climate change and its impacts with a view to face & help in 
diverting natural disasters at grassroot le vel. They should be able to mitigate the 
sufferings of the farmers, fisherman and common men in the village, due to adverse 
impacts of Climate change and at the time of floods, droughts, climate variability, 
natural disaster and technology failure, etc., t hey should have the ability to convert a 
disaster into an opportunity for better survival of humanity, as well as flora and fauna 
of the local areas under their jurisdiction. Since “Climate Risk Managers” are needed 
at both, village level & block level, th ey should be able to communicate the strategies 
required to manage climatic risks on a real -time basis to the farmers. At the same 
time they should be able to liaise with other related functionaries, including National 
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA),  Indian Meteorology Department and 
Department of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, and insurance officials. He/she 
should be trained in these aspects by the NDMA. Such climate Risk Managers would 
also be useful at district and state levels to liaise with G overnment officials and other 
donor/relief agencies. 

 
 
  
 The Committee further recommend that in addition to creating an extension 
cadre of professionals, the Government should train at least one female and one 
male member in every Panchayat to act as Climate  Risk Managers. Moreover, 
Panchayati Raj Training Institutes in the country should introduce climate related 
literacy/knowledge and climate Risk/Disaster Management subjects/issues in their 
own curriculum for training the Panchayati Raj members and others who are coming 
for training.  Ministry of Agriculture should ensure that all their extension 
workers/whosoever has the responsibility to liaise with farmers, fisherman, and 
livestock managers, etc. to educate them, must be trained as Climate Risk Managers 
and each one of them, should have a specific annual physical target to educate and 
interact with farmers and allied sectors clientele on all aspects of climate Risk 
management in the area of their jurisdiction. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 This pertains to Nat ional Disaster Management Authority/Ministry of 
Agriculture/Ministry of Rural Development. ICAR will be ready to provide technical 
support in this matter. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
 
Financial Incentives and packages for improved Land management/Resource 
Conservation 
(Recommendation Para No.18) 
 
 The Committee are well aware of the alarming facts/impacts of the Global 
Climate Change on agriculture and al lied sectors in India as well as the endless 
ongoing sufferings of Indian farmers/fisherman/livestock managers, etc. 
 
 The Committee, therefore unanimously recommend that it is high time when 
the Government of India should make a healthy policy to provide and extend financial 
incentives and packages to States and UTs to improve land management, natural 
resource conservation / enhancement, i.e. (water, Energy, Corbon) as well as man -
made resources such as equipment/machinery, etc. conservation/enhancement an d 
fertilizer use efficiency to individual farmers, fisherman and livestock managers, etc. 
who proved to be a successful practitioner in achieving the desired goals.  This will 
really help the individuals and the society as whole to get motivated and encour aged 

 
 
  
to indulge in improved management/resources conservation/enhancement and 
efficient use of fertilizer/resources. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 This pertains to Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of 
Agriculture. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
Bharat Nirman – Irrigation Programme 
(Recommendation Para No.22) 
 
The Committee note that Irrigation is one of the components for development 
of rural inf rastructure under Bharat Nirman. Ground water irrigation is suffering 
immensely due to depletion of underground water -table. The irrigation component 
aims at creation of irrigation potential of 10 million hectare (Mha) in four years, i.e., 
from 2005-06 to 2008-09. The projects/schemes for creation of irrigation potential are 
taken up by the State Governments from their own resources according to their 
priorities. 
Government of India has enhanced allocation for grants under Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) to provide support to State Governments. 
The physical achievements/ progress under Bharat Nirman -Irrigation 
Component is stated to be 1676.916 thousand hectare for the year 2005 -06; 
1943.346 thousand hectare for 2006 -07; and 1522.394 thousan d hectare for 2007 -
08. It is evident from these figures that about less than 50 percent target has been 
achieved in initial three years and in the last/final year, i.e., 2008 -09, more than 50 
per cent target is left to be achieved.  
The committee, therefor e, strongly recommend that it is high time to develop 
right kind of strategies and action plan, reviewing the past performance, to convert 
the big failure of irrigation component of Bharat Nirman into a bigger success in wake 
of man-made Global Climate Change.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
This pertains to Ministry of Water Resources 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 

 
 
  
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH ACTION 
TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
- NIL – 

 
 
  
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
National Climate and Water Management Policies 
(Recommendation Para No.2) 
 The Committee note that the negative impacts of Global Climate Change on 
Agricultural & allied Sectors and on natural resources/water availability, etc. are 
enormous. The negative impacts of climate change  / global warming will be terrible 
on Himalayan Glaciers  / Rivers / Water availability, frequent, floods/droughts 
phenomenon.  
 The Committee learnt during evidence and on the spot Study Visits to 
Himalayan States that the Ministries of (i) Agriculture, (ii) Environmen t & Forests and 
(iii) Water Resources, etc. which are responsible for giving guidance to the 
Himalayan States, lack the positive approach/attitude towards these States/areas. 
These Ministries are mostly said to be telling only about don‟ts and hardly expla in 
about the do‟s and other positive things to the policy makers/implementing agencies 
at the States‟ level and at the level of the farmers and  common people/other 
stakeholders engaged in the agrarian & allied sectors activities.  
 The Committee further o bserve that there is certainly lack of coordination and 
interaction between Central Government and State Governments of Himalayan 
States. The Committee, therefore, unanimously recommend that Central Government 
through their Ministries/Departments should im mediately take necessary initiatives to 
associate the Himalayan State governments with all schemes and programmes 
related to Global Climate Change, its implications and solutions. These States should 
have an active role to play in National Action Plan on C limate Change/Water 
management practices implemented at State/grassroot level. They should actively 
participate in National Policy on Climate Management. The Central Government 
should help these State Governments financially and technically for better 
implementation of the Climate Control Policies/Action Plans.  
 The Committee note that agriculture is the backbone of our food security. Out 
of 75 million persons added world over to the „Hungry‟ during 2007, over 30 million 

 
 
  
are from India. Since the problem o f climate change is a current living reality, the 
Committee observe that Central and State Governments and their Departments have 
not learnt lessons from recent year‟s floods, droughts, high temperatures and 
changes in sea level, etc. due to climate change , as neither tsunami affected nor 
recent Kosi river floods‟ affected human beings have been found rehabilitated after 
the floods receded. The Government machineries have not been able to give 
sufficient help to rehabilitate the agriculture and allied activ ities of the affected areas. 
The frequent droughts/floods and other impacts of Global Climate Change on 
Agriculture can change the face of the Indian economy for worse. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Agriculture and all other 
concerned Central  Ministries/Departments should make coordinated efforts to find 
solutions to the floods/droughts/high temperature/climate variations etc. for the 
ultimate welfare of the homo-environ systems of the country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 This pertains  to Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Ministry of Environment and Forest/ PMO as well as other Central 
Ministries. 
 The ICAR is strengthening its research activities through the Network Project 
on Climate Change during the XIth plan. It has already established a National Institute 
of Abiotic Stress Management at Baramati, Maharashtra and is in the process of 
establishment of another institute dealing with Management of Biotic Stress.  
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Departm ent of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.11 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
Mass-Spreading of Climate Literacy and related M issions/ Programmes and 
among the Farmers/Commonmen 
(Recommendation Para No.3) 
 
The Committee note with serious concern that the Climate Change and global 
warming extension services are at the lowest level among the farmers, people 

 
 
  
engaged in animal husban dry, fishery sectors and other stakeholders involved in 
agricultural and allied sectors.  
 The Committee observe that this poor awareness of the knowledge about the 
legal issues, rights and environmental or climate change and its negative impacts on 
agro-economic life and things to be done at grassroot level to overcome the negative 
impacts of climate change, not only create mistrust and misunderstanding among the 
farmers, fishermen and the Government authorities and private agencies, involved in 
implementing/ executing the action plan, etc., but also generate strong opposition /  
objection from the masses/State Governments towards the Central laws or National 
Action Plans. With the result, it becomes extremely difficult to implement those laws 
or action plan s which are designed and created for the ultimate welfare of the 
farmers, fishermen and other affected people, as happened with the recently 
announced notification of the Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM). Almost 
all the State Governments and their  coastal population are objecting to it saying the 
Coastal Zone Management is going to harm the fishermen, farmers and their 
livelihood and their lands may be taken away by some rich people. Thus, a law or 
scheme/plan which intend to protect them, get obje ctions just because there is not 
enough legal, climate and environment literacy and awareness among farmers, 
fishermen and commonmen of the coastal areas. 
 Even if one goes to any tribal village or remote rural area, people there do not 
know about the Farmers‟ Rights Act or Biodiversity Act or the National Action Plan on 
Climate Change. So this lack of legal/environ/climate literacy among commonmen 
has become a serious shortcoming in getting the positive outcome from such Acts 
and National Action Plans in the country. 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that all the Central Ministries & 
their Departments and other Government agencies should take initiatives and make 
sincere efforts to inform, educate and propagate about the climate change with all its 
positive and negative aspects, among the farmers, fishermen and commonmen, only 
then any action taken or intended to be taken against global warming by the 
Central/State Governments will be successful. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The importance of creating awareness about the weather and the positive and 
negative aspects of climate change among the farmers has been well recognized by 

 
 
  
ICAR. Through its coordinating projects on Agrometeorology and Dryland Agriculture, 
a mass awareness campaign on climate change was conducted during October 2008 
at 37 research centres of both the projects. Farmers were exposed to the 
measurement of weather parameters in the observatory and their influence on 
agricultural crops. The feed back obtained from the farmers about thei r knowledge on 
importance of different weather parameters was quite interesting. About 70 -80% of 
farmers have some knowledge on the importance of weather elements on the 
incidence and spread of pest/diseases. This programme will be continued in each 
year. The current weather based agro advisories became popular among the farming 
community, and the climate this awareness programme shall also benefit the farmers 
in understanding and managing the weather resources properly for sustainable 
agricultural production.   
As a part of collaborative programme between ACIAR, ANGRAU and CRIDA 
the Agrometeorologists at CRIDA, Hyderabad have participated in training farmers of 
Warangal and Mahabubnagar districts in Andhra Pradesh during 2008 -09 seasons in 
utilizing the for ecast issued by IMD and also the agro advisories for managing the 
agricultural crops efficiently for higher productivity. 
From the research results of various centres of AICRP on Agrometeorology 
over the last two decades, developing optimum weather indices  at different important 
crop stages that influence the overall productivity is in progress. These indices shall 
help in developing weather insurance products that protects from the farmers against 
climatic risks such as high intensity rainfall, heat and cold waves, drought etc.  
At the same time we are advising all our research institutions and SAUs to 
take up this awareness programme in their respective areas for farmers and other 
stake-holders. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Res earch and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.14 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
  
Impacts of Climate Change on Agriculture/Allied Sectors due to Sea Level Rise 
(Recommendation Para No.10) 
 
The Committee note that IPCC recently in their assessment report has pointed 
out that modern global warming could melt glaciers and raise world sea level by 0.18 
to 0.59 meters by 2100. If such rise in the sea level a nd rise in high -tidal level, 
cyclones and storms takes place in India, with a coastline of 7500 kms, impacts on 
the livelihood of coastal communities will be considerable. But from agricultural 
perspectives, not many studies have been done in India by ICAR . However, it is 
expected that vast stretches of coastal lands may get submerged, making them 
unsuitable for upland crops and increased salinity in aquifers may lead to reduced 
crop production in coastal lands, and fish production will also get affected. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that DARE/ICAR should gear up their 
research efforts on all the pros and cons of the impact of climate change on all the 
agriculture & allied sectors due to rise in sea level. Its impacts on the agro -economic 
life of farm ers/fisherman, etc. should also be studied with practical & feasible 
solutions/remedies. Development of salinity –tolerant crop cultivars should be given 
priority. The fishermen should get timely and advance forecasting about weather and 
cyclone in the high seas. 
The Committee also recommend that Government should give more attention 
towards coastal forests & mangroves. Building public awareness and other extension 
programmes on various aspects of climate change in vernacular language is the 
need of the hour. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In order to cope up with the intrusion of sea waters in to the low lying coastal 
regions of the country due to rise in sea level, research on development of salt 
resistant varieties that can come up well under salt  affected soils  are in good 
progress at CSSRI, Karnal and also at CRRI Cuttack. Under the Network Programme 
on Climate Change CMRFI, Kochi is studying the possible impact of climate change 
on the migratory behavior of different fish species of economic importance and als o 
conducting experiments on the physiological changes that are likely to occur due to 
increase in sea surface temperature and salinity. CMRFI, Kochi in association with 
Indian National Centre for Oceanic Information Service (INCOIS) is participating in 
issuing advisories to the fishermen on the fish abundance regions in Arabian Sea.  

 
 
  
The ministry of Environment Forest and few NGOs like MSSRF have taken up 
mass campaign programmes among the people living in the coastal regions about 
the importance of mangrov es in the coastal ecosystem and the need to protect the 
mangroves, a measure against threats from Tsunami, tidal waves associated with 
severe cyclones and increase in the mean sea level and subsequent inundation of 
low lying region. 
[Vide Ministry of Agric ulture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.24 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
Intensify the R & D on Climate Change 
(Recommendation Para No.15) 
 
 The Committee note that climate change is likely to impact negatively on many 
aspects of agriculture, including, irrigation availabilyt, soil health, pests and crops and 
livestock production. Preliminary calculations to q uantify the decrease in production 
of wheat suggest a likely decrease of 4 to 5 million tones with an increase of 1 C 
increase in temperature throughout the growing season. ICAR stated that work on 
toher crops is being done and at present, comprehensive es timates of costs of 
abating these damages due to climate change has already started on Indian agri -
allied sectors.  
The Committee recommend that DARE/ICAR should expedite and intensify 
their research and development work on all the major food grains, coars e grains, 
pulses, cash crops, oilseeds, horticultural/medicinal and aromatic plants, tuber and 
fodder crops, etc., with regard to likely negative as well as positive impacts of climate 
change and should also come out successfully with remedial solutions/  packages/ 
technologies/ practices which can be conveniently and feasibly practiced and 
adopted by all the Indian farmers/ livestock producers in all the agro climatic zones of 
the country. Agriculture should be supported by the convergence of traditional 
practical knowledge of the farmers about the farming system and new technological 
innovations, biotechnology and in case of failure of the crops effective insurance 
mechanism need to be created. 

 
 
  
The Committee also recommend that DARE/ICAR should take expedit ious 
steps to work out the comprehensive estimates of costs/funds required to abate the 
challenges emerging out of climate change scenario as has been done by many 
other countries. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 DARE/ICAR is giving more emphasis on research rela ted to developing 
adaptation and mitigation strategies to cope up the likely effect of climate change for 
various agro -climatic zones of the country. Decision support systems and weather 
insurance products for managing climatic risks, drought/ heat resista nt varieties are 
also being developed at ICAR institutes.  ICAR has already initiated work for 
preparing estimates of costs/funds required to abate the impacts of climate change. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Educa tion) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.28 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
Research Grants to DARE/ICAR 
(Recommendation Para No.16) 
 
 The Committee note that ICA R has initiated research and development 
programmes on several aspects of global climate change impacts on 
crops/livestock/fisheries, etc. The Committee are of the view that the pace of ICAR 
research is not satisfactory and is very slow.  This snail pace p rogress can be 
accelerated only if the grants for climate change research are enhanced. 
 The Committee, therefore urge upon the planning Commission/ PM‟s Council 
on Climate Change/Ministry of Finance to help ICAR to accelerate their pace by 
doing useful R& D on the impacts of climate change by immediately providing more 
grants to them to put an end to unending sufferings of the Indian 
farmers/fisherman/livestock keepers, etc.  The Committee also advise the 
DARE/ICAR to make their comprehensive estimates of f unds/grants requirement and 
place the same before Planning Commission/PM‟s Council on Climate Change for 
a/meetings for help in getting the approval of the funds for their research on climate 
change impacts on agriculture & allied sectors. 

 
 
  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 ICAR has strengthened its research efforts by increasing the number of 
Centres from 14 to 23 in the Network Project on Climate Change and by increasing 
their budget allocation in the 11 th Plan. At the same time several research institutes 
have intensified their efforts to develop heat/drought tolerant varieties.  The ICAR has 
also established a  National Institute on Abiotic Stresses at Barmati to address these 
challenges related to abiotic stresses. A National Institute of Biotic Stresses is also 
proposed to be established in the 11th Plan. 
 For additional grants, ICAR has already submitted a proposal to the Prime 
Minister‟s Council on Climate Change. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.28 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
Making the Society and Economy Climate Proof 
(Recommendation Para No.20) 
 
 The Committee note that Climatic variability has always been an important 
issue in Indian Agriculture.  It has caused frequent events of droughts, floods, heat 
and cold stresses, causing widespread impact on food production.  Climate Change 
is likely to increase such risks in future. Alth ough ICAR and State Agricultural 
Universities (SAUs) are reported to have always taken this issue of „Climate Proofing‟ 
seriously yet, they have no comprehensive estimates of costs associated with making 
our Society and Economy „Climate proof‟. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend DARE/ICAR to understand the gravity 
of the negative impacts of Global Climate Change on Agriculture and Allied Sectors.  
It should come out with comprehensive estimates of costs and best management 
practices for making our agro -socio-economy climate proof at the earliest as this will 
help the research institutions to get the required funding from the MoF/Planning 
Commission.  Such comprehensive estimates of costs will also help the appraisal 
agencies to allocate funds appropriatel y among various Ministries/Departments 

 
 
  
considering the priority of the issues/matter involved.  This will also help the Central 
Government to negotiate India specific concerns with the various international 
financial institutions/agencies who can be instru mental in helping us with required 
funding to combat the whole issue of Global climate Change in its totality. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Reply in respect of cost / fund is already provided in Recommendation No.15. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
O.M. No.7(1)/2009(Pt.) dated 15 September, 2009] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.28 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 BASUDEB  ACHARIA 
20  May, 2010                                                                        Chairman, 
30 Vaisakha, 1932(Saka)                                  Committee on Agriculture
   
 

 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 17 May, 2010 from 1500 hours to 1 655 hours 
in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite  
4. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Premdas 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
11. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Shri Narendra Budania 
13. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
14. Shri A. Elavarasan 
15. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
17. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul   - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset the Hon’ble Chairma n welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the Draft Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty -seventh 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee o n Agriculture (2008-09) on ‘Impact of 
Global Climate Change on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in India’.  After some discussion, 

 
 
  
the Committee adopted the Draft Report.   Being inter -session, the Committee also 
authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report  and present to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok 
Sabha and Chairman, Rajya Sabha. 
 
3.  ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
4.  ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
5.  ****  ****  ****  **** 
 
6.  ****  ****  ****  **** 
  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxx  Matter not related to this Report. 

 
 
  
ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF  
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations     23 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Serial Nos. 1, 5, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 17, 19, 21 and 23 
Total          11 
Percentage                 47.82 % 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
Serial Nos. 4, 6, 7, 14, 18 and 22 
Total          6 
Percentage               26.08 % 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
  of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
   
 Total          NIL 
  Percentage         0% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
   
 Serial Nos.  2, 3, 10, 15, 16  and 20 
  Total           6 
 Percentage              26.08 % 
 
 