      
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2011-2012) 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2011/, BHADRAPADA, 1933 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
  
25 

 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
 
         (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
                   (2011-2012) 
 
 
                     Presented to Lok Sabha on    29.08.2011 
                    Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on   29.08.2011 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
AUGUST, 2011/, BHADRAPADA, 1933 (Saka) 
 
  


COA No. 248 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
        
         
 
 
Price:  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
© 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………             (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………..            (v) 
ABBREVIATIONS.………………………………………………………..            (vi) 
   
CHAPTER I     IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS   1 
   
CHAPTER II   OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
          5   
 (i)  Analysis of Demands      7 
 (ii) Annual Plan 2011-12       8 
 (iii) Plan Allocation       9 
 (iv) Preparation for the Twelfth Plan     10 
  
CHAPTER III   SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS       17 
 
  (A) Scheme For Infrastructure Dev.     17 
 
 (i)  Mega Food Parks       19 
 (ii) Cold Chain, Value-Addition and Preservation  Infrastructure 22 
 
(B) Scheme for Technology Upgradation, Establishment and 
Modernisation of Food Processing Industries   23 
 
 (C) Schemes for Upgradation of Quality of Street Food  25 
 
(D) Scheme for Quality Assurance, Codex Standards and 
 Research and Development and other Promotional Activities 26 
 
(E) Scheme for Strengthening of Institutions    27 
 
(F) National Institute Of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship 
 And Management (NIFTEM)     28 
 
  (i) Financial Review        29 
  (ii) Recruitment Process      32 
  (iii) Targets for NIFTEM for 2011-12     33 
  (G) Utilisation Certificates      35 
       
ANNEXURES 
 
I. The Recruitment Process prescribed for each post in NIFTEM   44 
  
II. The details of Recruitment Process for each of the Academic and 
 Non-academic posts and the status of each case.    46 
                                    
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the 23rd Sitting of the Committee held on 11 April, 2011  48 
 
II. Minutes of the 39th Sitting of the Committee held on 26 August, 2011  51 
 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2010 -2011) 
 
 
 Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhary  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera  
23. Shri Narendra Budania 
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi  
25. Shri A. Elavarasan 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31. Shri S. Thangavelu 
(iii) 
 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

 
INTRODUCTION 
         
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty–fifth Report on 
the Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Committee under Rule 331 E(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha considered the Demands for Grants  (2011-12) of 
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, which were laid on the table of the House 
on 7 March, 20 11.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries and the Planning Commission  at their Sitting 
held on 11 April, 2011.    The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers 
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries and Planning Commission  for 
appearing before the Committee and for furnishing the information that the 
Committee desired in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants (2011 
– 12) of the Ministry.  
 
3. The Report was  considered and adopted  by the Committee at their S itting 
held on   26 August, 2011. 
 
4. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of each Chapter. 
 
 
         
            
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                    Basudeb Acharia 
26 August, 2011                                Chairman, 
4 Bhadrapada, 1933 (Saka)                                     Committee on Agriculture
  
 
 
 
(v)  

 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
BE Budget Estimate 
 
CCEA                     Cabinet Committee on Economic  Affairs 
 
 
CPWD       
 
DPR      
         
 
Central Public Works Department 
 
Detailed Project Report    
EFC 
 
EoI               
 
ETP                 
 
FY  
 
IGPB              
 
NBCC  
 
NMPPB    
Expenditure Finance Committee 
 
Expression of Interest 
 
Effluent Treatment Plant 
 
Financial Year 
 
Indian Grape Processing board 
 
National  Building Construction Corporation Ltd 
 
National Meat and Poultry Processing Board 
 
SFC Standing Finance Committee  
 
SHGs         
 
SNA  
 
SPV 
 
STP               
 
WTO     
Self Helf Groups 
 
State Nodal Agencies 
 
Special Purpose Vehicles 
 
Software Technology Park 
 
World Trade Organisation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

CHAPTER – I 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 The Fifth Report of the Committee on Agriculture on Demands for Grants 
(2009-10) of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented to Speaker, 
Lok Sabha on 18 February, 2010. The Report was subsequently presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 3 March, 2010. 
1.2. In terms of Direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, the 
Minister concerned is required to make a Statement in Lok Sabha about the status of 
implementation of Recommendations contained in the Origin al Report of the 
Committee within six months of presentation of the said Report to the Parliament. 
1.3. The Minister of State in the Ministry of Food Processing Industries made a 
Statement in terms of Direction 73A on 22 March, 2011 i.e. more than a year a fter 
the Fifth Report was presented to the Parliament.  
1.4 In the meantime, on the basis of Action Taken Notes received from the 
Ministry in respect of the Fifth Report on 19 July, 2010, the Committee presented 
their Sixteenth Report to the Lok Sabha on 8  March, 2011. The Report was laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. Out of the 21 Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee 11 Recommendations (52.38%) have 
been accepted by the Government. Of the remaining 10 Recommendation s Action 
Taken by the Government in respect of 7 Recommendations (33.34%) viz. Paras 
2.12, 3.34, 3.36, 3.38, 3.39, 4.42 and 5.20 have been commented upon by the 
Committee. Replies to the balance 3 Recommendations (14.28%) were of interim 
nature. 

1.5 From t he Statement of the Minister referred to in Para 1.2 above it was 
observed that in the context of most of the Recommendations, the position as 
indicated in the Action Taken Notes submitted by the Ministry more than eight 
months back on 19 July, 2010 had be en reiterated. The Ministry were, therefore, 
asked on 21 April, 2011 to get an updated Statement  under Direction 73A made in 
the next Session (Monsoon Session, 2011) of Parliament. The Minister is yet to 
make the updated Statement under Direction 73A in Lok Sabha. 
1.6 Similarly, the Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants  
(2010-11) of Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 3 May, 2011. 
1.7 On the basis of Action Taken Notes fur nished by the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries in respect of the Recommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report, the Committee presented their Twentieth Report to Lok Sabha on 24 March, 
2011. The Report was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25 March , 2011. Out of 
the 13 Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee 10 
Recommendations (76.90%) have been accepted by the Government.  The 
Committee decided not to pursue 1 Recommendation (7.7%) in view of the reply of 
the Government. In c ase of 1 Recommendation the Committee did not accept the 
reply of the Government and in the case of the remaining 1 Recommendation the 
reply was of interim nature. 
1.8 The Minister of State in the Ministry of Food Processing Industries made a 
Statement under direction 73A of the status of implementation of Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on 22 March, 2011 i.e. the day he 
made a Statement under Direction 73A on the Fifth Report of the Committee. The 

Statement was made more than  ten months after the Ninth Report was presented to 
the Parliament. The critical analysis of the Statement revealed that it required 
updation in respect of most of the Recommendations in general and in regard to 
Twelfth Plan projections in particular. The Ministry were, therefore, asked to get an 
updated Statement under Direction 73A made during the next session (Monsoon 
session, 2011) alongwith the Statement under Direction 73A on the Fifth Report of 
the Committee. The Minister is yet to make the updated S tatement under Direction 
73A on the Ninth Report. 
 
1.9 The Committee are greatly perturbed with the manner in which 
Statements under Direction 73A of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha are 
being made in the context of the status of implementation of 
Recommendations contained in their Reports. Previously also,  they had taken 
up this matter in their Fifth Repor t when they had found that the S tatement 
under Direction 73A in the context of the Fortieth Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) was not only made afte r more than fifteen months from the 
presentation of that Report to the Parliament but also contained incomplete 
information. Inspite of their well meaning advice, it seems, the situation has 
not improved. The S tatements in the context of the Fifth and Nint h Report  
have been inordinately delay ed and made after more than a year and  
10 months respectively. Both the S tatements were deficient on several counts 
requiring them to be updated and made again. Furthermore, though they were 
to be made in the ongoing Session of Parliament, the needful is yet to be done. 
The Committee strongly deprecate this casual attitude towards a Direction by 
Speaker, Lok Sabha and recommend that S tatements under Direction 73A in 

the context of the Fifth and Ninth Report duly update d and completed in all 
respects, be made in the ongoing Session of Parliament. 
 
 
  

CHAPTER – II 
 
OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
Introductory 
 
 Agricultural development is crucial to India‟s overall progress which can be 
achieved by intensifying agricultural and allied activities as well as by diversific ation 
and commercialisation of a griculture.  A strong and dynamic food processing sector 
plays a vital role in diversification and commercialisation of agriculture, enhances life, 
ensures value addition to agricult ural produce, generates employment, enhances 
income of farmers and creates market for exports of agro products. 
 
2.2 The Country in this year of surplus, is facing a major issue of ensuring 
remunerative prices to the farmers for their produce. There is no denying the fact that 
greater opportunities can be created for adding income of farmers and employment if 
the surplus production of cereals, fruits, vegetables, milk, fish meat and poultry etc. 
are processed and marketed both inside and outside the Country. 
 
2.3 Due to very low levels of food processing capability, huge losses are incurred 
inspite of India‟s leading position in the comity of nations as a producer of several 
agricultural, animal husbandry and dairy products. Because of these very reas ons,    
the share of India‟s export of processed food in global trade is only 1.5% at present. 
Even, within the Country, share of processed fruits and vegetables is much less 
when compared to other agricultural products such as milk (35%) and marine 
products (26%). More importantly the lack of processing and storage of fruits and 
vegetables results in huge post harvest losses estimated at about 35%, the value of 
which is approximately Rs. 50,000 crore annually. A developed food processing 

industry would not only reduce wastages, but would also increasingly fetch enhanced 
income to farmers, which is another problem before the agriculture sector at present. 
 
2.4 There are many constraints which the food processing industry s ector is 
facing, viz. non-availability of adequate critical infrastructural facilities, like cold chain, 
packing and grading centres, lack of adequate quality control and testing 
infrastructure, inefficient supply chain, etc. 
 
2.5 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries are concerned with  formulation 
and implementation of the policies and plans for the food processing industries within 
the overall national priorities and objectives. The Ministry were set up in July, 1988 to 
give an impetus to development of food processing sector in the Co untry.  
Subsequently, on 15 October, 19 99 they were made a Department and brought 
under the Ministry of Agriculture.  They  were again notified as the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries on 6 September,2001. 
 
2.6 According to t he Ministry , they  act as a catalyst for bringing in greater 
investment into this sector, guiding and helping the industry, and creating a 
conductive environment for healthy growth of the food processing industry.  Within 
these overall objectives, the Ministry aims at: 
 . Better utilization and value-addition of agricultural produce. 
. Minimising wastage at all stages in the food processing chain by 
development of infrastructure for storage, transportation and 
processing of agro-produce. 
. Induction of modern technology into the food processing industries. 

. Encouraging R&D in food processing for product and process 
development. 
. Providing policy support, promotional initiatives and facilities to promote 
value added exports. 
. Create the critical infrastructure to fill the gaps in the  supply chain from 
farm to consumer. 
 
Analysis of Demands 
 
2.7 Demand No. 17 pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries for 
the Fiscal 2011-12 was presented to the Lok Sabha on 7 March 2011. 
 
 The Table reflects the Demands in brief: 
(Rs. In crores) 
Sl. 
No. 
Section 
 
Revenue 
Plan Non-plan Total 
1. Voted 504.49 10.09 514.58 
2. Charged -- -- -- 
 Capital    
1. Voted 95.50 00.01 95.51 
2. Charged -- -- -- 
 Grand Total   610.09 
 
 It may be noted that a sum of Rs.610.09 crore has been allocated to the 
Ministry for the ongoing Financial Year. Out of this amount Rs.514.58 crore is in the 
Revenue Section. The balance of Rs.95.51 crore is in the Capital Section. The 
break-up in the Reve nue Section is Rs.504.49 crore on the Plan side and Rs.10.09 

crore on the Non -Plan side. In the Capital Section a sum of Rs.95.50 crore is in the 
Plan side and the remaining Rs.00.01 crore on the Non-Plan side. 
 
Annual Plan 2011-12 
 
2.8 The Ministry have i nformed that they sought Rs. 1490.86 crore for Annual 
Plan 2011 -12 but they have been allocated Rs. 600.00  crore only .  When asked 
about the reasons behind this drastic reduction in the allocation for the year 2011 -12 
by the Planning Commission and to what  extent would this shortfall  lead to pruning 
or staggering of  the various Schemes,  they replied that Eleventh Plan allocation for 
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was approved as Rs. 4031.00 crore 
based on the report of the Working Group.  As most of schemes of the Eleventh Plan 
were new initiatives, hence approval of the scheme could be obtained towards 
middle of    2008 – 09.  Actual progress in the schemes was possible only in the third 
and fourth year of Eleventh Five Year Plan.  The pa ce of utilization during 2010 –11 
has shown significant improvement over earlier years.  Hence, Ministry ha ve worked 
out realistic scheme -wise requirement for year 2011 –12, being the terminal year of 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  It was further stated that the Ministry have made all 
efforts but Rs. 600 .00 crore has actually been allocated.  As regards the extent to 
which various schemes of the Ministry would be required to be pruned due to 
curtailing of funds is concerned, proportionate reduction against the act ual 
requirement has been made in all the plan schemes.  Ministry will not be able to take 
up projects to the envisaged targets due to pruning down of the budget provisions.  

 
 
Plan Allocations 
 
2.9 The following are the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actuals 
during the first four years of the Eleventh Plan and BE for the current Fiscal: 
 (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Acutal expenditure 
 
2007-08 250.00 200.00 182.00 
2008-09 290.00 242.00 223.12 
2009-10 340.00 290.00 277.15 
2010-11 400.00 400.00 266.38# 
2011-12 600.00 - - 
Total 1880.00 1132.00 948.65 
#  Upto 31.01.2011  
 
2.10 It may be noted that the  approved Outlay for Eleventh Plan was of the tune of 
Rs. 4031.00 crore. However, the actual Allocation including BE for 2011 -12 Rs.1880 
crore only, which  is about 47%  of the approved Outlay for Eleventh Plan. When 
asked about the efforts made by the Ministry to persuade Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance to allocate approved Outlay of Eleventh Plan to 
them, the Ministry stated that they had submitted their Annual Plan proposals with 
full justification and tried to convince the Planning Commission about its requirement. 
Minister of Food Processing Industries has also taken up the issue with Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance from time to time.  The recommendations 
contained in the reports of Committee on Agriculture have also been communicated 
from time to time to the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. 

  
 
2.11 Further, the Secretary of the Ministry during the course of Oral Evidence on 
11 April, 2011 stated, regarding the lower allocation and still lower expenditure: 
“Sir, I would at this stage like to submit that while the Plan original ly 
included allocations related to much larger number of cold chains and mega 
food parks. In fact, the CCEA in its subsequent approvals told us to do only 10 
mega food parks out of 30 and 10 cold chains out of 30, which immediately 
put restriction on the t otal amount of money that could be spent. So, I would 
say that the partial approval of the scheme in a way affected the overall 
expenditure. If we were able to start 30 cold chains right at the first go, that is, 
at the end of the second year/beginning of the third year, then I am sure that 
we would have been able to spend more money and we would have been 
able to utilize a higher proportion of all our grants.” 
 
2.12 In response to a subsequent query  regarding the reasons extended by 
Planning Commission/Min istry of Finance for the reduced allocations, the Ministry 
furnished that no specific reasons have been extended by the Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance for the reduced allocation. 
 
Preparation for the Twelfth Plan 
 
2.13 Eleventh Five Year Plan  is o n the verge of its end and the Twelfth Plan is 
planning Twelfth one is on the anvil.  When as ked, during the course of Or al 
Evidence, as to what all was being done  in order to avoid the k ind of delays that 
usually take  place in finalisation of Five Year P lans and which has been a perpetual 
problem, the representative from the Planning Commission stated :  
 “We are very concerned about this issue and the process that we wish 
to encourage all the Ministries to follow is that the mid -term appraisal is the 
time for taking stock of all on -going programmes.  At that point, each Ministry 
is expected to review its schemes and programmes – ones which need to be 
taken forward, once which need to be changed and on es which need to be 
dropped.  It is also the time to recognize new areas in which the Ministry is not 
intervening and where a prog ramme is necessary.  The Ministry then gets 

about two years for the preparatory work which should be reflected in the Plan 
itself.” 
 
2.14 When asked about the status of Ministry of Food Processing Industries in this 
regard, the Secretary of the Ministry informed the Committee during Oral Evidence: 
 “Our Ministry, having gone through a detailed analysis of this sector 
with the decisions being discussed at the Group of Ministers level last year, 
has come up with a scheme which we would like to look back seriously and 
thoroughly only after the project period is over.  We will keep on doing the 
mid-term corrections.  We have been doing it.  So, for my Ministry, we expect 
the Mega Food Par k, Abattoirs, the cold -chain schemes to be continued.  We 
have had internal discussions amongst our Ministries more than six months 
back.  We are coming to the conclusion that we have to take it to its logical 
conclusion.  Taking a view quite immediately a nd start questioning your own 
view is not always the best way.  We want to take it to its logical conclusion.  
At a very early stage, we will be ready to propose to the Planning Commission 
that so far as our ongoing schemes are concerned, the major infrast ructure 
scheme which will require around Rs. 2000 .00 crore only, for continuation of 
what we have started, is an essential thing.  We can very soon write to them 
on that.” 
  
 
2.15 During the course of Oral Evidence on 11 April, 2011, the Witness , also 
stated that the  Ministry only implement Central Sector Schemes and unfortunately, 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes, which have their reach to common man are not 
implemented by this Ministry. When asked about the actions Ministry proposed in the 
direction of formul ating and implementing such Centrally Sponsored Scheme duri ng 
the Twelfth Five Year Plan  whose benefits reach the common man in a more 
effective, fast and holistic manner , it has stated that as an exercise for formulation of 
Twelfth Five year Plan, various Working Groups constituted by the Planning 
Commission are considering sector -wise proposals. Accordingly Constitution of a 
Steering Committee on Industry relating to Food Processing Industries is under 
consideration by Planning Com mission under the Chairmanship of Secretary, 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries.  As per statement of the  Minister of  Food 
Processing Industry during the full Planning Commission Meeting, the Ministry will be 

preparing National Food Processing Mission a s a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for 
the Twelfth Plan period. 
 
2.16 The Committee are really aghast at the way the financial  requirements  
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries have been attended to by the 
Planners and the Governments throughout  the Eleventh Plan. As has been 
amply brought out in the Fifth and Ninth Reports of the Committee pertaining 
to the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 2009-10 and 2010-11 respectively, 
the Ministry was starved of the funds in the initial two years of the Plan due to 
delays in approvals/clearances of the Schemes, most of whom were new 
initiatives. In the next two years also, when the moment um was picking up, the 
schemes of the Ministry though already reduced in the scale by the CCEA were 
again not provided the requisite funds, thereby hampering their 
implementation at the proper pace. For the ongoing Fiscal, at least, the 
Committee expected the planners and the policy makers to do justice with the 
financial requirements of the Ministry. The Committee are, however, hugely 
disappointed to note that against a sum of Rs. 1490.86 crore sought by the 
Ministry, they have been allotted a paltry Rs. 6 00 crore for what is the terminal 
year of the Eleventh Plan. It would be noteworthy to mention here that the 
Ministry was allocated a sum of Rs. 4031 crore for the Eleventh Plan by the 
Planning Commission against their earlier projections in respect of 30 Mega 
Food Parks, 30 Cold Chain projects and 30 Modernised Abbatoirs. The 
approvals were belatedly given for only 10 each of them. The fund allocation, 
therefore, got pruned in the initial years due to delays in approvals as also 
scaling down of targets.  T he targets have, however, been enhanced in the 

penultimate year of the Plan presumably after the Government and Planners 
were satisfied with the progress of the ongoing projects. Under such 
circumstances the Ministry were not only fully justified in asking  for enhanced 
allocation, they ought to have been rightfully provided the same. How can the 
Planners and the Government expect the Ministry to perform if they are not 
provided sufficient where-withal for the purpose. Clearly their attitude towards 
this fun damental requirement of the Ministry defies logic. In plain statistical 
terms, the Ministry have got about Rs1130 crore during first four years of the 
Eleventh Plan. This is one fourth  or so of the Rs.4031 crore allocated to them 
for the Eleventh Plan. Ev en with the Rs. 600 crore BE for 2011 -12 the Ministry 
will not even reach halfway mark of their total allocation (Rs.1730 crore). The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that though it may not be worth much to the 
food processing industries sector at large, th e Government should, at least in 
the interest of the projects in pipeline enhance the allocation of the Ministry 
substantially at the RE stage, this year. 
 
Plan Allocation 
 
2.17 As has been stated previously in this Report, as also in several other 
Reports of the Committee, the food processing industries sector has never 
been a priority area for the Planners and Government alike for decades 
together though a separate Ministry is in place for over two decades now.  As a 
part of skewered priorities, both thes e entities have very smugly focused on 
increasing the production of foodgrains, cereals, oilseeds, dairy products, 
animal husbandry and fisheries produce over the last so many years but 
nobody has cared to ensure that post harvest and storage losses are 

minimized. Resultantly, while the farming community has kept on contributing 
their might selflessly towards making the nation self reliant and secure in food, 
the fruits of their toil are still being wasted in humungous quantities all over 
the Country for want of adequate processing measures and technologies. 
 
2.18 It is very sad that inspite of the Committee pointing out to the Planners 
and the Government t ime and again about the need to fund this would be 
Sunshine Sector of Indian economy  adequately, in sev eral of their Reports, 
neither of the two have been spurr ed into requisite action. One can only 
imagine the staggering savings that could have been effected by more  focus 
on the food processing industry sector particularly when the post harvest 
losses, as  per conservative estimates are a mammoth Rs. 50000 crore per 
annum in fruits and vegetables sector  alone. The Committee can, therefore, at 
best say that though the Planners and the Government have uptil now not 
appreciated the exact import of their Recomm endations about the massive 
investment needed in the food processing industry sector, all is not lost. The y 
earnestly hope  the Planners and the Government could make amends by 
infusing  this funds sta rved sector with optimum amount of funds at least in 
the Twelfth Plan so as to plug the massive losses occurring year after year, for 
decades together, to the agriculture and allied sector  produce because of the 
lack of food processing and storage infrastructure.  
 
 
Preparation for the Twelfth Plan 
  
2.19 The d elayed finalization and approval  of Eleventh Plan, as is evident 
from the implementation proper of Schemes by the Ministries/Departments 

under the jurisdiction of the Committee has led to staggering of time lines and 
resultant inflation in  costs of almost t he entire developmental process during 
these five years. This according to the Committee is not a happy situation.  It 
goes without saying that proper and timely planning are sine qua non  of any 
activity, the planning process of a developing economy not exc luded. The 
Committee have been, therefore, critical of the way the Eleventh Plan was dealt 
with by the Planners and Policy makers in all their Reports on the Demands for 
Grants of last two Fiscals  pertaining to the Ministries/Departments under their 
jurisdiction. While ascertaining the preparedness of the Planners and the 
Government for the Twelfth Plan the Committee were informed by the 
representative of the Planning Commission that the Commission wished to 
encourage the Ministry to do stock taking of all  on going pregrammes at Mid -
Term Appraisal Stage so that they ge t two years for course correction. The 
Committee find the advice of the Planning Commission totally uncalled for in 
view of the fact that the Mid -Term-Appraisal of the Eleventh Plan inspite of  
Committee’s Recommendations in their previous Reports for being expedited, 
was actually completed somewhere in the second half of the Fourth year of the 
Plan. What would the Ministries/Departments be able to do in the last year of 
the Plan as Course Corre ction vis -à-vis the Schemes being implemented, is 
anybody’s guess. 
 
2.20 The Committee, however, hope that a si milar fate does not befall the 
Twelfth Plan. They, therefore, recommend that all the formalities and 
preparatory work pertaining to the Twelfth Five Year Plan should be completed 
on a war footing basis. The Plan should be communicated to all line 
Ministries/Departments at the latest by 31 December, 2011. The 

Ministries/Departments should also be directed to complete all formalities and 
incidental p rocedures in the last quarter of the ongoing Fiscal so that the 
implementation of the Schemes included in the Twelfth Plan commences from 
the very first day of the Plan viz. 1 April, 2012. 
 
 2.21 The Committee observe  that the Ministry of Food Processing I ndustries 
only implement s Central S ector Schemes and unfortunately  Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes, which have their reach to common man , are not 
implemented by the Ministry. They further observe from the statement of the  
Minister of Food Processing Industries before full Planning Commission 
Meeting, that the Ministry will be preparing National Food Processing Mission 
as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for the Twelfth Plan period. The Committee 
desire that this should be done in a comprehensive and holistic manner so that 
the benefits of the implementation of Sche mes of the Ministry can reach the  
common man in an efficient and prompt manner . The Committee would like to 
be informed of the progress made by the Ministry in this direction at the 
earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER – I I I 
 
SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS 
 
   (A) Scheme for Infrastructure Development 
 
The objective of the Scheme for Infrastructure Development is  to provide 
Infrastructure and common facilities for use by small and medium enterprises, which 
enhance value addition. The Scheme has three components Viz. (a) Mega Food 
Parks (b) Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure and                
(c) Establishment of new/ Mod ernisation of existing Abbattoirs. The budgetary 
allocation for  the Scheme during the Eleventh Plan is as given in the table below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
 
2007-08 90.00 15.00 14.79 
2008-09 90.00 42.20 48.28 
2009-10 135.00 73.81 72.94 
2010-11 137.50 120.89 88.67# 
2011-12 300.00 - - 
         #Till 31.01.2011 
 
 When asked about the  circumstances necessitating  drastic reduction at RE 
stage in all the four completed years of Eleventh Plan, the Ministry replied that delay 
of about one and half year in approval and phased approvals of the Schemes are the 
reasons for inadequate progress, thereby, necessitating drastic reduction.  
3.2 The following information  was furnished in writing by the Ministry to a query 
about component-wise reasons for the reduced allocations: 
 
Mega Food Park:  Although Eleventh Plan commenced with effect from the 
year 2007, approval of the Scheme was received by the Ministry precisely 
after one year and five months.  Also, only 10 projects were approved in the 

first phase out of 30 envisaged for the Eleventh P lan. Due to delay in the 
approval of the Scheme, the expenditure projected for the year 2007 -08 could 
not be incurred.   After the approval of the Government, the Ministry took 
expeditious action to formula te the Scheme Guidelines in October, 2008 and 
Expression of Interest was called for these projects in November, 2008. 
Although the selection of suitable proposal involves a very detailed and 
strenuous exercise of scrutiny, appraisal, evaluation and approva l as per the 
laid down procedure, „in principle‟ approval was accorded in December, 2008 
to 10 projects and first tranche of first instalment was released in March, 2009 
in case of 5 S tates such as Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Mahara shtra, 
Uttrakhand and  Assam.  
 
Cold Chain:  As regard, Cold Chain is concerned, pace of utilization has been 
normal. In 2010-11 low expenditure is due to phased approval. 
 
Abattior: The following are circumsta nces and reasons for reduced 
allocations and  delay in execution of modernization of abattoirs :  
  
(i) The Eleventh Plan was approved quite late and hence the 
Scheme was approved by 2009. 
(ii) Delay in allocation land for Abattoirs by State Government due 
to local agitations and objections of local people. 
  (iii) Delay in appointment of Project Management Consultant. 
(iv)  Delay in tender process by State Government for turnkey          
contractor. 
3.3 In response to a  query as to  how the Ministry propose to ensure that the 
allocated amount is fully utilised in the year 2011-12 and thereby funds escape 

pruning at RE stage , as has been done during each of the last four years, the 
Ministry submitted to following written information to the Committee: 
“Mega Food Park: The CCEA in its meeting held on 18  November, 2010 
approved se tting up of 5 new Mega Food Parks Projects in addition to 10 
projects already approved in the first phase. 
 
Cold Chain:   Upscaling to the extent of Eleventh Plan has been approved. 
New proposals have been received. It will be possible to utilize the entire  
budget in 2011-12. 
 
Abattoirs:  The Ministry of Food Processing I ndustries ha ve appointed 
Project Management  Agencies that are technical competent consultant to 
solve any problem raised by State Government immediately. 
 
Monthly review meeting s with State Government official and project 
management consultant are being held at the level of joint secretary for proper 
execution of the project.”    
 
(i) Mega Food Parks 
 
3.4 The Scheme of Mega Food Park aims to provide a mechanism to bring 
together f armers, processors and retailers and link agricultural production to the 
market so as to ensure maximizing value addition, minimizing wastages, increasing 
farmers‟ income and creating employment opportunities in rural sector.  During the 
Eleventh Plan, provisions have been made for 30 Mega Food Parks, out of which, 10 
Mega Food Parks have been taken up during the first phase. EFC has approved the 
upscaling of Scheme to take up 5 more projects during Eleventh Plan which has 
been approved by CCEA in its meeting held on 18 November, 2010.  
 
3.5 When asked whether  any of the Mega Food Park had become fully 
operational as on date, the Ministry replied that out of the 7 finally approved projects, 
2 projects viz. the Mega Food Park at Chittoor in  Andhra Pradesh and that at  
Haridwar in Uttarakhand are partially operational where processing units/ common 
pulping facility have come up. The remaining projects are at diffe rent stages of 

implementation. Queried further as to  when would all the ten Mega Food Parks 
approved initially become operational , the Ministry stated  that the successful 
implementation of the projects depends on a lot of factors such as land related 
issues and obtaining various statutory clearances from the State authorities.  In 
some cases these issues took a lot of time as a result of which project 
implementation got slowed down. However, the Ministry took up the matter , from 
time to time, with respective State Go vernments to expedite the things . The Ministry 
are constantly reviewing progress on quarterly basis and taking all possible action for 
timely completion. 
 
 
3.6 There is a fe eling that the process of establishing Mega  Food Parks is too 
complicated.  In response to a query of the Committee about the steps taken by the 
Ministry to reduce delays in approvals and for seamless setting up of Mega Foo d 
Parks, the Ministry stated that the proposal for Mega Food Park is  selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in the Scheme Guidelines. Based on the 
learning experience and suggestions from various stakeholders, the Scheme 
Guidelines are modifie d from time to time to facilitat e smooth implementation of the 
Scheme. Initially, the p rescribed composition of the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)  
was minimum of 5 members out of which one member should be Food Processor. 
Subsequently, the composition of (SPV) was modified to comprise of minimum 3 
members including one Food Processor whose net  worth should be minimum of  
Rs. 10.00 Cr ore and should have minimum of 26% of equity holding in the SPV. 
Ministry have taken expeditious steps from time to time for ac cording early approvals 
for setting up of Mega Food Parks in various states subject to fulfillment of 
prescribed conditions. In the first phase of S cheme implementation, CCEA had 

approved setting up of 10 Mega Food Parks on 11  September, 2008. Operational 
Guidelines for the Scheme were formulated within a month‟s time in October, 2008 
and Expression of Interest was called for in November, 2008. Although the selection 
of suitable proposal involves a very detailed and strenuous exercise of scrutiny, 
appraisal, evaluation and approval as per the laid down procedure, „in principle‟ 
approval was accorded as early as in December, 2008 i.e. within a month.  
3.7 The Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing Industries added further during 
the Oral Evidence: 
“The procedure for Mega Food Park is like this.  We give advertisement 
for a particular State asking for proposals, asking to submit what is normally 
termed as expression of interest, which is basically the applicants have to 
form a Special Purpose Vehicle.  Th ey have to have certain network, the area 
identified and it should economically feasible.  After that happens, we 
scrutinise it and we give in principle, approval to them that you are allowed to 
now prepare the Detailed Project Report.  The DPR preparation  is also a time 
consuming thing and it takes from three months to six months.  During this 
period, they also have to ensure that the land is in possession that the SPV is 
legally constituted, that the share holders agreements etc., are there and the 
bank has also been fully involved.  That is why, there has always been time 
taken between first the selection of the project amongst the competing five, six 
people, identification of the best project and thereafter for them to prepare the 
DPR.  The DPR is again scrutinized by us and if it is found satisfactory, it goes 
through two stages of scrutiny.  Then we give the final approval to the project.  
When we say that the project amount approved is Rs. 50 crore, that is, we are 
offering the project our Rs. 50 crore  after approval of the project.  The release 
has to be in different instalments.  First we give only Rs. 5 crore, followed by 
another Rs. 10 crore, this makes the first instalment.  Thereafter, it is Rs. 15 
crore and Rs. 5 crore.  Depending on the progress  of the thing, money is 
released.  It is not released immediately.” 
 
 
3.8 When asked about the efforts made to involve Self Help Groups (SHGs) to 
participate in SPVs for setting up their industry in Mega Food Parks , the Ministry 
stated that as per the Scheme Guidelines, the responsibility of execution, ownership 
and management vests with a SPV which shall be a body corporate registered under 
Indian Company‟s Act. In the formation of SPV, financial institutions, organ ized 
retailers, processors, producers, farmer organization s and other stake holders can 

participate as equity holders. Government agencies can also become shareholders 
in SPV, but the equity holding of such Govt. organization / organizations shall be 
restricted to less than 26% so as to ensure private sector  character of SPV.   Since 
the S cheme is market driven and is operated by a Body Corporate, there is no 
intervention of the Gov ernment in SPV formation.  However, where the composition 
of SPV has farmers  group SHGs, such proposal carry more weightage in the 
selection process. 
 
(ii) Cold Chain, Value-Addition and Preservation Infrastructure 
 
 
3.9 The objective of this component of Scheme for Infrastructure development is 
to provide integrated and complete cold chains and preservation facilities without any 
break, from farm gate to the consumer. When asked about the present status of this 
component the Ministry  replied that the component of Cold Chain, Value Addition 
and Preservation I nfrastructure was appro ved on 22  August, 2008 for 
implementation of 10 projects in the first phase, out of 30 projects  proposed by the 
Ministry. Rs. 210 .00 crore had been allocated for this component during Eleventh 
Plan. Accordingly, 10 projects were approved in the financial y ear 2008-09 in which 
the total amount of grants-in-aid involved is     Rs. 86.94 crore. So far Rs. 72.45 crore 
has been released and remaining amount of grant is likely  to be released in the 
current Financial Y ear. Out of 10 projects, 7 have started commer cial production.  
Substantive value addition, reduction in wastage and enhancement in the farmer‟s 
income is evident from the concurrent evaluation of the projects.  Remaining three 
projects are also at advanced stages.  Based on the progress of first phase, a 
proposal for upscaling the scheme, to the extent of Eleventh Plan allocation was 
considered and recommended by EFC and the same was approved by the Finance 

Minister. The Ministry would be taking new projects against balance-approved Outlay 
of Eleventh Plan. In furtherance of the approval by the Finance Minister, Ministry 
issued Expression of Interest (EOI) not ice seeking  proposals from potential 
stakeholders.  In response thereto 164 proposals were received by the Ministry, 
which are under consideration.   
 
(B) Scheme for Technology Upgradation, Establishment and Modernisation 
of Food Processing Industries 
 
 
3.10 The objectives of the Scheme for Technology, Upgradation, Establishment 
and Modernisation of FPI are to increase the level of processing, reduction of 
wastage, value addition, enhance the income of farmers as well as increase exports 
thereby resulting in overall economic development. Budgetary allocations for the 
Scheme for the Eleventh Plan are as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
 
2007-08 72.00 113.50 119.30 
2008-09 90.00 91.50 96.87 
2009-10 60.00 82.52 82.49 
2010-11 81.00 106.01 80.61# 
2011-12 98.00 - - 
# Upto 31.01.2011 
 
It is stated that the Revised Estimates during the last four years are showing an increase 
over respective Budget Estimates. Expenditures during the years  
2007-08 and 2008-09 have been even higher than the respective REs.  
 
3.11 The Ministry in response to a query as to why sufficient fund allocations for 
the above mentioned Scheme was not being done at the BE Stage , have stated that 
sufficient allocation of funds could not be done due to overall inadequate allocation of 
funds to the Ministry.  Over 2500 cases are still pending for disbursement.  When 
asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to get fund allocations augmented for the 
Scheme, the Ministry replied that they have repeatedly requested at various fora and 

at various le vels to Planning Commission as well as Ministry of Finance for 
enhanced allocation of funds for the Scheme for Technology Upgradation/ 
Establishment/ Modernization of Food Processing Industries in view of large number 
of pending cases as well as efficient utilization of funds continuously. Ho wever, the 
request has not materialized in term of higher allocation of funds so far.   
 
3.12 In response to a query about how the Ministry intended to tackle the 2500 
cases pending for disbursement, the Ministry stated  that first and foremost 
requirement for disposal of cases is adequate allocation of funds to the schemes, 
Besides, the Ministry ha ve taken necessary steps for close monitoring of new 
applications as well as pending application received under the Scheme .  The 
successful disposal of cases as per laid down norms for percentage of expenditure 
for each quarter will provide justification for further allocation for the Scheme. Under 
the Scheme fresh application s have been stopped since February,  2009 in Grain 
Milling Sector except for North East Region.  This will ensure that the pendency does 
not go up till backlog is cleared as maximum backlog is in this sector.   By way of 
close monitoring of cases according to seniority based on date of applic ation through 
Computerized Data Management System, the cases pending due to non - receipt of 
required documents or receipts of incomplete/incorrect document are being 
monitored on daily basis for vigorous follow up action for early disposal. 
 
(C) Schemes for Upgradation of Quality of Street Food 
 
 
3.13 A new Scheme for „Upgradation of quality of Street Food‟ was proposed in the 
Eleventh Plan. The Scheme has two components Viz. “Safe Food Town and the 
Food Street”. The Scheme is aimed at improving the quality  of street food being 

served and laying down standards. This Scheme has not been approved by Ministry 
of Finance.  When asked why the Ministry of Finance have not accorded their 
approval to the Scheme, the Ministry stated that the Ministry of Finance observ ed 
that the Ministry  were hard pressed for funds for implementation of its existing 
Schemes.  As almost half of the Eleventh Plan was over, only one and half year was 
left therefore the Ministry need not take any new Scheme. 
 
3.14 When further asked about  the efforts made the Ministry to get the Scheme 
approved, the y submitted that  Secretary, M oFPI took up the matter with the 
Secretary Department of Expenditure stating that since scheme was operationalized 
for undertaking preparatory work with the approva l of Minister for F ood Processing 
Industries in 11 cities for Safe Food Town & 6 cities for Safe Food Street component, 
the Scheme may be allowed to be continued on pilot basis, which will help the 
Ministry in implementation of Scheme more effectively in Twelfth Plan. In reply, 
Ministry of Finance ha ve suggested that scale down version of Scheme can be 
considered if the Ministry  feels there is merit in continuing Scheme on a pilot basis 
during Eleventh Plan and after consideration of SFC under Chairmanship of 
Secretary, MoFPI, subject to availability of funds.  Ministry is preparing SFC note for 
the same. 
 
(D) Scheme for Quality Assurance, Codex Standards and Research and 
Development and other Promotional Activities 
 
 
3.15 The objectives of the above mentioned Schemes are to motivate Food 
Processing Industries for adoption of food safety and quality assurance mechanisms, 
to prepare them to face the global competition in international trade in post WTO, to 
enable adherence to  stringent quality in hygiene norms, to enhance product 

acceptance by overseas buyers, to keep Indian industry technologically abreast of 
international best practices and that the end product/outcome/findings of R&D work 
benefit food processing industry, S ector.  Budgetary allocations for the Scheme 
during the Eleventh Plan are as under: - 
 
 
                                                                                                                 (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
 
2007-08 18.00 19.30 15.12 
2008-09 18.00 19.00 17.37 
2009-10 30.00 32.08 29.07 
2010-11 38.00 31.40 21.61# 
2011-12 45.00 - - 
# Upto 31.01.2011 
 
3.16 It is observed that Revised Estimates for the first three years of Eleventh Plan 
for the Scheme are on a higher side as compared to respective Budget Estimates. 
For the year 2010 -11, it is on the lower side.  The Actuals in all the four years are, 
however, less than even the RE amounts. In response to query about reasons for 
these fluctuations, the Ministry replied that base d on the actual expenditure for the 
preceding three years and the projects in hand, the RE for FY 2010 -11 was pegged 
at Rs. 31.90 Crore. Hence, against RE of Rs. 31. 40 Crore, an expenditure of 
approximately Rs. 31.22 Crore has been booked as on 31 March, 2 011, which is 
around 98% of the RE allocation of 2010-11.  
 
3.17 When asked about the underutilisation of allocated funds during the previous 
four years of the Eleventh Plan, the Ministry replied that the Scheme envisages 
assistance for various sub -components viz., setting up of food testing laboratories, 
R&D projects and promotional activities based on the request received for financial 
assistance. Except for the first year of the Eleventh Plan (2007 -08) in which the 

expenditure was around 78.14%, the actual expenditure in remaining years has been 
progressively and consistently increasing. Only a small allocation of the BE s/REs 
remained unutilized due to non -availability of enough suitable proposals.  As a      
pro-active measure, Ministry ha ve issued Special calls seeking proposals under the 
food testing laboratories and research and development so that there are enough 
feasible proposals/ projects, which can be taken up in the current Financial Year to 
utilize the full BE allocation.  
(E) Scheme for Strengthening of Institutions 
3.18 The objective of the Scheme for Strengthening of Institutions are to strengthen 
Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology, State Nodal Agencies(SNA), setting 
up of National Meat and Poultry and Processing Board, National Win e Board and 
National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management  
(NIFTEM). During the Eleventh Plan the budgetary allocations for the Scheme are as 
indicated in the table below : - 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
 
2007-08 35.10 26.10 26.51 
2008-09 54.00 53.50 52.71 
2009-10 64.00 92.08 83.59 
2010-11 132.00 130.06 67.73# 
2011-12 137.00 - - 
#Upto 31.01.2011 
 
3.19 In response to a query that keeping in view the continued under spending in 
the previous three years how the Government propose to utilize the allocation of Rs. 
137.00 crore during the year 2011 -12 on the Scheme, the Ministry replied that the 
Scheme for St rengthening of Institutions includes allocations for IICPT, NMPPB, 
State Nodal Agencies, NIFTEM and the Indian Grape Processing Board (IGPB). 
During the financial year 2010 -11 against the RE of Rs.130.06 actual expenditure 

was Rs. 128.66 crore. The Ministr y is therefore, confident of spending Rs. 137.00 
crore provided for 2011-12 fully. 
 
 NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FOOD TECHNOLOGY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
AND MANAGEMENT (NIFTEM) 
 
 
3.20 National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management is 
a component of Scheme for strengthening of Institutions.  It is being set up as an 
Institute of global excellence in education and research in the areas of food 
technology. The Insti tute is being set up at Kundli, Distt. Sonepat, Haryana. CCEA 
had approved setting up of the Institute on 31 August 2006 at an estimated cost of         
Rs. 244.60 crore.    
 
(i) Financial Review 
 
3.21 The Ministry informed that b ased on the inputs provide d by Cornell Sathguru 
Foundation the estimated cost was revised to Rs. 604.75 crore.  Concerned with this 
massive cost escalation, the Committee in their Fifth Report had recommended that 
the revised cost estimates be considered carefully and in all their dimensions by the 
evaluating agencies/ministries and a final decision arrived at accordingly.  In reply to 
a point, the Ministry have now stated that the proposal for revision of Project Cost 
Estimates from Rs. 244.60 crore to Rs. 479.94 crore has been app raised and 
recommended by the Expenditure Finance Committee in its meeting held on 18 
February, 2011 for approval of CCEA. The proposal as recommended by EFC is 
being submitted to CCEA for consideration and approval.  When asked to furnish a 
detailed note o n hiking of initial estimated cost of  Rs. 244.60 crore to Rs. 604.75 
crore and, thereafter, pruning it down to Rs. 479.94 crore, the Ministry replied that 

the original cost estimated of Rs. 244.60 crore was based on DPR of May 2006 
prepared by M/s RABO In dia Finance India Pvt. Ltd. The Break -up of cost, 
component wise, is indicated below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
S.No Component Original 
Approved 
Cost 
1st Revised 
Cost 
Final Revised 
Cost 
1 Land 31.40 31.37 36.10 
2 Building 75.10 314.16 264.58 
3 Equipments 47.00 41.60 56.00 
4 Hardware & Software 4.00 9.58 13.57 
5 Library & Others 11.70 12.50 12.50 
6 Preoperative expenses 31.32 13.27 
7 Contingencies (@3% on S. 
No. 3 to 5) 
1.91 - 
8 Total Non-recurring cost 169.20 432.44 396.02 
9 Recurring Cost (For 5 Years) 75.40 172.31 83.92 
 Total 244.60 604.75 479.94 
 
3.22 The Ministry further clarified that Secretary , M oFPI after visiting various 
Universities in USA from 23  September, 2007 to 3 October, 2007 suggested that the 
structure of NIFTEM as provided in RABO DPR  and functional requirements need to 
be reviewed immediately with a view to ensure that they are in line with the best 
international practices and that the Architect should visit USA and understand the 
architectural practices adopted and the facilities pro vided.  These suggestions were 
approved by M inister of State (Independent Charge ) of the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries on 10  October, 2007 and  he further ordered that the 
experience gained by the Secretary should be fully utilized in framing the Ministry‟s 
MOU with NBCC.  
  Accordingly, a team consisting of representatives of NBCC, STUP 
Consultants and MFPI visited Cornell University and U.C. Davis during December    
1-7, 2007.  Based on the inputs gathered by the team and those provided by the 
Cornell University to NBCC and their Architect, the concept and design of NIFTEM 

Campus was prepared by the Architect and approved by the Ministry with the 
approval of Minister of State (Independent Charge) of the MoFPI . On the basis of 
accepted concept and des ign Block Cost Estimates were submitted by NBCC for 
construction work. 
 
        Based on the inputs about technical area requirement from Cornell -Sathguru 
Foundation, NBCC worked out the circulation and utility areas for the NIFTEM 
campus as per established sound civ il engineering practices and bye laws. The area 
for residential and other amenities buildings have been adopted as per CPWD/UGC 
norms by NBCC.  The cost of construction submitted by NBCC has increased from 
Rs. 75.10 crore to Rs.310.74 crore with covered area of 98,539 sq.m. The 
construction cost has been worked out based on CPWD rates of 2008. The increase 
in cost of construction of NIFTEM campus has been attributed to the following: 
• Escalation in cost vis -à-vis the cost indicated in the DPR which is 
based on May 2005 market price. 
• Increase in area of construction vis -à-vis the area indicated in the DPR 
due to increased intake capacity of the students from 430 to 950 and 
assuming 100% provision for hostels and 60% for residential as against 
50% both for residential and hostels assumed in DPR of May 2006. 
• Additions of facilities not provided in the DPR such as landscaping, 
internal roads, lighting, etc., Continuing Education Centre, Water 
treatment plant with pumps, electric work for water treatment plant, 
plant room work, solar panel system, lifts, boundary wall, neighborhood 
facilities, amphitheater, ETP and STP. 
         

  Further to the submission of Block Cost Estimates by NBCC,  Cornell 
Sathguru Foundation worked out the total project outlay covering cost of 
construction, cost of equipments, hardware & software, library resources, IT 
infrastructure and other miscellaneous expenditure at Rs. 604.75 crore.       
  Accordingly, the draft EFC Note was circulated to Ministry of Finance and 
Planning Commission and other concerned Ministries/ Departments for their 
comments. The Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission had expressed 
reservations on the enhanced cost projected in the RCE vis -à-vis the original 
approved cost of Rs. 244.60 crore and advised the M oFPI to re -examine and 
rationalize the overall cost estimate. In pursuance of the directives of Ministry of 
Finance and Planning Commiss ion the Revised project cost was revised by the 
Ministry. A series of review meetings were taken with NBCC and Architect as a result 
of which the revised cost was reduced from Rs.604.75 crore to Rs. 479.94 crore 
without compromising with the quality of construction. 
 
(ii) Recruitment Process 
 
 
3.23 The Committee were informed that Government have approved creation of 46 
posts for NIFTEM. Recruitment process of academic and non academic posts has 
since commenced and will be completed by June 2011.  When the Ministry were 
asked to furnish details of all the 46 posts cre ated for NIFTEM, the following 
information was furnished by them : 
S. No. Name of the Post No. of  
Sanctioned Posts 
 Director 1 
 ACADEMIC POSTS  
1 Professor 5 

  
Information sought by the Committee about the recruitment process, mode prescribed for 
each of the posts etc. is placed at Annexure-I. 
 
 The status of recruitment of each of the posts is placed at Annexure –II. 
(iii) Targets for NIFTEM for 2011-12 
3.24 As the Scheme has lingered on for quite sometime now the Committee 
desired to know from the Ministry the specific timelines laid out for com pletion of 
various activities: 
 In response the following information was furnished to the Committee: 
S.No Task Completion Date 
1 To obtain approval of CCEA to the RCE proposal Completed 
2 To Obtain deemed to be University status under De 
Novo category from UGC/ Ministry of HRD 
31.7.2011 
2 Associate Professor 5 
3 Assistant Professor 11 
 NON-ACADEMIC   
1 Registrar 1 
2 Assistant Registrar (Admin) 1 
3 Assistant Registrar (IT) 1 
4 Assistant Registrar (Exam) 1 
5 Deputy Controller(Finance & 
Accounts) 
(Deputation) 
1 
6 Deputy Librarian 1 
7 Assistant Librarian 1 
8 Accounts Officer 1 
9 Accountant 2 
10 Junior Engineer 2 
11 Lab Incharge 2 
12 Lab Technician 3 
13 Executive Assistant 6 
14 Cashier 1 
 Total 46 

3 Completion of Construction of second phase consisting 
of residential accommodation, student hostels, 
research Labs, etc. 
31.3.2012 
4 a) Release of Advertisement for admission after UGC 
approval 
b) Finalise Admission of Students with CBSE 
15.8.2011 
15.9.2011 
5 Appointment of Director 
 
31.8.2011 
6 Appointment to Faculty and Administrative posts 31.7.2011 
7 Commencement of media campaign 
 
15.6.2011 
8 Setting up five teaching labs for B.Tech (FT&M) 
 
31.7.2011 
9 Commence activities under : 
a) Consultancy Division 
b) Skill Development Division 
c)SME Development Divisions  
d) Engagement of Companies interested in Joint 
Ventures 
 
1.7.2011 
20.6.2011 
31.7.2011 
1.8.2011 
10 Continue Outreach programmes in cities, towns, 
metros across the Country for brand building of 
NIFTEM. 
Already 
Commenced 
 
 
3.25 During Oral Evidence, representative of the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries submitted: 
“Institutional building has been completed.  We hope for starting of first 
year of B. Tech Food Technology and Management Courses by this year 
during August -September, we are to get Deemed to be University status of 
UGC.” 

 
 When asked further, whether the construction has been completed, the 
representative of the Ministry stated: 
“Sir, construction was in two parts, one was institutional building and 
other was residential complex, hostels.  Institutional building is complete, we 
have to use it.” 
  
Queried f urther if the hostels, labs and utility buildings were still not 
completed, the representative of Ministry, admitted: 
  “It is right, Sir.” 
(G) Utilisation Certificates 
 
3.26 The pending Utilisation  Certificates have been inviting the attention of the 
Committee for quite a number of years now.  The Ministry have 2117 numbers of 
Utilisation Certificates amounting Rs. 330.65 crore pending in respect of grants-in-aid 
paid up to 31  March, 2008 and due as  on 31  March, 20 09. 2389 numbers of 
Utilisation Certificates for an amount  Rs. 385.70 crore are pending in respect of 
grant-in-aid paid up to 31  March, 2009 and due as on 31  March, 2010. When asked 
about the reasons for slow liquidation of outstanding Uti lisation Certificates, the 
Ministry submitted that m any pending UCs are very old. Current pendency is mostly 
with respect to last installments hence, the grant recipients are not submitting UCs in 
time. In some cases, the progress of implementation of the projects is slow and no 
demand is being received for subsequent installment.  
 
3.27 In response to a query regarding the steps taken against the defaulters for not 
submitting the certificates the Ministry stated that they are vigorously and 
continuously pu rsuing the matter with a view to expedite all pending utilization 

certificates.  In case of non -receipt of utilization certificates of earlier grants, the 
Ministry do not consider requests, if any, received for further grant of 
units/organizations. The Ministry ha ve been following this practice in respect of all 
such cases. Release of second and subsequent installments is considered only after 
receipt of the utilization certificates for the assistance already extended.  When 
asked about the status of the advice sought in regard of old Utilization Certificates by 
the Ministry from Ministry of Finance , they stated that the advice of Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Expenditure, is still awaited and matter is being followed up. 
Scheme for Infrastructure Development 
3.28 The Committee note that Scheme for Infrastructure Development is the 
main Scheme of the Ministry which aims to provide infrastructure and common 
facilities, which enhance value addition, for use by small and medium 
enterprises. The Scheme has  three components viz. (a) Mega Food Parks (b) 
Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure and (c) 
Establishment of new/modernisation of existing Abattoirs. 
3.29 In the first phase only 10 Mega Food Parks and Cold Chains respectively 
were approved out of 30 envisaged for the Eleventh Plan.  The Committee note 
underutilisation of funds under this Scheme during the first four years of the 
Eleventh Plan. Against the BE figures of Rs.90 crore, Rs.90 crore, Rs.135 crore 
and Rs.137.50 crore respecti vely for the four Fiscals of the Eleventh Plan, the 
RE figures have been Rs. 15 crore, Rs. 42.20 crore, Rs. 73.81 crore and Rs. 
120.89 crore only.  The Actuals in these years have been Rs. 14.79 crore, Rs. 
48.28 crore, Rs. 72.94 crore and Rs. 86. 67 crore  (upto 31 January, 2 011), 
respectively.  The underspending is mainly attributable to the inordinate delays 
in approval of the Scheme. Glitches in implementation of the Sch eme have 

also resulted in under utilization as also staggering of timelines of the thre e 
components of the Scheme. As can be seen from the financial performance of 
the Scheme, the implementation has improved and the scheme has gained 
momentum from the fourth year onwards of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee 
also find that the Government have accorded approval for f ive more Mega 
Food Parks and upscaled  the Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation 
Infrastructure Component to the extent of balance, approved Eleventh Plan 
allocation. With these additional item s of expenditure the Committee are sure 
the Ministry will be able to utilize the Rs. 300 crore allocated as BE to them for 
the ongoing Fiscal. Since this Scheme is likely to cont inue in the Twelfth Plan 
as well, the Committee recommend that allocation for this Scheme be suitably 
enhanced  by the Government so that substantial ground work for Twelfth Plan 
is done before hand.  
 
Scheme for Technology Upgradation, Establishment and Modernisation of 
Food Processing Industries 
 
 
3.30 This scheme is meant for the existing Units in the food processing 
industry sector. The scheme provides financial assistance with a view to 
increase the level of processing, reduction of wastage, value addition, 
enhancement of income of farmers as well as increase exports. The Scheme 
has been provided BE of Rs. 72 crore, Rs. 90 crore, Rs. 90 crore and Rs. 81 
crore during the four completed years of the Eleventh Plan. These amounts 
were modified to Rs. 113.50 crore, Rs. 91.50 crore, Rs. 82.52 crore and Rs.  
106.01 crore respectively at the RE stage. The RE allocations were more than 
fully utilized in the first three Fiscals and as per the indications be spent fully 

in the year 2010 -11. Apart from the reasonably good financial performance of 
the Scheme its ben efit to the existing units in the food processing industry 
sector are innumerable. Unfortunately, however, the Government’s attitude 
towards this Scheme can at best be termed apathetic. With such pittance as a 
budget, year after year, the number of pending  applications for assistance 
have burgeoned to 2500 plus. And the Ministry, have virtually been compelled 
to resort to rationing of the Scheme, which is not a healthy state -of affairs. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should 
immediately work out their funds requirements for this Scheme for the ongoing 
Fiscal with a view to liquidate as many eligible applications as possible and 
present it to the Ministry of Finance. The Committee further recommend that 
additional requirements o f funds for this scheme should be released by the 
Ministry of Finance on top priority basis. 
 
Scheme for Upgradation of Quality of Street Food 
 
3.31 The Scheme for Upgradation of Quality of  Street Food, in the opinion of 
the Committee is another instance of the Government’s apathetic attitude 
forwards schemes  of public welfare. Almost the entire Eleventh Five year Plan 
has gone by and  this scheme is still looking askance for approvals. The lack 
of hygienic conditions, etc. are the main reasons behind sub -standard food 
being sold on streets almost on a pan India basis resulting in avoidable 
diseases in the consumers and avoidable unquantified expenditure on their 
healthcare. This scheme could have gone a long way in improving the quality 
of street food and thereby serving the cause of unsuspecting consumers, who 
belong to the poorer section of the society and for whom healthcare is still a 

pipedream. The assurance of the Ministry of  Finance that the scaled down 
pilot project version can be considered subje ct to availability of funds sounds 
hollow at the fag end of the Eleventh Plan. Moreso, when the Committee had in 
view of the inherent benefits of the Scheme asked the Ministry in their Fifth 
Report to operationalise the scheme well before the commencement of the 
Commonwealth Games held in October, 2010. Still, not withstanding the step 
motherly treatment meted out to this Scheme  by the Ministry of Finance, the 
Committee recommend release of additional funds for it at the RE stage so that 
the ambit of the S cheme is extended a bit beyond the scaled down version so 
that the Ministry is able to implement it with full speed during the Twelfth Plan 
with the benefit of experienced gained now.  
 
Scheme for Quality Assurance, Codex Standard and Research and 
Development and Other Promotional Activities. 
 
 
3.32 The Committee observe that the above Scheme has been launched by 
the Ministry with a view to motivate food processing industries to adopt food 
safety and  quality assurance mechanisms so as to prepare themselves  for 
global competition. They further observe that the BE for the Scheme required 
upward revision at RE stage during the first three years of the Plan viz. 2007 -
08,   2008-09 and 2009-10.  In all these years the BE was pegged at Rs. 18 crore 
and was hiked at RE stage to Rs. 19.30 crore Rs. 19 crore and Rs. 32.08 crore 
respectively. In the next year the trend got reversed. The BE amounts of Rs. 38 
crore was reduced at RE stage to Rs. 31.40 crore. Inexplicably, however, the 
actuals during the first three year s have been less than the RE allocations at 
Rs. 15.12 crore, Rs. 17.37 crore and Rs. 29.07 crore respectively in 2007 -08, 
2008-09 and 2009 -10.  During the Fourth year of the Plan the Scheme has 

gained momentum and the Ministry have been able to spend Rs. 3 1.22 crore 
i.e.  about 98% of the RE, which is a good sign. The low expenditure in this 
Scheme is mainly due to the fact that assistance and the Scheme is released 
on request basis. The Committee are, however, happy to note that the Ministry 
have now  issu ed special calls seeking proposals under the food testing 
laboratories and R&D. The Committee recommend that apart from this 
welcome initiative, the Ministry should also launch a suitable publicity 
campaign to popularize this Scheme. This will not only fac ilitate the limited 
purpose of full utilization of the allocation of Rs. 45 crore this year but also 
enable the local food processing sector to adhere to the stringent quality in 
hygiene norms with a view to enhance the acceptance of local produce 
overseas.  
 
National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management 
(NIFTEM) 
 
 
3.33 The Committee are constrained to note the sordid state of affairs in the 
National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management 
(NIFTEM).  This Institute is being set up as an institute of global excellence in 
education and research in the areas of food technology at Kundli, Sonepat, 
Haryana.  CCEA had approved setting up of the institute on 31 August, 2006 at 
an estimated cost of Rs. 244.60 crore.  The estimated cost was revised to a 
staggering Rs. 604.75 crore compelling the Committee to r ecommend in depth 
review of the same by the Government. The cost of the project later on was 
further revised to Rs. 479.94 crore.  Further probing of this vexed matter of 
fluctuating estimates revealed that it was the then Secretary’s inputs after his 
overseas visits that lead to the upscaling of earlier estimates of Rs. 244.60 

crore to a massive Rs. 604.75 crore. This was apparently done with a view to 
make the Institute a world class  facility. 
 
3.34 On the execution part also the Committee find that the situation is far 
from satisfactory. During last five years only the institutional building has been 
completed. The status of the Institute as a Deemed University is a big question 
mark as on date. With the recruitment process also yet to be completed , the 
Committee wonder as to what would happen to the students seeking 
admission in NIFTEM with high hopes.  They are doubtful if the Ministry would 
be able to start the Institute  even in this Academic Session in the prevailing 
chaos. 
 
Growth Rate in Food Processing Industry Sector 
 
3.35 The apparent lack of a suitable information sy stem to monitor and 
collate data  pertaining to the food processing industry sector has been 
engaging the attention of the Committee for quite a long time now. They have 
recommended fo r creation of a reliable information system for the purpose 
within the Ministry instead of the present practice of using the inputs of 
stakeholders. Precisely for these reasons, the Committee have also put to 
question the reliability of the data regarding post harvest crop losses, growth 
rate of the sector as well as the Vision 2015 Document, etc. After persistent 
follow-up, the Ministry now seem to have realised the importance of having a 
in-house information system. The Ministry are contemplating taking u p the 
matter with National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council or outsourcing 
for computation of growth rate in the food processing industry sector. They 
are also in the process of engaging a professional agency which will also help 

in establishing a mec hanism for compilation of growth rate in the sector. 
Furthermore, the Committee note, that the Ministry have engaged a 
professional agency to develop web based financial and physical progress 
monitoring system. The Food Processing Information System, so de veloped, 
will compile State -wise and Sector -wise data on various aspects of the Sector 
for the Plan Schemes of the Ministry. The  Committee while welcoming this 
belated initiative, exhort the Ministry to take all these initiatives to their logical 
conclusion at the soonest so that the information system is operationalised 
without any further loss of time and in any case before the Twelf th Plan 
commences in April, 2012. 
 
Utilisation Certificates 
 
3.36 The Committee are constrained to find that while 2117 numbers of 
Utilisation Certificates amounting Rs. 330.65 crore were pending in respect of 
grants-in-aid paid up to 31 March, 2008 and due as on 31 March, 2009 the 
number has swelled to 2389 for an amount  Rs. 385.70 crore in respect of 
grant-in-aid paid up to 31 March, 2009 and due as on 31 March, 2010.  What is 
more perturbing as per the Ministry’s own admission is that many pending 
UCs are very old. The situation has been further aggravated by current 
pendency mostly with respect to last installments  as the grant recipients are 
not submitting UCs in time. It is apparent that contrary to the claims of the 
Ministry that they are vigorously and continuously pursuing the matter with a 
view to expedite all pending utilization certificates things are not sh owing any 
improvement.  The Ministry’s practice of stopping releas e of further 
installments also is not a sufficient deterrent. In fact the Ministry had sought 
the advice of the Ministry of Finance on this vexed issue of pendency but that 

advice of Ministr y of Finance (Department of Expenditure ) is still awaited 
inspite of their following up. The Committee in their previous Reports on 
Demands for Grants for the years 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 exhorted that Ministry 
to pursue the liquidation of pending UCs with al l seriousness so that such 
huge backlog is cleared at the earliest. But nothing  tangible has happened. 
They are of the firm opinion that F iscal discipline is essential for 
implementation of Schemes as well as for accounting of precious public funds. 
They, therefore, desire the Ministry to take up the matter more forcefully with 
all concerned including the Ministry of Finance with a view to find out a lasting 
solution to this cronic problem. They desire to be apprised of the steps 
taken/progress made in this regard.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                Basudeb Acharia 
26 August, 2011                                 Chairman, 
4 Bhadrapada, 1933 (Saka)                                     Committee on Agriculture
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-I 
The Recruitment process prescribed for each post in NIFTEM  
 
  
S. No. Name of the Post No. of  
Sanctione
d Posts 
Method of Recruitment Method of Selection 
 Director 1 Direct Recruitment including on 
contract basis/ Deputation 
Through Search cum Selection Committee 
procedure 
 ACADEMIC POSTS    
1 Professor 5 Direct Recruitment/ Contract/ 
Deputation/ Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
2 Associate Professor 5 Direct Recruitment/ Contract/ 
Deputation/ Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
3 Assistant Professor 11 Direct Recruitment/ Contract/ 
Deputation/ Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
 NON-ACADEMIC     
1 Registrar 1 Contract/ On tenure (5 years) 
basis through open selection, 
failing which by Deputation/ 
Transfer. 
Selection through Search cum Selection 
Committee procedure. 
2 Assistant Registrar 
(Admin) 
1 Direct Recruitment, Deputation/ 
Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committee. 
3 Assistant Registrar 
(IT) 
1 Direct Recruitment, Deputation/ 
Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
4 Assistant Registrar 
(Exam) 
1 Direct Recruitment, Deputation/ 
Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
5 Deputy 
Controller(Finance 
& Accounts) 
(Deputation) 
1 Deputation only. 
 
Deputation 
6 Deputy Librarian 1 Direct Recruitment, Deputation/ 
Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
7 Assistant Librarian 1 Direct Recruitment, Deputation/ 
Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
8 Accounts Officer 1 Direct Recruitment, Deputation/ 
Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
9 Accountant 2 Direct Recruitment, Deputation/ 
Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
10 Junior Engineer 2 Direct Recruitment, Deputation/ 
Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 

 
  
11 Lab Incharge 2 Direct Recruitment, Deputation/ 
Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
12 Lab Technician 3 Direct Recruitment, Deputation/ 
Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
13 Executive Assistant 6 Direct Recruitment Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
14 Cashier 1 Direct Recruitment, Deputation/ 
Transfer 
Personal Interview before the Selection 
Committee after screening of applications 
through duly constituted Screening 
Committees. 
 Total 46   

ANNEXURE-II 
The details of recruitment process for each of the academic and non-academic posts 
started, post wise and the status of each case as on date 
  
S. 
No. 
Name of the Post No. of  
Sanctioned 
Posts 
Date of initiating the 
recruitment process 
Status as on date 
 Director 1 -- Search cum selection committee has been constituted. 
 ACADEMIC 
POSTS 
   
1 Professor 5 Recruitment advert 
published on 28th 
Aug‟2010 and 
subsequently on 30th 
Apr‟2011 
Due to inadequate response received against 1st advert, RRs 
amended to get the experience requirement on par with UGC 
prescription. Re-advertised on 30th Apr‟2011. Last date for receiving 
applications is 31st May‟2011. 
2 Associate 
Professor 
5 Recruitment advert 
published on 28th 
Aug‟2010 and 
subsequently on 30th 
Apr‟2011 
Selection of 2 candidates is made against 5 posts. 
Appointment letters dt. 21st Apr’2011, have been issued. 
Remaining 3 posts readvertised on 30th Apr‟2011. 
3 Assistant 
Professor 
11  Selection of 6 candidates is made against 11 posts. 
Appointment letters dt. 21st Apr’2011, have been issued. 
Remaining 5 posts re-advertised on 30th Apr‟2011. 
 NON-ACADEMIC     
1 Registrar 1  Search Cum Selection Committee is under constitution. 
2 Assistant 
Registrar (Admin) 
1 Recruitment advert 
published on 28th 
Aug‟2010 . 
Candidate selected. Appointment Letter Dt. 2nd May’2011 
issued. 
3 Assistant 
Registrar (IT) 
1 Recruitment advert 
published on 28th 
Aug‟2010. 
Candidate selected. Appointment Letter Dt. 2nd May’2011 
issued. 
4 Assistant 
Registrar (Exam) 
1 Recruitment advert 
published on 28th 
Aug‟2010. 
Due to inadequate response and screening having found only 1 
candidate eligible. RRs are being amended. 
 
5 Deputy Controller 
(Finance & 
Accounts) 
(Deputation) 
1 Recruitment advert 
published on 28 th 
Aug‟2010. 
The method of recruitment is by Deputation only. There is no 
response against recruitment advert. Dt. 28 th Aug‟2011. Post re -
advertised with no response .Letters sent to central accoun ting 
organizations for wide ly circulation of the post. Response is still 
awaited. 
 
6 Deputy Librarian 1 Recruitment advert 
published on 28 th 
Aug‟2010. 
Candidate selected. Appointment Letter under issue. 
7 Assistant 
Librarian 
1 Recruitment advert 
published on 28 th 
Aug‟2010. 
RRs have been amended and the post was re -advertised on 
11.3.2011 
Screening of applications is being done by the duly constituted 
committee. 
8 Accounts Officer 1 Recruitment advert 
published on 28 th 
Aug‟2010. 
Screening process completed and interviews will be held by the 
Selection Committee in the next 15-20 days. 
9 Accountant 2 Recruitment advert 
published on 28 th 
Aug‟2010. 
Candidates have been selected. Appointment Letters will be 
issued shortly. 

 
 
 
 
  
10 Junior Engineer 2 Recruitment advert 
published on 28 th 
Aug‟2010. 
Screening Process completed. Interviews will be held  shortly 
11 Lab Incharge 2 Recruitment advert 
published on 28 th 
Aug‟2010. 
Candidates have been selected. Appointment Letters will be 
issued shortly. 
12 Lab Technician 3 Recruitment advert 
published on 28 th 
Aug‟2010. 
Candidates have been selected. Appointment Letters will be 
issued shortly. 
13 Executive Assistant 6 Recruitment advert 
published on 28 th 
Aug‟2010. 
Screening process has been completed. Interviews will be held 
shortly. 
14 Cashier 1 Recruitment advert 
published on 28 th 
Aug‟2010. 
Candidates have been selected. Appointment Letter under 
issue. 
 Total 46   

 
APPENDIX-I 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 11th April, 2011 from 1100 hours to 1330 
hours in Room  „62‟, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi – In the Chair 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
    2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
    3. Shri Thangso Baite 
    4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
    5. Shri Anant Kumar Hedge 
    6. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
    7. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
    8. Shri Prabodh Panda 
    9. Shri Premdas 
    10. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
    11. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
12.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
13.  Shri Narendra Budania 
14.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
15.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
16.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
17.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Director 
3. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING 
INDUSTRIES 
 
  1. Shri Ashok Sinha  - Secretary 
  2. Shri Chaman Kumar - Additional Secretary 
        & Financial Advisor 
  3. Shri Ajit Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
  4. Dr. U. Venkateshwarlu -  Joint Secretary 
  5. Shri Amrit Lal Meena - Joint Secretary  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
  1. Shri Pranob Sen  - Principal Adviser 
  2. Dr(Mrs) Renu Singh Parmar- Adviser 
 
 At the outset, Joint Secretary, Lok Sabha Secretariat informed the Committee 
that due to unforeseen exigencies, it would not be possible for the Chairman to chair 
the Sitting. Therefore, the Committee chose Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi, MP (Rajya 
Sabha) to act as Chairman for the Sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. Thereafter, the Chairman 
welcomed the Members of the Committee and representatives of the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries and P lanning Commission to the Sitting. The Chairman 
then asked the witnesses to introduce themselves.  
  

2. The Committee then took the oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry and other witnesses for and in connection with examination of Demands for 
Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministry. The Secretary briefly highlighted the 
activities/achievements made by the Ministry during the ongoing Financial Year and 
the Plans of the Ministry for Annual Plan 2011 -12. The Chairman and Members of 
the Committee raised queries on several issues concerning the Demands for Grants. 
The witnesses replied thereto. 
 
3. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee 
on the subject. He also directed them to furnish replies to points on which information 
could not be provided by them during the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat by     
15 April, 2011.  
The Witnesses then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

APPENDIX-II 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 26 th August, 2011 from 0930 hours to 1000 
hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Premdas 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Uday Singh 
11. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
12. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
13. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
14. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
15. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
16. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
17. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
18. Shri S. Thangavelu 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of 
the Committee.  They, thereafter, took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration:-   
 
*(i) xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
*(ii) xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
*(iii) xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
 (iv) draft Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -2012) relating to the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports 
without any modification.  They also authorized the Chairman to finalise the above 
Draft Reports in the light of factual verification got done from the concerned 
Ministry/Department and present them to the Parliament.   
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
***** 
 
 
*Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 
 