 
 
 
1 
 
      
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND 
EDUCATION)  
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 (2011-12) 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2011 / BHADRAPADA, 1933 (Saka) 
23 

 
 
 
2 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
     (2010-2011) 
 
 
         (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 (2011-12) 
 
 
     Presented to Lok Sabha on            29.08.2011           
    Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on         29.08.2011 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2011 / BHADRAPADA, 1933 (Saka) 


 
 
 
3 
 
 
COA No. 246 
 
 
        
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
© 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in  Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE……………………………………………………………  (iii)       
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………….   (v) 
ABBREVIATIONS………………………………………………………    (vii) 
CHAPTER  I  IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S 
   RECOMMENDATIONS     1 
 
CHAPTER II ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS     3 
  (i) Introductory      3 
  (ii) Overview of Demands    5  
  (iii) Funds Utilisation during Eleventh Plan  6  
  (iv) Planning for Twelfth Five Year Plan   12 
  (v) Zero Based Budgeting    19 
CHAPTER  III ANALYSIS OF SECTORAL  PROGRAMMES  24 
  (I) New Scheme      24 
  (ii) Agriculture Education     26 
  (iii) National Agriculture Education Project  27 
  (iv) Central Agricultural University   29 
  (v) Agricultural Extension     30  
(vi) ICAR Headquarters     32 
(vii) Agriculture Engineering    34 
(viii) Animal Science     35 
(ix) Memorandum of Understandings   35 
     
ANNEXURES 
  I Sectoral break up of annual allocations during Eleventh Plan 46 
  II Research Agenda for Twelfth Plan.     47 
  III State/Union Territory-wise details of KVKs.    49 
  IV State/Union Territory-wise list of 78 KVKs proposed to be  
set up during Eleventh Plan.      54  
V Minutes of the 25th Sitting of the Committee held on  
18 April, 2011.        57  
VI Minute of the 39th Sitting of the Committee held on 
 26 August, 2011.       60   
  
(i)  

 
 
 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2010-2011) 
 
 Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
                           MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhary  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera  
23. Shri Narendra Budania 
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi  
25. Shri A. Elavarasan 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 
(iii) 
  

 
 
 
6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   - Joint Secretary 
 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Director 
 
3. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

 
 
 
7 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this   
Twenty-third Report on the Demands for Grants (2011-2012) of the Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research & Education). 
 
2. The Committee under Rule 331E (1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure 
considered t he Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the  Department of 
Agricultural Research & Education which were laid in Lok Sabha on 17 
March, 2011. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Department of Agricultural Research & Education, Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research and Planning Commission at their Sitti ng held on 18 
April, 2011. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of 
the Department of Agricultural Research & Education, ICAR and Planning 
Commission for  appearing before them and for furnishing the information 
they  desired in connection with the examination of Deman ds for Grants of 
the Department. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee  at their 
Sitting held on    26 August, 2011. 
 
4. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold at the end of each Chapter of the 
Report. 
 
 
         
      
NEW DELHI;               BASUDEB ACHARIA 
26  August, 2011                          Chairman, 
4 Bhadrapada, 1933 (Saka)                           Committee on Agriculture
 (v) 
 
 

 
 
 
8 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AU  Agriculture University 
 
AES  Agricultural Education Scheme 
 
ARS  Agriculture Research Service  
 
AICRP  All India Coordinated Research Project 
 
AKI  Agriculture  Knowledge Initiative 
 
BHU  Banaras Hindu University 
 
BE  Budget Estimate 
 
B&CM  Budget & Cash Management 
 
CAU  Central Agriculture University 
 
CCEA  Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
 
CGIAR  Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 
 
DARE  Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
 
DKMA  Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture  
 
DPR  Detailed Project Report 
 
DRWA  Directorate of Research on Women in Agriculture 
 
EFC  Expenditure Finance Committee 
 
GDP  Gross Domestic Product 
 
IAUA  Indian Agricultural University Associations 
 
ICAR  Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
 
IINRG  Indian Institute of Natural Resins and Gems 
 
ITC  Information & Communication Technology  
 
IRC  Institute Research Council 
 
IVRI  Indian Veterinary Research Institute 
 
KVK  Krishi Vigyan Kendra 
 
MCD  Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
 
MPKV  Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth 
 
(vii) 

 
 
 
9 
 
NAARM National Academy for Agriculture Research Management 
 
NAAS  National Academy of Agricultural Sciences 
 
NARS  National Agricultural Research System 
 
NDC  National Development Council 
 
NFBSRA National Fund for Basic & Strategic Research in Agriculture 
 
NIAB  National Institute of Agriculture Biotechnology 
 
NIASM  National Institute of Abiotic Stress Management 
 
NIBSM  National Institute of Biotic Stress Management 
 
NICRA  National Inictive for Climate Resilient in Agriculture 
 
RE  Revised Estimate 
 
SAU  State Agriculture University 
 
SDM  Subject Matter Divisions 
 
SFC  Standing Finance Committee 
 
ZBB  Zero Based Budgeting   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(viii) 
  

 
 
 
10 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The Eighth Report of the Committee on Agriculture on Demands for 
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural 
Research & Education) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 03 May, 2010. The Report contained 10 Observations / 
Recommendations. 
 
1.2 The Minister concerned is required to make Statement under 
Direction 73-A of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha about the status of 
implementation of Recommendation contained i n the Original Report of the 
Committee within six months of presentation of Report to the Parliament.  
However, a Statement under Direction 73 -A in the context of the Eight 
Report is yet to be made by the Minister of Agriculture.  The Minster of 
Agriculture had made the Statement under Direction 73 -A in the context of 
the Thirty-eight Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) more than 15 months after 
the presentation of the Report.  This inordinate delay in making the 
Statement under Direction 73 -A was adversely comme nted upon by the 
Committee in their Fourth Report.  The Department had also been advised 
not to repeat such lapses in future. 
 
1.3 On the basis of the Action Taken Notes  received from the 
Department of Agricultural Research & Education in respect of the Eighth 

 
 
 
11 
 
Report, the Committee presented their Nineteenth Report to the Lok Sabha 
on 24 March, 2011 .  The Report was laid on the T able of Rajya Sabha on 
25 March, 2011. The Committee commented on the Action Taken Notes 
furnished by the Department in respect of  Recommendations at             
Para Nos.1.14, 2.11, 2.12, 3.11 and 3.12 of the Fifth Report.  An analysis of 
the Action Taken Notes revealed that the Government have accepted 60% 
Recommendations of the Committee.  30% Recommendation s have not 
been accepte d by the Government th us requiring reiteration.  Replies in 
case of 10% Recommendations is of interim nature. 
 
1.4    The Committee are deeply pert urbed to note that the Minister 
of Agriculture is yet to make a Statement under Direction 73 -A of  
Direction by Speaker, Lok Sabha in the context of Eighth Report of the 
Committee.  The Statement which is to be mandatorily made within six 
months of the presentation of an Original Report to the Parliament has 
not been forthcoming even after more than fifteen mont hs have 
elapsed.  A similar delay in making of Statement under Direction 73 -A 
took place in the context of the Thirty -eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) and was adversely commented upon by the Committee in their 
Fourth Report.  The Committee take strong exception to the repeated 
failure of the Ministry to adhere to stipulations laid down in Direction 
73-A.  They also desire that the Statement may be made during the 
ongoing Session itself.  
  

 
 
 
12 
 
CHAPTER – II 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS 
 
(i) INTRODUCTORY  
 
The Department of Agricultural Research and Education  (DARE) 
provides government linkages to the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) - an apex and autonomous organization for planning, 
promotion, execution and coordination of agricultural research a nd 
education in the Country. DARE and ICAR also discharge other governance 
responsibilities like  coordination with  Central and State Government 
agencies and international matters relating to agricultural research and 
education.  
2.2 ICAR is an apex scientific organization at national level with very 
strong agricultural research system for planning, promotion, execution and 
coordination of agricultural research and education to meet emerging 
challenges in the Country.  ICAR has a wide network of Institutes s pread 
throughout the Country, has well -established and time -tested institutional 
linkages with the State Agricultural Universities and other Departments of 
the Central and State Governments.  ICAR is organized into eight Subject -
Matter Divisions (SMDs), wh ich are supported with a network of research 
Institutes/Schemes in their respective area of specialization, and have time -
tested institutional linkages with the State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) 

 
 
 
13 
 
and private organizations. In order to support this netw ork, there are a 
number of multidisciplinary centres called Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) for 
assessment, refinement and demonstration of frontline technologies and 
training of farmers and rural entrepreneurs. ICAR‟s vast network of Institutes 
spread all over the Country, include of 45 Research Institutes, 4 Deemed 
Universities, 6 National Bureaux, 17 National Research Centres, 25 Directorates/ 
Project Directorates, 61 All India Coordinated Research Projects and 17 Ne twork 
Projects. Besides, there are 4 6 State Agricultural Universities and one Central 
Agricultural University for Agricultural Research & Education and 5 89 KVKs in 
almost all districts of the Country for assessment, refinement and demonstration of 
technology/ products.  
2.3 ICAR is mandated with following responsibilities : 
 To plan, undertake, aid, promote and coordinate education, 
research and its application in agriculture, animal science, 
fisheries, agroforestry, home science and allied sciences. 
 
 To act  as a clearing -house for research and general 
information relating to agriculture, animal husbandry, fishery, 
agro-forestry, home science and allied sciences through its 
publications and information system and instituting and 
promoting transfer of technology programmes. 
 
 To provide, undertake and promote consultancy services in 
the field of research, education, training and dissemination of 
information in agriculture, animal science, fisheries, agro -
forestry, home science and other allied sciences. 
 
 To look  into the problems relating to broader areas of rural 
development concerning agriculture, including post -harvest 
technology by developing co-operative programmes with other 
organizations such as the Indian Council of Social Science 
Research, Council of Sci entific and Industrial Research, 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Universities, etc. 
 

 
 
 
14 
 
(ii) OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
 
 
2.4 Demand No.2 pertaining to the Department of Agricultural Research 
and Education for the year 201 1-12 was presented to the Lok Sabha on    
17 March, 2011. The details of allocations proposed in Demand No. 2 are 
as under :- 
DEMAND NO. 2 
(Rs. in crore) 
 
                                                                                                                 
 
 
 
 
* includes special grant of Rs. 8.54 crore for MPKV, Rahuri from out of the 
Social & Infrastructure Development Fund. 
 
 
It may be seen that a sum of Rs.  4966.14 crore has been allocated 
to the Department for 201 1-12. Out of this Rs. 2 808.54 crore is on the Plan 
side in the Revenue Section and the balance Rs. 2157.60 crore is on Non -
Plan side under the Revenue Section.   There are  no allocation s for the 
Capital Section in either Plan or Non-Plan side. 
 
 
 
 Plan Non Plan Total 
Revenue 
(Voted) 
2808.54* 2157.60 4966.14 
Revenue 
(Charged) 
00 00 00 
Capital 
(Voted) 
00 00 00 
Capital 
(Charged) 
00 00 00 
 
GRAND TOTAL 
 
4966.14 

 
 
 
15 
 
2.5 The details of Revised Estimates for the year 2010-11 and Budget 
Estimates for 2011-12 are given in the table below :- 
 (Rs. In crore) 
 RE 2010-11 BE 2011-12 
 
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
Revenue 2307.50* 2865.00 2808.54** 2157.60 
Capital 00 00 00 00 
 
* includes Rs. 7.50 crore ** includes Rs. 8.54 crore - as special grant of 
MPKV, Rahuri from out of the Social & Infrastructure Development Fund.  
 
 
2.6 It may be seen that there is a hike of 2 1.71% in the BE of 
Rs.2808.54 crore on the Plan side as compared to RE of 20 10-11.  
However, on the Non -Plan side in BE 201 1-12 there is a reduction of   
24.69 % over RE 20 10-11 with Rs.2157.60 crore being allocated this year 
against last year‟s RE of Rs.2865.00 crore. 
 
(iii)   FUNDS UTILISATION DURING ELEVENTH PLAN 
 
2.7 On the question of what allocation s have the Department been 
proposing year after year in the Eleventh Plan , the amounts actually 
released in the first four years of the Plan out of Rs. 12023.00 crore 
earmarked for the Eleventh Plan of DARE/ICAR and the actual expenditure 
against the funds thus released, the Department submitted the following 
information to the Committee:- 
         
                           

 
 
 
16 
 
         (Rs. in crore) 
Years Proposed BE RE Expenditure 
2007-08 1945.50 1620.00 1434.00 1317.19 
2008-09 2646.79 1760.00 1760.00 1652.61 
2009-10 4000.00 1760.00 1760.00 1711.00 
2010-11 4000.00 2300.00 2300.00 *1466.82 
2011-12 4534.44 2800.00   
Total 17126.73 10240.00 7254.00 6147.62 
 * till January, 2011 
 
2.8 During the year 2011 -12, the Department had proposed an amount 
of Rs. 4534.44 crore to the Planning Commission against which an amount 
of Rs.2800.00 crore has been allocated .  As stated previously d uring the 
Eleventh Plan a sum of Rs. 12,023.00 crore has be en allocated to the 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education.  
2.9 Out of Rs.  12,023 crore for the Eleventh Plan, only Rs. 7254  crore 
(first four year RE) plus Rs. 2800 crore (fifth year BE) totalling Rs. 10,054 
crore have been allocated so far.  The Department have been able to spend 
a sum of Rs. 6147.62 crore in the four years of the Plan .  Assuming they 
would be spending entire amount of Rs. 2800 crore earmarked for the 
terminal year of Plan, the Department still would be able to spend about  
Rs.8947.62 crore in the total Plan . The detailed break -up of annual 
allocation sought and actually made, sector-wise during the Eleventh Plan  
is indicated in Annexure-I. 
  

 
 
 
17 
 
2.10 It may be seen that the Department sought Rs.316.29 crore for 
Agricultural Extension in 2007 -08 and were allocated Rs.320.5 crore the ir 
against.  In the same year they were allocated Rs.361 crore against         
Rs. 28 9.51 crore sought by them for Agricult ural E ducation.  The 
Department also received a sum of Rs. 100 crore against Rs. 92.14 crore 
sought by them for Natural Resource Management in the year 2008 -09.  
Similarly, they were allocated Rs. 21 crore, Rs. 26.5 crore and 187.00 crore  
respectively for ICAR Headquarters against Rs. 16.8 crore , Rs. 18.1 crore 
and 186.64 sought by them during the year 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2011-12.    
They were allocated Rs. 454 crore against Rs. 240.04 crore sought by them 
for Crop Science and Rs. 176 cro re against Rs. 176.09 crore for NAIP 
during the current Fiscal.  It may further be seen that in no other case have 
the funds sought by the Department during the four years of Eleventh Plan 
were actually allocated to them for any of the Sectors. 
 
2.11 On th e question of the extent to which progress of each of these 
schemes/programmes suffered due to less allocation,  DARE in their written 
reply stated that d ue to lower availability of funds, inter -se prioritization 
within the schemes takes place, and this directly affects certain activities, 
some of the essential equipments and works which are very much required 
for initiating works on genomics, stem cell res earch, transgenics, carbon 
sequestration, biotechnology, nanotechnology, bioremediation , etc. could 
not be processed.  

 
 
 
18 
 
2.12 Illustratively, the various activities that would impact  various subject 
matter divisions are detailed as under: 
 Germplasm enhancement 
 Pace of development of cultivar in the time frame  
 Genomics work in potato and banana which has been initiated will be 
slowed  down.  
 Pace of genomic work in coconut, banana and cucurbits will be affected. 
 The pace of efforts on organic farming will also slow down.  
 Waste utilization through use of mushroom will continue but pace of             
achievement will be weakened.  
 Diagnostics for quick detection of viruses will be completed only in three            
crops.  
 Seed and planting material production system, priming etc. will get affected. 
 Cost effective drainage technology including bio drainage for saline and  
waterlogged lands 
 Agro-eco zone specific diversification of agriculture 
 Resource characterization and land use planning at district  and block levels 
of the country 
 Zoonotic diseases 
 Allele Mining for abiotic stress and development of molecular markers in  
ruminants  
 Environmental pollutants, toxicants and antibiotic residue affecting feed and 
product quality and safety  
 Nutraceuticals and functional foods 
 Designing of fuel efficient and resource specific crafts and gears 
 Reservoir fisheries  enhancement 
 Fish health management in open water and aquaculture systems 
 Prototype production and supply to different  farmers and other extension 
agencies  
 Pace of outreach programme and frontline demonstration activities in 
farmers fields at different location across the country will be affected. 
 Transfer of Technology for the adoption of fibre reinforced plastic silos and 
storage structure 
 Utilization of jute mill waste and its by products 
 Niche area of excellence is aimed at overall development in the specified 
area by exploiting the excellent human resources and local potential. 
Creation of additional centres @ 2 per university as approved  will be 
deferred to some extent. 
 Hands-on training is a critical component of skill development. Further 
additions to these units have to be deferred. 

 
 
 
19 
 
It was further stated that this has the effect of stretching the schemes 
over a longer period, which wou ld imply delay in outcomes expected from 
the schemes. 
 
2.13 The Committee specifically desired to know the particulars of the 
proposals under various schemes for which Planning Commission have not 
agreed to during the current Fiscal.    DARE informed the Committee that 
the Planning Commission did not specifically disagree with any proposal of 
the Department. 
2.14 During the Eleventh Plan, out of Central Plan Outlay of                  
Rs. 21 ,56,571 crore , the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education were allocated 12,023.00 crore which is 0.56% share of the total 
Central Plan Outlay. But after the BE 2011 -12, the total Outlay of DARE 
during Eleventh Plan has come down to Rs. 10 ,054 (RE 2007 -08 to 2010 -
11 Rs.7254 crore +BE 2011 -12 Rs.2800 crore) which is only 0.46% of the 
total Central Plan Outlay. 
 2.15 The Committee desired to know the reasons for decrease of total 
Plan Outlay of DARE during the Eleventh Plan and the steps taken  by the 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education to ensure allocation of 
1% of Agriculture GDP to the Department in tune with past recommendation 
of the Committee. The DARE in their written reply informed that the Ministry 
of Finance and the Plann ing Commission make allocations keeping in mind 
availability of funds and competing demands and requirements of other 

 
 
 
20 
 
ministries.  The y further informed the Committee that the Department 
completed the finalization of EFC/SFC of 71 ongoing schemes during th e 
year 2008 -09 and thereafter three new initiatives were envisaged. The 
Department requisitioned Rs. 4000 Crores at BE Stage during 2009 -10 and 
reiterated the same amount in 2010 -11. However, as against Rs.4000 
Crores, the Department were allocated Rs.1760 Crores in 2009 -10 and 
Rs.2300 Crores (Rs.2100 Crores + Rs.200 Crores for Climate Resilient 
Agriculture Initiative) in 2010 -11. In fact a note with regard to those items 
that are approved in Plan documents and not possible to be taken up or are 
being taken up at a low pace due to shortage of funds has been submitted 
to the Planning Commission. The Department could utilize much higher 
levels of funding than the funds envisaged for approved Plan activities. At 
every relevant forum and opport unity, the Department ha ve been pressing 
the need for higher allocation to research in agriculture.  
2.16 During Oral Evidence on 18 April, 2011 the Committee  drew the 
attention of the representative of Department of Agric ultural Research and 
Education to the recommendation of the Committee regarding allocation to 
1 % of Agriculture GDP for Research  and desired to know the steps taken 
by them for XII Plan in this direction , t he representative of Ministry of 
Agriculture (DARE) stated : 
“Indian Council of Agricultural Research provides funds to 
agricultural university for four projects. We have what is called as 
modernization of agricultural university farms. There is a separate 
head for that. Then we also look into the development grants.  Then 
we look at the specific areas called niche areas of excellence and 

 
 
 
21 
 
experiential learning units and so on. So, all these heads are 
continuing. The proposed outlay for 2011 -12 for the agricultural 
education division is of the order of Rs. 507 crore. Th ere is a 
provision of Rs. 507 crore in the budget out of which an amount of 
around Rs.450 crore is earmarked for universities. This is what we 
have proposed for the 2011 -12. We demand that one percent of 
agricultural GDP should be utilized for research. If  we work it out, it 
comes to half per cent. The amount we are getting now, is limited to 
half per cent only. That is why, we have been raising this point 
before the Planning Commission repeatedly. This time, when we 
approached Planning Commission on 15 th January, We submitted 
our proposal for the year 2011 -12 and our projection worked out to 
Rs. 4,000 crore. At the same time, the Planning Commission makes 
allocation keeping in mind the competing d emands of various other 
Ministries. Now it is about half a pe r cent. In the next Five Year Plan, 
when we will submit our proposal, we would like to keep it about one 
per cent of investment into research and education”. 
 
(iv) PLANNING FOR TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN 
 
2.17 The Department have stated as an advance exercise for finalizing 
requirements and projections for the Twelfth Plan in respect of various 
Divisions, the Council meetings have been undertaken to review the 
progress made till date, tasks completed, the activities still to be taken up, 
shortfalls and shortcomings and the projections for the Twelfth Plan in term 
of infrastructure development, research, programmes, manpower and funds 
requirements etc. 
 2.18   They further informed the Committee that Brain storming session 
involving all the Directors, Joint directors and Heads of the Regional Station 
were held to prioritize the research agenda for XII Plan. Subsequently 
meetings of the SMDs were held to identify theme areas to be addressed in 
a Network mode.   The major thrust areas indentified are list ed in 
Annexure-II. 

 
 
 
22 
 
2.19 The Committee were further informed that i n addition to the thrust 
areas, the Council aims at strengthening, integrating, broadening and 
diffusing knowledge base in the human dimension of agricultural sciences 
and natural resources. It aspires global pre -eminence of ICAR -AU system 
in agricultural education and agricultural leadership. The reputat ion of 
National Agricultural Research System will be upgraded through innovative 
schemes and promoting all round excellence in UG/PG and profess ional 
education to bring excellence in teaching, learning, discovery, application of 
knowledge, creative ability and engagement regarding current and 
emerging challenges of agriculture and allied sciences. The focus will be to 
promote an image of higher ag ricultural education and research by offering 
good financial support during studies, assured careers and continuous 
professional development. The hallmark of HRD programmes will be to 
attract young talents by offering additional opportunities for scholarsh ips / 
fellowships / internships and faculty and staff capacity building in the state 
of art of teaching and learning strategies to build a supportive base for the 
ambitious efforts of ICAR to revitalize curriculum and transform campus 
culture. The new prog rammes proposed during XII Plan include ICAR Post 
Doctoral Fellowships, Aspire Programme to attract young talents, ICAR UG 
& PG Scholarships/Fellowships, besides strengthening and broadening 
capacity building mechanism for faculty and teachers.   
 
 

 
 
 
23 
 
2.20 Emphasis will be given to improve the quality of higher agricultural 
education through making the accreditation process more objective based 
on quantifiable parameters; revision/modification in the curriculum and 
syllabi to make education comprehensive provi ding knowledge, skills and 
attitude thereby enhancing quality and acceptability of pass outs. Efforts 
will be put up on reducing inbreeding in faculty and students, and on faculty 
improvement to a great extent particularly in view of implementation of 
revised curriculum in agricultural universities. The scope of agricultural 
education will be widened to increase enrolment ratio. Performance 
assessment of universities, colleges and programmes will be linked with 
their performance to extend Central support. T he sub -scheme on 
Modernization of Agricultural University Farms, approved during XI Plan, 
will continue during XII Plan. Also, impact assessment of the various 
initiatives including reforms will be undertaken.   
 
2.21 The Council will also strive to contin ue its mandate and on -going 
activities of Agricultural Extension. As far as KVKs are concerned, a 
national level consultation on future strategies in agricultural extension had 
been organized, which was attended by experts and stakeholders from all 
over th e country. The outcome of the consultation is a number of 
suggestions pertaining to strengthening of the KVK system in terms of 
reorganization of eight Zonal Project Directorates and creation of additional 
infrastructure facilities like basic plant health diagnostics, soil and water 
testing, minimal agro -processing and demonstration units on integrated 

 
 
 
24 
 
farming system, portable carp hatchery and rain water harvesting, besides 
providing agro-advisory through mobile.   
 
2.22 The activities relating to the schemes of Directorate of Research on 
Women in Agriculture (DRWA) including AICRP on Home Science will 
continue to work on identifying gender issues, testing appropriateness of 
available farm technology and programmes with women perspective , 
drudgery reduction, empowerment of women, and capacity building of R&D 
to address gender issues. Likewise the Directorate of Knowledge 
Management in Agriculture (DKMA) will continue its activities on 
dissemination of research information / literature thr ough Print & Electronic 
Media. In addition, basic research as well as coordinated and network 
projects will also be partly implemented through the State Agricultural 
Universities. Location-specific problems will be addressed by the Institutes. 
Efforts will  be made to commercialize technologies for their large -scale 
application. Land use plan and soil fertility maps will be prepared and 
supplied to all the stakeholders. Greater exploitation of ICT would be 
attempted. Animal disease forecasting, monitoring an d surveillance 
modules would be developed and supplied to line departments. 
 
2.23 During the course examination of Demands for Grants of the 
previous years of the Eleventh Plan, the Committee had observed that in 
respect of most of the schemes, the first two to three years of the Plan were 
spent on planning and approvals, thereby leavin g precious little time for 

 
 
 
25 
 
their implementation proper.  Consequently, in almost all such cases, the 
implementation of the schemes has suffered immensely, leading to 
substantial cost and time overruns, staggering/curtailing of targets, etc.  
They desired to know the suggestions of the Department for improving the 
extant process of the planning and approvals for the Five Year Plan 
keeping in view the experience of Eleventh Plan so that more time is 
available for the implementation part of the scheme and ensure that the 
planning and approval stages of the Twelfth Plan are completed well before 
the commencement of the Plan in April, 2012 enabling the Department to 
utilise the Plan period of five years exclusively dedicated to implementation 
of the schemes.   
 
2.24 The Department informed the Committee that t he exercise has 
already been initiated for XII Plan preparation, keeping in view the strategic 
plan.   The Thrust Areas and Targets for the XII Plan have been identified.   
SFC/EFC Documents would be prepare d as soon as the allocations of XII 
Plan are intimated by the Planning Commission.  
2.25 The Committee then  desired to know the details of systemic 
improvements that have been initiated now when the Twelfth Five Year 
Plan is being worked out, the timelines  set for the various stages of 
drawing-up and finalisation and by when would the Twelfth Five Year Plan 
be conveyed in all its dimensions to the line Ministries/Dep artments for its 
implementation. The DARE informed the Committee that t he Planning 

 
 
 
26 
 
Commission has stated that a draft of the Approach Paper for the XII Plan 
(2012-17) has been presented in a meeting of the full Planning Commission 
chaired by the Prime Minister on 21 April, 2011. The issues highlighted in 
the Approach Paper are in the public domai n. After wider consultations with 
experts and various other stakeholders the Approach Paper will be placed 
before the National Development Council for its approval. Planning 
Commission has also constituted 11 Working Groups on various aspects of 
Agriculture & Allied Sector for formulation of Twelfth Five-Year Plan.  
 
2.26 These Working Groups, being represented by concerned 
Departments/ Ministries alongwith experts and other stakeholders, are as 
follows: 
(i)  Agricultural Extension in Agriculture & Allied Sector 
(ii)  Animal Husbandry & Dairying 
(iii)  Development and Management of Fisheries and Aquaculture 
(iv)Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure, Secondary Agriculture and 
Policy required for Internal and External Trade 
 
(v) Horticulture & Plantation Crops 
(vi) Management of Natural Resources & Rainfed Farming 
 (vii)Crop Husbandry, Agricultural Inputs, Demand and Supply 
Projections and Agricultural Statistics  

 
 
 
27 
 
 (viii)Outreach of Institutional Finance, Cooperatives and Risk 
Management  
(ix) Decentralized Planning in Agriculture 
(x) Disadvantaged Farmers including Women 
(xi) Agriculture Research & Education  
These Working Groups will recommend the policies to be followed in their 
respective areas and are expected to submit their reports by 30 September, 
2011. The Reports of the Working Groups will be considered by a Steering 
Committee whose report will form the basis for formulation of the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan. Thereafter, the XII  Plan will be placed internally by the 
Planning Commission before  its approva l by the National Development 
Council.   At present meeting of the NDC has not been scheduled. 
 
2.27 It was further clarified that i n the meantime, the Department will 
formulate proposals for the programmes/ schemes to be implemented 
during the Twelfth Pla n. Planning Commission has constituted a committee 
under Chairmanship of Shri B.K. Chaturvedi, Member to suggest ways to 
reduce the number of Centrally Sponsored Schemes. A smaller number of 
scheme with large amounts and broader objectives is expected to i nter-alia 
expedite sanctioning procedure by cutting down on the need for seeking 
approval for a number of schemes with small amounts.  From time to time , 
the Ministry of Finance ha ve been rationalizing the delegation scheme for 
undertaking investment programmes , so as to make the entire procedure 
more responsive. Such delegation  scheme has been revised last in April 
2010.  

 
 
 
28 
 
(v) ZERO BASED BUDGETING  
2.28 The Committee have been informed that the Planning Commission, 
at the commencement of the Eleventh Plan, had conducted a Zero Based 
Budgeting (ZBB) Exercise with a view to improve financial management. 
They had, thereafter, advised the Ministries/ Departments to finalise their 
Schemes accordingly.  However, since the ZBB Exercise of Planning 
Commission was a time consuming one, leading to delays in planning and 
approvals, the Committee had  recommended in their previous Reports that 
the Ministries/Departments sh ould themselves explore the possibility of 
conducting the ZBB Exercise and send the schemes, thus processed for 
approval of the Planning Commission to save time. 
2.29 When asked the details of the preparatory work undertaken by  
DARE for the Twelfth  Plan and what are the considered views of the 
Department on this aspect , the Department in their reply stated that s ince 
all schemes of ICAR are examined in the EFC/SFC at the beginning of 
each Plan period, a fundamental review of the scheme does take place, 
even if it is not called a ZBB exercise. Further, instructions are being issued 
to all concerned in ICAR and the EFC/ SFC cell of ICAR (PIM Division) that 
EFC/SFC notes for the XII Plan period must contain, at the beginning itself, 
a justification for continua tion of the scheme including points, in the nature 
of a ZBB exercise, and this will be strictly examined in the EFC/ SFC 
meeting. In this manner, the goal of carrying out ZBB will be substantially 
achieved. 

 
 
 
29 
 
ELEVENTH PLAN ALLOCATION 
2.30 The Committee note that the Working Group for the Eleventh 
Plan had proposed a sum of Rs. 37672 crore for Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education for the Eleventh Plan.  During 
the currency of the Plan.  T he Department have proposed on an year 
to year basis , allocations amounting to Rs. 17,12 7 crore (approx) to 
the Planning Commission .  Against this, the Planning Commission 
made an allocation of  Rs. 12023  crore.  However , on perusal of the 
budgetary documents furnished by DARE, the Committee observed 
that the actual releases by the Planning Commission are to the tune of          
Rs. 10054 crore only.  The Committee are unable to comprehend the 
frugal approach adopted by the Planning Commission while allocating 
funds to DARE whose fund utilization has always crossed 90% during 
the first four fiscals of the current Plan period.  The Department were 
also very candid in informing the Committee that scarcity of funds has 
negatively impacted all the Schemes being implemented by them by 
showing down the pace of completion.  What is further disconcerting 
to observe is that a Scientific Department is being subjected to severe 
insensitivity because of the severe apathy of all concerned.  DARE is 
not only mandated with developing scientific, are a specific and 
economically viable agricultural practises  but also the National 
Agriculture Research System (NARS)  which is responsible for 
ensuring the food security of the nation and the prosperity and well 

 
 
 
30 
 
being of the farmer.  T he Committee, inspite of sounding repetitive for 
the umpteenth time, urge the Government to mend their heaven may 
care attitude towards the Agriculture S ector and ensure that this 
sector is not starved of funds in future.  The Committee further 
recommend that for the ongoing Fiscal , DARE take up the issue of 
enhancement of funds at the highest level with the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Expenditure) for a quantum jump at RE stage to 
ensure that the total allocation earmarked for the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan and the actual allocation made are in sync with each other. 
ALLOCATION FOR AGRICULTURE RESEARCH 
 
2.31 The Committee are dismayed to find that i nspite of DARE and 
the Planning Commission having concurred with the recommendation 
of the Committee for allocation of 1% of Agriculture GDP for 
Agricultural Research, the allocations for DARE from the Central Plan 
Outlay for the duration of the Eleventh Five Year Plan has never ever 
been more than a fraction of it.  It  anguishes the Committee no end 
that the allocation for the c urrent Plan period is a mere 0.46 % of the 
Central Outlay.  The Committee strongly deprecate this sordid state of 
affairs which is endemic of the shortcomings plaguing the prevalent 
system of planning in the Country.  However, the Committee are pretty 
sanguine that if all concerned are committed to the task at hand, the 
same can be achieved from the next Five Year Plan.  The Committee, 

 
 
 
31 
 
therefore, exhort the Department as well as the Planning Commis sion 
to ensure allocation of 1% of Agriculture GDP  for Research right from 
the inaugural year of the Twelfth Five Year Plan and ensure that it 
remains constant. 
TWELFTH PLAN PLANNING 
2.32 During the Eleventh Plan the Committee observed that the first 
two to three years of the Plan were spent on obtaining approvals of 
various Schemes of the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education from various agencies , thereby leaving precious little time 
for their proper implementation. This has adm ittedly impacted 
negatively the implementation of the Schemes leading to substantial 
cost and time overrun s, staggering/curtailing of targets, reduced 
allocations, etc.  The Committee note that the advance exercise for 
finalizing requirements and projectio ns for the Twelfth Plan has been 
initiated by the Department of Agricultural Research and Education on 
the advice of the Planning Commission and t he major thrust areas 
have been identified.  A draft Approach Paper for the Twelfth Plan 
(2012-17) has been presented before the full Planning Commission 
and the issues highlighted in the Approach Paper are in the public 
domain.  The Committee desire the Department to initiate timely action 
for preparation of SFC/EFC Documents so that the experience of 
Eleventh Plan does not recur  in the Twelfth Plan and implementation 
of Twelfth Plan start s in time.   They further desire that the Planning 

 
 
 
32 
 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance and other agencies involved 
in according approval to a project reduce their time  frame s o as to 
ensure prompt implementation of Schemes and thereby avoiding 
staggering of timelines and increase viability of the Scheme.   Before 
concluding, the Committee would strongly recommend that the 
Planning Commission and the Government should ensure that  all 
formalities relating to the Twelfth Plan are completed well in advance 
so that the Plan is conveyed to the Ministries/Departments latest by 
December this year and they are able to start proper implementation 
of their Schemes from day one of the Twelfth Plan.  
 
  

 
 
 
33 
 
CHAPTER-III 
ANALYSIS OF SECTORAL PROGRAMMES 
 
(i) NEW SCHEMES  
 
The Committee desired to know the progress registered during 2010-
11 in regard to the new schemes viz. Indian Institute of Agriculture 
Biotechnology (IIAB) and National Institute of Biotic Stress Management  
(NIBSM).  DARE in their written reply stated that the EFC proposals in 
regard to the above -mentioned Schemes along with the Detailed Project 
Reports were circulated to the appraisal agencies on 25 September, 2009. 
The support of the proposals from all the concerned appraisal agencies was 
received on 17 June 2010. On the basis of the suggestions received from 
the appraisal agencies, the EFCs were modified and sent to the 
Department of Expenditure for conduct of EFC at their earliest convenience. 
The proposals for setting up new institutions need to be discussed by the 
EFC to be chaired by Secretary (Expenditure) followed by the approval of 
CCEA. The progress for implementation will be initiated by the Department 
only after the EFC consideration and approval by the competent authority. 
The schemes are yet to be considered and cleared by the competent 
authority. 
 

 
 
 
34 
 
3.2 They further stated that the original EFC proposals were formulated 
for Plan Expenditure of Rs.430.50 crores in respect of IIAB and Rs.145.50 
crores for NIBSM for a period of 3 years i.e.; from 2009 -10 to 2011 -12 
during the XI Plan. After receiving the comments from the appraisal 
agencies over the draft EFC proposal in respect of  the two Institutes , the 
costs wer e modified to Rs.417.80 crore and Rs.125.50 crore respectively 
for the last two years of the XI Plan (i.e; 2010 -12).  Based on the 
requirements projected in the EFC proposals, the Department projected the 
tentative outlay in the Annual Plan 2010 -11 for the se two new initiatives 
(viz; Rs.192.80 crore for IIAB and Rs.70.30 crore for NIBSM) with the 
assumption that these Schemes will be approved for implementation in that 
year (2010-11) but the same could not materialise. Hence, as on date no 
funds have been utilized during the year 2010-11.   
3.3 During the course of oral evidence the Committee desired to know 
the reasons for the approval of these schemes being withheld by the EFC 
and CCEA.  In response a representative of the Department stated: 
“It is difficult to say. We have already sent a note in this regard. But 
we fail to understand as to why EFC approval is not being given. We have 
sent several reminders even at Minister level but we do not know why EFC 
approval is not given. We faced a very embar rassing situation because on 
one hand, we had already made allocation for both the institutes but on the 
other hand, we could not get EFC approval. We diver ted the allocation and 
utilized it for other scheme so that we did not have to surrender the same. 
Thereafter, an objection was made that you have no funds, therefore EFC 
approval can not be given. We had submitted that since you had not given 
EFC approval, we have diverted the allocation provisionally. If we get EFC 
approval, we can meet the expenditure  by reducing money from other 
scheme next year. Inspite of that, we were not accorded EFC approval. We 
have taken this matter at the highest level but we have no answer to the 
question as to why EFC approval is not being accorded”. 

 
 
 
35 
 
Clarifying further the Secretary of the Department added:  
“I would like to submit one more related aspect.  These two 
schemes are the outcome of the Oversight Committee.  On the basis of the 
Constitution of the OBC Committee we have got the approval of these 
three Institutes .  O ne was the National Institute of Abiotic Management, 
with these two.  These are absolutely new schemes because of the report 
of this Committee”. 
 
(ii) AGRICULTURE EDUCATION 
 
3.4 When queried about the steps taken by the Department based on 
the recommendations contained in the Mid-term Appraisal conducted by the 
Planning Commission for improving the functioning of State Agriculture 
Universities by ensuring allocation of adequate funds and carrying out 
immediate institutional reforms, the represen tative of the De partment 
informed the Committee: 
“ICAR provide s assistance to Agriculture Universities in four 
projects. We have what is called as modernisation of agricultural 
university farms.  There is a separate head for that.  Then we also 
look into the development grants.  Then we look at the specific areas 
called niche areas of excellence and exp eriential leaning units and 
so on.  So, all these heads are continuing.  The proposed outlay for 
2011-12 for the agricultural education division is of the or der of 
Rs.507 crore. Out of the provision of Rs.507 crore a sum of Rs.450 
crore goes to Universities”. 
 
3.5 When further asked about the details of steps taken by DARE to get 
some amount of respectability and glamour back into agricultural education, 
the representative informed the Committee as under: 
 
“xx…xx…xxx bringing glamour into agriculture. That is what 
we are talking of. We have been talking about the kind of cut -off 
marks we have in admissions. Why are our students excited to join 
agriculture? Day before yesterday, I was in a Convocation of a 

 
 
 
36 
 
University. I asked all the students: “Are you proud to be an 
agricultural graduate?”  They said “Yes”. I asked: “  Are you more 
confident and happy to be an agriculturist than an engineer?  They 
said:  “yes”.  I asked: Are you feeling better than a medical doct or?”  
They said:  “Yes”.  I told them not to tell it simply because it is a 
Convocation congregation. I asked:  “Are you really proud? Are you 
happy that you are an agricultural graduate?”  As you said rightly, 
about 30 years back, people were proud to joi n agriculture for 
whatever reason. Today, I may be talking of the mobile technology. 
This is a sign of confidence, excitement. That excitement is not in 
agriculture. People are feeling it. People said for a while that there is 
not great science in agricult ure. In the last few years, we have 
revisited all the syllab i. You talk of remote sensing. We have it here. 
You talk of Nanotechnology. We have it in agriculture. You talk of 
biotechnology in a very big measure. It is in agriculture. So, we have 
been bringing all the new sciences into agriculture. xxx..xxx…xxx... 
We have been following the cut -off marks. For example, since the 
last three years, we monitor it. About five years back, the cut -off 
mark in agriculture was about 68 per cent. Last year, we closed it for 
veterinary science at 92 per cent and for general agriculture at about 
80-82 per cent.  So, there is a revival of interest. In fact, I tell about 
PPP: the first is profit for the farmer; the second is prestige to the 
farmer and then only the partner ship when all other things are 
secondary. Do our children feel excited in joining agriculture? This is 
the question. Agricultural research, education, teaching whatever it 
is, is it exciting? We are trying this as a major measure. I should 
submit these two  parameters to talk of us. ...xxx...xxx.....xxx..... We 
are trying to put agricultural education on the same pedestal. That is 
a sincere effort from our side to bring back that glamour and 
excitement to agriculture”. 
 
 
(iii) NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EDUCATION PROJECT 
3.6 The Department informed the Committee that they are formulating a 
National Agriculture Education Project with t he objective to achieve 
excellence, enhanced relevance, and high efficiency in the higher 
agricultural education system and the agricultural universities to offer 
enhanced services to benefit farmers, rural women and other stakeholders. 
The key initiatives being consid ered in the Project are initiating ASPIRE 

 
 
 
37 
 
(Agricultural Sciences Pursuit for Inspired Research Excellence) 
programme for attracting young talent to agricultural education, major 
reforms in governance for bringing efficiency in the system, embedding 
system for attracting and retaining talented faculty, continued emphasis on 
capacity building through quality improvement programmes nationally and 
internationally, development of Centers of Excellence, developing public - 
private partnership for curriculum delive ry and educational research, 
partnership with foreign universities for sandwich programme, development 
of joint projects with the scheme of post -doctoral fellowships, inviting 
international faculty for capacity building, performance linked support, 
development of priority setting monitoring and evaluation cells in the 
institutions, starting non-formal education with the objective of reaching the 
unreached for tapping the agricultural potential in disadvantaged regions, 
and the model extension outreach through ICT for technology dissemination 
for enhancing productivity in neglected regions.  
3.7  For preparation of draft proposal the Department held consultations 
with the stakeholders including industry/industry associations, successful 
entrepreneurs and the State Development Officers; persons having 
experience of governance such as selected Vice Chancellors  of agricultural 
universities (AUs), Secretary of Ministry of Human Resource Development, 
Secretary General of the Association of Indian Universities and IAUA, and 
representative from Central University (BHU); A consultation at UAS, 
Bangalore was graced by Dr. K. Kasturirangan, Member (Science), 

 
 
 
38 
 
Planning Commission, and participated by several past and present Vice 
Chancellors and Deans and Directors of the  AUs in Karnataka, Karnataka 
State Officials of the Department of Agriculture and Horticulture and several 
industry leaders.  In addition to  these, a National Consultation on Higher 
Agricultural Education was inaugurated by  Minister of State  in the Ministry 
of Agriculture participated by all Vice Chancellors of AUs and so me 
distinguished academicians.  Most suggestions of these consultation have 
been incorporated. The detailed draft proposal is being developed and, will 
be discuss ed with the Officials  of W orld Bank and the Planning 
Commission. 
(iv) CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES 
 
3.8 The Department informed the Committee that  the draft EFC for 
establishing Central Agricultural University (CAU), Barapani was prepared 
and circulated to the concerned  Ministries/Departments of Government  of 
India for comments on 20.01.2011. The comments of various appraisal 
agencies were received from (i) Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries; (ii) Department of Agriculture and Cooperation                   
(iii) Department of Expenditure; and (iv) Planning Commission.  Based on 
these, the revised EFC note is being prepared. 
3.9 The EFC of CAU, Bundelkhand was prepared and circulated to the 
various Ministries/ Departments for their comments on 31 Decem ber, 2009. 
Comments of the Department  of Agriculture & C ooperation; Department of 

 
 
 
39 
 
Animal Husband ry, Dairying & Fisheries; Department of Expenditu re of 
Ministry of Finance;  Department of Science & Technology; Department  of 
Biotechnology and the Planning Comm ission, have been received, and the 
EFC meeting was held under the chairpersonship of Secretary 
(Expenditure), Min. of Finance on 28  April, 2011. 
3.10 For CAU, Pusa, Bihar, the response was received from the 
Government of Bihar in 2010 on which the Planni ng Commission had 
sought some clarifications which have been furnished. Further consultations 
with the Government  of Bihar for working out modalities for transfer of 
manpower, infrastructure, facilities and liabilities including court cases and 
others are in progress. Thereafter, the EFC will be firmed up and circulated 
to the various Ministries/Departments for their comments.  
3.11 The Department further informed the Committee that for the year 
2011-12 sums of Rs. 30 Crore and Rs. 28 Crore respectively hav e been 
allocated to CAU, Bundelkhand and CAU, Barapani.   
(v) AGRICULTURE EXTENSION 
  
3.12 The Department had sought an allocation of Rs. 2300 crore for 
Agriculture Extension for the Eleventh Plan.  However, they could not utilise 
even half of the said amount. When queried to fur nish the reasons for 
proposing Rs. 2300 crore during the Eleventh Plan proposals for Agriculture 
Extension and  not being able to utilise  even the reduced allocation of 
Rs.1140.77 crore, the Department in their written submission stated that an 

 
 
 
40 
 
outlay of Rs. 2300 crores under Agriculture Extension was based on the 
EFC/CCEA approval of the KVK Scheme at Rs. 2051.98 crores.  This 
included provisions for new works, procurement of new equipments, 
furniture, vehicles and other infrastructure facilities, etc. under non-recurring 
head for which adequate funds have not been sanctio ned during the first 
four years. The allocation made during first four years of XI Plan in respect 
of Agricultural Extension consisting of Plan schemes - KVK, DRWA, AICRP 
on Home Science & DIPA was Rs. 1378.50 crores and the expenditure 
incurred thereon is Rs.1338.88 crores during the period.  Because of 
provision of inadequate funds during the Plan period, expenditure could not 
be more than what has been indicated as above .  SFC/EFC had approved 
Rs. 2102.74 crore for Agriculture Extension.  Rs.1140.76 crore has already 
been spent and BE for 2011 -12 is Rs. 432 crore, hence, anticipated 
expenditure in the Eleventh Plan is Rs. 1572.76 crore. 
3.13 When the Committee desired to know the effect of the reduced 
allocation of Rs. 332 crore on Plan schemes under Agricultural Extension, 
the Department in their Post Evidence reply stated that out of Rs 2102.74 
crore approved under XI Plan for Agricultural Extension Division,               
Rs. 1378.50 crore has been allocated during the first four years of XI Plan. 
During 2011-12 an amount of Rs 432 crore has been allocated as BE. Due 
to less allocation of funds , prioritization of activities and the infrastructure 
had to be made and accordingly infrastructural facilities like farmers‟ 
hostels, staff quarters, equipmen ts and demonstration units could not be 

 
 
 
41 
 
provided to certain KVKs. This, however, did not affect the mandated 
activities. 
3.14 In regard to information on Krishi Vigyan Kendras, the Committee 
were informed that t he Government have approved establishment of 667 
KVKs by the end of  Eleventh Plan.  The district-wise details of 589 KVKs 
that have been  established so far  and the remaining 78  KVKs  which are 
earmarked for completion during the Eleventh Five Year Plan are  given in 
Annexure-III and I V , respectively.  Out of 589 KVKs, 587 are operated by 
Agricultural Universities, ICAR institutes, NGOs; State Governments, Public 
Sector Undertakings and other Educational Institutions. Two KVKs including 
KVK in Vidisha district and a KVK in Khagaria district are not  operational at 
present due to legal and administrative reasons. During 2011-12 an amount 
of Rs 411.05 crores has been allocated for continuation and establishment 
of KVKs. It was further informed that 192 KVKs have been provided with    
e-connectivity. 
(vi) ICAR Head Quarters 
 
3.15 The Department assured the Committee that out of Rs.19.00 crore 
allocated under the Major Head ICAR Headquarters - Plan Head during 
2009-10 a sum of Rs.17 crore would be utilized and Rs. 2 crore will be 
reallocated within the ICAR.  When queried by the Committee about the 
reasons resulting in under utilization of funds during 2009 -10 despite the 
assurance of the Depart ment, the Committee were informed that under RE 

 
 
 
42 
 
2009-10 (Plan) a sum of Rs. 19 crore was allocated to ICAR Hqrs. 
However, Rs. 2 crore was re -appropriated for NAARM, Hyderabad to clear 
pending bills under Establishment Charges and TA (ARS Scientist P ay & 
Allowance, TA). The shortfall was mainly due to the reason that the 
construction of Auditorium planned for this year could not be started for 
want of clearance from MCD, Delhi Fire Service and Delhi Urban Art 
Commission, etc.  
3.16 The Committee further desired to be apprised about the action taken 
by Department for clearance of the project from MCD, DFS and DUAC. The 
Department in their written reply informed that the  layout plan of the 
proposed Auditorium was submitted to Town Planning Division of MCD on 
27 June, 2010.  The approval for the same was received on 17  February, 
2011.  Thereafter, it was submitted to Building S ection of MCD on 4 March, 
2011 for examination and also for seeking approval from DUAC and Delhi 
Fire Service.   Sustained efforts are on to get clearance by August, 2011.  
The original estimated cost of the project was Rs. 35.00 crores and the 
revised cost of the project is Rs. 101.9 0 crores, of which Rs. 66. 90 crores 
can be ascribed to additional items.   
 
 (vii)  AGRICULTURE ENGINEERING 
 
3.17 The Committee have been informed that under the Major Head 
Agriculture Engineering against the proposed outlay of Rs.262.20 crore for 
Eleventh Plan , SFC/EFC has approved Rs.274.03 crore. Actual 

 
 
 
43 
 
Expenditure under the Head in first 4 years is Rs.160.60 crore which is only 
58.58% of the total Allocation.  The Department  further informed that the 
increase of Rs. 11.83 crore occurred manly because the Indian Institute of 
Natural Resins and Gums (IINRG) was earlier devoted to R&D exclusively 
on lac. In view of changing scenario and national perspective, the mandate 
of the Institute was expanded in the XI Plan, with the approval of the ICAR 
Society in its 206th meeting on March 19, 2007. The mandate now includes 
processing, application development of plant s of the gums and resins 
produced in the Country, besides all aspects of lac it used to address 
earlier. The Indian Lac Research Institute was thus renamed as Indian 
Institute of Natur al Resins and Gums, w.e.f. September  20, 2007. The 
expansion of the mandate necessitated strengthening of the infrastructural 
and other research contingencies of Institute, which was taken into account 
while preparing the XI Plan SFC document. Accordingly, the approved XI 
Plan outlay of the Institute was Rs 11.30 crores.  It was a lso intimated that 
the utilization has been according to the actual allocation of funds, and on 
EFC/SFC approval.  
 
(viii) ANIMAL SCIENCE 
 
3.18 The Department have informed that against the proposed outlay for 
the Major Head Animal Science of Rs.1074.99 cr ore for Eleventh Plan , 
SFC/EFC had approved Rs.920.83 crore. The initial proposed allocation for 
XI Plan was inclusive of two sub -projects viz. Bufflao Seed Project and 

 
 
 
44 
 
Goat Seed Project which was not approved. Also, the EFCs of some of the 
institutes like PDFMD. PD ADMAS were reduced at the discussion stage. 
Hence, the initial proposal was reduced to Rs. 920.83 crore. 
3.19 It was further informed that Animal Science Division has received an 
amount of  Rs.374.69 crore in the first 4 years of the Plan, which works out 
to 40.68% of the approved EFC outlay i.e. Rs.920.83 crore. The utilization 
for the first 4 years against the RE allocation (Rs.374.69 crore) has been 
Rs.349.56 crore which amounts to 97.04% upto 31 March 2011. Hence, the 
Animal Science Division has almost fully utilized the actual funds allocated. 
During the y ear 2011 -12 Rs.165.30 crores have  been allocated. The 
expenditure will be ensured as per RE. 
(ix) Memorandum of Understandings 
 
 3.20 For cooperation in Agricultural Research and Education Sector, the 
ICAR have signed MoUs with the Kansas State University, USA, the 
National Institute of Research on Forestry, Agriculture and Livestock of the 
United Mexico States, Memico, the Board of Trustee of the Univ ersity of 
Illinois, Urbana -Champaign, US A and with the Fishing and Aquaculture 
Development Centre of Republic of El Salvador.  The work plans for 
implementation of the activities identified by the subject matter Division 
under the aforesaid MoUs are being worked out. 
 3.21 The Department further  informed that the MoUs signed with various 
countries/Organizations will help in promoting cooperation in the field of 

 
 
 
45 
 
agricultural research and training through visits or exchange of scientists 
and technicians, exchange of genetic resources, scientific li terature, 
information, methodology and also exchange of scientific equipment.  
NEW SCHEMES 
 
3.22 The ills besetting the extant system of according 
clearance/approvals to a Scheme by the various agencies involved 
which the Committee have highlighted unequivocally on numerous 
occasions in their earlier report seems to be falling o n deaf ears, as is 
evident in the extant case.  The New Schemes of the Department, 
namely, National Institute of Agriculture Biotechnology and National 
Institute of Biotic Str ess Management have been held up since the 
inception of the Eleventh Five Year Plan till date while the Plan itself is 
in its terminal stage.  Though the Committee are well aware that 
majority of the New Schemes have staggered timelines for their 
implementation, this procrastination of the Government , however, in 
these two cases is totally bewildering.  The Committee empathize with 
DARE on this issue as for no fault of their s they are facing the wrong 
end of the stick.  The Committee strongly deprecate this  sordid state 
of affairs and call for a complete overhaul of the extant system of 
planning when the Planning Commission and the Government sit 
together to sort out the modalities for the soon to be implemented 
Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The Committee exhort the Department to play 

 
 
 
46 
 
a pro -active role in this matter and take up this issue with all 
concerned at the highest level to ensure that all New Schemes are 
accorded clearances by all concerned in good time, thereby ensuring 
timely implementation , timely revi ew and ultimately achieving its 
assigned target in the next Plan period.  As regard the two Schemes in 
question, the Committee desire that a time bound schedule of 
implementation be worked out by DARE and presented to them within 
three months of presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
ATTRACTING TALENT TOWARDS AGRICULTURE SECTOR 
3.23 The Committee express their happiness over the fact that the 
Department of Agriculture Research and Education have at last 
realised the need for making element of agriculture an attractive 
profession.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that in order to 
break the now prevailing stereo-typed image of the agriculture sector 
and to attract the youth of the Country towards it, agriculture has to 
be made a viable and lucrative vocation in all aspects . Towards this 
end, the slew of measures being taken by DARE is indeed laudable as 
they have embarked upon incorporation of the latest scientific and 
technology development in agriculture, like Nanotechnology, 
biotechnology, remote sensing in the syllab i, of Agricultural 
Universities.  This has resulted in interest being rekindled amongst 
the youth to take up Agriculture as a subject at graduate and post -
graduate levels.  In the considered opinion of the Committee , this will 

 
 
 
47 
 
ultimately result in young agriculture graduates taking to agriculture 
in a big way and chang ing the overall face of Indian Agriculture by 
putting their the oretical knowledge into practice  in a scientific and                       
well planned m anner guided by  their youthful zeal.  However, the 
Committee caution the Department not to sit on their laurels and 
continue to work on this aspect as in their opinion this is a continuous 
process and thus requiring constant updates keeping in view the 
latest technological a nd scientific advancements taking place 
worldwide. 
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EDUCATION PROJECT 
 
3.24 The Committee note that to achieve excellence, enhanced 
relevance, and high efficiency in higher agricultural education system, 
and the agricultural universities to offer enhanced services to benefit 
farmers, rural women and other stakeholders, the Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education are trying to formulate the 
National Agriculture Education Project (NAEP).  Under this Project it is 
proposed to attract young talent to agricultural education sector, 
major reforms in governance for bringing efficiency in the system, 
embedding system for attracting and retaining talented faculty 
continued emphasis on capacity building through quality 
improvement programmes nationally and internationally, development 
of Centres of Excellence, developing public -private partnership for 

 
 
 
48 
 
curriculum delivery and educational research, partnership with foreign 
universities for sandwich programme s, inviting internation al faculty 
for capacity building , etc.  In addition to these , there is a proposal to 
start non-formal education with the objective of reaching the untapped 
sections  for tapping agricultural potential in disadvantaged regions.  
The Committee appreciate that the Department have consulted a large 
number of stakeholders, experts, scientists, industries and their 
associations etc. and incorporated their valuable suggestion s in the 
National Agriculture Education Project. 
 The Committee however fail to comprehend the reasons stalling 
the implementation of the said project when the Department have 
already finalized all modalities.  Keeping in view the potential 
importance of this Project, the y desire the Department to get the 
approval for NAEP expedited in a stipulated time  frame thereby 
clearing the decks for implementation of a project of vital importance 
without any further delay. 
CENTRAL AGRICULTURE UNIVERSITY 
3.25 The Committee have been informed that the comments from 
various agencies on the proposal for  Expenditure Finance Committee 
for setting up of Central Agriculture University, Barapani were 
received and a revised note for EFC has been prepared.  In regard to 
Central Agriculture University, Pusa, Bihar , the Planning Commission 
had sought some clarifi cations on the proposal received from the 

 
 
 
49 
 
Government of Bihar.  The modalities for transfer of manpower, 
infrastructure, etc. are in progress.  Once all these issues are settled 
the EFC note will be firmed up and circulated for comments to various 
agencies.  In case of CAU, Bundelkhand the EFC note was circulated 
way back in 3 1 December, 2009 and the EFC meeting has been held 
almost one and a half year later on 28 April, 2011. In the mean time, a 
provision of Rs. 30 crore for CAU Bundelkhand and Rs. 28 cror e for 
CAU Barapani has been made for 2011-12.  The Committee take 
umbrage at the tardy progress made in regard to setting up of Central 
Agriculture University, Barapani and CAU, Pusa, Bihar.  In the 
considered opinion of the Committee, the Central Agricult ural 
University at these places would be a much needed interface with the 
agriculture sector and allied activities in these States and act as a fillip 
for a holistic development of agriculture in th ese areas and therefore 
its timely sanction and implementa tion needs to be accorded highest 
priority by the Government.  They, therefore, recommend the 
Department to take up this issue in right earnest with the concerned 
agencies to ensure timely approval for setting up of CAU at Barapani, 
Pusa and Bundelkhand from EFC and CCEA and thereby avoid further 
staggering of timelines. 
AGRICULTURE  EXTENSION 
3.26 The Committee note that Agriculture Extension consists of Plan 
Schemes -  KVK, DRWA, AICRP on Home Science and DIPA for which 

 
 
 
50 
 
an outlay of Rs. 2102.74 was earmarked for the Eleven th Plan.  Out of 
the earmarked o utlay Rs. 1378.50 crore has already been allocated 
during the first four years of Eleventh Plan and BE for 2011 -12 is      
Rs. 432 crore.  The Department ha ve been able to spend Rs. 1 140.76 
crore in f irst four years and with Rs. 432 crore as anticipated 
expenditure in the current Fiscal the total spending will reach to       
Rs. 1 572.76 crore.  The Committee are not at all convinced with the 
plea of the  Department that due to less allocation of funds 
prioritization of activities and the infrastructure had to be made and 
accordingly infrastructural facilities like farmers’ hostels, staff 
quarters, equipments and demonstration units could not be provided 
in certain KVKs which did not affect the mandated activities.  The 
Committee find it inexplicable that if such shortcomings in certain 
KVKs did not /do not  affect the mandated activities the n why the 
Department have made provisions for such activities in the KVKs in 
the Country.  They, therefore, recommend  the Department to rework 
on their priorities in the KVKs and strengthen the system so that 
funds allocated for the Scheme can be fully utilized in future.   Since 
KVKs are the bulwark of agriculture extension network in the Country, 
the Committee also desi re the Department to work out reasonable 
fund requirements for them in the Twelfth Plan and make all out 
efforts to get them approved from the Planning Commission. 
 

 
 
 
51 
 
ICAR HQ 
 
3.27 The Committee note that the Department have failed to fulfil 
their assurance regarding utilisation of allocation under the Major 
Head ICAR Headq uarter Plan Head during 2009 -10.  The Committee 
found that the construction of Auditorium planned for could not be 
started for want of clearance s from MCD, Delhi Fire Service and Delhi 
Urban Art Commission , etc.  The  Department have submitted Layou t 
Plan to Town Planning Division of MCD on 27 June, 2010 and approval 
was received on 17 February, 2011.  Thereafter, it was submitted to 
Building Section of MCD on 4 March 2011 for examination and  also 
seeking approval from Delhi Urban Art Commission and Delhi Fire 
Service.  In the meantime, this dilly dallying has led to the revised cost 
getting escalated from Rs. 35 crore to Rs. 101. 90 crore, of which       
Rs. 66. 90 crore is ascribed to addition al items.  The Committee are 
surprised to note that the Department allocated Rs. 2 crore for 
construction of Auditorium during 2009 -10 when the basic 
requirements viz. Layou t Plan, Building  Plan, etc. for construction 
were not completed.  While expressing their disapproval of such 
practices t hey desire the Department to strengthen their internal 
planning mechanism so that the cases of non -utilisation are avoided 
in future.  They also desire the Department to expedite the clearan ce 
of the project from variou s local civic a uthorities, so that the further 

 
 
 
52 
 
cost escalation of the project can be avoided and it can finally see the 
light of the day. 
AGRICULTURE ENGINEERING 
3.28 Under the Major Head Agriculture Engineering the Outlay for 
Eleventh Plan was Rs. 262.20 crore.  SFC/EFC  approved an amount of 
Rs. 274.03 crore. Rupees 11.83 crore was taken into account while 
preparing the Eleventh Plan SFC/EFC document for the Indian 
Institute of Natural Resins and Gunis (INRG) to stre ngthen the 
infrastructure and other research contingencies of Institute.  The 
Committee found that the Department ha ve not been able to utilize 
their original outlay of Rs. 262.20 crore under the H ead.  They further 
find that during the current Five Year P lan the Department will be able 
to utilise Rs. 176.33 crore (first four years RE plus Fifth Year BE           
Rs. 67.40  crore totalling to Rs. 243.73  crore) thereby resulting in 
underutilisation of more than Rs. 30 crore under the H ead.  The 
Committee in t heir Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) 
had already recommended the Department to ensure that both the 
cost and timelines of the Schemes under this H ead are not staggered.  
The Committee deprecate this sordid state of a ffairs and impress 
upon th e Department to review the reasons leading to under-
utilization of allocated funds and  Plan their fund utilisation in a more 
even spread and proper manner so that under -utilization of  precious 
funds can be avoided in future. 

 
 
 
53 
 
ANIMAL SCIENCE 
3.29 The Committee observe that out of the earmarked outlay of     
Rs. 920.83 crore which was approved by SFC/EFC for animal sciences, 
the Department have been able to utilize only  Rs. 374.69 crore during 
the first four Years of the Plan, which in percent age terms amounts to 
a mere  40.7% of the approved amount during the period .  Now in the 
last year of the current Plan, a provision of Rs. 165.30  crore, which is 
17.95% of the EF C/SFC has been allocated as BE .   Even if the 
Department were able to utilize the  entire BE amount, the total 
utilization during the current Plan period would be only Rs. 540 crore, 
which in percentage terms would amounts to 58.64% of the  Outlay. 
This particular Scheme is a poor reflection on the overall utilization of 
DARE which is otherwise in the range of 90% and above.  The 
consistent under performance of the Animal Science Sector does 
diminish the overall gloss of a high performance Department like 
DARE as here the blame falls squarely on their shoulders.  The 
Committee, therefore,  desire DARE to  put their house in order and 
improve the implementation of Schemes under the Animal Science 
Sector so as to ensure optimum utilization of allocated funds and thus 
escape the chopping scissors of Ministry of Finance at RE stage.  
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDINGS 
3.30 The Committee note that the Indian Council of Agriculture 
Research have signed Memorandum of Understandings  with 

 
 
 
54 
 
institutions in USA, Mexico and El. Salvador  for c ooperation in 
Agricultural Research and Education Sector and the work plans for 
implementation of the activities by the Divisions concerned with these 
Memoranda are being worked out.  The Committee desire the 
Department to expedite the finalisation of work plan for 
implementation of all activities under these MoUs with purposefulness 
and due promptitude, so that the objective of promoting co -operation 
in the field of agriculture research and training, exchange of scientists 
and technicians, exchange of genetic resources, scientific literature, 
information methodology can be s uccessfully carried out, thereby 
forging a symbiotic relationship between t he signatories to the MoUs 
and en riching the Indian Agriculture Sector and vice-versa.  They 
desire to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                         BASUDEB ACHARIA 
26 August, 2011                             Chairman                      
04 Bhadrapada, 1933 (Saka)                  Committee on Agriculture
  

 
 
 
55 
 
Annexure-I 
'Sector-wise Breakup of Annual Allocation During Eleventh Plan   
Sector                                                                                           Year (Rs. Crores)     
  2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12             XI Plan   
            Ear-marked Actual 
  Sought Actual  
 
Sought Actual  
 
Sought Actual   Sought Actual  Sought BE Outlay including 
                  
 
    BE 2011-12 
Crop Science 341.55 240.5 410.93 303.5 510 304 420.11 366 240.04 454 1900 1668 
Horticulture 148.7 75.6 130.75 90 260 98 257.26 124 193 184.2 761 571.8 
Natural 
Resource 
Management 98.06 89.1 92.14 100 230 102 210.63 123.03 274 200.1 730 614.23 
Engineering 46.63 40 115.94 42 100 43 103.51 52.63 77.22 67.4 300 245.03 
Animal Science 149.52 80 288.92 90 337 92 341.45 112.68 342.02 165.3 1075 539.98 
Fisheries 47.14 40 98.5 45 150 45 125.44 65 100 65 400 260 
Economics, 
Statistics & 
Management 4.51 4 7.54 4 8 3 8.6 3 8 3 22 17 
Agril. Extension 316.29 320.5 538.17 315 800 328 749.84 415 1066.49 432 2100 1810.5 
Agril. Education 289.51 361 491.4 380 900 372 953.84 462 670.00 507 2585 2082 
ICAR Head 
Quarter 16.8 21 18.1 26.5 90 17 38.75 17.9 186.64 187 100 269.4 
CAU + DARE 157.04 56.5 169.07 91 150 70.5 150.5 81 198.80 109 560 408 
NAIP 286.75 85.7 257.32 257 400 277.23 293.97 270 176.09 176 1090 1065.93 
AKI 25 5.9 6 6 15 4 6 0 
 
0 50 15.9 
NFBSRA 18 14.2 22 10 50 4.27 7 7.76 60 20 100 56.23 
NICRA             0 200 150 150   350 
NIBSM             70   114.55 20   20 
IIAB             192.8   357.30 30   30 
CAU, 
Bundelkhand                 318.29 30   30 
 Bioinformatics              70.3   
 
      
Pipeline                 
 
  250   
Total 1945.5 1434 2646.78 1760 4000 1760 4000 2300 4534.44 2800 12023 10054 

 
 
 
56 
 
Annexure-II 
 
Research Agenda for Twelfth Plan 
 
The major thrust areas identified are listed as follows: 
 Genetic resource enhancement, its evaluation and valuation for 
effective use to meet the challenges of biotic and abiotic stresses 
besides yield quality and nutritional value. 
 Development of cultivars which can fit into achieving vertical growth 
and can sustain the impact of climate change and also to meet the 
consumers‟ requirement. 
 Utilise the tools of bio -informatics for c ollation, retrieval analysis and 
use of biological information and decision making process and to 
achieve maximum output. 
 Development of suitable rootstock for mitigating the problem of biotic 
and abiotic stresses besides enhancing yield and quality. 
 Developing efficient system for management of nutrient and water to 
get maximum production of water and nutrient. 
 Developing a model for plant architectural engineering and its 
management to harness maximum solar energy for its conversion to 
products. 
 Develop t he system of management to make problem of biotic 
stresses to reduce production losses by developing diagnostics 
forecasting models, bio -control system and effective management 
strategies. 
 Develop a system for protecting cultivation to have maximum output 
from reduce land through development of cultivars and technologies 
suitable for protected cultivation.  
 Suitable strengthening of research in specific areas such as 
biotechnology, biosensor, bioremediation, bio -security, bio -
prospection and nanotechnology etc. 
 Development of precision equipment for higher input use efficiencies 
in production agriculture 
 Use of proven designs of solar/biomass based dryers in commodity 
institutes for various agricultural, horticultural and fish products  
 Bio-methanation of agro-waste and dairy/processing plant affluent and 
use of biogas for power generation/thermal applications 
 Non-thermal processing and preservation techniques for major fruits 
and vegetables 
 Novel products development from good grains using fermentation 
technology.  
 Network on Acid Soil Management to develop, refine and demonstrate 
technologies for reclamation of acid soils 

 
 
 
57 
 
 Network on Coastal Ecosystem Research for rehabilitation of fragile 
coastal ecosystems of the country. 
 Enhancing water productivity throug h IWM, multiple use, 
bioremediation etc. through Efficient water harvesting, storage and 
utilization, location specific enterprises for income and livelihood 
generation, waste water treatment for safe agricultural use. 
 Conservation agriculture by upscaling  of RCTs like conservation/zero 
tillage, bed planting, ridge & furrow, laser levelling, precision farming 
for efficient resource use and carbon sequestration in different agro 
ecological regions of the country. 
 Network on Abiotic Stress Management by evolv ing technologies and 
breeding protocols for mitigating abiotic stresses in agriculture, 
particularly w.r. to drought, heat, salinity, acidity, water -logging, heat & 
cold waves etc. 
 Climate resilient agriculture to develop and popularize climate resilient 
technologies in vulnerable parts of the country. 
 Short and medium range weather forecasting for different agro 
advisories services.  
 Post harvest management of perishables, tribal area horticultural 
research and Diagnostics of Viruses.  
 Assessment of fishery resources for formulating strategies for 
sustainable exploitation and advisories for its management. 
 Research support for species & system diversification of culture 
practices for sustainable, eco -friendly and techno -economically viable 
hatchery & culture technologies for different eco-systems. 
 Standardization of management protocols for production improvement 
from inland open water systems through culture based fisheries, pen 
& cage culture technologies and species enhancement. 
 Impact assessment of  climate change on fisheries & aquaculture, 
adaptation and mitigation measures.  
 Updating database on fish biodiversity through collection, 
characterization, classification, cataloguing and utilization of fish 
genetic resources of the country. 
 Designing an d improvisation of resources specific craft & gear for 
responsible, diversified and conservation fishing. 
 Develop technologies for fish processing and product development, 
quality control, hygiene and fish food safety protocols, waste utilization 
and by products from un-conventional fish species. 
 Human resource development, capacity building and skill upgradation 
in the specialized disciplines of fisheries and aquaculture and related 
subject areas to support the sector. 
 
  

 
 
 
58 
 
Annexure-III 
State/Union Territory-wise details of KVKs 
 
S. 
NO. 
State/Union 
Territory 
Number 
of KVKs 
Name of districts with KVK 
1. 
Andaman and 
Nicobar 
Islands 
2 Port Blair, Nicobar 
2. 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
30 Ananthpur, West Godavari, Warangal, 
Shrikakulam, Vizianagaram, Kadapa , 
Krishna, Nellore, Adilabad, Prakasham, 
Khammam, Nizamabad, East Godavari, 
Ranga Reddy, Mahaboobnagar, Nalgonda, 
Chittoor, Karimnagar, Kurnool, 
Visakhapatnam, Medak, Guntur, Ananthpur 
(2), Kurnool (2), Mahboob nagar (2), East 
Godavari (2), Nalgonda (2), W arangal (2), 
West Godavari (2), Karim nagar (2) 
3. 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
12 West Siang, West Kameng, Tirap, Lower 
Dibang Valley, Lower Subansiri, Papumpare, 
Upper Siang, East Kameng, Tawang, Lohit, 
Upper Subansiri, East Siang 
4. 
Assam 
21 Sonitpur, Cachar, Golaghat, Kokrajhar, 
Sibsagar, Nalbari, Barpeta, Bongaigaon, 
Karbi Anglong, Kamrup, North Lakhimpur, 
Nagaon,Tinsukia, Karimganj, Dhubri, 
Dhemaji, Dibrugarh, Darrang, Jorhat 
Goalpara 
5. 
Bihar 
38 Shankarpur, Darbhanga, Vaishali, Begusarai, 
Saharsa, Nalanda , Banka, Patna, 
Sheikhpura, Muzaffarpur, Madhepura, 
Bhagalpur, Rohtas, Araria, Purnea, Katihar, 
Samastipur, Siwan, West Champaran , 
Jahanabad, Saran, Supaul, Gaya, Sheohar, 
Aurangabad, Lakhisarai, East Champaran, 
Kishanganj, Gopalganj, Buxar, Bhojpur, 
Nawadah, Kaimur, Jamui, Madhubani, 
Khagaria, Sitamarhi  

 
 
 
59 
 
6. 
Chhattisgarh 
16 Bilaspur, Surguja, Durg, Bastar, Raipur, 
Janjgir-Champa, Raigarh, Dhamtari, 
Mahasamund, Dantewada, Korba, Jashpur, 
Kanker, Kavardha, Korea, Rajnandgaon 
7. 
Delhi 
1 Ujwa, New Delhi 
8. 
Goa 
2 North Goa, South Goa 
9. 
Gujarat 
26 Banaskantha, Sabarkantha, Dahod, Anand, 
Ahemedabad, Dang, Surat, Navsari, 
Narmada, Amreli, Rajkot, Jamnagar, 
Porbandar, Surendranagar, Gandhinagar, 
Valsad, Kheda, Panchmahal, Mehsana, 
Bharuch, Vadodara, Patan, Kuchchh, 
Kuchchh (2), Bhavnagar, Junagadh 
10 
Haryana 
18 Panipat, Kaithal, Jind, Hisar, Kurukshetra, 
Faridabad, Yamunanagar, Sonipat, Rohtak, 
Sirsa, Mahendergarh, Fatehabad, Jhajjar, 
Bhiwani, Karnal, Gurgaon, Ambala, Rewari 
11. 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
12 Kullu, Una, Mandi, Sirmaur, Hamirpur, 
Kangra, Lahaul & Spiti, Bilaspur, Kinnaur, 
Chamba, Shimla, Solan 
12. 
Jammu and 
Kashmir 
14 Jammu, Rajouri, Doda, Udhampur, Poonch, 
Leh, Pulwama, Srinagar, Budgam, Kargil, 
Baramulla, Kupwara, Anantnag, Kathua 
13. 
Jharkhand 
22 West Singhbhum, Dumka, Palamau, Pakur, 
Lohardanga, Giridih, Bokaro, East 
Singhbhum, Sahibganj,Chatra, Garwah, 
Dhanbad, Simdega, Latehar, Jamtara, 
Koderma, Deoghar, Ranchi, Hazaribagh, 
Gumla, Godda, 
14. 
Karnataka 
28 Raichur, Haveri, Bidar, Dharwad, Koppal , 
Gulbarga, Bijapur, Uttara Kannada, Bagalkot, 
Hassan, Mandya, Shimoga, Tumkur, Udupi, 
Chitradurga, Chikkamagalur, Dakshina 
Kannada, Chamrajanagar, Kolar, Bangalore 
Rural, Kodagu, Mysore, Belgaum, Gadag, 

 
 
 
60 
 
Davanagere, Ramanagram, Tumkur, 
Dakshin Kannada 
15. 
Kerala 
14 Palghat, Kollam, Wynad, Kottayam, Kannur, 
Malappuram, Thrissur, Kasaragode, 
Alleppey, Ernakulam, Kozhikode (Calicut), 
Thiruvananthapuram, Idukki, Pathanamthitta 
16. 
Lakshadweep 
1 Kiltab Island Lakshadweep 
17. 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
47 Chhindwara, Jhabua, Sidhi, Shahdol, 
Khandwa, Tikamgarh, Seoni, Bhind, Rajgarh, 
Guna, Balaghat, Betul, Panna, Dhar, Dindori, 
Gwalior, Rewa, Hoshangabad, Morena, 
Sagar, Khargone, Shajapur,, Ujjain, 
Mandsaur, Jabalpur, Harda, Damoh, 
Narsinghpur, Dewas, Padaria, Chatarpur , 
Shivpuri, Neemuch, Mandla, Badwani, 
Umaria, Sheopur, Datia, Bhopal, Ratlam, 
Vidisha, Satna, Indore, Sehore, Raisen, 
Burhanpur, Ashoknagar  
18. 
Maharashtra 
39 Wardha, Bhandara, Chandrapur, Yavatmal, 
Gondia, Godchiroli, Aurangabad, 
Osmanabad, Ratnagiri, R aigarh, Dhule, 
Nagpur, Nashik, Parbhani, Kolhapur, 
Buldana(1), Amaravathi(1), Amaravathi (2), 
Nanded,  Solapur, Washim, Sindhudurg, 
Thane, Jalgaon, Beed(1), Satara, Pune, 
Ahmednagar, Sangli, Jalna, Hingoli, 
Nandurbar, Latur, Pune (2), Jalgaon, Akola, 
Satara (2), Beed (2), Buldana (2) 
19. 
Manipur 
9 Imphal West, Churachandpur, Tamenglong, 
Chandel, Senapati, Bishnupur, Imphal East, 
Thoubal, Ukhrul 
20. 
Meghalaya 
5 West Garo Hills, Ri -bhoi, Jaintia Hills, East 
Khasi Hills, West Khasi Hills 
21. 
Mizoram 
8 Lunglei, Kolasib, Chimtuipui, Lawngtlai, 
Mammit, Champhai, Serchhip, Aizwal 

 
 
 
61 
 
22. 
Nagaland 
8 Dimapur, Medziphema, Wokha, 
Mokokchung, Kohima, Tuensang, Mon, 
Zunheboto 
23. 
Orissa 
30 Koraput, Kendrapara, Keonjhar, Balasore, 
Gnajam, Bargarh, Kandhamal ( Phulbani), 
Kalahandi, Jaipur, Dhenkanal, Angul, 
Bhadrak, Nabarangpur, Sundergarh, 
Sundergarh, Nayagarh, Sambalpur, 
Jagatsinghpur, Gajapati, Rayagada, 
Nuapada, Boudh, Mayurbhanj, Sonepur, 
Malkangiri, Deogargh, Jharsuguda, Puri, 
Cuttack, Khurda 
24. 
Pondicherry 
2 Karaikal, Pondicherry 
25. 
Punjab 
17 Faridkot, Gurdaspur, Ferosepur,  Bathinda, 
Hoshiarpur, Patiala, Kapurthala, Sangrur, 
Nawanshahar, Roopnagar, Ludhiana, 
Amritsar, Muktsar, Fatehgargh Sahib, Moga, 
Jalandhar, Mansa 
26. 
Rajasthan 
32 Dausa, Jhunjhunu , Bikaner, Sawai 
Madhopur, Ajmer, Dhoulpur, Sikar, Jalore, 
Alwar, Bharatpur, Jaisalmer, Nagaur, 
Sriganganagar, Karauli, Dungarpur, 
Banswara, Baran, Sirohi, Chittorgarh, Kota, 
Bundi, Jhalawar, Rajsamand, Bhilwara, 
Jodhpur, Pali, Tonk, Jaipur, Udaipur, Churu , 
Barmer, Hanumangarh  
27. 
Sikkim 
4 East Sikkim, North Sikkim, West Sikkim, 
South Sikkim 
28. 
Tamil Nadu 
30 Salem, Cuddalore Virdhachalam, 
Trichirappali, Perambalur, Pudukottai, 
Ramanathapuram, Kanyakumari, Madurai, 
Villupuram, Vellore, Thiruvallur, Tiruvarur, 
Nagapattinam, Virudhunagar, Dharmapuri, 
Kancheepuram, Shivagangai, Namakkal, 
Dindigul, Coimbatore, Theni, Nilgiris, 
Tiruvannamalai, Tirunelveli, Krishnagiri, 

 
 
 
62 
 
 
 
Thanjavur, Tuticorin, Karur, Ariyalur 
29. 
Tripura 
4 West Tripura, South Tripura, Dhala i, North 
Tripura 
30. 
Uttar Pradesh 
67 Sahajahanpur,  Bijnor,  Saharanpur,  
Badaun,  Ghaziabad,  Rampur,  
Muzaffarnagar,  Meerut,  Pilibhit,  Baghpat,  
Moradabad,  Gautam Budha Nagar,  
Bahraich,  Ballia,  Mau,  Varanasi,  Basti,  
Faizabad,  Gorakhpur,  Maharajganj,  
Sonbhadra,  Siddharth Nagar,  Azamgarh,  
Barabanki,  Jaunpur,  Chandauli,  Balrampur, 
Sant Kabir Nagar, Mathura,  Jhansi,  Rai 
Bareli,  Fatehpur,  Aligarh,  Kanpur (Dehat),  
Mainpuri,  Mahoba,  Etawah,  Kannauj,  
Firozabad,  Hamirpur,  Jalaun ,  Lakhimpur 
Kheri,  Lalitpur,  Farrukhabad,  Hardoi,  
Lucknow,  Bareilly,  Kushinagar,  Etah,  Agra,  
Allahabad, Sant Ravidas Nagar,  Mirzapur ,    
Bulandshahar ,   Sultanpur,  Gonda ,   
Chitrakoot,  Unnao,  Pratapgarh,  Gazipur,  
Sidhauli,  Kaushambi, Au raiya, Deoria, 
Mahamayanagar, Banda,  
31. 
Uttarakhand 
13 Champavat, Tehri Garhwal, Nainital, 
Chamoli, Haridwar, Almora, Pauri Garhwal, 
Rudra Prayag, Udhamsingh Nagar, 
Pithoragarh, Dehradun, Uttarakanshi, 
Bageshwar 
32. 
West Bengal 
17 Darjeeling, Coochbehar, Malda, Dakshin 
Dinajpur, Uttar Dinajpur, Howrah, Hoogly, 
Jalpaiguri, Nadia, North 24 Parganas, 
Murshidabad, South 24 Parganas, West 
Midnapur, Purulia, Burdhman, Birbhum, 
Bankura 
 
Total  
589  

 
 
 
63 
 
Annexure-IV 
State/Union Territory-wise list of  78 KVKs proposed to be  set up during 
XI  plan 
S.No. State/ 
Union 
Territory 
KVK to be 
established in 
recently 
created 
District 
Additional 
KVK to be 
established 
in the  district 
KVK in the 
Districts 
approved in 
X Plan & to 
be 
established 
during XI 
Plan 
Total 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands 
North and 
Middle 
Andaman 
(Mayabunder) 
(1) 
- - 1 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 
-  Guntur, 
Prakasam,   
Chittoor , 
Krishna, (4) 
- 4 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Anjaw (1) - Dibang 
Valley, 
Kurung 
Kumey, 
Chaglang (3) 
4 
4 Assam Baska, 
Chirang, 
Udalguri (3) 
- North 
Cachar, 
Morigaon (2) 
5 
5 Chhattisgarh Narayanapur, 
Bijapur (2) 
Raipur, 
Sarguja (2) 
- 4 
6 Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
- - Silvasa (1) 1 
7 Daman & 
Diu 
- - Daman, Diu 
(2) 
2 

 
 
 
64 
 
8 Gujarat Tapi (1) Banaskantha, 
Rajkot (2) 
- 3 
9 Haryana Mewat, (1) - Panchkula 
(1) 
2 
10 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Reasai, 
Samba, 
Ramban, 
Kishtwar, 
Gandarbal, 
Kulgam, 
Bandipora, 
Shopian (8) 
Leh (1) - 9 
11 Jharkhand Ramgarh, Kuti 
(2) 
- - 2 
12 Karnataka Chikkaballapur 
(1) 
Gulbarga, 
Belgaum (2) 
- 3 
13 Madhaya 
Pradesh 
- - Anuppur(1) 1 
14 Maharashtra - Ahmednagar, 
Solapur, 
Nashik, 
Yavatmal, 
Nanded, 
Aurangabad 
(6) 
- 6 
15 Meghalaya - - South Garo 
Hills, East 
Garo Hills 
(2) 
2 
16 Nagaland Pareen, 
Kaiphire, 
Laongleng (3) 
- - 3 
17 Odisha - Mayurbhanj, 
Ganjam, 
- 3 

 
 
 
65 
 
Sundergarh 
(3)  
18 Puducherry - - Mahe, 
Yanam (2) 
2 
19 Punjab Tarantaran, 
Barnala, Mohali 
(3) 
- - 3 
20 Rajasthan Pratapgarh (1) Barmer, 
Nagpur, 
Bikaner, 
Jodhpur, 
Churu, Jaipur, 
Jaisalmer, 
Alwar, 
Hanumangarh 
(9) 
- 10 
21 Uttar 
Pradesh 
- Allahabad, 
Sitapur (2) 
Shravasti, 
Jyotiba 
Phule Nagar 
(2) 
4 
22 West Bengal - South 24 
Parganas, 
Murshidabad, 
Bardhaman 
(3) 
East 
Midnapor (1) 
4 
  Total          27                 34               17 78 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
66 
 
Annexure-V 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 18 April, 2011 from 1100 hours 
to 1345 hours in Room  No. „62‟, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi   -     In the Chair 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
5. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
8. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
9. Shri Uday Singh 
10. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
   
RAJYA  SABHA 
11. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
12. Shri Narendra Budania 
13. Shri A. Elavarsan 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 

 
 
 
67 
 
15. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
16. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri P.C. Koul   - Additional Director 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
1. Dr. S. Ayyappan  Secretary, DARE & DG, ICAR 
2. Shri Rajiv Mehrishi  Additional Secretary (DARE) &  
     Secretary (ICAR) 
3. Shri Chaman Kumar Addl Secy & FA  
4. Dr. H.P Singh DDG (Horticulture) 
5. Dr. A.K. Singh, Deputy Director General (NRM) 
6. Dr. S. K. Datta     Deputy Director General (CS) 
7. Dr  M.M. Pandey     Deputy Director General (Engg.) 
8. Dr. K.D. Kokate      Deputy Director General (Ext.) 
           9. Dr. Arvind Kumar   Deputy Director General 
(Education) 
10. Dr. Bangali Baboo        National Director (NAIP) 
 
PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
 Shri V.V. Sadamate, Adviser (Agriculture) 
 

 
 
 
68 
 
2. At the outset, Joint Secretar y, Lok Sabha Secretariat informed the 
Committee that due to unforeseen exigencies, it would not be possible for 
the Chairman to chair the Sitting. Therefore, the Committee chose          
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi,  MP (Rajya Sabha) to act as Chairman for the 
Sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Members 
of the Committee and representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) and Planning 
Commission to the Sitting.  
 
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Committee took the 
evidence of the representatives of Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Department. The 
Secretary briefly highlighted the activities / ach ievements made by the 
Department during the preceeding Financial Year. 
 
4. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised queries on 
several issues concerning the Demands for Grants of the ongoing fiscal. 
The representatives of the Department replied thereto. 
 
5. The Chairman, thereafter thanked the witnesses for appearing 
before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired 
by them.  He also directed them to furnish information on points on which 
the representatives of the Departme nt could not clarify during the Sitting, to 
the Committee Secretariat by  25 April, 2011. 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
 
 
69 
 
ANNEXURE–VI 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 26th August, 2011 from 0930 hours 
to 1000 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe,           
New Delhi.  
          PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Premdas 
9. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
10. Shri Uday Singh 
11. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
12. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
13. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
14. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
15. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
16. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
17. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
18. Shri S. Thangavelu 

 
 
 
70 
 
SECRETARIAT 
                                    1. Shri Deepak Mahna - Joint Secretary 
 
                                    2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
 
                                    3. Shri P.C. Koul - Additional Director 
 
                                    4.  Shri C. Vanlalruata - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the 
Sitting of the Committee.  They, thereafter, took up the following draft 
Reports for consideration:-   
*(i) xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx 
 
(ii) draft Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -2012) relating  to 
the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research 
and Education); 
*(iii) xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx 
 *(iv) xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx 
   
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft 
Reports without any modification.  They also authorized the Chairman to 
finalise the above Draft Reports in the light of factual verification got done 
from the concerned Ministry/Department an d present them to the 
Parliament.   
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
***** 
 
*Matter not related to this Report.  