 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-2014) 
                 
        
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                              
 
 
                                 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
              
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-ninth Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2013-2014)} 
 
 
          
  FIFTY-FIFTH  REPORT 
  
 
 
         
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana,1935 (Saka) 
55 

~ 2 ~ 
 
  
  FIFTY-FIFTH  REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-ninth Report 
of the Committee on Agriculture (2013-2014) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   09-12-2013 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  09-12-2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana,1935 (Saka) 
 
 

~ 3 ~ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COA No.  278 
 
 
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
            
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
© 2013 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by 
 
 

~ 4 ~ 
 
 
 
 
 CONTENTS PAGE 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (ii) 
 INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I Report 1  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government       24  
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  47  
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  48 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  54  
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee held on 11 
November, 2013. 56 
 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
 
Analysis of action taken by Government on the Forty -ninth 
Report of Com mittee on Agriculture on D emands for Grants 
(2013-14) pertaining to Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
 
 58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 

~ 5 ~ 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2013-14) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.   Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas  Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Kachhadia Naranbhai  
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri N. Balaganga 
23.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
30.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 
(iii)

~ 6 ~ 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (201 3-2014) having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fifty-fifth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Re commendations contained in the Forty-
ninth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (201 2-13) on Demands for Grants (201 3-14) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries.  
 
2.  The Forty-ninth Report of the Committee was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 April, 201 3. The Action Taken Replies on the Report were 
received from the Government on 8 July, 2013.  
 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 11 
November, 2013.  
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-ninth Report of the Committee is given in 
Annexure.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                              BASUDEB ACHARIA 
03 Decemebr, 2013                                                                Chairman, 
12 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                             Committee on Agriculture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 

~ 7 ~ 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-ninth Report of 
the Committee on Agriculture (2013-14) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries which was presented to Lok Sabha on 30 April, 2013 and laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
1.2 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries  have furnished Action Taken Replies in 
respect of all the 24 Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report. These have 
been categorized as under: 
 Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Recommendation Para Nos. 1.4, 2.42, 2.43, 2.45, 2.46, 2.47, 2.48, 2.49, 2.50, 
        2.51, 2.53, 2.54, 2.55, 3.46, 3.48, 3.51 3.52, 
       3.53 and 3.54           
 
      Total = 19 
 Chapter =   II 
 
 Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:  
 
Recommendation Para No.  Nil 
 
      Total =  00 
  Chapter =  III 
 
 
Observations / Recommendations in respect of which action take n replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Recommendation Para No.: 2.44, 3.47, 3.49 and 3.50 
 
      Total =  04 
  Chapter =  IV 
 
 Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
 
Recommendation Para Nos. 2.52  
 
      Total =  01 
  Chapter =   V 

~ 8 ~ 
 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation 
of the observations/recommendations accepted by the Government.  In cases, where 
it is not possible for the Department to implement the recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation.  The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on the 
Comments contained in Chap ter-I of this Report  and final  reply in respect of 
recommendation for which only interim reply has been given should  be furnished to 
them at an early date. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR  
 
(Recommendation No. 2.42) 
 
1.5 The Committee note d that the importance of food processing sector is second to 
none since it contributes as much as 9 -10% of GDP in agriculture, provide employment to  
16.75 lakh persons and infuse capital investment to the tune of Rs. 249,337 crore in the 
registered processing industry.  
 
1.6 The Committee were distressed to note that inspite of potential high value addition to 
the economy, the role of the sector has not been understood in the right perspective both by 
the Government and the planners. The Committee were of the view that unless drastic and 
radical steps are taken, the dream of India becoming global leader in the food processing 
and export of safe, hygien ic nutritious and quality processed food items, would remain a 
distant dream. The Committee, while exhorting upon the Government to overcome these 

~ 9 ~ 
 
deficiencies, recommended the Ministry to enhance their ability to successfully implement 
major Schemes, so a s to improve utilization of allocated funds substantially. This would 
facilitate the Ministry to play a meaningful role not only for the food processing sector but 
also to the agriculture sector as a whole.  
 
1.7 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries in their Action Taken Reply have stated 
that Government ha s been implementing a number of schemes for the promotion of food 
processing industry with a view to increase the level of processing, reduce wastage, 
increase income of farmers and address the food  security issues. These include 
infrastructure development (with components, Mega Food Parks, Integrated Cold Chain 
Projects and Modernization/Setting up of Abattoirs; Technology Upgradation/ 
Establishment/ Modernisation of food processing industries); Qua lity Assurance, Codex 
Standards, R&D, Establishment of Food Testing Laboratories & other promotional activities; 
Human Resource Development; Strengthening of Institutions for promotion & development 
of the food processing sector in the country.  With a vie w to give further thrust to the sector, 
Government have launched a new Centrally Sponsored Scheme –National Mission on Food 
Processing (NMFP) on 01.04.2012 for implementation by the State/UT Governments. 
 
1.8 The scheme provides for the establishment of a N ational Mission as well as 
corresponding Missions at the State and District level for implementation of the scheme.  
The various components under the scheme currently being implemented relate to (i) 
Technology Up-gradation/ Establishment/ Modernisation of Food Processing Industries; (ii) 
Setting up Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure for Non -Horticultural 
Products; (iii) Modernisation of Abattoirs; (iv) Human Resource Development; and (v) 
Promotional Activities. NMFP is implemented wi th financial contribution of Government of 

~ 10 ~ 
 
India and States/ UTs in the ratio of 75:25, except for North - Eastern States, where the ratio 
is 90:10. Further, in UTs administered by Government of India, it is funded 100% by 
Government of India. 
 
1.9 An amoun t of Rs 184.69 crore was released under the scheme to the State/ UT 
governments during 2012 -13. Allocation under the scheme for 2013 -14 is Rs 187.00 crore. 
The scheme will provide flexibility to State/ UT government to address the local needs and 
priority to develop the sector. The implementation of the scheme is being monitored by the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries on a regular basis.   
 
1.10 During Eleventh five year Plan, out of a total allocation of Rs 1880 crores for different 
schemes of Minist ry of Food Processing Industries, the Ministry utilized Rs 1596.88 crore 
representing 84.94% of allocated funds. The utilization of funds has increased substantially 
i.e. 99.6% during 2012-13 as indicated in the Table given below:  
 
11th Plan 
 
[Rs. in Crore] 
Years BE Actual Expenditure Expenditure as a % of BE 
2007-08 250.00 182.97 73.19 
2008-09 290.00 223.14 76.94 
2009-10 340.00 277.53 81.63 
2010-11 400.00 394.40 98.60 
2011-12 600.00 518.84 86.47 
Total 1880.00 1596.88 84.94 
12th Plan 
  2012-13 660.00 657.58 99.6 
 
 
 1.11 The Committee would like the Ministry of Food Processing Industries to ensure 
that the implementation of the newly launched Centrally Sponsored Scheme achieves 
the stated objective s and desire that they be  apprised of the progress in 
implementation. 
 

~ 11 ~ 
 
Delay in Finalisation of 12th Plan 
(Recommendation No. 2.44)  
 
1.12 The Committee had strongly disapproved the protracted delay in the finalization of 
the Twelfth Plan and did not find any justification in according approval to Schemes in a 
piecemeal manner by EFC / SFC, when the Plan and the schemes are yet to be approved 
formally. The Committee were of the view that such action on the part of the Ministry strikes 
at the very root of the planning process and threatens the sanctity of pl anning itself. The 
Committee wonder ed whether the instant rules / regulations permit ted such unwarranted 
action on the part of the Ministries concerned and the Planning Commission. The 
Committee would like d to be apprised thereof.    The Committee were info rmed that all the 
major projects under Industry Division of Planning Commission and food processing sector, 
a component of Industry Division, were in time, except, projects of food processing sector. 
The Committee failed to understand this exception and step-motherly treatment accorded to 
schemes of Food Processing Sector. The Committee viewed the neglect of food processing 
sector, by the Planning Commission seriously and desired that the sector should be 
accorded importance, as it warranted.  
 
1.13 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated that the approvals to the various 
schemes were given by the various EFC/SFC so that the Ministry would implement the 
schemes during the first year of the XII five year plan, i.e. 2012 -13 and there was no hurdle  
in the implementation of the schemes. The approvals to the schemes were obtained by the 
Ministry in accordance with the procedure laid down by the Government of India for this 
purpose. The schemes up to the allocation of less than Rs. 300 crores were appr oved by 
the EFC chaired by Secretary of administrative Ministry/Department. The schemes with an 
allocation of Rs. 300 crores and more were approved by the CCEA based on the 

~ 12 ~ 
 
recommendations of the EFC which was chaired by the Secretary (Expenditure), Minist ry of 
Finance. MoFPI had also obtained approval of the competent authority as per the procedure 
laid down.  
  
1.14 In the context of possible implications of time taken in finalisation of Plan document 
on implementation of schemes/ projects under industry sector, suitable measures were 
taken in consultation with the respective Ministries/ Departments. Such measures included 
according administrative approval for seeding/ initial actions in cases of new „big ticket 
projects‟, getting performance evaluation st udies carried out as per guidelines of 
Department of expenditure, Ministry of Finance, in cases of existing schemes slated for 
continuation in the 12 th Plan, facilitating „interim approval‟ by the competent authorities for 
limited period implementation in cases of schemes/ projects having multiplier effects and/ or 
objectives to address externalities etc. The said approach was adopted in case of schemes 
of M/o Food Processing Industries (MFPI) as well.   
 
1.15 It is not clear from the reply whether the 12 th Plan proposals for Food 
Processing Sector have since been approved or not.  The reply of the Government is 
not acceptable to the Committee.  De lay in finalization of 12 th Plan would affect the 
implementation of various schemes.  The Committee view  seriously the neglect of 
food processing sector  and reiterate their earlier recommendation that the sector 
should be accorded importance, as it deserves.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

~ 13 ~ 
 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS DURING ELEVENTH PLAN PERIOD AND  
FINANCIAL ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION DURING FIRST YEAR OF THE TWELFTH 
PLAN  
 
(Recommendation No. 2.46 & 2.47) 
 
1.16 The Committee observe d that the Plan outlay vis-a-vis BE stage fluctuated widely 
especially in the fiscal s 2008 -09, 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 as there was stark mismatch 
between BE & RE, for the years 2008-09, 2009-10. The Committee noted that their constant 
pleas to rectify the imbalances ha d gone unheard during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. As 
the sector provided a mechanism to bring together farmers, processors and retailers, l inking 
agriculture production to market so as to improve livelihood in rural sector, the Committee 
emphasised that all the agencies concerned i.e. the Planning Commission and Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Expenditure) would approach allocation of the Ministry on a new 
platform, taking into consideration the growth potential, especially critical rural infrastructure.  
The Committee also observed that the inability to utilize the reduced allocation in its entirety 
during the course of the Eleventh Plan, would awake the Ministry and they would now take 
proactive steps to ensure optimal utilisation of funds to the hilt in the coming fiscal.  
 
1.17 The Committee also noted the huge variations between the funds sought by the 
Ministry and the actual allocation made by the Planning Commission. The Committee urged 
all the agencies concerned to ensure that things turnaround in the next Fiscal and variation 
between proposals, allocation and utilization is negated to the extent possible.  
 
1.18 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries in their Action Taken Reply have stated 
that due to various constraints, prominent among them being the constraint in availability of 
resources and the need to meet the funding requirements of flagship schemes of the 

~ 14 ~ 
 
Government in the  health, education and social sectors, fund allocations to the various 
Departments/ Ministries were to be done after careful deliberations based on available 
information regarding performance of various schemes/ programmes/ projects of these 
Ministries/ De partments. However, the need for additional funds for implementing various 
programmes and projects were considered by M/o Finance at the Revised Estimate (RE) 
stage depending on their financial and physical progress.  However, Planning Commission 
has taken note of valuable suggestions made by the Committee in this regard. 
 
1.19 The Committee desire to know the details of additional allocation of funds 
sought by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries at RE stage  and the extent of 
enhancement actually materialised.   
 
EMPLOYMENT IN FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.49) 
 
1.20 The Committee found that one of the princip al aims of promoting food processing 
sector was to provide gainful employment especially in rural and non -metro urban cities and 
arrest migration of labour to urban conglomerate. The food processing sector being highly 
labour absorptive and less capital intensive in nature, generates employment to the tune of 
16.75 lakh persons in the country annually in the registered sector,  constituting 12.2% of 
total employment. A large section of Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) owe their 
growth and prosperity to the positive contributions made by food processing industries. The 
Committee were distressed to note that there had bee n downturn in the employment 
especially in the unregistered sector, despite rise in the output and capital employed. The 
employment in unregistered sector gone down dramatically from 63.4 5 lakh persons in 
2005-06 to 47.93 lakh persons in 2011 -12. The Commi ttee had desired that Government 

~ 15 ~ 
 
should assess the reasons for that unsavoury development of declining trend in 
employment in the sector and take appropriate steps in that direction. The Committee be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter.  
 
1.21 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries  in their Action Taken Reply have stated 
that there had been a decline in the employment in the food processing sector during the 
period from 2005 -06 to 2010 -11. That was primarily because of significant fall in 
employment in un -registered sector and slowdown in the growth of employment in 
registered sector as indicated in the Table below:- 
 
Estimates of Persons Engaged in Food processing Units (Person in Lakhs) 
Year Employment in 
Registered units 
Employment in   Un - 
Registered Units Total Employment 
2005-06 13.92 63.45 77.37 
2006-07 14.76   
2007-08 15.05   
2008-09 15.64   
2009-10 16.06   
2010-11 16.62 47.93 64.55 
 
 
1.22 The primary reason for such a decline was due to intensive use of capital (as 
compared to labour) as reflected in the increase in capital per employee ratio. It might also 
be noted that capital deployment had gone up more significantly in unregistered sector as 
compared to Registered food processing sector. That had led to a significant fall in 
employment in Unregistered sector by a CAGR of 5.5 percent.  Higher deployment of 
capital, however, had led to higher output per employee both in registered and un-registered 
manufacturing sector.  The capital per employee and output per employee are given in  the 
Table below:- 
 

~ 16 ~ 
 
 
2005-06 2010-11 * CAGR (%) 
Ratios Reg.  Un-Reg. Reg.  Un-Reg. Reg.  Un-Reg. 
Employment (Lakh persons) 13.92 63.46 16.62 47.93 3.6 - 5.5 
Fixed Capital/employee (Rs  lakh) 3.26 0.41 7.26 1.27 17.4 25.2 
Output/ employee (Rs lakh) 16.12 1.8 24.87 2.54 9.2 7.1 
Source: Annual Survey of Industries& National Sample Survey  
 
*  Compound Annual Growth Rate 
 
1.23 The fall in employment had come about despite significant growth in investment in 
fixed capital as could be seen from the table below:  
 
Year 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 CAGR 
Registered 
FPI 
(Rs crore) 
45,357 57,460 68,335 81,156 99,482 1,20,705 21.6 
Un Reg. FPI 
(Rs crore) 26,128     60,752 18.4 
Source: Annual Survey of Industries & National Sample Survey Office 
 
 
1.24 This issue was also discussed with the stake holders (CII, ASSOCHAM, AIFPA). The 
stake holders were of the view that there have been increasing mechanization of Food 
Processing Industries because of the following reasons: 
 
(i) Need to minimize manual hand ling to ensure quality control of product and 
improve hygiene;  
(ii) Lack of availability/ shortage  of skilled manpower; 
(iii) High cost of skilling and difficulty of retaining workers. 
 
1.25 Government have been facilitating setting up of food processing units with  a view to 
minimize post harvest losses, increasing shelf life and ensure year the round supply of food 
products, However, food processing units were set up by entrepreneurs in the private 
sector. The Government ha ve been extending financial assistance, by  way of grant -in-aid, 

~ 17 ~ 
 
for creation of food processing infrastructure and setting up of food processing units. 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries ha ve been implementing a Scheme for Infrastructure 
Development which include d components like Mega Food Parks , Cold Chain, Value 
Addition and Preservation Infrastructure and Modernization of Abattoirs. 
 
1.26 Government ha ve also been implementing a Scheme for technology upgradation/ 
establishment/ expansion/ modernisation of Food Processing Industries under which 
assistance by way of grant -in-aid was extended to en trepreneurs for modernization and 
setting up of processing units for fruits & vegetables, meat, milk, fish, grain  (oil mill; Rice, 
pulse & flour) milling , alcoholic beverages, consumer products (including bakery units) etc. 
That scheme have since been subsumed with NMFP for implementation by the States/UTs. 
 
1.27 Apart from th at, a new Centrally Sponsored Scheme – National Mission on Food 
Processing (NMFP) was launched on 01.04.2012 for implementation by the State/ UT 
Governments. An amount of Rs 184.69 cro re were released under the scheme to the State/ 
UT Governments. Allocation under the scheme for 2013 -14 is Rs 187.00 crore.   The 
scheme would ensure much needed flexibility to State/ UT Government to address the local 
needs and priority to develop the sec tor. The implementation of the scheme was being 
monitored by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries on a regular basis. 
 
1.28 The Committee had pointed out the drastic decline in employment in 
unorganised Food Processing Units which declined from 63.46 Lakh persons in 2005-
06 to 47.93 Lakh persons in 2010 -11.  It is observed from the Government’s reply that 
investment in un -registered FPI has more than doubled from Rs.26,128 crore to 
Rs.60,752 crore during the period under reference.  The decline in emp loyment is 

~ 18 ~ 
 
attributed to the need to minimise man ual handling, shortage of skilled manpower 
and high cost of skilling and difficulty of retaining workers.  The Committee are not 
convinced of these reasons particularly when the investment in un-organised units 
have more than doubled during th is period and employment in Registered FPI has 
been growing from year to year .  The Committee would like the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries to study the real causes for the decline in employment  in un-
organised u nits and report the position to the Committee along with facts about 
extent of availability of skilled manpower.  The Committee would also like to be 
informed what specific steps have been taken or proposed to address the shortage, if 
any, of the skilled manpower. 
 
MEGA FOOD PARK  
 
(Recommendation No. 3.47) 
 
 
 
1.29 The Committee found that in almost all the projects, which are operational and those 
under implementation, the progress has been far away from satisfactory. The Committee 
opined that there are major shortcomings in the planning and implementation of Mega Food 
Park Schemes. The mid -term evaluation of the scheme revealed major deficiencies in the 
implementation. However, the mid course corrective action undertaken by the Government, 
did not impact s ignificantly and improved the pace of progress. The Committee, therefore, 
desired that a critical appraisal of the scheme may be undertaken and corrective measures 
put in place immediately.  
 
 
 

~ 19 ~ 
 
1.30 The Committee also noted  that the Mega Food Park project was launched with much 
fan-fare with a presumption that each MFP will cater to 30 -35 food processing units, benefit 
6000 farmers directly and 25000 to 30000 producers indirectly. Further, it was expected to 
bring about investment to the tune of Rs. 75 – 100 crore in common facilities and another 
Rs. 225 – 250 crore in processing and ancillary units.  
 
1.31 The Committee ha d reasons to believe that the assumptions were highly unrealistic 
and inflated to garner support for the scheme. Taking these assumption s on their face 
value, the Committee would like to be apprised of the actual gain realised of each 
component as against those envisaged w.r.t. setting up of Mega Food Parks in the country. 
The socio-economic benefit studies of the Mega Food Park should also be undertaken so 
as to assess the benefits, reach and penetration of the scheme.  
 
1.32 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries in their Action Taken Reply have stated 
that the Ministry has approved 30 projects sanctioned by the Government under Mega Food 
Parks scheme .  The Ministry has not carried out mid -term evaluation of the scheme  and 
accordingly, the  scheme guidelines have been modified to minimize delay and facilitate 
speedier project implementation.  Critical appraisal of the scheme would be co nducted by 
the Ministry during 12 th plan mid-term review of the scheme and necessary corrective steps 
would be ensured by the Ministry.  
  
1.33 The Infrastructure Development scheme for Mega Food Parks has a long gestation 
period. The process of scheme imp lementation were still continuing. Presently 2 Parks, 1 
each at Haridwar in Uttarakhand and at Chittoor in Andhra are partially operational.  The 
financial outcome of these 2 projects as on today is as under: 

~ 20 ~ 
 
 
S. 
No. 
Status of Financial 
Outcome 
Patanjali F ood and Herbal 
Park Pvt. Ltd, Haridwar 
Srini Food Park Pvt. 
Ltd, Chittoor 
1 Total Number of Plots 24 15 
2. Number of plots 
allotted 
17 7 
3. Units in Operation 16 units in operation+ 1 unit 
under construction 
1 
4. Investment in Units Approx. Rs. 59.00 crore Rs. 20.00 crore 
5. Employment 
Generation 
5000 (direct and indirect 
combined) 
25 permanent and             
40-50 seasonal 
6. No. Of Plots Un -
Allotted 
7 14 
 
1.34 The socio -economic impact of the projects might be assessed only after the parks 
become fully operational. The Ministry would undertake a socio-economic study after some 
of the projects become fully functional in coming years. 
 
1.35 The Committee are disappointed to note  the very slow progress in 
implementation of Mega Food Parks Scheme launc hed in the year 2008.  After lapse 
of five years, only two food parks, as against 30 sanctioned, have been partia lly 
operational.  The Committee reiterate that the unrealistic and inflated figures of 
benefits stated at the time of launching the Mega Food P ark project to garner support 
are evident from just  2 Food Parks having come into being.  I n one Food Park Unit, 
the investment has been only Rs.20 crore  and employment generation (direct and 
indirect combined) for 25 persons on permanent basis and 40 -50 persons on 
seasonal basis.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that a critical appraisal of the 
scheme be undertaken without any delay and corrective measures taken up 
expeditiously. 

~ 21 ~ 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 3.49) 
 
1.36 The Committee noted that the Ministry of  Food Processing Industry in coordination 
with Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) ha s undertaken demonstration 
projects using bio-mass / solar hybrid system for generation of electricity. Some of the State 
Governments have been advised to take up cold-chain pilot project based on the 
technologies developed by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. While the 
Committee wished to promote the use of non -conventional sources of energy (NCSE) for 
the development of cold storage infrastructure, they wo uld first like to be apprised of the 
outcome of these demonstration projects before dwelling upon the subject further.  
 
1.37 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries in their Action Taken Reply have stated it 
was decided that some demonstration projects  based on the technology developed by 
MNRE may be set up by some State Governments to validate commercial use of these 
technologies. Therefore the State Govt. of Assam, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh have been requested t o set up Pilot projects based on 
the concept note prepared by the Solar Energy Centre of MNRE with the assistance 
available under the schemes of MNRE and Department of Agriculture & Co -operation, Govt. 
of India. However, no response has been re ceived from any of these States . Due to limited 
allocation of plan resources for the scheme during 12 th Plan, the Ministry did not propose to 
take up cold chain pilot project based on the non-conventional sources of energy. 
 
1.38 It has been stated that the State Gove rnment of Assam, Bihar, Madhya 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh had been requested to set up 
pilot projects for generation of electricity using bio mass/solar hybrid system with the 
assistance available under the schemes of MNRE and Depa rtment of Agriculture and 

~ 22 ~ 
 
Cooperation.  In the Action Taken Reply ,  the Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
have stated that since no response has been received from any of these States on 
this issue and due to limited allocation of plan resources for the scheme, the Ministry 
do not propose to take up cold chain pilot project based on the non -conventional 
sources of energy.  The Committee fail to understand the rationale for the Ministry’s 
stand particularly when assistance for the pilot projects is avai lable from MNRE and 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation.  The Committee would urge the Ministry 
of Food Processing Industries to pursue the matter with the State Governments 
concerned and ensure that the said pilot projects are set up at the earliest.   
 
(Recommendation No. 3.50) 
 
1.39 Food Irradiation facility is one of the components under Cold -Chain, Value Addition 
and Preservation Infrastructure plan scheme, for infrastructure development. Under this 
modern, cutting edge technology, food is subjec ted to ionizing energy or radiation which 
strengthens food conservation, improves food hygiene, help in extension of shelf -life, 
enhance safety by killing food borne pathogens and parasites, destroy insects, pests in 
stored products and fruits.  
 
1.40 The Committee found that Grant -in-Aid @ 50% of the total cost of plant and 
machinery and technical civil work in general areas and 75% for North -Eastern States and 
difficult areas subjected to maximum of Rs. 10 crore is extended to implementing agencies 
for various components of cold-chain including irradiation.  
 

~ 23 ~ 
 
1.41 The scientific evidence and literature available, world over are conflicting and mixed 
and tend to promote and denounce the use of irradiation for food processing. Despite 
concerns expressed by various consumer / interest groups, globally over safety and security 
issues, irradiated food is permitted in more than 50 countries. In the interest of public health, 
the Committee would like to tread with caution and desire that matters such as irradiatio n 
dosages, food labelling, standards and other safety and security parameters of irradiation 
food, be assessed, monitored and regulated, before the facilit ies are open on a large 
commercial scale. Concurrently, the Govt. should also educate the masses abou t irradiation 
food and step up publicity campaign before embarking upon this scheme on a larger 
pedestal.  
 
1.42 In their Action Taken Reply the MOFPI stated that irradiated food is regulated in the 
country in accordance with the Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation of Food) Rules, 
1996.Food can be irradiated only in a food irradiation plant, which is authorized by the 
Atomic Energy Regulatory Board and licensed by the competent Government authority. The 
license to carry out food irradiation operation is g iven only after ascertaining the safety of 
the installation, its suitability to ensure proper process control, and availability of licensed 
operators and qualified staff.  
 
1.43 The Committee had, inter -alia, emphasised that the Government should 
educate the masses about irradiation of food and step up publicity campaign before 
embarking upon this scheme on a larger pedestal.  The Government’s reply is silent 
on this point.  The Committee would reiterate that steps should be taken to 
implement this recommendation without delay. 
 

~ 24 ~ 
 
 
SCHEME FOR SETTING UP / MODERNIZATION OF ABATTOIRS  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.51) 
 
1.44 The Committee noted that the Plan scheme for establishing new abattoirs and 
modernizing the existing abattoirs were undertaken during Eleventh  Plan period with an aim 
to provide facilities for scientific and less painful slaughter, chilling, rendering plant affluent 
treatment plant, better hygiene, safety and retail cold -chain management. The Committee 
further noted that as against Plan allocation of Rs. 828 crore, the expenditure was Rs. 39.54 
crore only. Further of 10 approved abattoir projects, only 2 were completed and rest were 
under various stages of implementation, though the time line prescribed for completion of 
the projects were 18 mont hs each. The Committee further noted that there had been 
enormous time overrun of the projects.  As many as 8 projects were approved way back in 
the year 2008. Delay in the approval of the scheme, local agitation and objection of local 
people over land, de lay in appointment of consultants and also inordinate time taken in 
completing tender relating formalities, were some of the reasons assigned for delay in 
execution of the projects. The Committee further noted that the scheme had been upscaled 
to cover 25 new projects and modernisation of existing 25 abattoirs with a total project cost 
of Rs. 330.84 crore, during Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Committee were concerned to note 
the inordinate delay in the implementation of the projects included in the Eleventh P lan, 
which had slipped to 12th Plan. In the opinion of the Committee, there were some 
fundamental deficiencies in the project formulation and its implementation thereof. The 
Committee desired that the Government should take proactive steps to ensure that t he 
projects of Eleventh Plan period which were continuing in the Twelfth Plan were not delayed 
any more. At the same time, the Committee also recommended that Government should 
step up their monitoring mechanism to ensure that the larger mandate assigned t o the 

~ 25 ~ 
 
Ministry due to additional proposals in their kitty does not under -perform for want of efficient 
monitoring mechanism. The Committee desired to be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter.  
 
1.45 The Government in their Action Taken Reply stated th at the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries are implementing the Scheme for Setting up of New/Modernization of 
Existing Abattoirs under their Infrastructure Development Scheme. During 11 th Five Year 
Plan, 10 abattoir projects were approved, out of which two had been completed (i.e 
Ahmednagar Abattoir Project and Dimapur Abattoir Project).  
         
1.46 CCEA in their meeting held on 06.09.2012 had approved the proposal for upscaling 
of the 11th Plan Scheme for setting up of 25 new abattoirs and modernizat ion of 25 existing 
abattoirs as well as continuing 8 ongoing projects. The scheme would be implemented in 
the Central Sector for the first two years of the 12 th Five Year Plan i.e.2012-13 and 2013-14. 
Thereafter, the scheme would be implemented through Nat ional Mission on Food 
Processing by State Governments for the rest of the 12 th Plan period since most of the 
proposals were from Municipal Bodies which were closely connected to the State 
Governments.  
             
1.47 For timely completion and avoiding f urther delay of the projects of Eleventh Plan 
period which were continuing in the Twelfth Plan, periodical meetings were taken by Joint 
Secretary of the concerned division in that Ministry with Project Implementing Agencies 
(PIAs) to monitor the progress of projects.   
          

~ 26 ~ 
 
1.48 For the proposal to cover 25 new abattoirs and modernization of existing 25 abattoirs 
during first two year of the 12 th Plan, the Ministry had empanelled Programme Management 
Agencies (PMAs) to scrutinize/evaluates the Detailed  Project Reports (DPRs) and to 
recommend the proposals to provide grant -in-aid as well as monitor the progress of abattoir 
projects assigned to them.  
            
1.49 Based on evaluation of DPRs and appraisal reports from PMAs the Approval 
Committee under  the Chairmanship of Secretary (MFPI), in their meeting held on 
08.04.2013 had accorded “in -principle” approval for three Abattoir Projects to provide 
financial assistance i.e. proposal of the Goa Meat Complex Ltd (Govt. of Goa Undertaking) 
for financial a ssistance of Rs 617.02 lakh for modernization of abattoir at Usagon, Ponda, 
proposal of Meat Product of India Ltd (Govt. of Kerala Undertaking) for financial assistance 
of Rs 1436.12 lakh for establishment of modern abattoir at Edayar, and proposal of the 
Greater Vishakhapatnam Municipal Corporation under PPP mode for financial assistance of 
Rs 1500 lakh for establishment of modern abattoir at Paradesipalem, Vishakapatnam. Since 
two of projects i.e. Goa Meat Complex Ltd, Goa and Meat Product of India Ltd, K erala were 
promoted by State Public Sector Undertakings, Operational Guidelines for the Scheme had 
been modified for 12 th Five Year Plan to widen the eligibility to cover projects promoted by 
State Public Sector Undertakings, Co-operatives and Boards under State Government. That 
amendment was intended to provide flexibility to State Governments in taking up abattoir 
projects. 
 
1.50 The Committee had desired the Government to take steps to ensure that the 
projects which were taken up in the 11th Plan and were continuing in the 12 th Plan are 
not delayed any more and apprise the Committee of the ir implementation.  There is 

~ 27 ~ 
 
nothing in the reply to indicate whether the eight abattoir projects approved during 
the Eleventh Plan and were under various stages of impl ementation have since been 
completed.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the target dates for 
completion of these projects and steps taken to complete them within the targeted 
dates. 
 
SCHEME FOR QUALITY ASSURANCE, CODEX STANDARDS AND RESEARCH AND 
DEVELOPMENT AND OTHER PROMOTIONAL ACTIVITIES  
 
(Recommendation No. 3.54) 
 
1.51 The scheme enables the food processing industry to face the global competition in 
International trade post-WTO, product acceptance by overseas buyers, keep Indian industry 
technological abreast of International post -WTO and R&D works to benefit the industry in 
terms of products and process development, improved packaging value addition and 
leading to innovative products and processes with commercial values.  
 
1.52 The Committee found that performance under the scheme has been somewhat tardy.  
Lack of technology dissemination and commercialization, mechanism of disbursement of 
funds, are some of the areas of concern observed under R&D projects. The Committee 
further noted that in c ase of R&D projects, no provision exist ed under the scheme, for 
providing assistance for filing of patents and commercialization of research output. The 
Committee desired that adequate provisions be made for the purpose in the R&D sector.  
 
1.53 The Commit tee further found that International standards for food products are not 
mandatory for the food business operators in the country. However, they are to comply with 
the provision of Food Safety and Standards Act and Rules and Regulations framed there 
under. Further, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India is harmonising the National 

~ 28 ~ 
 
Standards with International standards such as codex wherever appropriate. The 
Committee desire d that National standards be evolved and aligned with International 
standards so that food processing sector is not denied opportunity to compete in the 
International market. 
 
1.54 The MOFPI in their Action Taken Reply stated that there ha d been an on -going 
demand for review of food safety standards taking into account the latest de velopment in 
food science, food consumption pattern, new specifications, presence of new contaminants 
and toxins as well as use of new food additives and ingredients required by the producers 
and manufacturers. It was the responsibility of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) under Ministry of Health to promote consistency with the relevant international 
standards. The standards adopted by Codex were the relevant international standards and 
were also the reference point within the frame -work of WTO. It was incumbent upon 
member nations to apply the national treatment clause, meaning thereby, all imported food  
stuff would be given a treatment equal to those applicable to the domestic producers, 
manufacturers and the market.  
 
1.55 FSSAI has in itiated the harmonisation process taking into account the standards 
adopted by the EU, USFDA, Canada, certain developing countries as well as India‟s needs. 
For the purpose it was proposed to utilize the knowledge available in the country in terms of 
experts in FSSAI, food industry (small, medium, large), relevant Govt. institutions, 
commodity experts, academicians, consumer organisations as well as the representatives of 
trade bodies (AIFPA, FICCI, CII, etc.).  
 

~ 29 ~ 
 
1.56 The draft standards and codes of practi ce will be developed by such expert groups.  
Once the Scientific Committee has approved the draft texts and FSSAI has accepted them, 
these will be notified to the WTO as per obligations under the WTO Agreement. The new 
FSSAI standards proposed to be notified by December 2014. 
 
1.57 Implementation of the R&D and lab components of the Scheme have been entrusted 
to Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) under Department of Science and 
Technology and Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) respecti vely.  An 
amendment in the R&D Scheme of MFPI is envisaged for extending assistance for filling of 
patents for the R&D outcome of projects supported under MFPI Scheme which would pave 
the way for up scaling of and commercialization of R&D outcome. 
 
1.58 The Committee had desired among other things that adequate provision s be 
made for the purpose of assistance for filing of patents and commercialization of 
research output.  It has been stated in the reply that during the 12 th Five Year Plan, an 
amendment in the R&D Scheme of Ministry of Food Processing Industries is 
envisaged for extending assistance for filing of patents.  The Committee are at a loss 
to understand as to why the proposed amendment has not been carried out so far.  
The Committee would like the  Ministry to take action in this regard without any 
further delay and the Committee be informed of the changes effected in the R&D 
Scheme.  
  
 
 
 

~ 30 ~ 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS. 
Recommendation No. 1.4  
 
The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the action taken 
by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Thirty -
third Report, the Committee were furnished by the  Government within the stipulated 
time. The Committee further note that in pursuance of Direction 73 -A of Directions by 
the Speaker, Lok Sabha, the Minister concerned is required to make a Statement on 
the status of implementation of Observations/ Recommen dations contained in the 
Original Reports of the Committee within six months of their presentation to the 
Parliament. Accordingly, a Statement under Direction 73 A in the context of the 
Thirty-third Report was made on 21 August, 2012 adhering to the time f rame 
stipulated for the purpose. The Analysis of the action taken by the Government 
reveals that out of 16 Recommendations contained in the Thirty -third Report of the 
Committee, 13 Recommendations (81.25%) have been accepted by the Government. 
The remainin g 03 Recommendations (18.75%) have not been accepted by the 
Government. The Committee desire the Government to take conclusive action in 
respect of the eight Recommendations commented upon in their Forty-second Action 
Taken Report and furnish further action taken notes to the Committee expeditiously. 
 
Reply of the Government:   
 
The status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the                     
42nd report of the committee has been laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 07.5.2013, but due 
to adjournment of Rajya Sabha sine die w.e.f. 08.05.2013, it could not be laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 10.05.2013. It will be laid in the ensuing Monsoon Session, 2013. 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated   26th June, 2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  Direction 73-A does not apply for Action Taken Reports. Hence, further Action Taken 
Notes are not required to be laid in the House by the Ministry/Department.  
  

~ 31 ~ 
 
 
FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR  
 
Recommendation No. 2.42  
 
While increasing production and p roductivity are essential components of a 
vibrant agriculture sector, improved post harvesting handling and processing are 
essential to ensure value addition, reduction in waste and ensure quality food 
products reaching the market. A strong and dynamic foo d processing sector plays a 
stellar role in the diversification and commercialization of agriculture, enhancing 
shelf-life, ensuring value addition to agriculture produce, generating employment, 
enhancing income of farmers and creating markets for export o f agro -foods. Food 
security, food inflation, improved nutrition and rural poverty are some of the 
development concerns addressed by the food processing sector. The food 
processing sector acts as a bridge between agriculture and manufacturing sectors by 
providing healthy and affordable food to stimulate the overall growth of the Country. 
The importance of food processing sector is second to none since it contributes as 
much as 9-10% of GDP in agriculture, provide employment to 16.75 lakh persons and 
infuse capital investment to the tune of Rs. 249,337 crore in the registered processing 
industry. The multi-pronged strategy for enhancing processing level and reduction in 
wastages; institutional strengthening; food safety and quality assurance; capacity 
building; R&D and technical support; and value additions, are some of the key areas 
which can overturn the fortunes of the sector. However, the Committee are distressed 
to note that inspite of potential high value addition to the economy, the role of the 
sector has not been understood in the right perspective both by the Government and 
the planners. The Committee are of the view that unless drastic and radical steps are 
taken, the dream of India becoming global leader in the food processing and export 
of safe, hygi enic nutritious and quality processed food items, will remain a distant 
dream. The Committee, while exhorting upon the Government to overcome these 
deficiencies, recommend the Ministry to enhance their ability to successfully 
implement major Schemes, so as  to improve utilization of allocated funds 
substantially. This will facilitate the Ministry to play a meaningful role not only for the 
food processing sector but also to the agriculture sector as a whole.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Government has been imp lementing a number of schemes for the promotion of food 
processing industry with a view to increase the level of processing, reduce wastage, 
increase income of farmers and address the food security issues. These include 
infrastructure development (with com ponents, Mega Food Parks, Integrated Cold Chain 
Projects and Modernization/Setting up of Abattoirs; Technology Upgradation/ 
Establishment/ Modernisation of food processing industries); Quality Assurance, Codex 
Standards, R&D, Establishment of Food Testing Laboratories & other promotional activities; 
Human Resource Development; Strengthening of Institutions for promotion & development 
of the food processing sector in the country.  With a view to give further thrust to the sector, 
Government has launched a ne w Centrally Sponsored Scheme –National Mission on Food 
Processing (NMFP) on 01.04.2012 for implementation by the State/UT Governments. 
 

~ 32 ~ 
 
 The scheme provides for the establishment of a National Mission as well as 
corresponding Missions at the State and Distr ict level for implementation of the scheme.  
The various components under the scheme currently being implemented relate to (i) 
Technology Up-gradation/ Establishment/ Modernisation of Food Processing Industries; (ii) 
Setting up Cold Chain, Value Addition a nd Preservation Infrastructure for Non -Horticultural 
Products; (iii) Modernisation of Abattoirs; (iv) Human Resource Development; and (v) 
Promotional Activities. NMFP is implemented with financial contribution of Government of 
India and States/ UTs in the ratio of 75:25, except for North- Eastern States, where the ratio 
is 90:10. Further, in UTs administered by Government of India, it is funded 100% by 
Government of India. 
 
An amount of Rs 184.69 crore was released under the scheme to the state/ UT 
governments during 2012 -13. Allocation under the scheme for 2013 -14 is Rs 187.00 crore. 
The scheme will provide flexibility to State/ UT government to address the local needs and 
priority to develop the sector. The implementation of the scheme is being monitored b y the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries on a regular basis.   
 
During Eleventh five year Plan, out of a total allocation of Rs 1880 crores for different 
schemes of Ministry of Food Processing Industries, the ministry utilized Rs 1596.88 crore 
representing 84.94% of allocated funds. The utilization of funds has increased substantially 
i.e. 99.6% during 2012-13 as indicated in the Table given below:  
 
11th Plan 
 
[Rs. in Crore] 
Years BE Actual Expenditure Expenditure as a % of BE 
2007-08 250.00 182.97 73.19 
2008-09 290.00 223.14 76.94 
2009-10 340.00 277.53 81.63 
2010-11 400.00 394.40 98.60 
2011-12 600.00 518.84 86.47 
Total 1880.00 1596.88 84.94 
12th Plan 
  2012-13 660.00 657.58 99.6 
 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated 26th June, 2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.11 of Chapter I of this Report. 
 
 
 
 

~ 33 ~ 
 
PLANNING PROCESS  
 
Recommendation No. 2.43  
 
The Committee are exasperated to be apprised that all the agencies concerned 
with the finalization of Twelfth Plan document have not paid any heed to their advise, 
rendered time and again, for streamlining the planning process, as the incumbent 
process is riddled with need for obtaining multi -agencies clearance, which are time 
consuming. The fate t hat befell the Eleventh Plan was the guiding factor for the 
instant recommendation. The Committee note that the Approach Paper to the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan was approved on 22 October, 2011 i.e. on the eve of operationalization 
of Plan w.e.f. 1.4.2012. In between, the planning process had to pass through plethora 
of working groups before being considered by NDC on 27 December, 2012. Ideally a 
scheme ought to be operationalized from day One of a Five Year Plan. Both the 
Ministry of Food Processing and Industry and Planning Commission too subscribe to 
this cardinal planning principle. The Committee, however, are concerned to note that 
this has seldom happened in the past. Since Tenth Plan period and before that also, 
there has been persistent delays in the fin alization and operationalization of a Five 
Year Plan, thereby impacting outlays, timelines and even schemes to a large extent. 
The past planning experience has revealed that by the time, schemes / projects in a 
Five Year Plan period were approved formally,  though retrospectively, one was in the 
midst of Plan period. In the opinion of the Committee this systematic ill has to be 
overcome, in the interest of development, including Food Processing Industry Sector. 
In case of Twelfth Plan, synchronization with m anufacturing policy; focus on 
decentralization so as to improve implementation mechanism for goal towards 
inclusive growth and wide -spread consultations were some of the factors, as stated 
by Planning Commission, were instrumental in delaying the approval.  Conceding that 
the Planning Commission has powers to allocate and approve resources for the 
Plans; the inordinate delay in their finalization, frustrates planning process and a sign 
of Planning Commission abdicating their authority of a planner.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The National Development Council (NDC), Chaired by the Prime Minister approved 
the 12th Five Year Plan in its meeting held on 27 th December, 2012.  Hence, at present the 
12th Plan is fully operational.  However, the Planning Commission h as taken note of 
observation made by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture and would strive 
to address the issues raised.   
 
Further, it is to be stated here that for the formulation of 12 th Five Year Plan, Planning 
Commission undertook exten sive consultation with various stakeholders so as to make the 
exercise meaningful and socially relevant. In addition, the actual formulation of the Plan was 
preceded by constitution of sectoral Working Groups and Steering Committees for critical 
examination of issues to be included in the Plan.   
 
***** 
 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 

~ 34 ~ 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2.45  
 
The performance of Working Groups constituted by the Planning Commission, 
to plan and suggest financial requirement of a sect or, needs much to be desired. The 
recommendations of Working Groups are treated casually and often, the resources 
suggested by them are slashed by the Planning Commission itself. This shows the 
scant respect which Working Group receives at the hands of the  Planning 
Commission and points towards their working in isolation, rather than in harmony 
with the different arms of the Government. Such incoherent actions, are another 
examples of deficient planning system, at macro level and in the process the better 
and more effective planning of resources is given a go by.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Working groups constituted by Planning Commission are an important part of Plan 
formulation process.  Working groups have major contributions in such process, such as 
engaging a large number of stakeholders for gaining insight into the respective sectors/ 
industries, their positioning in domestic & international context, demand supply aspects, 
their potential and the current shortfall/ gap areas, if any and most importantl y, evolving 
action lines/ interventions in the shape of working group recommendations required to 
bridge the gaps/ shortfalls, instil growth and realise actual potential of these industries/ 
sectors.  These recommendations are taken into reckoning in the P lan formulation exercise 
with suitable prioritisation and moderation to align them with Plan priorities and objectives 
and the resource positions.  The entire process involve careful deliberations in the Steering 
Committee (Group heading the working groups  constituted for a sector/ industry) meetings 
and consultations with the respective Ministries/ Departments.   
 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated 26th June, 2013) 
 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS DURING ELEVENTH PLAN PERIOD  
 
Recommendation No. 2.46  
 
During the course of the Eleventh Plan period the Committee have observed 
that Ministry were allocated an amount of Rs. 1880 crore only against the approved 
outlay of Rs. 4031 crore by the Planning Commission. The fact that the Ministry was 
able to utilize 95% of revised allocated funds, is a classical case of self 
aggrandisement and bemuse the Committee. In the opinion of the Committee, the 
ability to expand resources needs to be seen in the context of what was originally 
asked for at project formul ation stage and or at the most Budget Estimates (BE) 
stage. Matching actual expenditure vis-a-vis Revised Estimates (RE) is no 
achievement at all. The Committee further observe that the Plan outlay allocation vis-
a-vis BE stage fluctuated widely especially  in the fiscals 2008 -09, 2009-10 and 2010 -
11. Similarly, stark mismatch was observed between BE & RE, for the years 2008 -09, 
2009-10. The Committee are aggrieved to note that their constant pleas to rectify the 
imbalances have gone unheard during the Eleve nth Five Year Plan. As the sector 

~ 35 ~ 
 
provides a mechanism to bring together farmers, processors and retailers, linking 
agriculture production to market so as to improve livelihood in rural sector, the 
Committee would like to emphasise that all the agencies co ncerned i.e. the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) should approach 
allocation of the Ministry on a new platform, taking into consideration the growth 
potential, especially critical rural infrastructure. The allocation of funds to the 
Ministry must be evenly spread across all the five fiscals to ensure greater flexibility 
in planning priorities and avoiding back loading of plan funds. The Ministry would 
thus be able to absorb these funds easily and ensure optimum utiliza tion of allocated 
resources. The inability to utilize the reduced allocation in its entirety during the 
course of the Eleventh Plan, should awake the Ministry and they should now take 
proactive steps to ensure optimal utilisation of funds to the hilt in the coming fiscal.  
 
FINANCIAL ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION DURING FIRST YEAR OF THE TWELFTH 
PLAN  
 
Recommendation No. 2.47  
 
The Committee are aggrieved to note the huge variations between the funds 
sought by the Ministry and the actual allocation made by the  Planning Commission. 
This seems to make a mockery of the instant planning process since Planning 
Commission and the Ministry work in close tandem, to arrive at the projected 
allocation, as per their own admission. Having enlightened themselves with the 
viewpoint of the Ministry and the Planning Commission, the Committee impress upon 
both the agencies to arrive at a model, wherein, the figures of proposed allocation 
and actual allocation are brought on an even keel. Being concerned to note that the 
first fiscal of the Twelfth Plan is reminiscent of the past ones, the Committee urge all 
the agencies concerned to introspect at their working, identify their weak areas, work 
on them and thereby ensure that things turnaround in the next Fiscal and variation 
between proposals, allocation and utilization is negated to the extent possible.  
 
Reply of the Government: (Recommendation Nos. 2.46 & 2.47) 
 
Due to various constraints, prominent among them being the constraint in availability 
of resources and the need to mee t the funding requirements of flagship schemes of the 
Government in the health, education and social sectors, fund allocations to the various 
Departments/ Ministries were to be done after careful deliberations based on available 
information regarding perfo rmance of various schemes/ programmes/ projects of these 
Ministries/ Departments. However, the need for additional funds for implementing various 
programmes and projects are considered by M/o Finance at the Revised Estimate (RE) 
stage depending on their fi nancial and physical progress.  However, Planning Commission 
has taken note of valuable suggestions made by the Committee in this regard. 
 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter I of this Report. 

~ 36 ~ 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF DEMAND  
 
Recommendation No. 2.48  
 
The Committee find from Demand No. 46 pertaining to the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industry that for the current financial year i.e. 2013 -14, a sum  of Rs. 
719.11 crore has been allocated to the Ministry which is entirely under revenue 
section. Out of this, Rs. 708 crore has been allocated in the Plan side which is 18% 
more than the RE figure of 600 crore in the year gone by. On the non -plan side, there 
is no marginal change in the allocation during the years under reference. The total 
allocation of the Ministry for the FY 2013 -14 needs to be seen in the context of outlay 
of Rs. 1309.03 crore proposed by the Ministry. In view of reduced allocation to t he 
tune of Rs. 708 crore in the year 2013 -14, the resultant reduction has been 
apportioned to various ongoing schemes of 11th Plan which are being continued 
during the 12th Plan. As such, the up -scaling of the schemes being targeted to 
desired extent, will not be possible due to lower allocation. The major schemes which 
are likely to be affected as a consequence of reduced allocation, to a very large 
extent are: (i) schemes for infrastructure development (allocation reduced to Rs. 247 
crore against the prop osed allocation of Rs. 503 crore); (ii) scheme for technology 
up-gradation / establishment and modernization of food processing industry 
(allocation reduced to Rs. 165 crore as against the proposed allocation of Rs. 325 
crore). Taking into consideration, t he ample growth potential of the sector, the 
Committee desire that Government should pull up their sleeves and ensure that 
whatever the allocation assigned to them, is utilised prudently, and there is no 
occasion to reduce allocation at RE stage. Further, in order to utilize funds efficiently, 
the Ministry should also synergize some of their schemes with that of other 
Ministries/Departments like the Intensive Dairy Development Programme, Dairy 
Entrepreneurship Development Schemes of Department of Animal Hus bandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries whereunder processing of milk and other dairy products, is 
one of the components & RKVY of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation. The 
Committee expect proactive action in the matter.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Due to various constraints, prominent among them being the constraint in availability 
of resources and the need to meet the funding requirements of flagship schemes of the 
Government in the health, education and social sectors, fund allocations to the various 
Departments/ Ministries were to be done after careful deliberations based on available 
information regarding performance of various schemes/ programmes/ projects of these 
Ministries/ Departments. However, the need for additional funds for implementing various 
programmes and projects are considered by M/o Finance at the Revised Estimate (RE) 
stage depending on their financial and physical progress.  However, Planning Commission 
has taken note of valuable suggestions made by the Committee in this regard. 
The Minist ry is making all out efforts for full utilization of the allocation during the 
current year. During the last year (2012 -13) out of the Budget allocation of Rs. 660 crore, 
Rs. 657.58 crore have been spent i.e. about 99%. 
 

~ 37 ~ 
 
This Ministry is in regular touch w ith other Ministries/ Departments/ organizations so 
that various schemes of the Ministry are synergized with similar schemes of other 
Departments.   
 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
EMPLOYMENT IN FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR  
 
Recommendation No. 2.49  
 
The Committee find that one of the principle aims of promoting food 
processing sector is to provide gainful employment especially in rural and non -metro 
urban cities and arrest migration of labour to urban conglomerate. The food 
processing sector being highly labour absorptive and less capital intensive in nature, 
generates employment to the tune of 16.75 lakh persons in the country annually in 
the registered sector, constituting 12.2% of total employment. A large section of 
Micro Small a nd Medium Enterprises (MSME) owe their growth and prosperity to the 
positive contributions made by food processing industries. The Committee are 
distressed to note that there has been downturn in the employment especially in the 
unregistered sector, despite rise in the output and capital employed. The employment 
in unregistered sector gone down dramatically from 63.46 lakh persons in 2005 -06 to 
47.93 lakh persons in 2011-12. The Committee desire that Government should assess 
the reasons for this unsavoury d evelopment of declining trend in employment in the 
sector and take appropriate steps in this direction. The Committee be apprised of the 
action taken in the matter.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
There has been a decline in the employment in the food processi ng sector during the 
period from 2005 -06 to 2010 -11. This was primarily because of significant fall in 
employment in un -registered sector and slowdown in the growth of employment in 
registered sector as indicated in the Table below:- 
 
Estimates of Persons Engaged in Food processing Units (Person in Lakhs) 
Year Employment in 
Registered units 
Employment in   Un - 
Registered Units Total Employment 
2005-06 13.92 63.46 77.37 
2006-07 14.76   
2007-08 15.05   
2008-09 15.64   
2009-10 16.06   
2010-11 16.62 47.93 64.54 
 
The primary reason for such a decline is due to intensive use of capital                        
(as compared to labour) as reflected in the increase in capital per employee ratio. It may 
also be noted that capital deployment has gone up more sign ificantly in unregistered sector 
as compared to Registered food processing sector. This has led to a significant fall in 

~ 38 ~ 
 
employment in Unregistered sector by a CAGR of 5.5 percent. Higher deployment of capital, 
however, has led to higher output per employe e both in registered and un -registered 
manufacturing sector.  The capital per employee and output per employee is given in the 
Table below:- 
 
 
2005-06 2010-11 CAGR (%) 
Ratios Reg.  Un-Reg. Reg.  Un-Reg. Reg.  Un-Reg. 
Employment (Lakh persons) 13.92 63.46 16.62 47.93 3.6 - 5.5 
Capital/employee (Rs  lakh) 3.26 0.41 7.26 1.27 17.4 25.2 
Output/ employee (Rs lakh) 16.12 1.8 24.87 2.54 9.2 7.1 
Source: Annual Survey of Industries& National Sample Survey  
 
 The fall in employment has come about despite signif icant growth in investment as 
can be seen from the table below:  
 
Year 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 CAGR 
Registered 
FPI 
(Rs crore) 
45,357 57,460 68,335 81,156 99,482 1,20,705 21.6 
Un Reg. FPI 
(Rs crore) 26,128     60,752 18.4 
Source: Annual Survey of Industries & National Sample Survey Office 
 
This issue was also discussed with the stake holders (CII, ASSOCHAM, AIFPA). The 
stake holders are of the view that there has been increasing mechanization of Food 
Processing Industries because of the following reasons: 
 
(iv) Need to minimize manual handling to ensure quality control of product and 
improve hygiene;  
(v) Lack of availability/ shortage  of skilled manpower; 
(vi) High cost of skilling and difficulty of retaining workers. 
 
Government has been faci litating setting up of food processing units with a view to 
minimize post harvest losses, increasing shelf life and ensure year the round supply of food 
products, However, food processing units are set up by entrepreneurs in the private sector. 
The Governm ent has been extending financial assistance, by way of grant -in-aid, for 
creation of food processing infrastructure and setting up of food processing units. Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries has been implementing a Scheme for Infrastructure 
Development which includes components like Mega Food Parks , Cold Chain, Value 
Addition and Preservation Infrastructure and Modernization of Abattoirs. 
 
Government has also been implementing a Scheme for technology upgradation/ 
establishment/ expansion/ modernisation of Food Processing Industries under which 
assistance by way of grant-in-aid is extended to entrepreneurs for modernization and setting 
up of processing units for fruits & vegetables, meat, milk, fish, grain (oil mill; Rice, pulse & 

~ 39 ~ 
 
flour milling), alcoholic beverages, consumer products (including bakery units ) etc. This 
scheme has since been subsumed with NMFP for implementation by the States/UTs. 
 
Apart from this, a new Centrally Sponsored Scheme – National Mission on Food 
Processing (NMFP) was launched on 01.04.2012 for implementation by the State/ UT 
Governments. An amount of Rs 184.69 crore was released under the scheme to the State/ 
UT Governments. Allocation under the scheme for 2013 -14 is Rs 187.00 crore.   The 
scheme will ensure much needed flexibility to State/ UT Government to address the local 
needs and priority to develop the sector. The implementation of the scheme is being 
monitored by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries on a regular basis. 
 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of Chapter I of this Report. 
 
NEW SCHEMES OF TWELFTH PLAN  
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON FOOD PROCESSING  
 
Recommendation No. 2.50  
 
The Committee find that the food processing schemes, hitherto suffered from 
lack of enthusiasm by State Governments and district administration as the projects 
formulated were inflexible and did not suit local needs. To overcome such handicaps, 
the Government have formulated a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, known as National 
Mission on Food P rocessing (NMFP). The Scheme was launched on 1st April, 2012, 
aimed to decentralize the operation of schemes through involvement of State 
Governments / UTs for better outreach, supervision, monitoring and ensuring job 
creation in a Mission -Mode. The multi -pronged objectives of Mission envisages 
augmenting food processing capacity to upscale their operations through capital 
infusion, technology transfer, skill up -gradation and land -holding support, establish 
Self Help Groups (SHGs) working in food processing  sector to facilitate them to 
achieve SME status; capacity development and skill up -gradation through 
institutional training to ensure sustainable employment opportunities and also 
reduce gap in requirement and availability of skilled manpower in food proc essing 
sector; raise the standard of food safety and hygiene to globally accepted norms; 
augment farm gate infrastructure; supply chain logistic storage and processing 
capacity; facilitate the industry to adopt Internationally accepted certification norms;  
provide better support to organised food processing sector.  
 
The scheme subsumed existing components / schemes such as technology 
up-gradation / establishment / modernization of food processing industry, cold-chain, 
value addition and preservation of inf rastructure in non -horticulture products, 
modernisation of abattoir, human resource development, creation of infrastructure 
facilities for running degree, diploma, certificate course on food processing 

~ 40 ~ 
 
technology, entrepreneurship development programme, fo od processing training 
centre, etc. Further, new schemes such as creating primary processing centre, 
collection centre in rural areas, modernization of meat shop and reefer vans are some 
of the new components included under the Mission mode.  
 
The Committe e note that the Mission may enable the Ministry to access the 
States in addressing both institutional and infrastructure gap along the value chain 
and thus create efficient supply chain, promote initiatives for skill development, 
training and entrepreneurs hip to meet needs of both post -harvest management and 
food processing industry.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MFPI) has launched a new Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (CSS) - National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP) durin g                 
12th Plan (2012-13) for implementation through States/UTs. The basic objective of NMFP is 
decentralization of implementation of Ministry‟s schemes, which will lead to substantial 
participation of State Governments/UTs. The NMFP contemplat es establishment of a 
National Mission as well as corresponding Missions in the State and District level. NMFP is 
likely to improve significantly the Ministry‟s outreach in terms of planning, supervision and 
monitoring of various schemes.  
   
All the State  Governments have been empowered to receive the applications, 
sanction and release grant -in-aid to the eligible beneficiaries under the NMFP. States have 
flexibility in selection of location of projects as well as beneficiaries, to harness the potential 
of value addition by using locally grown raw material.  
 
Proposal for continuation of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme – National Mission on 
Food Processing (NMFP) during remaining four years of 12 TH Plan (2013 -17) has been 
recommended by EFC with some modific ations / enhancements in the schematic 
assistance. The draft CCEA Note has been approved by Finance Minister and the same has 
been submitted to Cabinet Secretariat for placing before the Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA), for consideration / approval. 
 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
Recommendation No. 2.51         
             
 The Committee has taken note of structure of National Mission on Food 
Processing. The State Governments donning the role of implementing agenc ies, in 
the schemes and projects of the Ministry, is a welcome paradigm shift, and a true 
national initiative. The Committee is satisfied to note that in the first year of its 
operation, the Scheme has performed well. As against approved outlay of Rs. 185. 32 
crore, an expenditure of Rs. 181.44 crore was incurred. In the second year, a 
provision of Rs. 182 crore provided, as against projected allocation of Rs. 350 crore. 
The Committee hope and trust that the Ministry will keep this tempo of performance 
in future as well.  

~ 41 ~ 
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Total RE for NMFP (2012 -13) was Rs. 185.32 crores. Out of which, Rs. 184.68 
crores (Rs. 35.62 crores for preparatory activities / advance action + Rs. 149.06 crores for 
NMFP main Scheme) has been released to 32 States / UTs under National Mission on Food 
Processing (NMFP) during 2012-13. BE for 2013-14 is Rs. 187.00 crores for implementation 
of NMFP. 
 
***** 
 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
 
FOOD TESTING LABORATORY, R&D AND PROMOTIONAL ACTIVITIES OF THE FOOD 
PROCESSING SECTOR  
 
Recommendation No. 2.53  
 
The Committee note that Food Testing Laboratory, R&D and promotional 
activities of the food processing sector have been assigned to ICAR. Similarly, R&D 
component of the scheme is entrusted to Sci ence and Technology Ministry and the 
cold-chain project for horticulture is to be looked after by the National Horticulture 
Board. The specialists activities, assigned to different institutions, shall enable the 
Ministry to focus on policy issues entirely.  The Committee appreciate the long 
awaited action on the part of Ministry, who hitherto were planner as well as executor 
of schemes of the Ministry. The Committee would, however, sound a word of caution 
and desire that the Ministry should actively coordina te and liaise with all these three 
institutions, to ensure that the objectives for which the activities outsourced are not 
lost sight of.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The recommendation of the Committee is very appropriate and the Ministry has 
already put in place methods of coordination and liaison with all these three institutions, viz. 
ICAR, SERB and NHB. The Technical Scrutiny Committee and the Project Approval 
Committee have a representative of the Ministry at the level of Joint Secretary, so that the 
proposals being considered and approved by these institutions are closely monitored. 
These institutions are also required to submit regular reports to the Ministry showing the 
various details. The overall monitoring of the progress of the implementation of the schemes 
rests with the MoFPI. 
 
Food Testing Lab component of the scheme has been entrusted to ICAR. R&D 
component of the scheme is entrusted to SERB under Department of Science and 
Technology Ministry.    

~ 42 ~ 
 
MOFPI is monitoring the implementation of the F ood Testing Lab and R&D 
component of the Scheme by ICAR and SERB, respectively. Joint Secretary of the Ministry 
is a member of the expert committees constituted by ICAR and SERB for scrutiny of project 
proposals. An amount of Rs. 7.75 Crore has been releas ed by MFPI to ICAR; similarly, Rs. 
5.29 Crore has been released by MOFPI to SERB during the last financial year (2012 -13) 
for implementation of Food Testing Lab and R&D component of the Scheme with effect from 
01.04.12. Progress reports on approval of proj ects and utilisation of funds have been 
submitted by both the organisations to the Ministry. 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
RESULT FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 2.54  
 
The concept of Result Framework Document (RFD) wa s introduced to measure 
the performance of Ministries / Departments of Government of India. The Ministry of 
Food Processing Industry have been coming out of RFD and putting the same in 
public domain. The Committee are concerned to note that the composite s core 
obtained by the Ministry was below average i.e. 83% during the year 2011 -12. 
Although slackness in the development of infrastructure projects, mega food parks, 
abattoir schemes did impact the performance, the reasoning that the targets and 
indicators fixed for measuring the achievements of the Ministries were too ambitious, 
for under -performance, as stated by the Secretary during evidence is hardly 
convincing. The Committee believe that the outcome of RFD provides an opportunity 
to the Ministry to intr ospect the areas where they are not performing well and hence 
can re-orient their focus and work towards achieving the targets. The Committee do 
not take it kindly to the below average composite score of the Ministry as it reflects 
the performance of the Ministry in poor light. The Committee, therefore, impress upon 
the Ministry to put their house in order and ensure that RFD score of the Ministry 
surges past 90% points during the coming years and stay intact there.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The reasons f or under performance during 2011 -12 were rather ambitious targets 
and below expected performance in some of the schemes due to external reasons. The 
Ministry will endeavour to improve the composite score in RFD in the coming years.  
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
OUTSTANDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES (UCs)  
 
Recommendation No. 2.55  
 
The Committee are highly disappointed to note that the Ministry have not made 
concerted efforts in reducing the number of pending UCs. During the pe riod from 
March 2011 to March 2013, 63 UCs, amounting to just Rs. 36 crore were liquidated. 
However, the Outstanding Utilization Certificates (2967) amounting to Rs, 501.60 

~ 43 ~ 
 
crore as on 15 March, 2013, are yet to be liquidated. The Committee desire that the  
Government should tackle the pendency of UCs on a war -footing and impress upon 
all the implementing agencies to clear their backlog. They further observe that this 
huge pendency is reflective of bad accounting and financial management being 
practiced by the State Governments / Implementing Agencies and urge upon them to 
initiate corrective measures at the earliest as in absence of the same, they are the 
ones who have to bear the consequences. Lastly, they also plead upon the 
Government to ensure that the c ase of outstanding utilization certificates is 
eliminated during the current fiscal itself. 
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The Government is making every effort for obtaining the outstanding utilization 
certificates. The State Nodal Agencies of the beneficiar y States and UT Governments are 
being requested to collect the outstanding UCs from the beneficiaries and to transmit the 
same to the Ministry. As on 15.04.2013, there was pendency of UCs numbering 3212 
amounting to Rs. 592.48 crore. During the month of Ap ril, 2013, 347 UCs amounting to Rs. 
89.02 crore have been liquidated. Division/Scheme -wise UCs settled during the month of 
April, 2013 is furnished below: 
 
S. 
No. 
Division No. of UCs settled 
with PAO 
Amount (Rupees in 
crore) 
1. Abattoir Division  1 3.40 
2. Meat Board Division  3 5.45 
3. Technology upgradation Scheme 197 34.98 
4. Integrated Cold Chain Division  10 30.89 
5. R&D Division  18 4.55 
6. Laboratory Division 6 4.33 
7. Study Division  72 4.19 
8. HRD Division  40 1.23 
 Total 347 89.02 
 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 3.46  
 
The scheme for infrastructure development is one of the major schemes of the 
Ministry envisaging infrastructure and common facilities used in part icular by small 
and medium enterprises to enhance the value addition of the products. The scheme 
has three components (i) Mega Food Park (ii) Cold -Chain Value Addition and 
Preservation of Infrastructure and (iii) Establishment of New / Modernization of 
existing Abattoirs. During Twelfth Five Year Plan, the scheme has been modified with 
regard to enhanced financial assistance in the component of scheme. A sum of Rs. 
184.00 crore was provided for the financial year 2012 -13. The expenditure for the 
fiscal gone by was Rs. 123.60 crore. Against the projected allocation of Rs. 503 crore, 

~ 44 ~ 
 
the BE for the year 2013-14, is Rs. 247 crore. As the schemes are project oriented and 
not State or area specific, the grant for financial assistance extended, is based on 
viable project proposals received from the entrepreneurs or organizations. There 
have been drastic shortfalls in the achievement, in all the three schemes, for the 
reasons which are not convincing.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
In view of persistent demand from the smaller States for provision of Mini Food Parks 
with less land requirement, as acquisition of 50 acres of contiguous land in the smaller 
States is difficult, the Ministry, in consultation with Industry Associations and Stakeholders, 
had prepared a suggest ive framework for Mega Parks Scheme with provision of Mini Food 
Parks and revised pattern of assistance with reduced level of financial assistance during 
12th Plan period. The proposal was based on the approved Plan outlay of Rs 5990.00 Crore 
of the Ministry for the 12 th Plan. However, the actual allocation for 2012 -13 and 2013-14 for 
all the pro grammes of the Ministry is only Rs 660.00 Crore and Rs 708.00 Crore 
respectively. Thus, it seems that much less resources will be made available to the Ministry 
than the total outlay approved for 12 th Plan. Therefore, in view of the limited availability of 
funds, the proposal for taking up new projects as per revised pattern of assistance has been 
kept in abeyance till enough resources are made available.  
 
The Minis try is genuinely concerned about slow progress of Mega Food Parks 
scheme.  Initially, the prescribed timeline for implementation of the project was 24 months 
from the date of release of 1 st installment which has now been revised to 30 months from 
the date of „Final Approval‟. In most of the projects, the delay in implementation has been 
due to the reasons such as possession of land in the name of the SPVs with permission to 
sublease the plots, financial closure (sanction of term loan) and obtaining statutor y 
clearances from the State etc. In some cases, where land has been allotted by State 
agency to SPV on a long term lease basis, the lease agreement executed between State 
agency and SPV did not provide for sub -lease permission which caused restriction on S PV 
to sub -lease developed plots to prospective units, since outright sale of plots is not 
permitted under the scheme. 
 
The Ministry has played a proactive role to resolve these issues by taking up the 
matter with the respective authorities. For effective m onitoring of the progress, Review 
Meetings involving the SPVs and Representatives of the State Governments are held 
periodically. Based on the discussions in the Review Meetings, further follow up actions are 
initiated by the Ministry. To address the local  issues, a Mega Food Park Committee has 
been constituted in the districts under the chairmanship of District Collector. Further, based 
on the experience, the Ministry has modified the Scheme Guidelines to facilitate speedy 
implementation of the projects. As per the revised scheme guidelines, possession of land in 
the name of the SPV has been given more weightage in the selection process of proposals 
and change of land use for Industrial purpose and financial closure have been made  
preconditions for consideration of final approval. 
 

~ 45 ~ 
 
Out of Rs. 184 crore for the Infrastructure Development scheme, BE of Rs. 86.00 
crore and RE of Rs. 81.52 crore was provided for the component Cold Chain, Value 
Addition and Preservation Infrastructure during 2012 -13. Out of this  an expenditure of Rs. 
81.13 crore has been incurred during 2012 -13 under the scheme of cold chain, value 
addition and preservation infrastructure. During 2013 -14, BE of Rs.100 crore have been 
provided for the scheme. 
 
Out of the 63 projects approved by the Ministry, 24 projects have been completed, 16 
projects have achieved 75% physical progress and 15 projects have achieved 25% physical 
progress. Ministry is making all out efforts to complete all the approved projects timely by 
closely and regularly monitoring the progress of the scheme implementation. 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
SCHEME FOR COLD CHAIN, VALUE ADDITION AND PRESERVATION OF 
INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
Recommendation No. 3.48  
 
To encourage setting up of cold -chain faciliti es and backward and forward 
linkages in the agriculture supply chain in the country and to provide integrated and 
complete cold chain and preservation infrastructure facilities, without any break, 
from the farm -gate to the consumer, the Ministry launched t his plan scheme during 
Eleventh Plan. Under the scheme the projects are financed for integrated cold -chain 
infrastructure development. The initiatives were aimed at filling the gap in the supply 
chain, strengthening of cold -chain infrastructure, establishi ng value additions with 
infrastructure facilities like sorting, grading, packing and processing of horticulture 
including organic produce, marine, dairy and poultry. Out of 79 projects approved for 
financial assistance, the Ministry issued approval for 74 projects and another 9 
project proposals cancelled. The progress of the projects is pathetic, as only 8 
projects started commercial production. Although 18 months was the scheduled time 
of completion, which was subsequently raised to 24 months, on case to case basis, 
most of the 63 projects under implementation have incurred time overruns. The 
Committee is of the opinion that there exist major deficiencies in the formulation and 
implementation of the projects. The Committee while like to be apprised of time  
overrun of each of the project, also desire that Ministry of Food Processing Industry 
should strengthen their monitoring mechanism so as to minimise slippages in the 
execution of the projects.  
 
The Committee note that the Working Group of the Planning Co mmission 
recommended continuation of the scheme during Twelfth Five Year Plan and also 
proposed an allocation of Rs. 700 crore for the purpose. 140 new projects are 
proposed to be taken up during Twelfth Five Year Plan period. Further, the scheme 
for non-horticulture projects is to be merged with one of the components of Central 
Sponsored Scheme – the National Mission on Food Processing. The cold -chain 
project for horticulture projects is to be implemented through National Horticulture 
Board. Taking into co nsideration the past performance of the project, the Committee 
wonders as to how the Government would be able to realize the highly ambitious 

~ 46 ~ 
 
target of new 140 proposals for implementation. The Committee would like the 
Government to take pro-active actions so as to ensure that bottlenecks / deficiencies 
noticed in the past projects, do not come in way of implementation of new projects.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Against the target of 79 cold chain projects, 74 integrated cold chain projects were 
sanctioned by the Ministry. Subsequently, 11 projects were cancelled due to not meeting 
the timelines for implementation as per the scheme. Remaining 63 projects supported by 
the Ministry are at various stages of implementation .The progress of implementation is 
satisfactory as 24 projects out of total of 63 projects have reported commercial operations. 
Of the remaining 39 projects, 16 projects have reported 75% physical progress and 15 
projects have reported 25% physical progress. Out of 63 projects, only 2 projects of phase-1 
have incurred time overruns beyond 24 months and out of these 2 projects, 1 project has 
commenced commercial operations. Details of these 2 projects are as below:-  
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the project State Date of 
Approval 
Remarks 
1 M/s. Atharvass Tr aders 
Pvt. Ltd 
Karnataka 30.10.2009 The unit has facilities 
at 3 locations of 
Hassan, Belgam and 
Dobaspet. The unit is 
likely to start 
commercial 
operations at Hassan 
by next month. 
2 M/s. Ascon Agro 
Products Exporters & 
Builders Pvt. Ltd 
West 
Bengal 
27.03.2009 The unit commenced 
commercial 
operations on 
15.09.2012. 
 
Most of the phase -2 projects are expected to commence commercial production 
during this fiscal year. 25 Projects approved in year 2012 under phase -3 are expected to 
start commercial production during the next fiscal year. The Ministry invited applications for 
setting up of integrated cold chain project through an EOI with last date 10.07.2012. In 
response, 146 applications were received. After appraisal and detailed scrutiny, 75 
applications were found to be eligible as per the scheme guidelines. Planning Commission 
has made an allocation of Rs. 700 crore for the 12 th Plan for the scheme. In view of the 
reduced allocation to the scheme, the Ministry has now proposed to take up 75 additional 
cold chain projects during the remaining period of the 12 thplan. It will not be possible to 
achieve the target of sanctioning 140 new projects during 12 th plan with this level of 
allocation. However, if additional resources are made available to the Ministry at later stage, 
additional projects will be taken up for implementation accordingly.  
 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013)

~ 47 ~ 
 
 
SCHEME FOR SETTING UP / MODERNIZATION OF ABATTOIRS  
 
Recommendation No. 3.51  
 
The Committee note that the Pl an scheme for establishing new abattoirs and 
modernizing the existing abattoirs was undertaken during Eleventh Plan period with 
an aim to provide facilities for scientific and less painful slaughter, chilling, rendering 
plant affluent treatment plant, bett er hygiene, safety and retail cold -chain 
management. The Committee further note that as against Plan allocation of Rs. 828 
crore, the expenditure was Rs. 39.54 crore only. Further of 10 approved abattoir 
projects, only 2 were completed and rest are under various stages of implementation, 
though the time line prescribed for completion of the projects were 18 months each. 
The Committee further note that there has been enormous time overrun of the 
projects. As many as 8 projects were approved way back in the y ear 2008. Delay in 
the approval of the scheme, local agitation and objection of local people over land, 
delay in appointment of consultants and also inordinate time taken in completing 
tender relating formalities, were some of the reasons assigned for dela y in execution 
of the projects. The Committee further note that the scheme has been upscaled to 
cover 25 new projects and modernisation of existing 25 abattoirs with a total project 
cost of Rs. 330.84 crore, during Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Committee are concerned 
to note the inordinate delay in the implementation of the projects included in the 
Eleventh Plan, which have now slipped to 12th Plan. In the opinion of the Committee, 
there are some fundamental deficiencies in the project formulation and its 
implementation thereof. The Committee would like the Government to take proactive 
steps to ensure that the projects of Eleventh Plan period which are continuing in the 
Twelfth Plan are not delayed any more. At the same time, the Committee also 
recommend that Govt. should step up their monitoring mechanism to ensure that the 
larger mandate assigned to the Ministry due to additional proposals in their kitty do 
not under-perform for want of efficient monitoring mechanism. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries is implementing the Scheme for Setting 
up of New/Modernization of Existing Abattoirs under its Infrastructure Development 
Scheme. During 11 th Five Year Plan, 10 abattoir projects were approved, out of which two 
have been completed (i.e Ahmednagar Abattoir Project and Dimapur Abattoir Project).  
         
CCEA in its meeting held on 06.09.2012 has approved the proposal for upscaling of 
the 11 th Plan Scheme for setting up of 25 new abattoirs and modernization of 25 existing 
abattoirs as well as continuing 8 ongoing projects. The scheme will be implemented in the 
Central Sector for the first two years of the 12 th Five Year Plan i.e.2012 -13 and 2013 -14. 
Thereafter, the scheme will be implemented through National Mission on Food Processing 
by State Governments for the rest of the 12 th Plan period since most of the proposals are 
from Municipal Bodies which are closely connected to the State Governments.  
             

~ 48 ~ 
 
For timely completion and avoiding further delay of the projects of Eleventh Plan 
period which are continuing in the Twelfth Plan, periodical meetings are taken by Joint 
Secretary of the concerned division in this Ministry with Project Implementing Agencies 
(PIAs) to monitor the progress of projects.   
          
For the proposal to cover 25 new abattoirs and modernization of existing 25 abattoirs 
during first two year of the 12 th Plan, the Ministry has empanelled Programme Management 
Agencies (PMAs) to scrutinize/evaluates the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) and to 
recommend the proposals to provide grant -in-aid as well as monitor the progress of abattoir 
projects assigned to them.  
            
Based on evaluation of DPRs and appraisal reports from PM As the Approval 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (MFPI), in its meeting held on 08.04.2013 
has accorded “in -principle” approval for three Abattoir Projects to provide financial 
assistance i.e. proposal of the Goa Meat Complex Ltd (Govt. of Goa  Undertaking) for 
financial assistance of Rs 617.02 lakh for modernization of abattoir at Usagon, Ponda, 
proposal of Meat Product of India Ltd (Govt. of Kerala Undertaking) for financial assistance 
of Rs 1436.12 lakh for establishment of modern abattoir at  Edayar, and proposal of the 
Greater Vishakhapatnam Municipal Corporation under PPP mode for financial assistance of 
Rs 1500 lakh for establishment of modern abattoir at Paradesipalem, Vishakapatnam. Since 
two of projects i.e. Goa Meat Complex Ltd, Goa and  Meat Product of India Ltd, Kerala are 
promoted by State Public Sector Undertakings, Operational Guidelines for the Scheme have 
been modified for 12 th Five Year Plan to widen the eligibility to cover projects promoted by 
State Public Sector Undertakings, Co-operatives and Boards under State Government. This 
amendment is intended to provide flexibility to State Governments in taking up abattoir 
projects. 
 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.50 of Chapter I of this Report. 
 
SCHEME FOR TECHNOLOGY UP -GRDATION / ESTABLISHMENT / MODERNIZATION 
OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRY  
 
Recommendation No. 3.52  
 
The Committee note that the scheme for technological up -gradation, 
establishment, modernization of food processing industry promotes latest 
technology in the preservation of perishable commodities including horticultural 
produce processing. The scheme envisages financial assistance for setting up of 
new processing units as well as technological up -gradation and expansion of 
existing units in the country. Consumer industries which include bakery industry; 
fruit and vegetable processing units; fish, meat and dairy processing; rice, pulse 

~ 49 ~ 
 
milling, oil milling and flour  milling sector, alcoholic, beverages etc. are some of the 
unorganised highly employable industries which are availing benefit under the 
scheme. During Ninth Plan period, as against budgetary allocation of Rs. 600 crore, 
the utilisation under the scheme wa s 583.55 crore, which makes the scheme as one 
of the most popular plan scheme of the Ministry. During this period, Government 
assisted 3229 food processing units. The Committee further find that the scheme has 
now been subsumed in the National Mission on F ood Processing (NMFP) with effect 
from 2012-13 as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme. As such, no new proposals are being 
accepted with effect from 1.4.2012 under the scheme for the Central sector. Hitherto, 
the applications received and sanctioned by respective  State / UT Government under 
NMFP, the Union Government is sanctioning the old cases prior to 31.3.2012. Despite 
wiping off the past liabilities, as many as 2926 cases with committed liabilities of 
around Rs. 700 crore is still remains as an outstanding. T he Committee desire that 
Government should approach the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance to 
ensure that adequate budgetary provisions are made in the scheme so as to ensure 
that the past committed liability is wiped out at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
A total of 3168 cases were pending as on 01.04.2012. amounting to Rs.795.26 
crores towards spillover liabilities of 11th Plan, to be met  during 12th Plan.  
    
          During 2012 -13, out of Rs. 186.46 crores RE provided under the Sc heme, Ministry 
has assisted 1232 units amounting to Rs.186.20 crores.  Further, the Ministry‟s proposal to 
meet the spillover liabilities of 11 th Plan during the remaining period of 12 th Plan (2013-17) 
has been recommended by EFC. And a draft CCEA Note is being circulated.  
 
   Allocation of Rs. 740.00 crores during 12 th Plan would be utilized as per the following 
break-up for meeting the committed liabilities of 11th Plan:- 
Year 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 Total 12 th Plan 
allocation 
Amount *186.46 214.00 250.00 49.54 40.00 740.00 
*As per proposed RE Rs. 186.46 crores (2012-13) 
 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
BOTTLING/PACKAGING OF SUGARCANE JUICE  
 
Recommendation No. 3.53  
 
The technology to bottle and tetra -pack t ender coconut water, has 
revolutionised its usage amongst consumers. Another commodity, with equal 
promising returns, in the opinion of the Committee, is juice extracted from 
sugarcane. The Committee desire that Ministry of Food Processing Industry should 
undertake R&D work, so as to develop appropriate technologies for the bottling / 
package of sugarcane juice. If developed, this will go a long way in serving the 
interest of the food processing sector.  
 

~ 50 ~ 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Ministry had sought inform ation on appropriate technologies for bottling and 
packaging of sugarcane juice from the Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow, 
Central Food Technology Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysore, Sugarcane Breeding 
Institute, Coimbatore and National Suga r Institute, Kanpur.  The Indian Institute of 
Sugarcane Research (IISR), Lucknow have intimated that they are currently running a 
project on “Developing a technology for preservation and packaging of sugarcane juice.”  
The experimental results are indicati ve of improving shelf life of cane juice under 
combination of permitted preservation and low temperature storage (10 degree C) to 35 
days in PET glasses, PET and glass bottles and polythene packs with original colour, task 
and flavour.  Efforts are in prog ress for enhancing the shelf life from four weeks to six 
months.  Further this Ministry has desired to invite and fund the proposals on the above 
lines. Accordingly, Sugarcane Breeding Institute, CFTRI and Indian Institute of Sugarcane 
Research, Lucknow, have shown their interest in submitting the R&D proposals for carrying 
out research on the Bottling/Packaging of Sugarcane Juice within a shortest period of time. 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
SCHEME FOR QUALITY ASSURANCE, CODE X STANDARDS AND RESEARCH AND 
DEVELOPMENT AND OTHER PROMOTIONAL ACTIVITIES  
 
Recommendation No. 3.54  
 
The objective of the scheme is to motivate food processing industries for 
adoption of food safety and quality assurance mechanisms such as total quality 
management including ISO -22000, ISO -14000, the Hazardous Analysis and Critical 
Control Points (HACCP), Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) and Good Hygienic 
Practices (GHP). The scheme also enables the food processing industry to face the 
global competition in International trade post -WTO, product acceptance by overseas 
buyers, keep Indian industry technological abreast of International post -WTO and 
R&D works to benefit the industry in terms of products and process development, 
improved packaging value additi on and leading to innovative products and 
processes with commercial values. The Committee find that performance under the 
scheme has been somewhat tardy. During Eleventh Plan period, as against the outlay 
of Rs. 250 crore, the expenditure was only 131.07 c rore. For the Twelfth Plan, an 
allocation of Rs. 290 crore has been proposed for the scheme. The budgetary 
allocation for the year 2012 -13 was Rs. 31.91 crore against which, expenditure 
incurred was Rs. 22.23 crore (upto December 2012). A provision of Rs. 32 crore has 
been proposed for the year 2013 -14. Lack of technology dissemination and 
commercialization, mechanism of disbursement of funds, are some of the areas of 
concern observed under R&D projects. The Committee are pained to note that in case 
of R&D projects, no provision exists under the scheme, for assistance for filing of 
patents and commercialization of research output. The Committee take this seriously 
and desire that adequate provisions may be made for the purpose in the R&D sector.  
 
The Committee further find that International standards for food products are 
not mandatory for the food business operators in the country. However, they are to 

~ 51 ~ 
 
comply with the provision of Food Safety and Standards Act and Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder. F urther, Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India is harmonising the National Standards with International standards such as 
codex wherever appropriate. The Committee desire that National standards be 
evolved and aligned with International standards so that food processing sector is 
not denied opportunity to compete in the International market. 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Development of food standards has evolved over the past several years. Most of 
these have been drawn from provisions of the Prevention o f Food Adulteration Act. 
However, there has been an on -going demand for review of these standards taking into 
account the latest development in food science, food consumption pattern, new 
specifications, presence of new contaminants and toxins as well as u se of new food 
additives and ingredients required by the producers and manufacturers. Under Section 
16(3) (m) of the FSS Act, 2006, it is the responsibility of Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India (FSSAI) under Ministry of Health to promote consist ency with the relevant 
international standards. The standards adopted by Codex are the relevant international 
standards and are also the reference point within the frame -work of WTO. It is incumbent 
upon member nations to apply the national treatment claus e, meaning thereby, all imported 
foodstuff will be given a treatment equal to those applicable to the domestic producers, 
manufacturers and the market. The FAO and WHO of the United Nations regularly 
encourage countries to harmonise their standards with those of the Codex.  
 
 FSSAI has initiated the harmonisation process taking into account the standards 
adopted by the EU, USFDA, Canada, certain developing countries as well as India‟s needs 
by following two approaches as given below: 
 
a) Vertical Standards :  Vertical Standards would mean quality standards of food 
products, e.g., fresh and processed fruits and vegetables, milk and milk products, meat and 
meat products, fish and fish products, poultry products, fats and oils, etc.  The following two-
pronged strategy is proposed to be followed in the following hierarchy: 
 
i) Review the domestic standards under FSSR and initiate the process of revision/ 
harmonisation. In such cases, it is proposed to review the international standards and 
identify the necessary changes  required for harmonisation with the Codex standards; 
simultaneously, identify the products where we do not have domestic standards under 
FSSR but a relevant Codex standard is available. In such cases, it is proposed to 
adopt/adapt such Codex standards based on India‟s needs; 
 
ii) There are several products for which there are neither domestic standards under 
FSSR nor are there Codex standards, e.g., ethnic foods of Indian origin.  In such cases, it is 
proposed to take up identification of products and the proc ess for their standardization in 
consultation with sector specific experts; 
 
b) Horizontal Standards : Horizontal Standards are those which apply across all 
products categories. For instance, food additives, food contaminants (like heavy metals,  

~ 52 ~ 
 
toxins, etc.) , food hygiene (microbiological standards), pesticide residues, residues of 
veterinary drugs, food labelling, food inspection and certification, methods of sampling and 
analysis, and nutrition requirements. These would also need to be equipped with Codes o f 
Practice for uniform application across all vertical standards. 
 
It is proposed to utilize the knowledge available in the country in terms of experts in 
FSSAI, food industry (small, medium, large), relevant Govt. institutions, commodity experts, 
academicians, consumer organisations as well as the representatives of trade bodies 
(AIFPA, FICCI, CII, etc.). Because of the high volume of work involved, several experts are 
to be identified to carry forward the work in a collaborative and inclusive manner. The draft 
standards and codes of practice will be developed by such expert groups. These documents 
will then be considered by a working group of FSSAI. It is proposed to follow an iterative 
process with the expert groups to check for consistency with the inten t of FSS Act and 
Regulations before circulating the draft texts to a large group of stakeholders by placing 
them on the FSSAI website for comments/suggestions. After receipt of comments, the draft 
texts will be placed before the relevant scientific panels,  where applicable and then before 
the Scientific Committee for consideration. 
 
Once the Scientific Committee has approved the draft texts and FSSAI has accepted 
them, these will be notified to the WTO as per obligations under the WTO Agreement. A 
minimum o f 60 days period will have be provided to the WTO members for comments 
before the going through the process of adoption and notification of the standards by 
FSSAI.  FSSAI placed the invite on its web -site in February 2013 and several nominations 
have been received and has started the process of identifying the expert groups. It is 
proposed to assign the tasks in April so that the draft standards can be prepared by them by 
the end of July 2013 for the subsequent steps as per the procedures. It is aimed that the 
new FSSAI standards are notified by December 2014. 
 
During 2012-13, 38 new R&D proposals have been approved by MOFPI/ SERB and 
an amount of Rs.10.31 crore has been released to various institutions/ organisations 
including on -going projects also. To ens ure more effective utilisation of funds under the 
Scheme, implementation of the R&D and lab components of the Scheme have been 
entrusted to Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) under Department of 
Science and Technology and Indian Council of Agric ultural Research (ICAR) respectively.  
During the 12 th Five Year Plan (2012 -17), an amendment in the R&D Scheme of MFPI is 
envisaged for extending assistance for filling of patents for the R&D outcome of projects 
supported under MFPI Scheme and this will p ave the way for up scaling of and 
commercialization of R&D outcome. 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.58 of Chapter I of this Report. 

~ 53 ~ 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE GOVERNMENT 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

~ 54 ~ 
 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2.44  
 
The Committee while strongly disapproving the protracted delay in the 
finalization of the Twelfth Plan, which has still to see the light of the day, do not find 
any merit and justification in according approval to schemes in piecemeal manner by 
EFC / SFC, when the Plan and the schemes are yet to be approved formally. The 
Committee are of the view that such action on the part of the Ministry strikes at the 
very root of the planning process and threatens the sanctity of planning itself. The 
Committee wonder whether the instant rules / regulations permit such unwarranted 
action on the part of the Ministries concerned and the Planning Commission. The 
Committee would like to be apprised thereof. 
  
The Committee have been informed that all the major projects under Industry 
Division of Planning Commission and food processing sector, a component of 
Industry Division, are in time, except, projects of food processing sector. The 
Committee fails to understand this exception and step -motherly treatment accorded 
to schemes of Food Processing Sector. The Committee view the neglect of food 
processing sector, by the Planning Commission seriously and desire that the sector 
should be accorded importance, as it warrants.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The approvals to the various schemes were given by the various EFC/SFC so that 
the Ministry could implement the schemes during the first year of the XII five year plan, i.e. 
2012-13 and there is no hurdle in t he implementation of the schemes. The approvals to the 
schemes have been obtained by the Ministry in accordance with the procedure laid down by 
the Government of India for this purpose. The schemes up to the allocation of less than Rs. 
300 crores are appro ved by the EFC chaired by Secretary of administrative 
Ministry/Department. The schemes with an allocation of Rs. 300 crores and more are 
approved by the CCEA based on the recommendations of the EFC which is chaired by the 
Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance. MoFPI has also obtained approval of the 
competent authority as per the procedure laid down.  
  
In the context of possible implications of time taken in finalisation of Plan document 
on implementation of schemes/ projects under industry sector, suitable measures were 
taken in consultation with the respective Ministries/ Departments. Such measures included 
according administrative approval for seeding/ initial actions in cases of new „big ticket 
projects‟, getting performance evaluation studies ca rried out as per guidelines of 
Department of expenditure, Ministry of Finance, in cases of existing schemes slated for 

~ 55 ~ 
 
continuation in the 12 th Plan, facilitating „interim approval‟ by the competent authorities for 
limited period implementation in cases of schemes/ projects having multiplier effects and/ or 
objectives to address externalities etc. The said approach was adopted in case of schemes 
of M/o Food Processing Industries (MFPI) as well.   
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.15 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
MEGA FOOD PARK  
 
Recommendation No. 3.47  
 
The Committee note that the scheme of Mega Food Park (MFP) was conceived 
to provide a mechanism  for bringing together farmers, processors, retailers, linking 
agricultural production to the market, so as ensure maximum value addition, 
minimise wastage, increase farmers’ income and create employment opportunities. 
During Eleventh Plan period, as again st allocation of Rs. 1575 crore, the actual 
expenditure was just 217.25 crore. As many as 30 Mega Food Parks were approved in 
three phases i.e. 10 in Phase -I, 5 in Phase -II and 15 in Phase -III. As against this, 13 
projects have been accorded final approval , 17 projects accorded in -principle 
approval. In the financial year, 2012 -13 as against the budget estimates of Rs. 86 
crore, an expenditure of Rs. 62.75 crore incurred. For the year 2013 -14, the financial 
projections have been to the tune of Rs. 270 crore . Comprising of Grant-in-Aid for 10 
Mega Food Park (Phase -I), 5 Mega Food Park (Phase -II) and 15 Mega Food Park 
(Phase-III) with allocation of 105, 85 and 75, respectively. Rs. 5 crore have been 
proposed for other activities of Project Management Agency ch arges, publicity etc. 
As against the projected allocation of Rs. 270 crore, the BE for the year 2013-14 is Rs. 
110 crore. Though a Mega Food Park Project is required to be completed within a 
span of 30 months from the release of first installment, the fast est progressing 
project was implemented in four years. The Committee find that in almost all the 
projects, which are operational and those under implementation, the progress has 
been far away from satisfactory. The contention of the Government that the pas t 
Food Parks did not come up due to inability of the States to contribute their share of 
equity and thus private sector was roped in, did not yield desired impact on the 
implementation of the scheme. The Committee feel that the leadership and proactive 
role expected from the Ministry to enlist private sector support for important Mega 
Food Park scheme has been wanting, as a large number of parks, have not started 
commercial production. In the opinion of the Committee, there are major 
shortcomings in the pla nning and implementation of Mega Food Park Schemes. The 
mid-term evaluation of the scheme revealed major deficiencies in the implementation. 
However, the mid course corrective action undertaken by the Government, did not 
impact significantly and improved t he pace of progress. The Committee, therefore, 

~ 56 ~ 
 
desire that a critical appraisal of the scheme may be undertaken and corrective 
measures put in place immediately.  
 
The Committee also note that the Mega Food Park project was launched with 
much fan-fare with a presumption that each MFP will cater to 30 -35 food processing 
units, benefit 6000 farmers directly and 25000 to 30000 producers indirectly. Further, 
it was expected to bring about investment to the tune of Rs. 75 – 100 crore in 
common facilities and ano ther Rs. 225 – 250 crore in processing and ancillary units. 
The Committee have reasons to believe that the assumptions were highly unrealistic 
and inflated to garner support for the scheme. Taking these assumptions on their 
face value, the Committee would like to be apprised of the actual gain realised of 
each component as against those envisaged w.r.t. setting up of Mega Food Parks in 
the country. The socio -economic benefit studies of the Mega Food Park may also be 
undertaken so as to assess the benefits, reach and penetration of the scheme.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
As on 01.04.2013, the Ministry has approved all the 30 projects sanctioned by the 
Government under Mega Food Parks scheme, out of which 14 projects have been accorded 
final approval and 16 projects have been accorded in-principle approval. The BE and RE for 
2012-13 were Rs. 86.00 Crore and 93.20 Crore respectively, against which actual 
expenditure is Rs. 93.11 Crore under the above scheme. The BE for 2013 -14 is Rs. 116.00 
Crore.      
   
 The M inistry has not carried out mid -term evaluation of the scheme. However an 
evaluation of implementation of the scheme during 11 th plan has been carried out by Center 
for Market Research and Social Development Pvt. Ltd.  Based on the evaluation report of 
the scheme, and the learning experience, the scheme guidelines have been modified to 
minimize delay and facilitate speedier project implementation. Earlier, Financial Closure 
(Term loan sanction by the Bank) used to take a lot of time which caused delay in pro ject 
implementation. Now, Financial Closure has been made a pre -condition for consideration of 
final approval of the project. Acquisition of land in the name of SPV, also caused delay in 
implementation of various projects. To addressed this problem, the pr oposals having land in 
the name of promoter (s), are given more weightage during selection process.    
   
Critical appraisal of the scheme will be conducted by the Ministry during 12 th plan 
mid-term review of the scheme and necessary corrective steps will be ensured by the 
Ministry.  
  
The Infrastructure Development scheme for Mega Food Parks has a long gestation 
period. The process of scheme implementation is still continuing. Presently 2 Parks, 1 each 
at Haridwar in Uttarakhand and at Chittoor in Andhra a re partially operational.  The financial 
outcome of these 2 projects as on today is as under: 
 
S. 
No. 
Status of Financial 
Outcome 
Patanjali Food and Herbal 
Park Pvt. Ltd, Haridwar 
Srini Food Park Pvt. 
Ltd, Chittoor 
1 Total Number of Plots 24 15 
2. Number of plots 
allotted 
17 7 

~ 57 ~ 
 
3. Units in Operation 16 units in operation+ 1 unit 
under construction 
1 
4. Investment in Units Approx. Rs. 59.00 crore Rs. 20.00 crore 
5. Employment 
Generation 
5000 (direct and indirect 
combined) 
25 permanent and             
40-50 seasonal 
6. No. Of Plots Un -
Allotted 
7 14 
 
 The socio -economic impact of the projects may be assessed only after the parks 
become fully operational. The Ministry will undertake a socio -economic study after some of 
the projects become fully functional in coming years. 
 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.35 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 3.49  
 
The availability of uninterrupted power, 24x7, is pre -requisite and an important 
conditionality for operating cold storage chain successfully. The shortage of power, 
in various parts of the country both in qualitative and quantitative terms, especially in 
rural areas, constraint the development of cold storage infrastructure. The Committee 
note that the Ministry of Food Processing Industry in coordination with Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) have undertaken demonstration projects using 
bio-mass / solar hybrid system for generati on of electricity. Some of the State 
Governments have been advised to take up cold -chain pilot project based on the 
technologies developed by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. While the 
Committee wishes to promote the use of non -conventional sources of energy (NCSE) 
for the development of cold storage infrastructure, they would first like to be apprised 
of the outcome of these demonstration projects before dwelling upon the subject 
further.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
It was decided that some demonstration projects based on the technology developed 
by MNRE may be set up by some State Governments to validate commercial use of these 
technologies. Therefore the State Govt. of Assam, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh have been requested to set up Pilot projects based on 
the concept note prepared by the Solar Energy Centre of MNRE with the assistance 
available under the schemes of MNRE and Department of Agriculture & Co -operation, Govt. 
of India. However, no response has been received from any of these States on this issue by 
the Ministry till date. Due to limited allocation of plan resources for the scheme during 12 th 

~ 58 ~ 
 
Plan, the Ministry do not propose to take up cold chain pilot project based on the non -
conventional sources of energy. 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.38 of Chapter I of this Report. 
 
IRRADIATION FACILITY  
 
Recommendation No. 3.50  
 
The Committee note  that food Irradiation facility is one of the components 
under Cold -Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure plan scheme, for 
infrastructure development. The scheme has since subsumed in the National Mission 
for Food Processing, a Centrally Sp onsored Scheme, in the Twelfth Plan. Under this 
modern, cutting edge technology, food is subjected to ionizing energy or radiation 
which strengthens food conservation, improves food hygiene, help in extension of 
shelf-life, enhance safety by killing food b orne pathogens and parasites, destroy 
insects, pests in stored products and fruits. The Committee further find that Grant -in-
Aid @ 50% of the total cost of plant and machinery and technical civil work in general 
areas and 75% for North -Eastern States and d ifficult areas subjected to maximum of 
Rs. 10 crore is extended to implementing agencies for various components of cold -
chain including irradiation. The Ministry have approved four irradiation projects, of 
which one, with project cost of Rs. 17.73 crore ha s commenced commercial 
production and rest are under various stages of implementation. The conflicting 
scientific evidence and literature available, world over are conflicting and mixed and 
tend to promote and denounce the use of irradiation for food proce ssing. Despite 
concerns expressed by various consumer / interest groups, globally over safety and 
security issues, irradiated food is permitted in more than 50 countries. In the interest 
of public health, the Committee would like to tread with caution and desire that 
matters such as irradiation dosages, food labelling, standards and other safety and 
security parameters of irradiation food, be assessed, monitored and regulated, before 
the facility is open on a large commercial scale. Concurrently, the Govt. should also 
educate the masses about irradiation food and step up publicity campaign before 
embarking upon this scheme on a larger pedestal.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Irradiated food is regulated in the country in accordance with the Atomic Energy 
(Control of Irradiation of Food) Rules, 1996.Food can be irradiated only in a food irradiation 
plant, which is authorized by the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board and licensed by the 
competent Government authority. The license to carry out food irradiation operatio n is given 
only after ascertaining the safety of the installation, its suitability to ensure proper process 
control, and availability of licensed operators and qualified staff.  
 
Board of Radiation & Isotope Technology (BRIT) is providing consultancy services for 
establishment of Food irradiation plant as follows: 

~ 59 ~ 
 
 
 Process Technology  
 Plant Design  
 Supply of Co-60 radiation source, its loading/unloading/disposal  
 Advice for getting statutory clearances from Atomic Energy Regulatory Board  
 AERB Safety Standard - Land based stationary Gamma Irradiators (2008)  
 AERB Safety Code - Safety code on Operations & Maintenance of land based 
Stationary Gamma Irradiators (1993)  
 Commissioning Dosimetry 
 Support for seeking ISO accreditation  
 
Codex Alimentarius Commission has endorsed a green irradiation logo. Food Safety 
and Standards Authority of Ind ia (FSSAI) is also regulating the food safety aspects of 
Irradiated foods. Following are the mandatory regulations for irradiated foods: 
 
i) As per the Regulation 2.4.4 of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labelling) 
Regulation, 2011 all packages of ir radiated foods to be marketed in India will be 
labeled with this logo, along with the words “Processed by Irradiation method”, and 
the date of irradiation, license number of the facility and the purpose of irradiation. 
Consumers will have a free choice to buy radiation processed or non - radiation 
processed commodity. 
ii) Regulation 2.13 of Food Safety and Standards (Food Product standards and Food 
Additives) Regulation, 2011 prescribes the standards for irradiation doses, 
requirement for process of irradiation,  restrictions, records, standards, storage and 
sale of irradiated foods.  
iii) Regulation 2.3.14(20) of Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restriction on 
Sales) Regulation, 2011 prescribes the “condition for sale of Irradiated Foods”. 
 
 For export of food items like mangoes in countries such as USA, it is mandatory to go 
for irradiation. Therefore, establishment of commercial food irradiation facilities in the 
country will help increase export of food articles. 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.43 of Chapter I of this Report. 

~ 60 ~ 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
VENTURE CAPITAL FUND (VCF) AND INNOVATION FUND (IF)  
 
Recommendation No. 2.52  
 
The Committee note that majority of food processing entrepreneurs face 
serious constraints of easy access of bank credit due to low net worth, lack of 
tangible security, absence o f proven track record etc. They also suffer from 
additional limitations due to seasonal operations and thus lower capacity utilization. 
Further, the market development and quality assurance cost are also relatively higher 
for them. The lack of incentive fo r innovation too impacts the entrepreneurs. 
Entrepreneurship and skill development are hallmark to growth of a sector. In order 
to address the constraints of long term credit and innovation, the Working Group 
constituted by the Planning Commission had reco mmended dedicated Venture 
Capital Fund (VCF) and Innovation Fund (IF), respectively, to address these issues 
during the Twelfth Plan period. The proposed Venture Capital Fund designed to allow 
food processing units to leverage their limited seasons in a mo re effective manner. 
The innovative Fund was to encourage market oriented applied research, act as 
bridge between lab and industry and assist small entrepreneurs especially in rural 
areas. The Committee are distressed to note that the highly spirited twin initiatives of 
the Ministry of venture capital and innovation, which can be game changer in the 
food processing sector, have been deferred for want of resources, during the Twelfth 
Plan period. As the schemes under reference are likely to spur growth and a ct as 
catalyst to boost the sector, the Committee recommend that the funds for these 
schemes may be made available during Twelfth Plan period itself and the Plan 
proposal accordingly modified. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard.  
 
 
 
 

~ 61 ~ 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 
An outlay of Rs. 5990 crores for the 12 th Five Year Plan has been made available by 
Planning Commission against the recommendation of working group for Rs. 15304 crore.  
This Ministry had proposed an allocatio n of Rs. 14604 crore. The above two 
initiatives/schemes recommended by Working Group i.e. Venture Capital Fund (VCF) and 
Innovation Fund (IF) are not being taken up for the present due to lack of resources. 
However, in view of the recommendations of the Ho n‟ble Committee, the matter has been 
taken up with the Planning commission for additional resources during the XII Plan to 
enable this Ministry to take up these new schemes. The Committee will be apprised of the 
action taken, on getting a response from the Planning Commission. 
 
***** 
 
(Letter No. 6-03/2013-Parl   dated  26th June, 2013) 
 
 
 
 
                           
NEW DELHI                              BASUDEB ACHARIA 
03 Decemebr, 2013                                                                Chairman, 
12 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                             Committee on Agriculture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

~ 62 ~ 
 
APPENDIX 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-14) 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 11 th November, 2013 from 1500 hours to 16 15 
hours in Committee Room „C‟ (G/F), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
          PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA   
2.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
3.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
5.  Shri P. Kumar 
6.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
8.  Shri Patel Kishanbhyai V. 
9.  Dr Kumar Pandey. Vinay ‘Vinnu’ 
  
                                    RAJYA SABHA 
10.  Shri N. Balaganga 
11.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
12.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
13.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
14.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
15.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
16.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
17.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 

~ 63 ~ 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.H. Rao   - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
Then, the Committee took up for consideration the following: 
 (i) xx   xx   xx   xx 
 (ii) Memorandum No.06 pertaining to the draft Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-ninth Report of 
the Committee on Agriculture (2012 -13) on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries. 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee approved the categorization of action taken 
replies as shown in the Memoranda and adopted the draft Reports without any modification.  
They authorised the Chairman to present these Reports to Parliament after getting them 
factually verified from the concerned Departments. 
 
4. xx   xx   xx   xx 
5. xx   xx   xx   xx 
 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

~ 64 ~ 
 
ANNEXURE 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE FORTY-NINTH REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) PERTAINING TO MINISTRY 
OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations               24 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Para Nos.1.4, 2.42, 2.43, 2.45, 2.46, 2.47, 2.48, 2.49, 2.50,  2.51, 
      2.53, 2.54, 2.55, 3.46, 3.38, 3.51 3.52, 3.53 and 3.54 
Total           19 
 
Percentage                           79% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
Para Nos.  Nil 
Total                   00 
Percentage                               00% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos.  2.44,  3.47, 3.49 and 3.50   
Total              04  
Percentage               17% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para Nos. 2.52   
Total             01  
Percentage                    04% 