 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-2014) 
                 
        
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                              
 
                                  
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING & 
FISHERIES. 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-eighth Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2013-2014)} 
 
 
          
  FIFTY-FOURTH  REPORT 
  
 
 
         
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana,1935 (Saka) 
54 

~ 2 ~ 
 
  
  FIFTY-FOURTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, 
DAIRYING & FISHERIES. 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Forty-eighth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2013-2014)} 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   09-12-2013 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  09-12-2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana,1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 


~ 3 ~ 
 
 
 
 
 
COA No.    
 
 
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
            
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
© 2013 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by 
 
 
 
 
 

~ 4 ~ 
 
 
 CONTENTS PAGE 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iii) 
  
INTRODUCTION (v) 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report 1  
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government       
13  
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
41 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 47 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
48 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
 Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee held on 11 
November, 2013. 
51 
 ANNEXURE   
 
Analysis of action taken by Government on the Forty-ninth 
Report of Committee on Agriculture on Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) pertaining to Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
 
 53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

~ 5 ~ 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2013-14) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.   Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas  Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Kachhadia Naranbhai  
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri N. Balaganga 
23.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
30.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 
 
(iii)  

~ 6 ~ 
 
   
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (2013 -2014) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fifty -fourth Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained 
in the For ty-eighth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2012 -13) on Demands for 
Grants (2013 -14) pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture, (Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries). 
 
2.  The Forty-eighth Report of the Committee was presented to the Lok Sabha on 23 
April, 2013 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25 April, 2013. The Action Taken 
Replies on the Report were received from the Government on 22 July, 2013.  
 
3.  The Report wa s considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 11 November, 2013.  
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty -eighth Report of the Committee is given in 
Annexure.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                              BASUDEB ACHARIA 
28  Novemebr, 2013                    Chairman,  
7  Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                            Committee on Agriculture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 

~ 7 ~ 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Forty -eighth Report of the 
Committee on Agriculture (2012 -13) on „Demands for Grants (2013 -14)‟ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Anima l Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 23 April 2013 and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 25 April, 2013. 
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries) have furnished Action Ta ken Replies in respect of all the 20 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as under:-  
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Recommendation Nos. 1.4, 2.20, 2.21, 2.22, 3.29, 3.30, 3.31, 3.32, 3.33, 
     3.34, 3.36, 4.46, 4.47, 4.49, 4.50 , 4.52  and 4.53. 
   
      Total = 17 
 Chapter =   II 
 
(ii)  Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:  
 
Recommendation Nos. 3.35, 4.51  
            
         Total = 02 
          Chapter =   III 
 
 (iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Recommendation No. Nil      
      Total = 00 
 Chapter =  IV 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Recommendation No.  4.48     
 
      Total = 01 
 Chapter =  V 

~ 8 ~ 
 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Committee‟s comments contained 
in Chapter-I and Chapter V be furnished to them at an early date. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
PROPOSED FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (FTA) BETWEEN INDIA AND EUROPEAN 
UNION (EU) 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.22)  
1.5 During oral evidence of the Department in connection with examination of 
Demands for Grants (2013-14) it had been noticed by the Committee that a  Free Trade 
Agreement (FTA) between India and European Union (EU) had been under 
consideration. It was learnt that EU has not been permitting the import of dairy products 
citing Sanitary and Phyto Sanitary (SPS) clause s and had alleged that the Indian milch 
animals were not being maintained as per EU norms. As such, the Indian dairy products 
had been unfit for consumption in Europe. On the contrary, EU had continued to export 
and sell their dairy products in India seeking protection under Geographical Indication 
(GI). On the other hand, the indigenous dairy items like, Lassi and Paneer were freely 
sold in European m arket without giving any protection to India. When the Committee 
enquired about the Government‟s stand on the issue, it was intimated that India oppose 
any tariff concessions to EU for their dairy products and the same has been conveyed 
to the Department of Commerce. The matter is under negotiation.  

~ 9 ~ 
 
Observing that dairy production is a mainstay for a wider section of small and 
marginal farmers, landless farmers, cattle rearers, womenfolk and urban poor, the 
Committee had desired that the interest of the da iry producers of the country which is 
paramount be protected from monopolistic, discriminatory and lopsided trade practices. 
As the EU Government provides heavy subsidies for the farm produce and dairy sector, 
the Government is urged not only to ensure a l evel-playing field but also prevail upon 
EU to accord concessions for their domestic dairy producers. The Committee  had 
hoped that Government would take adequate actions in the matter for the benefit of 
farmers.  
1.6 The Department in their action taken no te have stated that they  have 
communicated to the Department of Commerce that it does not agree for any tariff 
concessions being offered to EU which will affect the interest and livelihood of dairy 
farmers. The matter is still under negotiation. 
1.7 The Committee desired that the interest of the dairy producers of our 
Country be protected from monopolistic, discriminatory and lop sided trade 
practices.  As the EU Government provides heavy subsidies to the farm produce 
and dairy sector, the Committee h ad urged the Government to ensure a level 
playing field and prevail upon EU to accord concessions for domestic dairy 
producers.  The Committee regret to note from the reply of the Government that 
no action has been taken so far by the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries except repeating that “the matter is still under negotiation”.  The 
Committee would like to know, how soon the negotiation will be completed and 
what specific steps are proposed by the Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries to ensure level playing field to our dairy producers.  The 
Committee would await information in this regard.   The Government should not 
agree to Free Trade Agreement unless EU agree to our terms and conditions. 

~ 10 ~ 
 
 
EXPEDITIOUS IMPLEMENTATION OF PLAN SCHEMES 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.31) 
 
1.8 The Committee had recommended a slew of measures in their Second Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the Department regarding the prolonged delay in the 
finalization of Eleventh Plan and its detrimental impact on the implementation of va rious 
schemes of the Government  and reiterated the same in their Twenty -fourth Report that 
the Twelfth Plan documents should be finalized before 1 st April, 2012. The adverse 
impact on schemes / projects had also been confessed by the representatives of 
Planning Commission during oral deposition in connection with the examination of 
Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Department.  The Committee had noted that in 
spite of their having repeatedly espoused the caus e of initiating corrective measures to 
expedite the finalization of Twelfth Plan document, so as to avoid procedural delay in 
according clearance to schemes and resulting staggering of timelines and reduced 
allocation, no concrete action had been taken in this regard. The Plan Document was 
stuck with the Planning Commission and as and when the Twelfth Plan would be finally 
operationalized, the implementations of the schemes would be severely hampered. The 
fears of the Committee had further compounded on bei ng informed that the final 
approval of the new schemes of the Department m ight not be cleared before October -
November, 2013, i.e. after RE stage of the second year of the Twelfth Plan. The 
Committee, once again had recommended expeditious finalization of t he Twelfth Plan 
document so as to ensure timely implementation of the various schemes of the 
Department.  The Committee had also desired the Government to have a re-look at the 
planning procedures, process es and practices especially in the context of protr acted 
delays in the finalization of Five Year Plans.   
1.9 The Department in their action taken note have stated that the 12 th Plan 
document was approved by  the National Development Council in its 57 th meeting held 

~ 11 ~ 
 
on 27 th December 2012. The Planning Commission had conveyed its approval to the 
broad scheme -wise details of Plan outlay of Rs. 14,179 crore for the Department of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries for the 12 th Five Year Plan to facilitate 
finalization of programmes and schemes. Bas ed on the approved allocation, EFC 
meetings of the restructured three Centrally Sponsored Schemes and three Central 
Sector Schemes of the Department have been completed. 
To ensure transition of the programmes to 12 th Plan, the Department have 
decided that the programmes which were under implementation during 11 th Plan will 
continue to be implemented till approval on new/restructured schemes is obtained by 
the Department. 
1.10 As the Planning Commission has since conveyed its approval to the broad 
Scheme-wise details of Plan  outlay of Rs. 14 ,179 crore for the Department of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries for 12 th Plan, the Committee urge the 
Department to ensure expeditious implementation of plan schemes a nd 
programmes and achieve desired results. The Committee hope that the 
Government have taken note of the Committee‟s recommendation regarding 
“having a re -look at the  planning procedures, process es and practices ” 
especially with regard to finalization of Five Year Plans. 
MASS AWARENESS CAMPAIGNS  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.36) 
 
1.11 The Committee had noted that many of the important schemes of the 
Department could not achieve the desired targets due to lack of awareness amongst the 
intended beneficiaries,  which resulted in the non -utilization of allocated funds by the 
Department. S urprisingly, no departmental  institutionalize mechanism had existed  for 
generating mass awareness of the schemes for the intended beneficiaries, unlike ATMA 
and KVKs. The argumen t of the Department that ATMAs of Department of Agriculture 

~ 12 ~ 
 
and Cooperation (DAC) and Krishi Vigyan Kendras of Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) are being engaged in extension services and they do not want any 
duplicity in this regard had been  hardly convincing. The Committee  had, therefore, 
recommended that on the line of KVK / ATMA, a separate scheme for the mass 
awareness campaigns, exclusively for animal husbandry, dairy and fisheries sector s be 
initiated at the earliest, so as to ensure focused attention and high reach.  
1.12 The Department in their action taken note have stated that the CSS on Livestock 
Extension and Delivery Services was discontinued from 10 th Plan on the 
recommendation of Committee o n Zero Based Budgeting set up by Plann ing 
Commission. Sub -group on extension setup by Planning Commission advised the 
revival of the scheme during 11 th Plan. The Department agree d with the observation of 
the Committee that a separate scheme is necessary for mass awareness campaigns 
exclusively for livestock and fisheries sectors to facilitate implementation of various 
schemes of the Department, as it increases awareness among all s takeholders 
regarding the latest developments in the sector including scientific methods of rearing 
and management/disease control/animal nutrition etc.  The Department has already 
prepared a draft scheme which envisages increased information support among  animal 
rearers, operating specific training and capacity building of various stakeholders, 
organizing large number of Livestock Farmers Groups for empowering them with 
technology required for improving their income from livestock farming activities, 
organizing livestock melas and regional livestock fairs, organizing exposure visits of the 
stakeholders to progressive States having established extension mechanism and 
developing a mechanism of obtaining feedback from the animal rearers regarding their 
necessities and aspirations and gradually incorporating them in the extension 
machinery. The scheme has been proposed as a Sub -mission on skill development, 
technology transfer and extension for livestock sector under the proposed National 

~ 13 ~ 
 
Livestock Mission to be  implemented during 12 th Five Year Plan. In respect of fisheries 
sector, separate scheme for capacity building, training and deployment of “Matsya 
Mitra” in order to strengthen extension services in fisheries has been proposed under 
National Fisheries Development Board. There would also be a component on “Training 
and Extension” proposed under the National Scheme for Welfare of Fishermen. 
1.13 The Committee are glad to note that in pursuance of the Committee‟s 
recommendation, a scheme which envisages increa sed information support has 
been proposed as a sub -mission under the proposed National Livestock Mission 
to be implemented during the 12 th Five Year Plan.  In respect of fisheries sector, a 
separate scheme of “ Matsya Mitra ” has been proposed  in order to st rengthen 
extension services in fisheries.  The Committee hope that these schemes will be 
finalised and implemented expeditiously and dissemination of information 
regarding programmes of the Department to intended beneficiaries is done 
effectively. 
 
UTILISATION OF FUNDS ALLOCATION TO ANIMAL HUSBANDRY SECTOR 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.46) 
 
1.14 The proposed outlay for Annual Plan (2013 -14) for animal husbandry sector 
under the Centrally Sponsored and Central Sector Schemes are Rs. 991.20 crore and 
Rs. 360.09 crores, respectively, which aggregates to Rs. 1351.29 crore. However, the 
BE for 2013-14 is Rs. 1051.49 crore, which is Rs. 11.61 crore less than the allocation in 
previous fiscal. The Committee had deprecated this, and pointed out that the animal 
husbandry sector has immense potential for the welfare of small and marginal farmers, 
small dairy  producers and cattle rearers. It not only offers financial help to the 
womenfolk of the society but also helps them during the lean season. The Committee  
had, therefore, impressed upon the Department to work out a detailed roadmap to claim 
its due place i n the economy and developmental process. The Committee had, further,  

~ 14 ~ 
 
recommended that the Departmen t should take pro -active steps to fully utilize the 
allocated funds.   
1.15 The Department in their action taken reply agreed with the concern of the 
Committee about less allocation to animal husbandry sector, which has immense 
potential for the welfare of small and marginal farmers, small dairy producers and cattle 
rearers. The Department ha ve taken up the matter with Pla nning Commission and 
Department of Expenditure for additional allocation for the Department during 2013 -14.  
Steps would be taken to increase allocation for animal husbandry sector at RE stage 
within available resources. Department is also making constant efforts to make 
available more funds for Animal Husbandry Sector from the Schemes like National 
Mission on Protein Supplements (NMPS) which is a component under the scheme of 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY).  
 It has been stated further that the Department ha s taken proactive steps for 
optimally utilizing the allocated funds under different schemes of the Department. 
1.16 The reply of the Department has not indicated as to what proactive steps 
are being taken for fully utilizing the allocated funds und er different Schemes .  
The Committee would appreciate if they are informed of the steps taken in this 
regard.  
NATIONAL PROGRAMME ON BOVINE BREEDING AND DAIRYING (NPBBD)  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.47) 
1.17 Genetic upgradation of cattle, buffalo, conservation of breeds, production and 
distribution of breeding inputs, quality control of goods and services, lack of human 
resources and incongruent institutional and policy framework with the ground realities 
are some of the major challenges in the animal breeding and dairying sectors. The 
NPBBD will have two main components namely, National Programme for Bovine 
Breeding (NPBB) and Dairy Development to create synergy of resources. It is believed 

~ 15 ~ 
 
that the combined a ctivities of breeding and dairying will be more effective in Artificial 
Insemination (AI) services, feed management, extension services and lead to increase 
dairy productivity and enhanced income of farmers. The Committee share the optimism 
of the Departme nt that the convergence of breeding and dairying activities will have a 
positive impact on the livestock and enhanced production and productivity of the 
animals. The Committee however, concerned with the current focus of the Government 
wherein emphasis is increased number of Artificial Insemination without paying any 
heed to its success rate as evident in the rather low success of Artificial Insemination. 
Noting this to be a rather discouraging factor, the Committee therefore, recommend the 
Department to sh ift their focus from myopic quantitative one to a qualitative one, by 
laying emphasis on increasing the success rate of Artificial Insemination activities. 
Alongwith this, it also stress that emphasis should be placed on the genetic 
improvement of the indi genous varieties so that the segment of farmers who can not 
afford the exotic breeds may also get a means of profit to sustain their livelihood. A 
positive step, herein, would be to ensure proper / scientific training of field staff under 
expert guidance.  
1.18 NPBBD scheme will have two main components namely, National Programme 
for Bovine Breeding (NPBB) and Dairy Development Programme. For continuing the 
breed improvement programme mostly in areas not covered under NDP, the component 
of NPBB will be continued during 12th Plan as a part of NPBBD. However, the combined 
activities in respect of breeding and dairying will be more effective in extension of 
artificial insemination services, feed management and marketing of good quality of milk, 
which are essent ial for improving productivity and income of farmers. Regarding 
success rate of artificial insemination (AI), it would depend on the quality of frozen 
semen produced/supplied, skill of the inseminator and reproductive health status of the 
milch animal receiving AI. 

~ 16 ~ 
 
The Department is taking necessary action to improve the success rate of AI.  
The Department has developed Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) and Minimum 
Standard Protocol (MSP) for AI Technicians, which have been circulated to all States.  
A Cen tral Monitoring Unit has been constituted for evaluation and accreditation of AI 
Training Institutes in the country. Uniform training module has also been developed by 
the Department.  Funds have been proposed under the scheme for training and 
retraining of existing AI workers.  For improving quality of semen production, funds have 
been released to the States for strengthening semen stations.  Department has 
formulated MSP for semen production and also constituted a Central Monitoring Unit for 
evaluation and grading of semen stations in the country.  As a result of these efforts, the 
number of A and B graded semen stations in the country has been increased to 27 
stations against 14 in 2004.  Funds have been released to the States for streamlining 
LN2 transport and distribution system which is lifeline of artificial insemination 
programme. Due to efforts made by the Department under NPCBB, overall conception 
rate in the country has increased from 20% in 2000 to 35%. 
In so far as scientific training of field st aff under expert guidance is concerned, a 
component for Skill Development of the inseminators under NPBB and a component for 
skill development of staff working in dairy sector have been proposed under „Dairy 
Development Programme‟ component of NPBBD. Effor ts would be made to impart skill 
development training to experienced private artificial inseminators so as to enable them 
to function as multi-purpose extension workers providing quality extension service to the 
farmers. 
1.19 The Committee had stressed, among other things, that emphasis should be 
placed on the genetic improvement of the indigenous varieties of bovine breeding 
so that the segment of farmers who can not afford the exotic breeds may also get 
a means of profit to sustain their livelihood.  The action taken reply of the 

~ 17 ~ 
 
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries is silent on this point.  
The Committee urge the Department to take necessary action in this regard under 
intimation to them. 
 
REPRESENTATION IN DRUG AND TECHNICAL ADVISIORY BODY (DTAB) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.49) 
 
1.20  The Committee had noted that Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940 regulates the 
import, manufacture and marketing of drugs and biological s including veterinary drugs 
and biological s. The regulatory role for the purpose is discharged by Drug Controller 
General of India (DCGI) which is under the administrative control of Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare. The Department of Animal Husbandry had informed that the 
Working Group of Ani mal Husbandry had proposed a separate Veterinary Drug 
Controller Authority during Tenth Plan which was further reiterated by Working Group in 
Eleventh and Twelfth Plan. The Drug and Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) which has 
a major role in policy decision on type of veterinary drugs to be allowed in Indian 
markets, has no representation from the DADF. The plea of the Department that they 
have very limited role in the present arrangements of medical products and almost 
negligible efforts made by DCGI to lay down standards for veterinary drug, trial protocol, 
testing facilities, toxicity and safety standards was hardly convincing. The Committee 
had taken note of the prevalent practices in various parts of the World in regard to 
separate or unified regulatory a uthorities in the matter of drugs and biological, both for 
human beings and animals and find that USFDA (US Food and Drug Administration) 
has a unified and umbrella authority for food, drugs both for human beings and animals. 
The Committee failed to unders tand the logic of separate drug regulatory authority for 
veterinary drugs and human drugs, when USFDA encompasses single regulatory 
authority for all these matters. The Committee was of the view that there cannot be any 
justification of separate regulatory  authority and as such the status -quo may continue. 

~ 18 ~ 
 
The Committee urged the Department to prevail upon the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare to enlarge the composition of DTAB so as to assign a meaningful and fruitful 
role to the representatives of the  Department in matters of veterinary drugs, whenever 
required.  
 
1.21 The Department in their action taken note have stated that as recommended by 
the Committee, they have decided to drop the proposal for separate Veterinary Drug 
Control Authority and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had been requested to 
enlarge the Drug and Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) by including a representative of 
DADF. 
 
1.22 The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have stated 
in their reply that the Department have decided to drop the proposal for separate 
Veterinary Drug Control Authority and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
has been requested to enlarge the Drug and Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) by 
including a representative of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries (DADF).  They would, however, like to be apprised of the response of 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in this r egard.  They strongly 
recommend the Department to take the matter relating to representation of DADF 
in DTAB to a conclusive end. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 

~ 19 ~ 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE‟S RECOMMENDATIONS. 
 
(Recommendation No. 1.4) 
 
The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee were furnished by the Government within 
the stipulated three months and  the Statement of the Minister under Direction 73 -
A was made within the stipulated six months period. An analysis of the action 
taken by the Government reveals that 45% Recommendations have been 
implemented, 44% Recommendations have not been implemented an d 11% of 
Recommendations are in various stages of implementation. While the Committee 
hope and trust that the scheduled time line, prescribed for submission of Action 
Taken Statement, under Direction 73-A would be adhered to in future, without fail, 
at the same time, they urge the Government to take conclusive action in respect 
of recommendations commented upon in their Forty -third Action Taken Report 
and furnish further action takes notes to the Committee expeditiously. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The observations of the committee are noted. T he Department have taken the 
action on recommendations/observations of the Committee on Forty –Third Action 
Taken Report and Further Action Taken notes have been submitted by the Department 
on 24th May, 2013. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 

~ 20 ~ 
 
CHALLENGES CONFRONTING ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND FISHERIES 
SECTORS IN INDIA 
 
(Recommendation No. 2.20 & 2.21) 
 
Crop-livestock farming system is vital for livelihood and financial security 
of farmers, especially small and marginal ones. In such a system, livestock 
supplements income of the farmers, provides durable employment, draught 
power and manure. The recent fo od inflation, whereunder high increase in price 
of animal products, have renewed interest in the animal husbandry and dairying 
sector. The sector also assumes special significance owing to spurring economic 
growth, rising income, increasing urbanization, c hange in taste and dietary 
preferences, consumption of high -value food and shift from consumption of 
plant-based protein to animal-based protein.  
 
The animal husbandry sector is plagued with myriad problems like 
shortage of veterinary hospitals, infrastructure and technical manpower; 
inadequate disease reporting system and lack of infrastructure related with the 
vaccination of livestock.   The major challenges encountered in the dairy sector 
includes inadequate availability of credit, low productio n and productivity of 
cattle, poor success rate of artificial insemination, poor breeding facilities, 
immortality and morbidity due to disease outbreak, non -availability of grazing 
lands etc. The constraints of fisheries sector include lack of breeding fac ilities, 
low production, lack of scientific and technological interventions, inadequate 
infrastructure and resources for fishing, low institutional credit to fishermen, non-
availability of quality fish seeds. Many of these challenges, both in animal 
husbandry and fisheries sectors owe their genesis to the past and some are the 

~ 21 ~ 
 
products of fast - changing contemporary scenario. Although, these challenges 
are grave and serious but are not insurmountable.  
 
The Committee observe that mandate of Department of A nimal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries encompasses the cattle – rearers, small dairy 
entrepreneurs, fishermen, which also include the marginal sections of the society 
throughout the Country. These vocations provide opportunities for the cattle – 
rearers a nd fishermen to sustain themselves during lean season, by not only 
being as a source of income generation but also a dietary supplement.  
 
However, the Committee are constrained to note that in -spite of the fact 
that India being an agrarian economy, these sectors are not getting their due from 
the planners in terms of public investment. The fluctuating allocations by the 
planners results in fluctuating fortunes of cattle – reares, small dairy 
entrepreneur and fisherfolk. The Committee further believe that a lthough the 
policy / programmes of the Government appears meaningful on paper, the reality 
on ground level is in stark contrast to it. There is a wide gap between the policy 
formulation and implementation. The Committee strongly believe that unless the 
gap between the formulation and implementation of the policies / programmes is 
bridged, important sectors of animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries will 
remain continue to be neglected and in doldrums.  
 
The burgeoning population coupled with resolve to mak e the sector 
sustainable, remunerative and employment generating venture, is a serious 
challenge both for the planner and Govt. alike. Thus, it became all the more 
important to increase productivity, generate employment alongwith ensuring 
viability, sustai nability and profitability to the population involved in these 

~ 22 ~ 
 
segments. The pressing need of the hour for all concerned agencies is to work in 
tandem and unison so as to ensure the effective functioning of the animal 
husbandry, dairying and fisheries sector for achieving not only a high growth rate 
trajectory but also induce development and capacity-building of these sections.  
 
The Department, whilst formulating any scheme, should keep the 
beneficiaries i.e. the cattle – rearers, dairy producers and fishe rmen at the focal 
point and then formulates their schemes / programmes. Further, scientific 
knowledge / techniques support should be a value addition to the traditional 
practices in these sectors. The Committee are pretty sanguine that if the 
concerned age ncies adhere to their advise, the Department would be able to 
tactfully overcome the challenges, in the years to come and thereby jumpstart the 
revival process of these invaluable sectors which have a direct bearing on the 
fortunes of the farming community , especially the small and marginal ones. The 
Committee desire that Govt. should align their plans / programmes / schemes in 
the light of above observations.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The recommendations of the Committee to bridge the gap between the 
formulation and implementation of the policies/programmes are noted for guidance.  
Efforts would be made to improve effectiveness of the implementation of various 
schemes of the Department  while formulating the guidelines for the schemes of the 
Department after  approval of restructuring by the competent authority. One major 
initiative taken by the Department is to restructure its Schemes/Programme relating to 
Animal Husbandry, Dairy and Fisheries Sectors for 12 th Plan reducing the number of 
schemes and giving more flexibility to States to formulate projects to address specific 

~ 23 ~ 
 
bottlenecks and challenges of the livestock and fisheries sector . These Schemes would 
cover the need for improving production and productivity of livestock, healthcare, quality 
and processing etc. besides emphasis ing the need to strengthen the institutions for 
better delivery of input and output services. Under t hese programmes  and schemes , 
efforts would be strengthened to facilitate adoption of scientific practices/techniques of 
management of livestock and fisheries sector by the farmers/rearers, with due emphasis 
on development of appropriate skill s and capacity building. With less rigid structure and 
greater flexibility to States, it is hoped that restructured schemes would be able to meet 
the challenges of this sector. 
 
To enhance the Plan allocation, the matter has been taken up with the Planning 
Commission and Department of Expenditure of the De partment of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries from the approved allocation of Rs.14,179 crore during 12th Five 
year Plan. The D epartment is interacting continuously with the implementing agencies 
for effective implementation of the Schemes of the De partment benefitting the livestock 
rearers and fishermen.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
PROPOSED FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (FTA) BETWEEN INDIA AND EUROPEAN 
UNION (EU)  
 
(Recommendation No. 2.22) 
 
During oral evidence of the Department in connection with examination of 
Demands for Grants (2013 -14), proposed Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between 
India and European Union (EU), came for discussion. It was noted that EU is not 
permitting the import of dair y products citing Sanitary and Phyto Sanitary (SPS) 
clause and alleged that the Indian milch animals were not being maintained as 
per EU norms. As such, the Indian dairy products are unfit for consumption in 

~ 24 ~ 
 
Europe. On the contrary, EU continue to export a nd sell their dairy products in 
India seeking protection under Geographical Indication (GI). On the other hand, 
the indigenous dairy items like, Lassi and Paneer were freely sold in European 
market without giving any protection to India. When the Committee  enquired 
about the Government‟s stand on the issue, it was intimated that India oppose 
any tariff concessions to EU for their dairy products and the same has been 
conveyed to the Department of Commerce. The matter is under negotiation.  
 
Observing that In dia is global leader in the dairy production, which is a 
mainstay for a wider section of small and marginal farmers, landless farmers, 
cattle rearers, womenfolk and urban poor, the Committee desire that the interest 
of the dairy producers of the country wh ich is paramount be protected from 
monopolistic, discriminatory and lopsided trade practices. As the EU Government 
provides heavy subsidies for the farm produce and dairy sector, the Government 
is urged not only to ensure a level -playing field but also pre vail upon EU to 
accord concessions for their domestic dairy producers. The Committee hope and 
trust that Government would take adequate actions in the matter for the benefit of 
farmers.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries has communicated 
to the Department of Commerce that it does not agree for any tariff concessions being 
offered to EU which will affect the interest a nd livelihood of dairy farmers. The matter is 
still under negotiation. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I of this Report. 
 

~ 25 ~ 
 
OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
(Recommendation No. 3.29 & 3.30) 
  
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the 
Department, the Committee noted that the Planning Commission have allocated 
Rs. 8,174.00 crore, which was only 46 percent of the proposed allocation for 
Eleventh Plan of the Department . Further, the actual expenditure of the 
Department was Rs. 4870.54 crore which was a mere 60 percent of the allocated 
funds during the Eleventh Plan. They, are of the opinion that had the balance Rs. 
3,304.00 crore been utilized, the implementation of sch emes would have been far 
better and more fruitful. They are pained to note that their constant pleas to 
rectify the imbalances at BE and RE stages have gone unheard during the 
Eleventh Plan period. As the Twelfth Plan is in final stage of finalization, the  
Committee impress upon all the agencies concerned i.e. Planning Commission 
and the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to adopt a holistic 
approach and not cling on the past. The allocation of funds to the Department 
must be uniformly spread s o as to avoid backloading of Plan funds. This would 
ensure that the Department not only get maximum funds out of the approved 
outlay but also able to optimally utilize the allocated resources.  
 
The Committee observe that one of the major constraints of th e 
Department is its inability to entirely utilize even the reduced allocated funds 
during the Eleventh Plan period. This is attributed to the failure of the Department 
in motivating the States / UTs to send their proposals as well as Utilization 
Certificates in time and hence, an even pace of utilization of funds in each fiscal 
year could not be ensured. The Committee, therefore, exhort upon the 
Department to finally adopt a pro -active approach and impress upon the 
implementing agencies to come forward and participate actively in the schemes 

~ 26 ~ 
 
run by the Department. In order to ensure this, they desire the Department to take 
into confidence and incorporate the views of States / UTs while planning the 
modalities of the schemes / programmes and thereby ensure th eir active 
participation in the schemes of the Department. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The recommendations of the Committee are noted by the Department for 
necessary guidance.  During the Eleventh  Plan, though Rs. 8 ,174 crore had  been 
allocated to the Department, but it was reduced to Rs. 5,910 crore at BE stages and Rs. 
5,293.52 crore at RE stages. In the 12th Plan, the approved allocation for the 
Department as intimated by Planning Commission is Rs. 14,179 crore, which is about 
2.9 times more than the expenditure made during the 11th Plan. 
During 2012-13, the Department was made available Rs. 1 ,910 crore which was 
reduced to Rs. 1 ,800 crore at RE stage . In spite of the fact that there was liability for 
expenditure under some schemes, which could not be met during 2012 -13 due to 
reduction in the BE of the Department. Out of which, the actual e xpenditure of the 
Department was Rs.1,736.61 crore which is abou t 96.48 percent of amount actually 
made available to the Department. The Department has also taken up various 
measures for motivating the Stat es for sending proposals and furnishing the u tilisation 
certificates in time. During 2013 -14, Department had written to States for submission of 
Project proposals and related UCs upto 15.07.2013 for better implementation of the 
Schemes. Department has conducted Regional Review Meetings with all the States 
during May-June, 2013 for reviewing the implementation of the Schemes by the States  
to expedite the fresh  proposals along with  pending Utilisation Certificates against 
previous releases with physical progress reports. The response from the States has 

~ 27 ~ 
 
been very positive.  It is hoped that in current year the expenditu re and pending UCs 
position would improve further. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
 
TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN  
 
(Recommendation No. 3.31) 
 
 
Being well aware of the prolonged delay in the finalization of Eleventh Plan 
which had detrimental impact on the implementation of various schemes of the 
Government, the Committee had recommended a slew of measures in their 
Second Report on the Demands for  Grants (2009 -10) of the Department and 
reiterated the same in their Twenty-fourth Report that the Twelfth Plan documents 
should be finalized before 1st April, 2012. The adverse impact on schemes / 
projects was also confessed by the representatives of Plan ning Commission 
during oral deposition in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Department. However, much to their disappointment, the 
Committee note that in spite of their having repeatedly espoused the cause of 
initiating corrective measures to expedite the finalization of Twelfth Plan 
document, so as to avoid procedural delay in according clearance to schemes 
and resulting staggering of timelines and reduced allocation, no concrete action 
seems to have been taken in this regard. The Plan Document is stuck with the 
Planning Commission and as and when the Twelfth Plan is finally operationalized, 
the implementations of the schemes are likely to be severely hampered. The fears 
of the Committee are further compounded on being i nformed that the final 
approval of the new schemes of the Department may not be cleared before 
October-November, 2013, i. e. after RE stage of the second year of the Twelfth 

~ 28 ~ 
 
Plan. Such development does cast a question mark on the very desirability of 
planning procedures practices and processes. Hoping against hope, the 
Committee, however, not wanting to shirk away from its responsibility, once 
again recommend the expeditious finalization of the Twelfth Plan document so as 
to ensure its implementation in rea l time, thereby scuttling the negative impact of 
this delay on the efficiency of the various schemes of the Department. At the 
same time, Govt. should re-look into and review, if necessary, system of planning 
procedures, process and practices especially in  context of protracted delays in 
the finalization of Five Year Plans.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The 12th Plan document was approved by National Developme nt Council in its  
57th meeting held on 27th December 2012. The Planning Commission has informed that 
the 12th Five Year Plan document is likely to be placed in the Parliament in the coming 
Monsoon Session. 
With approval of the 12 th Five Year Plan by the National Development Council, 
which is the apex body to approve the Five –Year Plans, the process for in vestment 
clearances of schemes / programmes of the different Departments has been 
undertaken by the Planning Commission . The Planning Commission has conveyed its 
approval to the broad scheme -wise details of Plan outlay  of Rs 14 ,179 crore for the 
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries for the 12 th Five Year Plan to 
facilitate finalization of programmes and schemes.  Basing on the approved allocation, 
EFC meetings of the restructured three Centrally Sponsored Schemes and three 
Central Sector Schemes of the Department have been completed. 
 

~ 29 ~ 
 
To ensure transition of the programmes to 12th Plan, it has been decided that the 
programmes which were under implementation during 11 th Plan will continue to be 
implemented till approval on new/restructured schemes is obtained by the Department. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
INTER – SECTORAL ALLOCATIONS  
 
(Recommendation No. 3.32 & 3.33) 
 
The Committee note with disappointment that despite their repeated 
recommendations, the Plan allocation of the Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries be scaled up, so as to increase its share, compared to the 
other two Department of Ministr y of Agriculture viz. Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation (DAC) and Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
(DARE) have not fructified, but rather slipped to 0.33 percent from 0.38 percent of 
the total share of Central Plan Outlay of Govern ment of India in Twelfth Plan and 
Eleventh Plan respectively. The Committee again urge upon the Planning 
Commission to quantumly enhance the share of Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries in plan allocation.  
 
At the same time, the Committee reiterate that the Department should get 
their house in order and address the pressing issues of pending Utilisation 
Certificates on priority basis so that the States / UTs avail Central funds. The 
Committee strongly believe  that if State Governments are genuinely concerned 
about envigorating the sections of population engaged in animal husbandry, 

~ 30 ~ 
 
dairying and fisheries sector then they should avail more Central funds by 
ensuring timely submission of Utilisation Certificates,  so that the last beneficiary 
is benefitted in true sense. This, in result, would lead to positive outcomes at later 
stages of financial allocations, and hence, desired growth rate.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Planning Commission has informed that t he share in budgetary allocation of 
funds to the Department in 12 th Plan is 12.75% of total allocation for agriculture sector 
compared to 9.36% in the 11 th Plan. Besides, additional Central Assistance is also 
available to States for development of the sector through RKVY, for which Rs . 63,246 
crore is allocated during 12th Plan, against 11th Plan expenditure of Rs . 22,426 crore. 
The S tates are advised to utilize the RKVY funds for development of livestock & 
fisheries sector for achieving 4% growth in agriculture. 
 
However, the Department agrees with the observation of the Committee that the 
approved allocation of Rs.14,179 crore for 12 th Plan is not adequate. Accordingly, the 
Department has taken up the matter with Planning Commission and the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance  to enhance the outlay of the Department taking into 
account its  share in the economy. Hon‟ble Agriculture Minister has also written to 
Hon‟ble Prime Minister to enhance the outlay of the Department to at least Rs. 20,000 
crore for the 12th Five Year Plan.  
 
The Department has taken various measures to clear  the pending Utilisation 
Certificates with the States/Implementing agencies. In this regard, Department has 
taken up matter with States/implementing agencies through review meetings for timely 
submission of utilisation certificate , so as to make them eligible for availing large 

~ 31 ~ 
 
amount of central funds for the development of animal husbandry, dairying and 
fisheries sectors. Due to the steps taken by the Department, the numbers of pending 
Utilisation Certificates have come down significantly during last six months.  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
RESULT FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT (RFD)  
 
(Recommendation No. 3.34) 
 
 
The concept of RFD was introduced in 2009 to measure the performance of 
Ministries / Department of Government of India and the Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have also been preparing the RFDs since 
then. The Committee note that the RFD score during 2010 -11 was 92.91 percent 
which slid to 80.27 percent in 2011 -12. The Department have attributed this slide 
to result of less -weighted score obtained in success indicators related with 
independent audit of grievance redressal mechanism, co mpliance of RTI Act, 
2005, finalisation of action plan on mitigation of potential areas of corruption, ISO 
9001 certification, fodder seed production, construction of houses for fishermen 
etc. They believe that the outcomes of RFD provides an opportunities  for 
Department to introspect the areas where they are not performing well and hence 
can reorient their focus and work towards achieving the target. However, they do 
not take kindly to the drop in RFD score of the Department in the year 2011 -12 as 
they vie w it to be reflecting the Department in a negative light. They therefore 
impress upon the Department to put their house in order and ensure that the RFD 
score of the Department surges past 90 percentage points during the coming 
years and stays intact there.  
 

~ 32 ~ 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The composite RFD score for the year 2012-13 for the Department has improved 
to 92.75 percent  as intimated by Cabinet Secretariat . Department is monitoring the 
progress of RFD targets regularly so as to maintain the score above 90 percent  as 
recommended by the Committee. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
MASS AWARENESS CAMPAIGNS  
 
(Recommendation No. 3.36) 
 
 
The Committee note that the Department is implementing various important 
schemes in diversified fields and many new schemes are proposed for the 
Twelfth Plan. They are also aware that many of the important schemes of the 
Department could not achieve the de sired targets due to lack of awareness 
amongst the intended beneficiaries, which resulted in the non -utilization of 
allocated funds by the Department. Surprisingly, no departmentalized 
institutionalize mechanism exists for generating mass awareness of the schemes 
for the intended beneficiaries, unlike ATMA and KVKs. The argument of the 
Department that ATMAs of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) and 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras of Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) are 
being engaged in extension services and they do not want any duplicity in this 
regard is hardly convincing. The Committee, therefore, recommend that on the 
line of KVK / ATMA, a separate scheme for the mass awareness campaigns, 
exclusively for animal husbandry, dairy and f isheries sector be initiated at the 
earliest, so as to ensure focused attention and high reach. The Committee feel 

~ 33 ~ 
 
that a dedicated extension service for the sector, is likely to overcome the 
obstacle of lack of awareness of the various schemes related wit h the 
Department. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The CSS on Livestock Extension and Delivery Services was discontinued from 
10th Plan on the recommendation of committee on zero based budgeting set up by 
Planning Commission. Sub-group on extension setup by Planning Commission advised 
the revival of the scheme during 11 th Plan. The Department agrees with the observation 
of the Committee that a separate scheme is necessary for mass awareness campaigns 
exclusively for livestock and fisheries sectors to facilita te implementation of various 
schemes of the Department , as it increases  awareness among all stakeholders 
regarding the latest developments in the sector including scientific methods of rearing  
and management/disease control/animal nutrition etc. Department has already prepared 
a draft scheme which envisages increased information support among animal rearers, 
operating specific training and capacity building of various stakeholders, organizing 
large number of Livestock Farmers Groups for empowerin g them with technology 
required for improving their income from livestock farming activities, organizing livestock 
melas and regional livestock fairs, organizing exposure visits of t he stakeholders to 
progressive S tates having established extension mechani sm and developing a 
mechanism of obtaining feedback from the animal rearers regarding their necessities 
and aspirations and gradually incorporating them in the extension machi nery. The 
scheme has been proposed as a Sub-mission on skill development, technology transfer 
and extension for livestock sector under the proposed National Livestock Mission to be 
implemented during 12th Five Year Plan. In respect of fisheries sector, separate scheme 
for capacity building, training and deployment of “Matsya Mitra” in order to strengthen 

~ 34 ~ 
 
extension services in fisheries has been proposed under National Fisheries 
Development Board.  There would also be a component on “Training and Extension ” 
proposed under the National Scheme for Welfare of Fishermen. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
SECTORAL AND SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS 
ALLOCATION OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY SECTOR 
(Recommendation No. 4.46) 
 
The proposed outlay for Annual Plan (2013-14) for animal husbandry sector 
under the Centrally Sponsored and Central Sector Schemes are Rs. 991.20 crore 
and Rs. 360.09 crores, respectively, which aggregates to Rs. 1351.29 crore. 
However, the BE for 2013 -14 is Rs. 1051.49 crore, which is Rs. 11.61 crore less 
than the allocation in previous fiscal. The Committee highly deprecates this, as 
they believe that the animal husbandry sector has immense potential for the 
welfare of small and marginal farmers, small da iry producers and cattle rearers. It 
not only offers financial help to the womenfolk of the society but also helps them 
during the lean season. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department 
to deeply introspect in the matter and work out a detailed  roadmap to claim its 
due place in the economy and developmental process. From the past 
performance during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period, the Committee 
recommends the Department to gear themselves appropriately, failing which it 
may be difficult for t hem to utilize this amount, which would further hamper the 

~ 35 ~ 
 
implementation of the major schemes of the Department. They further 
recommend the Department to come clean of the impression of „low absorption 
capacity of the utilization of funds‟, so that it can  get the reasonable and 
adequate from the Planning Commission at BE stage. The optimum utilization of 
funds will help in claiming an enhanced allocation at RE stage from the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to achieve the desired targets.  
 
The Committee observe that Annual Plan allocations and expenditure of Animal 
Husbandry sector shows that its outlay for Eleventh Plan was Rs. 4,323.00 crore, 
which is 52.8 percent of the total plan allocation of Rs. 8,174.00 crore for the three 
sectors viz., Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries. However, the Department 
could utilize only to the tune of Rs. 2,610.00 crore, which reflects under -utilization 
of more than Rs. 205 crore from the RE level which negatively impacted the 
implementation of schemes of this sector.  
 
The Committee note that the Department has averred that delay in 
finalization of Twelfth Plan document may impact and hamper, the viability of 
many schemes including major schemes like NLM, NPBDD, FMD -CP, ESVHD, 
DEDS, NFDB etc. The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that the Department 
should take pro -active action so as to optimally utilize the allocated funds for 
existing schemes failing which, it may have cascading effect on the 
implementation of schemes in years to come.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The less allocation for animal husbandry sector in 2013-14 as observed by the 
Committee, is due to comparatively reduced overall allocation of Rs. 2,025 crore for the 

~ 36 ~ 
 
Department as against the demand of Rs.3,025 crore projected by the Department  
during 2013 -14 and comparativ ely higher allocation to Dairy s ector. The higher 
allocation in Dairy sector is mainly due to the higher allocat ion for the Schemes like 
Dairy E ntrepreneurship Development Scheme caused due to existing liability with 
NABARD towards pending subsidy claims carried over from 2012-13 due to reduction of 
Department‟s BE at RE stage and increase in demand from all the States for DEDS.  
 
Department agrees with  the concern of the Committee about less  allocation to 
animal husbandry sector , which has immense potential for the welfare of small and 
marginal farmers, small dairy producers and cattle rearers. Department has taken up 
the matter with Planning Commission and Department of Expenditure for additional 
allocation for the Department during 2013 -14.  Steps would be taken to increase  
allocation for animal husbandry sector at RE stage  within available resources . 
Department is also making constant efforts to mak e available more funds for Animal 
Husbandry Sector from the Schemes like N ational Mission on Protein Supplements 
(NMPS) which is a component under the scheme of  Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
(RKVY).  
  
Department has taken proactive steps for optimally utilizing the allocated funds 
under different schemes of the Department. 
  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 

~ 37 ~ 
 
NATIONAL PROGRAMME ON BOVINE BREEDING AND DAIRYING (NPBBD)  
 
(Recommendation No. 4.47) 
 
 
Genetic upgradation of cattle, buffalo, conservation of breeds, production 
and distribution of breeding inputs, quality control of goods and services, lack of 
human re sources and incongruent institutional and policy framework with the 
ground realities are some of the major challenges in the animal breeding and 
dairying sectors. The NPBBD will have two main components namely, National 
Programme for Bovine Breeding (NPBB)  and Dairy Development to create 
synergy of resources. It is believed that the combined activities of breeding and 
dairying will be more effective in Artificial Insemination (AI) services, feed 
management, extension services and lead to increase dairy prod uctivity and 
enhanced income of farmers. The Committee share the optimism of the 
Department that the convergence of breeding and dairying activities will have a 
positive impact on the livestock and enhanced production and productivity of the 
animals. The C ommittee however, concerned with the current focus of the 
Government wherein emphasis is increased number of Artificial Insemination 
without paying any heed to its success rate as evident in the rather low success 
of Artificial Insemination. Noting this to  be a rather discouraging factor, the 
Committee therefore, recommend the Department to shift their focus from myopic 
quantitative one to a qualitative one, by laying emphasis on increasing the 
success rate of Artificial Insemination activities. Alongwith t his, it also stress that 
emphasis should be placed on the genetic improvement of the indigenous 
varieties so that the segment of farmers who can not afford the exotic breeds may 
also get a means of profit to sustain their livelihood. A positive step, herei n, 
would be to ensure proper / scientific training of field staff under expert guidance.  

~ 38 ~ 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
NPBBD scheme will have two main components namely, National Programme 
for Bovine Breeding (NPBB) and Dairy Development  Programme. For continuing the 
breed improvement programme mostly in areas not covered under NDP, the component 
of NPBB will be continued during 12th Plan as a part of NPBBD. However, the combined 
activities in respect of breeding and dairying will be more effective  in extension of 
artificial insemination services, feed management and marketing of good quality of milk , 
which are essential for improving productivity and income of farmers.  Regarding 
success rate of artificial insemination (AI), it would depend on the q uality of frozen 
semen produced/supplied, skill of the inseminator and reproductive health status of the 
milch animal receiving AI. 
 
The Department is taking necessary action to improve the success rate of AI.  
The Department has developed Standard Operati ng Procedure (SOP)  and Minimum 
Standard Protocol (MSP) for  AI Technicians, which have  been circulated to all States.  
A Central Monitoring Unit has been constituted for evaluation and accreditation of AI 
Training Institutes in the country. Uniform training module has also been developed by 
the Department.   Funds have been proposed under the scheme for training and 
retraining of existing AI workers.  For improving quality of semen production, funds have 
been released to the States for strengthening  semen sta tions.  Department has  
formulated MSP for semen production and also constituted a Central Monitoring Unit for 
evaluation and grading of semen stations in the country.  As a result of these efforts, the 
number of  A and B graded semen stations in the country  has been increased to 27 
stations against 14 in 2004.  Funds have been released to the States for streamlining 
LN2 transport and distribution system which is lifeline of artificial insemination 

~ 39 ~ 
 
programme. Due to efforts made by the Department under NPCBB,  overall conception 
rate in the country has increased from 20% in 2000 to 35%. 
 
In so far as scientific training of field staff under expert guidance is concerned, a 
component for Skill Development of the inseminators under NPBB and a component for 
skill d evelopment of staff working in dairy sector have been proposed under „Dairy 
Development Programme‟ component of NPBBD. Efforts would be made to impart skill 
development training to experienced private artificial inseminators so as to enable them 
to function as multi-purpose extension workers providing quality extension service to the 
farmers. 
 [Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF VETERINARY DRUG CONTROL AUTHORITY  
(Recommendation No. 4.49) 
 
 
The Committee note that Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940 regulates the 
import, manufacture and marketing of drugs and biological including veterinary 
drugs and biological. The regulatory role for the purpose is discharged by Drug 
Controller General of India (D CGI) which is under the administrative control of 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Department of Animal Husbandry has 
informed that the Working Group of Animal Husbandry has proposed a separate 
Veterinary Drug Controller Authority during Tenth Pl an which was further 
reiterated by Working Group in Eleventh and Twelfth Plan. The Drug and 
Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) which has a major role in policy decision on 

~ 40 ~ 
 
type of veterinary drugs to be allowed in Indian markets has no representation 
from the DADF. The plea of the Department that they have very limited role in the 
present arrangements of medical products and almost negligible efforts made by 
DCGI to lay down standards for veterinary drug, trial protocol, testing facilities, 
toxicity and safety  standards is hardly convincing. The Committee have taken 
note of the prevalent practice in various parts of the World in regard to separate 
or unified regulatory authorities in the matter of drugs and biological, both for 
human beings and animals and find  that US FDA (Food and Drug Administration) 
has a unified and umbrella authority for food, drugs both for human beings and 
animals. The Committee fail to understand the logic of separate drug regulatory 
authority for veterinary drugs and human drugs, when US FDA encompasses 
single regulatory authority for all these matters. The Committee is of the view that 
there is no justification of separate regulatory authority and as such the status -
quo may continue. The Department may, however, prevail upon the Minist ry of 
Health and Family Welfare to enlarge the composition of DTAB so as to assign a 
meaningful and fruitful role to the representatives of the Department in matters of 
veterinary drugs, whenever required.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As recommended by the Com mittee, the Department has decided to drop the proposal  
for separate Veterinary D rug Control Authority  and the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare has been requested to enlarge the  Drug and Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) 
by including a representative of DADF. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 

~ 41 ~ 
 
 
POULTRY DEVELOPMENT  
(Recommendation No. 4.50) 
 
The poultry sector has recorded a growth of about five percent in the fiscal 
2012-13 compared to the year 2011 -12, with production touching 66.45 billion 
tonnes. However, in fiscal terms the allocation of Department has reduced to Rs. 
35.62 crore at RE sta ge from Rs. 52.50 crore at BE stage, whereas the actual 
expenditure was only Rs. 23.77 crore till December, 2012. The Department 
reasoned that such a reduction in allocation of funds is due to increase in cost of 
reared chicks and input prices of feed / fe ed ingredients. Taking a cue from the 
Department‟s reasoning, the Committee implore upon the Government to make 
suitable provisions in the programme that would ensure that escalation in the 
cost is taken care of. The Committee further recommend the Departm ent to 
stretch its arms in terms of allocated funds so that it can act as a source of 
sustenance for the poultry farmers and also act as a fillip to the rural backyard 
poultry.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department, in consultation with Integrated Finan ce Division, has increased 
the cost of 4 -week old reared chicks under „Rural Backyard Poultry Development‟ 
component of Centrally Sponsored Scheme, “Poultry Developme nt” from Rs. 30/- to 
Rs.40/- per chick for the year 2013-14. This will enable, to some exte nt, to address the 
escalation in the cost of rearing of chicks and facilitate smooth implementation of the 
scheme. 
 

~ 42 ~ 
 
It may further be mentioned that in the proposed National Livestock Mission 
(NLM), the „Poultry Development‟ scheme will be subsumed. Proposal to empower 
Executive Council to use its discretion in approving components of a project and to 
include new components and to approve special interventions for tackling 
emergent/unforeseen requirements  is incorporated in NLM . Under NLM, States may 
propose the projects suited to their specific local conditions to make it more efficacious. 
  
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
NATIONAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT BOARD (NFDB) AND FISHERY SURVEY 
OF INDIA (FSI)  
 
(Recommendation No. 4.52) 
 
The Committee are discerned to note that the information furnished by the 
Department regarding the functions and achievements of NFDB and FSI are not at 
all satisfactory as it is reflective of their tardy performance. The Department have 
attributed the low performance of NFDB to teething problems, viz. recruitment of 
staff, finalization of scheme guidelines, modalities for implementation of the 
schemes based on needs of the States etc. As the NFDB is still in its infancy, the 
present achievements will guide  the future of the institution and as such the 
Committee do not buy argument assigned for below par performance and 
recommend the Department to provide full infrastructure and resources to the 
NFDB as it has the potential and has been entrusted with the re sponsibility of the 
development of fishery sector. Regarding the performance of FSI, the Department 
have stated that the shortfall in performance was due to inordinate delay in the 
Dry Docking and Repair (DDR) and Life Saving Appliances (LSA) / Fire Fighti ng 
Appliances (FFA) of certain vessels as well as some serious technical problems 
in some other vessels. Also, the age of the vessels and non -priority given to the 
vessels by the shipyards were further aggravating the situation. Notwithstanding, 

~ 43 ~ 
 
the system ic constraints hampering the performance of these institutes, the 
Committee urge the Department to overcome these functional shortcomings in 
real time and ensure a judicious balance between physical and fiscal targets and 
achievements of the institution so that it can fulfill its mandate.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Department noted the recommendation of Committee for necessary guidance. 
NFDB implements production oriented schemes in fisheries sector in order to improve 
impact on enhancement of fish productio n. The guidelines of NFDB are simplified with 
more flexibility as per the request of States as they are the implementing agencies. 
Priority is given to thrust areas like production of fish seed, post harvest and value 
addition infrastructure. To enhance th e overall performance, all States have been 
requested to submit Annual Action Plans well in advance for fisheries development. A 
Project Monitoring Cell is created at NFDB to monitor all schemes of NFDB for effective 
implementation. Adequate funds for deve lopment of fisheries to NFDB have been 
released by the Department.   
  
 Regarding performance of Fishery Survey of India, constant monitoring is done 
by the Department and performance of the vessels evaluated in review meetings. 
Presently, FSI has about 11  fishing vessels under operation. Every vessel requires dry 
docking and repairs every 2 nd year. Since most of the vessels of FSI are more than 25 
years old, considerable time is lost in dry docking and repair of the vessels. The vessels 
are held up for dry  docking and repairs for almost 3 -4 months at the Ship yard and for 
major over hauling of the main engine. Some of the engine parts are to be imported and 
considerable time is lost in import of spare parts. Sometimes this activity consumed 
almost 8 months and the targets could not be achieved and there by leading to poor 

~ 44 ~ 
 
performance of the vessel which resulted in poor achievement. The FSI is being 
instructed to get the dry docking bills settled as and when they are received from the 
shipyards and should no t wait at the fag end of the financial year to avoid rush of 
expenditure.  
 
 Some of the machinery like power generation equipment is almost 33 years old. 
For acquisition of new vessel for survey, global tenders were floated twice and since the 
response was extremely poor, it was decided to explore the possibility of leasing. Steps 
have been initiated to acquire new vessels. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
WELFARE PROGRAMME OF FISHERMEN  
(Recommendation No. 4.53) 
 
The Centrally Sponsored Scheme “National Scheme for the Welfare of 
Fishermen” has four components, viz. Group Accident Personal Insurance; 
Saving-cum-Relief; Model Fishermen Village (that includes assistance for low 
cost houses for fishermen, tube wells and co mmunity hall); and Training and 
Extension. The Department have stated that due to budgetary constraints, the 
fund released for housing is affected despite good response from the States for 
availing the funds to provide low cost houses to fishermen. The Dep artment 
informed that component on training and extension is being discontinued during 
the Twelfth Plan to avoid duplicacy as similar programme exists under the 
schemes of NFDB. Instead, a new component, capacity -building for alternative 
livelihood for fishers, has been proposed during the Twelfth Plan. The Committee 
are bewildered to note that the component on training and extension is entrusted 
to NFDB whereas a new component – capacity-building for alternative livelihood 

~ 45 ~ 
 
for fishers has been proposed und er the Welfare Programme of Fishermen, 
which, in view of the Committee, points towards lack of foresight while 
formulating the schemes as this had lead to overlapping and duplicity. 
Deprecating this act of callousness on the part of the Government, the Committee 
recommend that capacity-building for alternative livelihood for fishermen may be 
merged with the Training and Extension component and should be placed under 
Welfare Programme of Fishermen. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“Training and Extension” was a sepa rate scheme prior to 2005 -06 and was 
merged with the “National Scheme for Welfare of Fishermen” from 2005 -06 onwards. 
The main objective of this component is to provide training to fishers on fishery related 
activities and to enhance the extension skills. With setting up of the NFDB in 2006, the 
Human Resource Development (HRD) activities were conducted at different levels 
through NFDB. The Report on the Working Group on Fisheries for the 12 th Plan 
recommended that during the 12 th Five Year Plan, this programme should be handled 
by the NFDB in cooperation with the institutions under the Ministry of Agriculture, State 
Agriculture Universities (College of Fisheries) and the Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). 
Accordingly, NFDB has proposed  separate schemes for skill development training, 
Human Resource Development (HRD) and for strengthening extension in fisheries 
sector. It was, therefore, proposed by the Department to discontinue the component of 
“Training and Extension” from National Scheme for Welfare of Fishermen. 
 
However, in view of the recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
would propose to retain the component of “Training and Extension” as a part of the 

~ 46 ~ 
 
scheme of “National Scheme for Welfare of Fishermen” which will contin ue as a Central 
Sector Scheme during 12th Plan. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

~ 47 ~ 
 
CHAPTER –III 
 
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S 
REPLY 
 
DISCREPANCIES IN INFORMATION SUBMITTED IN OUTCOME BUDGET (2013-14)  
(Recommendation No. 3.35) 
 
The Committee observe that the Outcome Budget is an integral part of the 
budgeting process since 2005 -06, wherein the Government aims to con verge the 
outlays into outcome by planning expenditure, fixing suitable targets, quantifying 
deliverables of each scheme and finally, arrive at „outcomes‟ of each scheme / 
programme. Thus, the Outcome Budget serves as a policy tool to establish an 
effective linkage with allocation and disbursement of public funds on the basis of 
measurable performance. However, much to their bewilderment, they observe 
that the Outcome Budget which was presented to the Parliament on 19th March, 
2013 was riddled with several discrepancies / errors and misinformation, which 
were highlighted by the Committee during the course of Oral Evidence of the 
Department in examination of Demands for Grants (2013 -14). As the Outcome 
Budget serves as an accurate measurable tool for the perf ormance of various 
schemes / programmes, the Committee is shocked to note that factually wrong 
information was furnished to the Parliament. Strongly deprecating this slipup on 
the part of the Department, the Committee recommend that utmost care should 
be t aken by the Department in furnishing factually correct information to 
Parliament and its authorities and also ensure that such slippages are not 
repeated in the future. While strongly recommending the Department to maintain 
the sanctity of the documents pr esented to the House, they also desire that the 
Outcome Budget may again be re -looked into and the misinformation, 

~ 48 ~ 
 
deficiencies etc. made good. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
action taken in the matter.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Errors in the Outcome Budget were in the nature of computer formatting which 
could not be detected due to pressure of various official works including financial 
release deadlines in the last month of the financial year. All the concerned Divisions of 
the D epartment have been directed to exercise utmost caution in future before 
submitting data for inclusion in the Outcome Budget. Chapter-IV of the Outcome Budget 
that contained the errors has since been revised, and with the approval of Hon‟ble 
Agriculture Mi nister, laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23.04.2013. The 
recommendations of the Committee in this regard are noted by the Department for 
necessary guidance. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
 
NATIONAL DAIRY PLAN  
(Recommendation No. 4.51) 
 
The Committee have been informed that the National Dairy Plan – I (NDP – 
I) is to be implemented in only 14 major States – Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, 
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Maharashtra, 
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pr adesh, Odisha and Kerala. The Department 
have received 139 sub project proposals from 13 States as on 25th March, 2013. 
The Department have also informed that only 14 states confirmed compliance and 
End-Implementing Agencies (EIAs) submitted sub project pr oposals to National 
Dairy Development Board (NDDB) for consideration. The Committee is surprised 

~ 49 ~ 
 
to note that the 14 States which are found eligible for consideration under NDP - I, 
are already performing well in milk and dairy production. The Committee wo uld 
concerned over the fate of the other States which are kept out of purview of    
NDP – I as these States are faring poor in dairy production, like to be apprised of 
the rationale leading to selection of those States who are leaders in the field of 
milk production and exclusion of the States who currently lag behind. 
Endeavouring to ensure a level playing field for all the States and to ensure a 
comprehensive development of the dairying sector, the Committee urge upon the 
Government to expand the scope of  NDP – I and also include the urgently need 
the intervention of Government to upgrade the resources, infrastructure and 
facilities related with the dairy sector. Thus, the Committee recommends the 
inclusion of other States like Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Him achal Pradesh under 
its ambit.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1. National Dairy Plan – Phase I (NDP - I) is being implemented with a total 
investment of about Rs. 2,242 crore with the following objectives: 
i) To help increase productivity of milch animals and thereby  increase milk 
production to meet growing demand for milk. 
ii) To help provide rural milk producers with greater access to the organised 
milk processing sector. 
 
 
2. Justification for focussing NDP-I in 14 States:  
a).  Demand for milk is growing rapidly due to growing incomes on account of 
various welfare schemes of the Government. It is therefore necessary to 

~ 50 ~ 
 
expeditiously launch a scientifically planned initiative to increase milk 
production by increasing bovine produc tivity. This is also relevant in the 
light of reports that milk producers are not finding milk production to be 
sufficiently remunerative and some milk producers may be disengaging 
from dairying as a source of income and looking at other alternatives. 
Emerging trends indicate that the demand for milk is likely to be much 
more than 180 million tonnes in 2021-22 and could be in the range of 200-
210 million tonnes and the demand by 2016-17 (end year of 12th Five Year 
Plan) is projected to be 150 million tonnes.  
 
b) To successfully meet the growing demand for milk, the incremental annual 
production of milk over the last 10 years, which has been on an average 
about 3.5 million tonnes per year, is envisaged to increase annually to an 
average of 6 million tonnes per year by the end of 12th Plan period. 
Dependence on imports to meet the surging demand for milk cannot be a 
long term solution. India is the largest milk producing nation in the world 
and resorting to imports of milk products to meet the growing demand for 
milk, even in small quantities, is likely to spike international prices and 
thereby result in higher import and consumer prices. On the other hand, 
there is a long gestation in raising  bovine productivity. It was , therefore, 
imperative that a scientifically planned multi -state initiative is launched at 
the earliest through a programme to improve bovine productivity with a 
focus on a scientific approach to breeding and feeding  in States having 
necessary potential for increasing productivity of milk. 
 
c) NDP I is focussed on 14 major milk producing States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 

~ 51 ~ 
 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar  Pradesh and 
West Bengal which account for about 90 per cent of the country‟s milk 
production, have about 87 per cent of breedable cattle and buffalo 
population and 98 per cent of the fodder resources. However, it is felt that 
by focussing on these 14 States, it would be relatively easier to achieve 
the objective of increasing average incremental milk production to 6 million 
tonnes per year required to meet the growing demand in the country. This 
would be possible through scientific management of breeding a nd feeding 
of animals which would be promoted under N DP-I extensively in 14 
States. Coverage of other States under NDP may result in spreading of 
available resources under the NDP-I thinly across more States, as a result 
of which achieving the desired objective of increasing average incremental 
production of milk to 6 million tonnes per year in the country  may not be 
achieved.  However, the benefits of the Scheme will also be available to 
all the States including Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Himachal Pra desh 
through access to quality disease free semen doses produced at semen 
stations being supported under NDP- I.  
 
3.      It may be noted that the Department is  implementing various other schemes 
throughout the country for creation of infrastructure , augm enting availability of fodder 
and facilities and  genetic up-gradation of bovine breeds . Some of these  development 
schemes are as indicated below:  
i) National Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding (NPCBB) Phase-II  
ii) Centrally Sponsored Fodder and Feed Development Scheme 
iii) Intensive Dairy Development Programme (IDDP) 
iv) Strengthening Infrastructure for Quality & Clean Milk Production 
(SIQ&CMP) 

~ 52 ~ 
 
v) Dairy Entrepreneurship Development Scheme 
 
Besides, projects supporting these activities can be approved under Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana. Non -NDP States would be encouraged to access funding under 
these schemes  to take up  dairy development activities. The projects that would be 
proposed by other States like Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Himachal Pradesh for 
improving production of milk would be supported by the Department through ongoing 
Schemes as above. Hence, taking into consideration above facts, the recommendation 
to include other States under NDP-I may be reconsidered by the Committee. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
 
  

~ 53 ~ 
 
CHAPTER –IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N I L 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

~ 54 ~ 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
ESTABLISHMENT AND STRENGTHENING OF EXISTING VETERINARY HOSPITAL 
AND DISPENSARIES (ESVHD)  
 
(Recommendation No. 4.48) 
 
The Committee note with concern that there is an acute shortage of 
veterinary hospitals / dispensaries in the Country to cater the pressing need to 
counter the challenge of control of animal diseases. The Committee was informed 
that out of the total 31,000 odd Veterinary Hospitals / Dispensaries in the Country, 
only 5200, which are spread over 12 States have availed benefit under this 
programme. The Committee is of the view that a desired investment made in 
these areas will have a multiplier effect in raisi ng the productivity of animals and 
providing economic gains to their owners. The shortage of skilled manpower 
further compounds the woes of this perennial suffering sector. The Committee 
was also informed that an Expert Committee have been constituted to l ook into 
the minimum standards of veterinary education and to suggest necessary 
changes in the Indian Veterinary Council Act, to enable more veterinary 
graduates to pass out.  
 
The Department further informed that the fiscal aspect of the Scheme that 
during year 2011-12, the Department have released Rs. 98.81 crore against BE of 
Rs. 90.00 crore which was lauded by the Committee in the Thirty -fifth Report on 
the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department. However, things took a turn 
for the worse in the fiscal 2012 -13 as this sector received only Rs. 46.87 crore 
against the BE of Rs. 91.00 crore and the actual utilization is only Rs. 31.25 crore 

~ 55 ~ 
 
till December, 2012. This has im pacted the allocation of current fiscal with the 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 60.00 crore only. This is a classic example of past 
performance guiding the future allocations as is evident in reductions starting at 
the BE level, due to under-utilization in the current fiscal.  
 
Deeply concerned at this sordid state of affairs, the Committee has no 
option, but to reiterate that the strengthening of veterinary services be taken up 
without fail and the Committee strongly recommend that the allocation of the 
scheme be enhanced and utilized optimally and the shortage of veterinary 
doctors and technical staff be bridged at the earliest so as to improve the quality 
of veterinary services.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The veterinary hospitals, dispensaries, polyclinics et c. are set up by the States/ 
Union Territory Governments depending upon the livestock population in a particular 
area and availability of resources. Manpower including Veterinarians is also provided by 
the respective State Governments.  
Department is provi ding financial assistance to the States/UTs to set up new 
veterinary hospitals/dispensaries and to strengthen the existing ones as per the project 
proposal received from the States under the Scheme. Till 2012 -13, the Department has 
released funds to 27 Sta tes and 4 Union Territories for construction/renovation of 
veterinary hospitals/dispensaries. During 2012 -13, the Department has released the 
funds to the tune of Rs. 51.76 crore under the Scheme. Taking into account the overall 
allocation for the Departme nt for 2013 -14, an allocation of Rs. 60.00 crore has been 
provided for the scheme at BE Stage for 2013-14.  In view of the recommendation of the 
Committee, steps would be taken to augment the provision under the scheme at RE 

~ 56 ~ 
 
stage for current year. Taking into account the requirement, the States are also availing 
funds for this purpose under RKVY, RIDF and other schemes. 
[Letter No.25-5(1)/2013-AHD (Coord) dated 22nd July, 2013] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                              BASUDEB ACHARIA 
28  Novemebr, 2013                    Chairman,  
7  Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                            Committee on Agriculture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

~ 57 ~ 
 
APPENDIX 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 11 th November, 2013  from 1 500 hours to 
1615 hours in Committee Room „C‟ (G/F), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
          PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA   
2.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
3.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
5.  Shri P. Kumar 
6.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
8.  Shri Patel Kishanbhyai V. 
9.  Dr Kumar Pandey. Vinay „Vinnu‟ 
  
                                    RAJYA SABHA 
10.  Shri N. Balaganga 
11.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
12.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
13.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
14.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
15.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
16.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
17.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 

~ 58 ~ 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.H. Rao   - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  Then, the Committee took up for consideration the following: 
(i) Memorandum No.05 pertaining to the draft Report on the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-eighth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2012 -13) on 
Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of Ministry of Agriculture, Department of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries.   
(ii) xx   xx   xx   xx 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee approved the categoriza tion of action 
taken replies as shown in the Memoranda and adopted the draft Reports without any 
modification.  They authorised the Chairman to present these Reports to Parliament 
after getting them factually verified from the concerned Departments. 
 
4. xx   xx   xx   xx 
5. xx   xx   xx   xx 
 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

~ 59 ~ 
 
ANNEXURE 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE FORTY -NINTH REPORT OF 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) PERTAINING TO 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING & 
FISHERIES. 
 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations               20 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Para Nos. 1.4, 2.20, 2.21, 2.22, 3.29, 3.30, 3.31, 3.32, 3.33, 3.34, 3.36, 4.46, 4.47, 4.49, 
4.50, 4.52 and 4.53.  
 
Total           17 
 
Percentage                           85% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
Para Nos. 3.35, 4.51  
Total                   02 
Percentage                               10% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos.  Nil 
Total              00
  
Percentage               00% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para Nos. 2.52   
Total             01
  
Percentage                    05% 
 