FIFTY-NINTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-2014)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION)
CULTIVATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED
FOOD CROPS—PROSPECTS AND EFFECTS
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-seventh Report of the
Committee on Agriculture (2011-2012)]
Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker on 15.03.2014
Presented to Lok Sabha on .........2014
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on .........2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2014/Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)


C.O.A. No. 282
Price : Rs. 191.00
© 2014 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 001.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 35
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 77
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ....................................... 90
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ............................................................................ 148
A
NNEXURES
I. Indicative List of the Scientific Subjects for which
Expertise is required for Safety Assessment of GM
Crops ........................................................................................ 156
II. Composition of IBSC and RCGM..................................... 157
III. Key international consultations addressing the safety
assessment of GM foods (1990—2007) ............................ 160
IV. Economic impacts and impact dynamics of Bt .
(Bacillus thuringiensis) cotton in India ........................... 163
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the 20th Sitting of the Committee held on
3 March, 2014 ........................................................................ 182
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on
Agriculture (2011-2012)......................................................... 184

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2013-2014)
Shri Basudeb Acharia —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
6. Shri L. Raja Gopal*
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
9. Shri Premdas Katheria
10. Shri P . Kumar
11. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
12. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
13. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
14. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
15. Shri Devji M. Patel
16. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
17. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
18. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
19. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
20. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
21. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri N. Balaganga
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
(iii)
*Ceased to be the member of the Committee on his resignation from Lok Sabha on
19.02.2014.

24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
25. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
26. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
27. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri S. Thangavelu
30. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2013-2014)
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the report on
their behalf, present this Fifty-ninth Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Thirty-seventh Report of the Committee on “Cultivation of Genetically
Modified Food Crops—Prospects and Effects” pertaining to the Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation).
2. The Thirty-seventh Report of the Committee on Agriculture
(2011-2012) on “Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops—
Prospects and Effects” pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) was presented to Lok
Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09 August, 2012. The
Action Taken Replies on the Report were received on 30 November,
2012.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 03 March, 2014.
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh Report
of the Committee is given in Appendix II .
   N
EW D ELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA,
03 March, 2014 Chairman,
12 Phalguna, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-seventh Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2011-12) on
‘Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops—Prospects And Effects’
of The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha on 09 August, 2012.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the
102 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1.21, 1.22, 1.23, 2.74, 2.75, 2.76,
2.80, 2.82, 2.87, 2.88, 2.92, 3.35, 3.36, 3.37, 3.38, 3.39, 3.43,
3.44, 4.28, 4.30, 4.31, 4.32, 4.33, 5.43, 5.44, 5.45, 5.54, 6.141,
6.142, 6.143, 6.150, 6.151, 6.152, 6.153, 6.154, 6.155, 6.156,
7.59, 7.71, and 8.115.
(Chapter II—Total 40)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‘s reply:
Recommendation Para Nos. 2.77, 3.45, 3.47, 4.29, 4.34, 5.47,
5.48, 5.55, 7.18 and 7.21.
(Chapter III—Total 10)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1.20, 2.78, 2.79, 2.81, 2.83, 2.84,
2.85, 2.86, 3.40, 3.41, 3.42, 3.46, 3.48, 5.46, 5.49, 5.50, 5.52,
5.53, 5.56, 5.57, 5.58, 5.59, 6.144, 6.145, 6.146, 6.147, 7.19,
7.20, 7.60, 7.61, 7.75, 7.76, 8.116, 8.117, 8.118, 8.119, 8.120,
8.121, 8.122, 8.123, 8.124, 8.125, 8.126 and 8.127.
(Chapter IV—Total 44)

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Para Nos. 2.89, 2.90, 2.91, 5.51, 6.148, 6.149,
7.62 and 7.63.
(Chapter V—Total 08)
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that
further Action Taken Note on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter-I and Final Action Taken Replies to the
Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished
to them within a period of three months.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1.20, 3.40, 3.41, 3.42, 3.48, 5.46, 5.49,
5.52, 5.53, 6.144, 6.145, 6.147, 8.116, 8.117, 8.119 and 8.120)
1.5 The Committee are not satisfied with the replies furnished
by the Government in respect of the above-mentioned
recommendations. They therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendations and desire that further research and development
on transgenics in agricultural crops should be done only in strict
containment and field trials should not be undertaken till the
Government puts in place all regulatory, monitoring, oversight,
surveillance and other structures. The Committee note from press
reports that the Minister for Environment and Forests has decided
to allow field trials of transgenics which is contrary to the
recommendations of the Committee in the Thirty-seventh report. The
Committee strongly deprecate this.
Increase in Toxic Alkaloid in Bt. Brinjal
Recommendation (Para No. 2.78)
1.6 Dr. P .M. Bhargava had pointed out that the growing failures of
Bt. cotton on the front of resistance to pests it was supposed to kill,
increasing attacks of secondary pests, etc. prove that the technology is

3
not sustainable. The death of cattle and other livestock in
Andhra Pradesh after grazing on Bt. cotton fields also raised doubts
about the safety of Bt. cotton as feed. The Committee desired to know
how the regulatory mechanism had missed the 30% increase in toxic
alkaloid content in Bt. brinjal and approved it for environmental release,
as all these developments could have devastating effects on
environment and human and livestock health.
1.7 The Department have replied in their Action Taken Note that
the observations of Dr. Bhargava on the growing failures of Bt. Cotton
due to development of insect resistance is contrary to the field situations
and appeared to be based on allegations made by some activists. They
further stated that there are no reports of development of resistance to
Bt. protein anywhere in the world so far under cultivated field
conditions. All the reports are based on laboratory experiments for
understanding the phenomena of resistance development and
interpreting these laboratory observations in the context of field
situation is not scientifically justified. The main purpose of Bt-cotton
is to control bollworms. Bt. cotton effectively controlled bollworms,
thus preventing yield losses from an estimated damage of 30 to 60%
each year in India thus far from 2002 to 2011. Increasing attacks of
sucking pests are because of susceptible hybrids and not related to
Bt. technology. It further stated that there is adequate scientific evidence
to state that cry proteins have not been reported to be toxic to higher
animals such as goats, sheep and cattle in any part of the world. The
Andhra Pradesh State Department of Agriculture investigated the case
of cattle/livestock and sheep mortality in the State due to grazing in
Bt. cotton fields and the samples were found to contain high levels of
nitrates, nitrites, hydrogen cyanide residues and organophosphates,
which might have come from the soil, fertilizer or pesticides used in
cotton cultivation and were the cause of animal deaths.
1.8 The Committee had desired to know how the regulatory
mechanism had missed the 30% increase in toxic alkaloid in
Bt. Brinjal and approved it for environmental release as all these
developments could have devastating effects on environment and
human and livestock health. The reply of the Government is silent
on this point. The Committee would like to know the Government’s
response in this regard.
Thorough Probe into the Bt. Brinjal Case
Recommendation (Para No. 2.79)
1.9 On the functioning of the extant regulatory mechanism
Dr. P .M. Bhargava had revealed that co-Chairman of GEAC,
(Prof. Arjula Reddy) had stated that the tests asked for by Dr. Bhargava

4
for assessing Bt. brinjal were not carried out and even the tests
undertaken were performed badly and he was under tremendous
pressure from industry, GEAC and from the Minster to approve Bt.
brinjal. The Committee felt that this was indicative of collusion of the
worst kind. The Committee, therefore, recommended a thorough probe
into the Bt. brinjal matter from the beginning upto the imposing of
moratorium on its commercialization by a team of eminent independent
scientists and environmentalists.
1.10 In their Action Taken Note, the Department have stated that
the allegation of Dr. P .M. Bhargava has surfaced time and again.
Ministry of Agriculture decided to get into the depth of this issue.
Accordingly, both Dr. Bhargava and Dr. Arjula R. Reddy were addressed
asking them to clarify specific issues. Dr. P .M. Bhargava was asked to
give specific comments on the following two issues:—
“(i) in retrospect, the only conclusion is that he “succumbed”.
You are requested to kindly elaborate as to how this
conclusion was arrived at.
(ii) Knowing Monsanto’s record and our own, it can be
surmised as to how he was brought around.”
In response to this letter Dr. Bhargava chose not to respond himself
and asked someone else who sent a reply on the Anveshna letter
head. For query No. (i) Dr. Bhargava’s reponse as indicated to DAC
was that Oxford English Dictionary clearly gives the meaning of the
word “succumb”. For query No. (ii) Dr. Bhargava responded by citing
Monsanto’s record for the last half-a-century and government records
for dealing with GM crops. Dr. Bhargava mentioned that large number
of scientific papers that have been published in well known scientific
journals confirm this fact. Also Dr. Bhargava referred the Oxford
Dictionary to explain the meaning of the word “surmise”.
On the other hand Dr. Reddy gave a detailed response, in response
to the following three points raised by DAC:—
“(i) The Chairman of EC-II, Dr. Arjula Reddy….was making
totally confidential call to tell me that eight of the tests that
I had said should be done on Bt. Brinjal and with which he
agreed, had not been done.
(ii) Even in the case of tests that have been done, many have
not been done satisfactorily and adequately.
(iii) He was, however, under ‘tremendous pressure’ to clear the
Bt. brinjal and had calls from Agriculture Minister, GEAC
and industry.”

5
The response of Dr. Reddy is reproduced below:—
“(i) As Dr. P .M. Bhargava himself claims that it was a totally
confidential call, he breached it by making it public.
Nevertheless, it was a normal conversation in which I said
that the eight tests suggested by him were not done as
those are not actually in the approved protocols by GEAC.
It does not certainly mean that I have agreed for these
tests. My intention of talking to him was to appraise him
about the scientific aspects of several questions he usually
raises at the GEAC meetings and it was in the back of my
mind that he is going to raise these questions at the GEAC
meeting any way. The GEAC discussions earlier also entered
on the view that these tests are not expected to contribute
significantly.
(ii) This statement is out of context. I said that I am seriously
going through the draft report to see whether the tests data
and interpretations were done properly. I said that some
data were badly interpreted in draft text (sentences were
rather awkward) which were corrected later and that took
time I also said that I am also seeking clarifications on
certain tests from the concerned Government laboratories
such as NIN, Hyderabad.
(iii) I said I was under pressure as I was to meet the deadline
of the forthcoming GEAC meeting and I already took a lot
of time because of my pre-occupation with my official duties
as the Vice Chancellor of a new University. There were no
specific calls from Agricultural Minister nor from the
industry for approval of Bt. brinjal. Only calls were from
the GEAC office to expedite the report as I was taking
quite a long time in going through it.
It is unfortunate that he did not understand my intention
of calling him and also did not take it in the right scientific
perspective. In any event, I do not wish to dwell further on
this matter.”
As can we see the above two responses received from Dr. Bhargava
and Dr. Reddy, it is clear that the statement of Dr. Bhargava cannot be
relied upon as it has been refuted by Dr. Reddy, the person who he
has been quoting, often out of context.
1.11 What the Committee had sought was not a response from
Dr. Bhargava and Dr. Reddy, but a thorough probe into the Bt. brinjal
matter from the beginning upto the imposing of moratorium on its

6
commercialization by a team of eminent independent scientists. This
has not been done. The Committee therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation of a thorough and independent probe into the
Bt. brinjal matter from the beginning upto the imposing of
moratorium on its commercialisation.
Change in the Role of GEAC
Recommendation (Para No. 2.81)
1.12 The Committee had noted that the demarcation of roles and
responsibilities between Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF)
and Genetic Engineering Approval Committee (GEAC) seemed to be
hazy. While Rules 1989 are very clear and unambiguous about the
authority of according approval for environmental and commercial
release vesting with GEAC, the information submitted to the Committee
by MoEF and GEAC from time to time, for and in connection with
the examination of the subject, conveyed an intent to obfuscate the
matter. At some places, the authority of GEAC to accord approvals
was truly reflected, at others it was couched as ‘recommendation of
GEAC to accord approval’ and at still others it was stated that GEAC
accorded approval for environmental release and had no role in
commercialization of GM crops. The Committee, therefore, strongly
felt that this uncertainty is not in the interest of the regulatory
mechanism in place for such a sensitive matter. They, therefore,
recommended the Government to come up with a detailed statement
clarifying on all aspects of the matter so as to put the ongoing
controversies to rest.
1.13 The Department in their Action Taken Note have submitted
that as per Rules 1989, under the Environment Protection Act, 1986,
regulatory powers for environmental release of Genetically Modified
Organisms (GMOs) rest only with the GEAC. It has been further
clarified that the commercial use of technology is subject to the laws,
regulations and policies of line Ministries in the Central Government
and State Governments, who are responsible for deployment of modern
technologies in agriculture, healthcare, process industry, environment
protection etc. suitable to societal and local needs.
It has been stated further that concurrent to the Parliamentary
Committee deliberations, the Scientific Advisory Council to the Prime
Minister (SAC-PM) has been discussing the matters related to
biotechnology and agriculture and has recommended that “RCGM and
GEAC should be the sole authority for biosafety and bio-efficacy
assessment of all recombinant products. Decision on commercial use

7
of biotechnology produced crops should be taken by the Agriculture
Ministries/Department of Central and State Governments as per
existing policies and regulations on crops. For medical products, Central
Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) of Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare, Government of India would approve
commercialization as of now”.
1.14 It is observed from the reply of the Government that GEAC
will have only regulatory role. It will no longer have the role of
according “approval of proposals relating to release of genetically
engineered organisms and products in the environment including
experiment field trials” as provided for in the Rules of 1989. The
Committee in this connection note that the notification No. GSR
613(E) dated 16 July, 2010 has only amended the name of the “Genetic
Engineering Approval Committee” into “Genetic Engineering
Appraisal Committee” and not amended the role of the Committee.
The words “approval of activities” and “approval of proposals”
appearing in Rule No. 4(4) of 1989 rules still remain unamended.
This would mean that the statutory power to accord approvals is
still vested with the GEAC. The Committee expect the Government
to look into this aspect and amend the relevant rules [7(1), 8, 10, 11,
12 and 13] suitably under intimation to the Committee.
Organizational Setup of GEAC
Recommendation (Para No. 2.83)
1.15 The Committee noted that GEAC is chaired by a civil servant
who also doubles up as Additional Secretary in the MoEF. The Vice-
Chairman is also a civil servant and the Co-Chairman of GEAC, a
nominee of DBT, is a biotechnologist. The Committee were not satisfied
that ensuring environmental safety, health safety, food and feed safety
of the entire country from induction of GMOs has been left at the
mercy of such a setup for these many years. They, therefore,
recommended that while reviewing the organizational set-up of GEAC,
the Government should also keep this aspect in mind.
1.16 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the composition of GEAC has been prescribed in Rules, 1989 notified
under Environment Protection Act, 1986. The GEAC consists of both
scientific experts as well as inter-ministerial representatives. Further,
expert committees or sub-committees were constituted on a case by
case basis providing the necessary support. The decision making process
provides adequate opportunity to each member to express and record
their views, if any. Besides, scientific evidence and data available on
each case is also a key factor in decision making.

8
1.17 The Committee are aware of the composition of GEAC
prescribed in the Rules 1989. The Committee feel that with the
change in the role of GEAC from one of ‘according approval’ to
‘appraising proposals’, it would be in the fitness of things, if GEAC
is headed by a technical expert rather than by a bureaucrat. The
Committee hope that the Government will look into this aspect.
Formulation of a Policy Regarding Marker Gene Technology
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.84, 2.85 and 2.86)
1.18 The Committee noted that Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) or World Health Organization (WHO) expert panel, International
Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for
Development (IAASTD) report and several other studies have
recommended the use of anti-biotic resistant marker free genes
technology while creating GMOs. According to such studies though
the possibility of such a transfer is low but any transfer of such genes
from Genetically Modified (GM) crops/commodities to cells of the
body or to bacteria in the gastro-intestinal tract would be of concern.
In our context, while GEAC has stuck to the argument that such
possibilities are remote, most of the other ministries/departments whose
views were sought by the Committee had shown a marked inclination
for technologies without antibiotic resistant marker genes. Most of the
independent scientists and other witnesses who appeared before the
Committee also expressed their concern on use of anti-biotic resistant
marker gene in developing GMOs.
1.19 An overwhelming majority of stakeholders who appeared
before the Committee were in favour of use of anti-biotic marker
resistant gene free technology. GEAC had, however, taken the stand
that since technology for generating marker free technology is available,
it is a matter of policy whether to allow GM crops with antibiotic
resistant markers. They have also informed the Committee that they
had noted this matter in its meeting held on 8 December, 2010 and
had found that any decision to disallow release of GM crops with
antibiotic resistant genes would make almost all transgenic plants that
are under consideration of GEAC or Review Committee on Genetic
Manipulation (RCGM) ineligible for release.
1.20 The Committee expressed their extreme displeasure at the
response of GEAC, which showed a complete lack of concern towards
its role and responsibility and rather conveyed its strong inclination
towards the benefit of industry. The Committee, therefore,
recommended the Government to not leave such a crucial decision in
the hands of GEAC but to come up with a clear-cut policy in this
regard immediately.

9
1.21 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
there is ample scientific evidence that there is no significant, real world
hazard associated with the markers that are commonly used. Regulatory
decisions for plants containing one antibiotic resistance marker ( nptII)
have been issued in 15 countries including at least one from every
continent. Decisions have been made for 12 species of plants
representing more than 30 separate transformation events. This includes
more than 200 food or feed safety decisions and 80 environmental
safety decisions (for nptII). These have all agreed that the potential for
harm from HGT of antibiotic resistance markers from these GE plants
is negligible. Likewise, food and feed safety decisions have determined
that the consumption of expressed proteins from antibiotic resistance
markers does not present any risk to human or animal health and
safety. Several international agencies, like International Food
Biotechnology Council, FAO, WHO, US Food and Drug Administration
(USFDA), European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), etc. have deliberated
on the issue and given statements with regard to safe use of antibiotic
resistance markers.
The Department have stated further that in 2009, EFSA requested
the Panel on Genetically Modified Organisms and the Panel on
Biological Hazards (BIOHAZ) to deliver a joint scientific opinion on
the use of antibiotic resistance genes as marker genes in genetically
modified plants. From all the evidence gathered, the two Panels came
to the conclusion that “The current state of knowledge indicates that
adverse effects on human health and the environment resulting from
the transfer of these two antibiotic resistance genes from GM plants to
bacteria, associated with use of GM plants are unlikely”.
It has been stated by the Department that in the global context,
there is no ban on GM crops containing Antibiotic Resistance Marker
(ARM) even in European Union (EU). Recognising new technologies
available at proof of concept stage, the phasing out of ARM in GM
crops has been considered by various countries as a future option.
The GEAC decision dated December 8, 2011 is also on similar lines.
RCGM also reportedly opined that use of markers for antibiotic
resistance is not an issue, since transfer of these genes from transgenic
crops to bacteria living in the gut of humans and livestock is an
extremely rare event under natural conditions and that antibiotic
resistance genes are already found in some bacteria. Furthermore, none
of the transgenic crops released for cultivation in the past is marker-
free, and no case of any transfer of marker gene or its toxic effect has
ever been reported during the last 15 years of commercialization of
crops.

10
1.22 Regarding the use of anti-biotic marker resistant gene free
technology, the Department have stated that perception of stakeholders
on possibility of transfer of ARM genes from GM crops to other
organisms has no scientific evidence as explained in detail above.
1.23 The Department have stated further that the use of antibiotic
marker gene has been the first generation technology with history of
safe use as described above and therefore, even the public sector
institutions employ these markers for development of GM crop varieties
addressing problems of Indian agriculture.
1.24 The Committee are not inclined to agree with the views of
the Government that possibility of transfer of antibiotic resistance
marker genes from GM crops to other organisms has no scientific
evidence. The Committee feel that there should be no compromise
even remotely on human health and environment by the use of
antibiotic-resistance marker in GM crops. It has been stated that
since technology for generating marker gene technology is available,
it is a matter of policy whether to allow GM crops with antibiotic
resistance markers. The Committee urge that the Government should
formulate a policy in this regard without delay keeping the human
health and environment in view.
Role of Institutional Biosafety Committees (IBSC)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.43)
1.25 The 1989 Rules provides for the regulatory mechanism, which
consists of six committees, (i) Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee,
(ii) Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM), (iii)
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RDAC), (iv) State Biosafety
Coordination Committees (SBCC), (v) District Level Committees (DLC),
and (vi) Institutional Biosafety Committees (IBSC). While GEAC is at
the apex body to accord approval for environmental release and
commercial release, IBSC is where primary studies and assessments
are undertaken and data generation takes place. This IBSC is within
the company which intends to market the GMO product being worked
upon. RCGM is the body to assess and evaluate the studies undertaken
and data generated by IBSC. Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
(RDAC) is advisory in nature, while State Biosafety Coordination
Committees (SBCC) and District Level Committees (DLC) are tasked
with monitoring at State and district levels respectively.
1.26 The Department in their Action Taken Note have clarified the
role of IBSC and stated that it is mandatory for any company/
organisation/institution involved in GMO research to set up an

11
Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBSC) with a nominated external
expert by the regulatory system. The mandate of IBSC is of a
supervisory nature to ensure that research and development is carried
out in a safe manner and regulatory compliance is strictly followed.
Therefore on the contrary to statement in the report that “IBSC is
where primary studies and assessments are undertaken and data
generation takes place”, it may be clarified that IBSC does not generate
safety data.
1.27 The Committee had nowhere mentioned that IBSC generates
safety data. Hence, the clarification given by the Government “that
IBSC does not generate safety data” is unwarranted.
Conflict of Interest of Agencies involved in Existing Regulating
Mechanism
Recommendation (Para No. 3.46)
1.28 The Committee had observed that GEAC is headed by a civil
servant who also functions in another capacity in MoEF, the controlling
authority of GEAC. The Co-Chairman of GEAC, though purportedly
from outside is nominated by DBT, the promoter Department. The
Vice-Chairman is again a civil servant and simultaneously discharging
responsibilities in another role in MoEF. By its very composition, the
Committee does not have regular existence and meets monthly , only
when some decisions are to be taken. There is a serious dearth of
scientists of eminence in sufficient number. Therefore, more or less the
same set of people sit on both sides to develop technologies/products
and also assess/evaluate and approve them as well.
1.29 The Department in their Action Taken Note have submitted
that RDAC was set up by DBT in the early years to assist in framing
of initial set of guidelines for biotechnology research. Due to diverse
and specialized needs of various sectors, subsequently, various other
mechanisms such as setting up of task forces, expert committees etc.
have been used by various ministries to seek advice with respect to
issues on GMOs in agriculture and healthcare.
Further, Biosafety assessment of GM crops is a multidisciplinary
and scientific endeavour and so requires multiple kind of expertise.
The important scientific subjects include molecular biology, agronomy,
breeding, plant pathology, biochemistry, toxicology, etc. In the current,
regulatory framework the safety assessment is carried out by statutory
committees at three levels; Institutional Biosafety Committees (IBSCs)
at the institution level and the Review Committee on Genetic

12
Manipulation (RCGM) and Genetically Engineered Appraisal Committee
(GEAC) at the national level. Each application is examined critically
by about 60 experts covering all the above disciplines, most of whom
are external experts from public sector institutions and universities.
It may also be noted that Global Biotechnology Industry in
Agriculture, Healthcare and Industrial applications is about US$ 100
billion and Indian Biotech industry recorded a revenue of around
US $ 5 billion in 2012 with average growth rate of 21% per year.
About US $ 1 billion worth biotech pharmaceuticals are exported from
India after regulatory and safety clearances from Indian regulatory
system which includes RCGM and DCGI. Therefore, questioning the
credibility and expertise available in the country on issues of safety
assessment is not appropriate.
DBT and DST along with CSIR, ICAR and ICMR have invested
heavily in human resource development and sufficient expertise is
available in the country to take care of the regulatory functions. In
addition, DBT and MoEF has organized series of training programmes
and capacity building activities to create expertise in the safety
assessment of GM crops.
About 600 universities, institutions and private sector laboratories
with an estimated 3000 scientific and technical people are engaged in
R&D and regulatory testing including research field trials. About 120
public sector universities/institutions and 320 private sector colleges
and universities are engaged in biotechnology education.
1.30 Having noted the detailed submission of the Government,
the Committee are constrained to note that the reply is silent on the
question of the same set of people being involved in development
of technologies/products and also in assessment, evaluation and
approval. The Committee would like the Government to make
changes in the composition of GEAC and other bodies so that the
conflicting roles played by some of them are done away with.
Process of Examining Domestic Laws
Recommendation (Para No. 4.32)
1.31 Nagoya—Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol (N-KLSP) is
meant to contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of
biodiversity by providing international rules and procedures on liability
and redress damage resulting from Living Modified Organisms (LMOs).
The Committee were given to understand that as a party to the

13
Supplementary Protocol, a special legislation, in the field of liability
and redress for damage resulting from LMOs would be needed to
meet the obligations under the Supplementary Protocol as also the
proposed The Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India (BRAI) Bill,
2010 do not address the concept of damage and sufficient likelihood
of LMOs and the response for measures including financial security to
take preventive measures.
1.32 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the MoEF has already signed the N-KLSP and initiated the process of
examining the provisions before ratification. The Government had been
going through a process of examining domestic laws to determine
whether domestic rules and procedures already existed that address
potential damage, as defined in Article 2 of the N-KLSP . If applicable
rules exist, they should be carefully analyzed to ensure compliance
with all aspects of the N-KLSP . Where rules do not exist or are
insufficient or contrary to the N-KLSP , a comprehensive plan for
amendment and/or creation of new legal instruments could be
developed. This plan would address all aspects of referenced applicable
domestic laws on both the mandatory and discretionary rules and
procedures set forth in the N-KLSP .
1.33 The Committee note that the Government is going through
a process of examining domestic laws to determine whether domestic
rules and procedures already exist that address potential damage, as
defined in Article 2 of the Nagoya—Kuala Lumpur Supplementary
Protocol. The Committee desire that the whole process should be
completed within a time-frame under intimation to the Committee
and if any gap is found, action to redress the same be taken without
loss of time.
Post Marketing Surveillance
Recommendation (Para Nos. 5.50, 7.61 and 8.124)
1.34 The IAASTD Report has concluded about the need for a
systematic direction of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology
(AKST) including a rigourous rethinking of biotechnology and
especially, modern biotechnology in the decades to come, effective long
term environmental, health monitoring and surveillance programmes
and training and education of farmers to identify emerging and
comparative impacts on the environment and human health and to
take timely counter measures. According to IAASTD Report, no regional
long term environmental and health monitoring programmes had
existed in the countries who are most concentrated with GM foods.
Hence, long-term data on environmental implications of GM crop
production are at best deductive or simply missing and speculative.

14
1.35 The Committee had desired to be apprised of the all action
taken by the Government with regard to post marketing surveillance,
health safety, food and feed safety of the cotton seed oil and other
products like cotton cake extracted from Bt. cotton and whether the
manufactures of the cotton seed oil and cotton cake derived from
Bt. cotton have complied with all relevant laws and regulations laid
down for production and marketing of products derived from
transgenic materials.
1.36 The Committee also observed that the long term environment
impact assessment and chronic toxicology studies of the effects of
transgenic agriculture crops have not even been attempted till now.
The Government had not yet taken a final call on labelling. There has
been a complete lack of post market surveillance, as has been pointed
out in one particular example of lacs of tonnes of Bt. cotton seed oil
having gone into the food chain during last ten years without anybody
in the Government being aware or concerned about it.
1.37 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in their Action
Taken Note have stated that the area under GM crops has been
increasing exponentially since these were first commercialized in 1996,
with more and more countries adopting the modern biotechnology.
The global area under GM crops in 2011 has reached to 160 million
hectares in 29 countries, thus indicating their acceptance globally . No
product has ever been withdrawn by regulatory authorities in any
country.
The Department have further stated that the IAASTD report has
underestimated the potential of new technologies relative to existing
technologies. Hence, rigorous rethinking of biotechnology and especially
modern biotechnology as suggested to by the Committee seems out of
place. Government is committed to continuously learn and evolve its
regulatory procedures based on its home grown experience and
scientific data generated worldwide. In addition, Government in
accordance with its accepted policies is open to exploring all options
that leads it towards food security, well being of farmers and making
agriculture an economically viable proposition.
Regarding the issue of long term environmental and health
monitoring programmes, the Department has clarified that the safety
assessment of a GM crop encompasses two components viz. food and
feed safety and environmental safety. Regulatory authorities undertake
a detailed pre-release assessment on both aspects before permitting
their commercial cultivation. Regarding food and feed safety, the post

15
release marketing of GM foods or any food in terms of safety aspects
is not scientifically feasible. While post approval monitoring in case of
drugs or any single chemicals produces useful sentinel data on drug
safety and adverse effects, in such cases, people who provide a detailed
history are taking a highly defined substance where there is already
an idea of the types of adverse health effects that may be found. In
contrast, any post market monitoring of GM foods would be of a
population consuming different amounts at different times and in
different ways amongst all other food intake, and with no particular
health outcome in mind. The health effects observed may be vague,
and may not be attributed to a particular cause. These factors make
it unlikely that an adverse health effect due to any food or GM food
could be detected above all the other health effects in the general
population. In the light of above, regulatory authorities across the world
focus on safety assessment before the food is placed on the market
and the same is also reflected in the consensus documents by FAO,
WHO, Codex Alimentarius, Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) etc.
It has been stated further that the need for post-release
environmental monitoring is determined on a case-by-case basis, taking
into account familiarity with the plant species and trait. Bt. cotton,
with a history of safe use has been subjected to post release monitoring
by Central Institute of Cotton Research with respect to monitoring of
development of insect resistance in the target insect population.
Regarding the general surveillance of Genetically Engineered (GE)
crops, it has been stated that while countries like USA, Canada and
Australia have no specific requirements, an attempt was made by Brazil
to enforce a general monitoring, in case of herbicide tolerant soyabean,
but even after four years of detailed field studies no harm was
observed, as expected. In the light of this experience, Brazil has already
modified its guidance and done away with the complex requirements.
1.38 It has been stated further that Bt. cotton has been in cultivation
for the last 16 years with no report of any negative impact on health
and environment. Even in the ICAR animal feeding trials on lamb, it
was noted that the animal did not exhibit any detrimental effects
attributable to Bt. cotton. This led to the conclusion that “feeding of
Bt. cotton to lambs did not alter immunity status” as evidenced by
increased RBC and decreased WBC in the gut of the lamb fed with
Bt. cotton seed. Similar studies published in international journals also
support these conclusions. Further, long term studies for over 25 months
based on cows feeding on Bt. corn whole crop silage, kernels, whole-
cobs also support these results (Ref: Steinke et al. 2010; Journal of
Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition).

16
1.39 The Committee had desired to be apprised of the steps
taken by the Government regarding post marketing surveillance,
health safety, food and feed safety of the cotton seed oil and other
products like cotton cake extracted from Bt. Cotton and whether the
manufactures of the cotton seed oil and cotton cake derived from
Bt. Cotton have complied with all relevant laws and regulations laid
down for production and marketing of products derived from
transgenic materials. In response, the Government have inter-alia
stated that the post release marketing of GM foods or any food in
terms of safety aspects is not scientifically feasible. It has been stated
that “any post market monitoring of GM foods would be of a
population consuming different amounts at different times and in
different ways amongst all other food intake, and with no particular
health outcome in mind. The health effects observed may be vague,
and may not be attributed to a particular cause. These factors make
it unlikely that an adverse health effect due to any food or GM
food could be detected above all the other health effects in the
general population”. The Committee do not agree with this view.
The Committee feel that it is a question of evolving a system of
collecting and monitoring reports from health centers about novel
cases involving GM food consumption and attempting to study the
pattern regarding health effects for appropriate remedial action. The
Committee would appreciate intimation of steps taken in this regard.
Conservation of Biodiversity
Recommendation (Para No. 5.51)
1.40 The Committee observed that while there is awareness and
appreciation of the various findings contained in IAASTD Report and
a lot of preparatory action is available in documents, purposeful and
definitive action towards adopting and implementing sustainable and
environment friendly practices and technologies in agriculture and allied
sectors which will conserve biodiversity and also ensure safety of
human and livestock health had not been initiated in right measures.
1.41 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in their Action
Taken Note have stated that the National Agriculture Research System
(NARS) with its extensive network of research institutions along with
State Agriculture Universities (SAUs) have been continuously working
towards identifying suitable technologies and developing sustainable
and environmental friendly practices in agriculture. Several initiatives
such as Task Force, constitution of expert committees, framing of policy
guidelines are a continuous process and these update as well as guide
the proposed agenda. Indigenous recommendations for making

17
agriculture more competitive as well as sustainable are more
comfortable rather than drawing conclusions from IASTTD, which has
only provided sweeping generalised statements. In fact, the Independent
Evaluation Group, a unit within the World Bank group in its Global
Programme Review has noted that IASTTD had limited representations
of farmers and those closest to them. There was predominance of
international Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) over national
and local NGOs and therefore local knowledge representation was
found to be inadequate.
1.42 The Committee had pointed out that purposeful and
definitive action towards adopting and implementing sustainable and
environment friendly practices and technologies in agriculture and
allied sectors which will conserve biodiversity and also ensure safety
of human health and livestock health is unfortunately yet to be
initiated. The Government in their reply have not indicated what
specific initiatives have been initiated in this regard. The Committee
would await information in this regard.
Merits and Demerits of GM Crops
Recommendation (Para No. 5.56)
1.43 GEAC had approved the commercial release of Bt. Brinjal as
the apex regulatory body for the purpose in the Country. The same
agency has been holding the judgement on the merits and demerits of
GM crops, in general, and Bt. brinjal in particular, which is a clear
case of conflict of interest. The Committee, therefore, recommended
that evaluation of various reports on this matter should be done by
some other agency such as Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR), since they not only have sufficient expertise in this regard but
also have minimum conflict of interest amongst the various public
sector scientific institutions. The Committee also felt that the
examination of various reports had to be expedited and results
conveyed to them at the earliest so that a final view in the matter is
facilitated without any further delay.
1.44 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the GEAC is a statutory body under Rule 1989 for according approval
for environmental release of GMOs. The GEAC is well represented by
CSIR. DG, CSIR is a statutory member of the GEAC as also its nominee.
1.45 The Committee had recommended, among other things that
the examination of various reports on the merits and demerits of
GM crops in General and Bt. brinjal in particular has to be expedited

18
and results conveyed to them at the earliest. There is nothing in the
reply of the Government to indicate whether examination of various
reports has been completed and what is the outcome of its
examination. The Committee would appreciate a detailed reply in
this regard.
Evaluation of Environmental Risks
Recommendation (Para Nos. 5.57 and 5.58)
1.46 The Committee had noted that the Report of Prof. David A.
Andow on Bt. brinjal is a scientific evaluation of the scope and
adequacy of environmental risk assessment of transgenic EE-1
Bt. brinjal. The Report has criticized GEAC for setting a narrow scope
for environmental risk assessment of Bt. Brinjal due to which the
assessment of Bt. brinjal by Expert Committee II was not adequate.
Amongst the possible environmental risks that have not been
adequately evaluated include risks to local varieties and wild relatives,
risk to biological diversity and risk of resistance evolution in Brinjal
fruit and shoot borer.
1.47 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the information generated on GM crops from discovery to market
involves three important aspects i.e. biosafety assessment on scientific
basis, bioefficacy of targeted genetic intervention and other technology
transcending issues such as farming conditions, socioeconomic analysis
etc. The reports referred to by the petitioners quoted large mix of all
these issues lacking clarity and with theoretical and non-pragmatic
approach. The Committee’s report itself states that several stakeholders
who are against transgenic crops have cited this report. The
environmental safety assessment by GEAC is in line with international
approaches and Indian regulatory requirements. The risks mentioned
by the Committee have been adequately covered in EC-II report.
1.48 The Committee had pointed out, among other things, that
amongst the possible environmental risks that have not been
adequately evaluated include risks to local varieties and wild
relatives, risk to biological diversity and risk of resistance evolution
in brinjal fruit and shoot borer. The Government have not responded
to these specific concerns of the Committee. The Committee desire
on expeditious evaluation of these risks and intimation of results
thereof.

19
Expeditious Evaluation of Reports
Recommendation (Para No. 5.59)
1.49 In the opinion of the Committee, Bt. brinjal, unlike Bt. cotton
is a food crop and it would have been the first such endeavour in
India of a technology on whose safety and sustainability the last word
is yet to be heard. Further, the contents of the report are still under
examination as post moratorium follow-up. The Committee were of
the opinion that since the matter pertains to human health, any amount
of time and money spent on any number of studies and analyses to
evaluate the product is justified. Mere referring to best global practices
and internationally laid down norms would not suffice. The Committee,
therefore, recommended that the Government should get all the reports
evaluated and examined by any agency other than GEAC like CSIR,
etc., strictly in national interest on the basis of scientific merits.
1.50 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the regulatory guidance and evaluations are the result of a long period
of consultations and consensus building based on participation of large
number of subject specific experts and other stakeholders at both
national and international level. Published literature from peer reviewed
journals is taken into account while deliberating on various issues.
1.51 The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation
regarding expeditious evaluation of the reports by an agency other
than GEAC and would like to be apprised of the outcome of the
evaluation.
Decision Making Process in Commercial Release of Bt. cotton
Recommendation (Para No. 6.146)
1.52 Though Bt. cotton is a cash crop which in no way would
have contributed to the food security of the country, yet lakhs and
lakhs of hectares of land have got diverted to Bt. cotton cultivation
because of misconception about its potential, leading to reduction of
area of cultivation of several food crops during these years and thus
jeopardizing the country’s food security to that extent. Also, due to
the popularity of Bt. cotton, countless number of traditional varieties
of cotton have been wiped out. The some fate would have be fallen
our traditional varieties of brinjal had the moratorium not been placed
on the commercialization of Bt. Brinjal. Taking a very serious note of
this matter, the Committee had recommended that an in-depth probe
may be carried out to track the decision making involved in commercial
release of Bt. cotton right from the initial stage.

20
1.53 The Ministry of Agriculture in their Action Taken Note have
submitted that it would be to take a narrow view to link increased
acreage under cotton to jeopardising food security. Relying on figures
of increased foodgrain production it can be seen that India has made
considerable increase in food grain production and the year 2010-11
accounted for record food production of 244.78 million tonnes, as per
final estimates of the Department of Economics and Statistics under
the Ministry of Agriculture.
Further it is clarified that total acreage under cotton crop remained
almost same all these years. The area under cotton crop in India was
8.9 million hectares during 1997-98 and 9.2 million hectares during
2008-09. The productivity increased from 302 kg./ha. in 1997-98 to
591 kg./ha. in 2008-09. Therefore, there has been no negative effect of
cultivation of Bt. cotton on the food security in the country.
DAC has played a responsible role and attaches great importance
to NPF 2007, which is why it endorsed release of Bt. brinjal. Brinjal
cultivation consumes maximum quantity of pesticides after cotton. As
indicated in section 6.145, experience of cotton itself shows that we
could prevent-12,738 tonnes of pesticides getting released annually into
the environment. Before the introduction of Bt. cotton, insecticide
quantity applied on cotton was the highest relative to other cultivated
crops. By the mid 1990s Indian cotton farmers were spending >43% of
the variable costs of cotton production on insecticides, around 80% of
that being for bollworm control and in particular Helicoverpa control.
Insecticide use on cotton was 50% of all insecticide use in the country
and as a result cotton production was being rendered uneconomic in
many regions of the country. The area under cotton in the country has
increased in recent years as compared to the coverage of 2008-09 as
farmers in the new regions are coming forward to this crop for
remunerative price and higher net income especially as compared to
Jowar, Bajra, upland rice and other crops. Recognizing, this trend DAC
has taken adequate measures to promote intercropping food crops with
cotton to maintain the area and sustainability of food grains production
to some extent.
Farmers also cultivate non-food crops as they have other uses for
man, like cotton, which provides clothing. Any technology, including
Bt. Cotton if enhances the productivity of the crop with reduced use
of chemicals, the ultimate beneficiary will be the farmers in terms of
realisation of higher income. Therefore, there appears nothing wrong
in commercial cultivation of Bt. cotton, though as stated in the earlier
para, Bt. cotton adoption was a reflection of farmers’ free will in
choosing a technology, which he feels is right for him.

21
1.54 The Committee had, inter-alia, pointed out that countless
number of traditional varieties in natural form of cotton have been
wiped out and recommended that an in-depth probe may be carried
out to track the decision making involved in commercial release of
Bt. cotton from the initial stage. There is no response from the
Government on these points. The Committee reiterate that as already
recommended, an in-depth probe be conducted into the matter
without further delay and the Committee be informed of the outcome.
Special Medicinal Properties in Traditional Brinjal
Recommendation (Para No. 6.150)
1.55 The Committee had conveyed their unhappiness over the
failure of the Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani,
Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy,
Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy) to bring the matters regarding with
their advice on Bt. brinjal not being heeded by Ministry of Environment
and Forests, their representation in GEAC being staggered to
subsequent years, etc. to the appropriate authorities meant to sort out
such inter-ministerial issues. The Committee had further desired a
detailed explanation from GEAC as to what action they had taken on
the serious reservations expressed by Department of AYUSH in regard
to commercialisation of Bt. brinjal and other plants having medicinal
properties. The Committee had also desired a detailed explanation from
Ministry of Environment and Forests on their refusal to co-opt the
representatives of Department of AYUSH on GEAC right away when
Bt. brinjal had been approved for commercial release and several other
crops having medicinal properties are already being assessed for
approval by Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM)/
GEAC.
1.56 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the representatives of the Department of AYUSH (Ayurveda, Unani
and Medicinal Plant Board) in the meeting of the GEAC with experts
on 27.4.2011 opined that their concern is limited to the fact that brinjal
had a special medicinal advantage in traditional system of medicine.
They had suggested that compositional comparative analysis of both
traditional brinjal and Bt. brinjal to ascertain the alteration, if any, in
the bioactivities, nutritional and medicinal values. It had been further
recommended by A YUSH that such studies may be conducted in public
sector institutions such as Central Drug Research Institute (CDRI),
Lucknow, National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Indian Institute of
Integrated Medicine (IIM) and others. In response to the above

22
observations, Department of AYUSH had been requested to provide
the information based on which appropriate follow-up action to identify
and estimate such components in the Bt. brinjal under consideration
will be carried out as additional components of compositional
equivalence studies.
1.57 It appears from the reply of the Government that neither
the Department of AYUSH nor the GEAC is serious about
expeditiously addressing the concerns of the former regarding the
issue of special medicinal properties in traditional brinjal and
Bt. brinjal. There is nothing in the reply to show as to when AYUSH
was requested to give details of information to enable compositional
comparative analysis and whether the requisite information has since
been furnished by them to undertake studies by Central Drug
Research Institute, Lucknow, National Institute of Nutrition, Indian
Institute of Integrated Medicine. The Committee desire this
information and would also like to be apprised of the outcome of
the aforesaid studies, if already completed.
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 6.154, 6.156 and 8.123)
1.58 The Committee in their Twelfth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha), presented to the Parliament on 20 April, 2005 had laid
stress on the need for a single regulatory body and an integrated food
law to obviate the confusion created by the multiplicity of laws. The
Committee had noted that the Food Safety and Standards Act was
enacted on 24 August, 2006. However, the mechanism to enforce it
was badly delayed and the Authority came into being only on
5 September, 2008. Due to teething troubles the Authority could start
functioning only from January, February, 2009. The Committee had
noted that FSSAI had been allocated sums of Rs. 8.00 crore, Rs. 21.00
crore and Rs. 32.37 crore respectively in the first three fiscals of their
existence viz. 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11. The FSS Act, 2006 has
come into force w.e.f. 5 August, 2011 and the Authority has been
functioning without any worthwhile infrastructure and manpower at
the Central and State levels to enforce the Act. All work pertaining to
strengthening of FSSAI Headquarters; development of science based
standards; food testing facilities; surveillance mechanism at both Central
and State levels have been being badly delayed because of paucity of
funds. The Food Safety and Standards Regulations which were
published in November, 2010 for inviting public comments had not
been finalized. The database for the Risk based food clearance system

23
had not been developed. Food Testing Laboratories network was in
shambles, accreditation procedure for referral labs have not been
devised.
1.59 The Committee had exhorted the Government to allocate
requisite funds to the Authority on priority basis.
1.60 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the FSSAI and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are fully
apprised of this situation and during 12th plan adequate financial
support and expansion plans have been proposed.
1.61 The Department have stated further that like any other science,
in GM technology too, new issues emerge for which a continuous
system of learning, evolving is needed. The Government is fully aware
of this and acting upon making systems updated. Protection of Plant
Varieties & Farmers’ Rights Authority (PPV&FRA) and National
Biodiversity Authority (NBA), have made significant achievements even
though the legislations have been a new area.
1.62 The Committee had pointed out the shortcomings in the
functioning of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)
due to paucity of funds, inordinate delay in finalisation of Food
Safety and Standards regulations, delay in development of data base
for the Risk based food clearance system and delay in devising
accreditation procedure for referral labs. The Government appears to
have drawn satisfaction by simply stating that FSSAI and the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are fully apprised of this
situation and during 12th plan adequate financial support and
expansion plans have been proposed. The Committee would like to
be informed of the details of financial support and expansion plans
during the 12th plan and whether Food Safety and Standards have
since been finalised and if not, reasons for delay. The Committee
would also desire to be informed of the status of development of
database for the Risk based food clearance system and accreditation
procedure for referral labs.
Absence of Monitoring Mechanism
Recommendation (Para No. 6.155)
1.63 In the opinion of the Committee, the Government should
have realized the magnitude of the task to be performed by FSSAI.
Apart from regulating local food and food products, the Authority has
to ensure food safety of food items imported into the Country. Imports

24
in India are permitted through 255 entry points. These include
82 custom ports, 32 custom airports, 132 land custom stations and
9 foreign port offices, sub-foreign post offices. During 2007-08 and
2008-09, 76 lakh metric tonnes of food items were imported into the
country. For the Committee, the most worrying aspect in the matter
had been the admission of the representative of Directorate General of
Foreign Trade before the Committee during oral evidence that there
were absolutely no monitoring of the food items being imported into
the country.
1.64 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the FSSAI and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are fully
apprised of this situation and during 12th plan adequate financial
support and expansion plans have been proposed.
1.65 The Committee take a serious view that there is no response
from the Government on the question of absence of monitoring
mechanism regarding safety of food items imported into the country.
Failure of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) in
this regard, which has been in existence for the last five years, is
glaring. The Committee would like to know what steps have been
proposed and how soon will these be implemented to ensure safety
of food items imported into India.
Field Trials of Transgenic Crops in various States
Recommendation (Para Nos. 7.19 & 7.20)
1.66 In regard to field trials of transgenic crops, the Committee
had observed that while some States like Kerala and Uttarakhand have
decided to keep their State totally GM free, others like Bihar, Madhya
Pradesh and Rajasthan have disallowed field trials, while Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Punjab and
Haryana have allowed field trials and Himachal Pradesh will take a
view on Bt. Brinjal once all trials are completed and Government of
India have taken a decision in the matter.
1.67 In their Action Taken Note, the Department have stated that
the decisions on banning or other-wise of field trials of GM crops
should be guided by a well reasoned scientific decision and guidelines
operational under the existing regulatory framework. The regulatory
framework already provide for constitution of State Biotechnology
Advisory Committees chaired by Chief Secretary with line ministries/
departments as members. The whole issue is that many States listed
have not constituted such Committees or where constituted have not

25
been functional to address issues related to GMOs. Using Ad-hoc and
reactive mechanisms guided by emotions and impulses is not an
appropriate approach to prevent or agree to the conduct of field trials
when the existing regulations, under an act of Parliament, are not
complied with. The States need to analyse the issue of GM crops on
scientific basis. As indicated in section 7.18, the SAC-PM report has
also suggested measures for resolving these issues
It may be reiterated that the evaluation of plant performance
(suitability to a condition of production) in the natural environment is
a key component of crop development, and GM crops are no exception.
Field studies enable researchers to evaluate environmental safety of
GM plants and collect bio safety data required for necessary regulatory
authorization and in addition promotion of plant materials, such as
seed and forage. These are produced using small confined field trials
and collected to perform compositional analysis and other testing
necessary to demonstrate food safety. Green house study cannot be
performed at a scale sufficient to comply with these regulatory
requirements. Without this field data, researchers cannot make
scientifically tenable predication about the performance of plants in
the field or about the environmental safety of the plant.
The issue of permitting field trials is entirely a science based issue.
GOI is of the view that field trials are done as per safe practices as
alluded above and accordingly the States shall have no objection in
conduct of such trials in due course.
1.68 The Government have stated that the issue of permitting
field trials is entirely a science based issue and field trials are done
as per safe practices and accordingly States have no objection in
conduct of such trials in due course. Also, decisions on banning or
otherwise of field trials of transgenics should be guided by a well
reasoned scientific decision and guidelines operational under the
existing regulatory framework. However, the Committee are of the
strong view that unless and until a comprehensive, transparent,
effective and professional regulatory system is in place, there exists
no scope for field trials of transgenics. They, therefore, reiterate that
a comprehensive and effective monitoring mechanism for transgenic
crops is put in place at the earliest, before any field trials are
undertaken.
Check on GM Processed Food
Recommendation (Para No. 7.60)
1.69 There had been no check on GM processed food and other
items coming from outside the country or being produced here viz.
cotton seed oil produced from Bt. cotton. To compound this inaction

26
further, the Government had been entrusting this responsibility to the
proposed BRAI. In the opinion of the Committee the delay in bringing
GM food and products, had not been a simple act of oversight or a
genuine inability to do the needful and needed to be thoroughly
investigated and responsibility for this callous neglect of health safety
be fixed at the earliest. The Committee desired to be apprised of the
results of the investigation and the action taken in pursuance thereof.
1.70 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the issue of regulations on labelling of transgenic food products is
complex and sensitive matter in terms of trade, farming practices from
land to markets, export and import and challenges of implementation
being an inter-ministerial matter. It requires techno-economic feasibility
study on a large scale including implication on price of food and
affordability due to additional cost. Studies published in Australia,
India (from JNU policy research group) and Philippines have shown
that consumer has to bear additional cost (a minimum of 10%) in case
GM labelling is introduced. In many countries where labelling
regulations are in place, the implementation and monitoring is highly
challenging task and has shown mixed results.
1.71 The Committee had pointed out that there is no check on
GM processed food and other items coming from outside the country
or being produced here viz. Cotton seed oil produced from Bt. cotton
in the country. The Committee also opined that the delay in bringing
imported GM food and products, thereof, is not a simple act of
oversight or a genuine inability to do the needful and needs to be
thoroughly investigated and responsibility for this callous neglect of
health safety be fixed at the earliest. The Committee are dismayed
to note that the Government have not given any response to this
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee reiterate their
earlier recommendation and urge the Government to investigate the
matter without further loss of time under intimation to them.
Allegation of Bio-Piracy
Recommendation (Para Nos. 7.75 and 7.76)
1.72 A report appeared in media about a case of 2010 pertaining
to alleged misappropriation of local brinjal varieties by M/s Mahyco
and others. Allegations about continued inaction of the Authority in
respect of this case were also reported in the media. The Committee
had sought a detailed explanation from the National Biodiversity
Authority in the matter. According to NBA on the basis of a complaint
alleging biopiracy by Monsanto and its corporate in development of

27
Bt. Brinjal, the Authority had began investigating the matter with the
help of Karnataka State Biodiversity Board. Information and inputs
from the institutions and agencies involved in the development of
said Bt. Brinjal material were procured and legal assessment of the
same had been undertaken considering the elements and extent of
violation of the provisions of Biological Diversity Act. Between August
and October, 2011 further information had been sought from the
agencies involved in the development of this material. NBA had also
informed the Committee that a subsequent application of
M/s Monsanto Holding Private Limited for accessing onion material
developed by Indian Institute of Horticulture Research, ICAR,
Bengaluru had not being cleared.
1.73 The Committee were not convinced by the dilatory response
of NBA on whether the Company in question had obtained any local
biological resource for and in connection with development of Bt. Brinjal
without prior approval of NBA and violated Section 3 of Biological
Diversity Act, 2002. The delayed conclusion on this simple issue shows
the NBA in a poor light. It would have been worth mentioning that
during this period, i.e. from 11 November, 2010 to 11 August, 2011,
Chairman, GEAC had been also holding the charge of Chairman, NBA.
The Committee had not only desired a thorough inquiry in the matter
of delay in decision making on a case of this magnitude but also had
recommended that the NBA should decide upon this case without any
further delay.
1.74 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
NBA has been in the process of resolving the issue as per the provisions
of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002.
1.75 The Committee had desired that the inquiry regarding
alleged bio-piracy by a company in development of Bt. Brinjal be
completed and a decision be taken regarding the case, without delay.
It appears from the reply of the Government that the inquiry is yet
to be completed. The Committee fail to understand why the inquiry
could not be taken to logical conclusion during the last three years.
They reiterate that the matter be resolved without any further loss
of time.
Effects of Transgenic Crops on Environment, Humans and Livestock
Recommendation (Para No. 8.118)
1.76 The Committee critically analyzed the evidence for and against
transgenic agriculture crops and had not limited their analysis to pure
science. Some of the most compelling concerns factored in by the

28
Committee include, India’s rich bio-diversity and agriculture which
provide sustenance to almost 70% of the rural populace, more than
70% of India‘s farmers being small and marginal farmers for whom
agriculture is not a commercial venture, but a way of life and a means
of survival, the irretrievability of side effects of transgenic crops on
the environment, human and animal health, etc.
1.77 The Ministry of Agriculture in their Action Taken Note
submitted that the Environment and Production Technology Division,
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI ) a CGIAR Institute
undertook a study in October 2008 on “Bt. cotton and Farmer Suicides
in India” to review the evidence on the alleged resurgence of farmer
suicides in India and the potential relationship between the adoption
of Bt. cotton and suicides among Indian farmers. It is shown that
“media hype around farmer suicides, fueled by civil society
organizations and reaching the highest political spheres in India and
elsewhere, there is no evidence in available data of a “resurgence” of
farmer suicide in India in the last five years” The report “provides a
comprehensive review of available evidence on the effects of Bt. cotton
in India and find that Bt. cotton technology has been very effective
overall. Using macro data on productivity and a synthetic review of
results from micro-level studies, it is shown that on an average
Bt. cotton has had a significant positive effect on cotton productivity
in India, raising farmers’ income via an increase in yields and a
reduction in pesticide use. Overall, analysis shows that, without a
doubt, Bt. cotton is not a necessary or sufficient condition for the
occurrence of farmer suicides or agrarian crisis. Therefore, it should
not be blamed for the resurgence of farmer suicides in the field. In
contrast, other factors have almost certainly played an indispensable
role in these cases, especially the insufficient or risky credit systems
with no formal or informal support and the wide availability of toxic
pesticides”.
Study reports of Planning commission and DAC detailed elsewhere
in this submission also explain the agrarian crisis in the same context.
Thus, it is now time to unshackle our farmers from undertaking
agriculture for survival, to making it as an economically viable option
for livelihood. To maximise returns on his inputs and labour, since
India is rainfed and water for irrigation on premium, new technologies
and GM crops assume greater significance. Rather, the very reasons
that are being cited for stopping transgenic research crops and release
are the very reasons why India should adopt it.
1.78 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Government. The reply is conspicuous by its silence on the concerns
expressed by the Committee about the side effects of transgenic crops

29
on the environment, human and animal health and on our
bio-diversity. The Committee would await the Government’s response
on the concerns expressed by them.
Reforms in Current Regulatory System
Recommendation (Para No. 8.121)
1.79 The Internal Bio-Safety Committee functions in the promoter
company and performs all basic assessments and evaluations of a
transgenic product being developed by that very company. It also
generates data on the basis of which RCGM and GEAC base their
evaluation. This mechanism does not inspire confidence for obvious
reasons. The Department of Biotechnology which is mandated with
the promotion of bio-technology in the country, funds various
transgenics research projects and activities both in public, as well as,
private sector companies. This funding is of a significant order. The
transgenic products created through these projects and activities are
then assessed and evaluated by an adjunct of Department of
Biotechnology (DBT) viz. RCGM. On top of it, the final approval for
environmental/commercial release is granted by GEAC which is
co- chaired by a DBT nominee. With the Chairman of GEAC as well
as the Vice Chairman being civil servants, it is not very difficult to
appreciate the primacy of DBT nominated Co-chair in GEAC in the
decision making process. The Committee, in spite of DBT’s protestations
to the contrary, had strong reasons to agree with the opinion of several
stakeholders that in a regulatory set-up where the promoter has an
overwhelming say and presence in the regulatory mechanism, an
element of subjectivity in assessment and evaluation is unavoidable.
The entire system, therefore, reflected a pro-DBT/pro-industry tilt which
was best avoided. Apart from this major shortcoming, the Committee’s
examination had revealed that the extant system has been grossly
inadequate and antiquated to face the typical challenges a population
intensive, agrarian economy like India poses when the question of
introduction of such modern technologies in agriculture sector crops
up.
1.80 The Department have stated in their Action Taken Note that
the matter has been under discussion for sometime in the Scientific
Advisory Panel of the Prime Minister (SAC-PM). The following
recommendations of SAC-PM in its meeting held on 9th October, 2012
on Agriculture Biotechnology were being considered to address the
issues:—
(1) The current regulatory system for recombinant products
administered under Rules (1989) of EPA Act, 1986 should
be reformed till BRAI is in place.

30
(i) RCGM and GEAC should be the sole authority for
bio-safety and bio-efficacy assessment of all recombinant
products. Decision on commercial use of biotechnology
produced crops should be taken by the Agriculture
Ministries/Department of Central and State Governments
as per existing policies and regulations on crops. For medical
products Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(CDSCO) of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Government of India would approve commercialization as
of now.
(ii) High Level dialogue with State Governments to streamline
clearances for conduct of multi-location “Confined field
trials”—a scientific pre-requisite in all countries for
meaningful decision making on approvals or otherwise.
(iii) A Biotechnology Regulatory Secretariat with high level of
scientific and technical trained manpower should be
established to support RCGM and GEAC.
(iv) GEAC and RCGM should have full time Chairpersons. The
Chairman of GEAC, may be of Special Secretary Status for
3 year period and RCGM one level lower. Chairman of
RCGM be the Co-chair in GEAC and not the expert nominee
of Department of Biotechnology. For greater synergy at least
three members should be common between RCGM and
GEAC.
(v) The public needs to be informed of every decision.”
The Department further stated that the Institutional Bio-safety
Committee (referred as Internal Bio-Safety Committee) is not responsible
for assessment and evaluation of transgenic products being developed
by a particular company. The responsibilities of IBSC are clearly defined
and its role is basically to ensure that organization is conducting
guidelines.
1.81 The Committee are glad to note that reforms in the current
regulatory system are being considered in pursuance of the concerns
expressed by the Committee. The Committee desire that the proposed
changes should be implemented without delay.
Absence of Liability Clause
Recommendation (Para No. 8.122)
1.82 The Committee were worried about the absence of any liability
clause or mechanism in the system which could compensate the poor
farmers and the consumers in the eventuality of crop loss and harm

31
to bio-diversity health, environment, etc. With the various crop
insurance schemes also not being of much help to a majority of farmers
any prospective losses to the farmers due to cultivation of transgenic
agricultural crops would have a crippling effect on their fortunes as
they are already under severe agrarian crisis for years together now.
1.83 Department in their Action Taken Note have submitted that
after wide ranging stakeholders discussions and elaborate
inter-ministerial consultations, the Biotechnology Regulatory Authority
of India (BRAI) Bill had been prepared and submitted to Parliament
for introduction. SAC-PM has been of the view that “The Bill pending
with Parliament, i.e. BRAI, 2012, should be debated with open mind.
It would be appropriate if administrative organization could be Cabinet
Secretariat because of the involvement of multiple ministries. The Bill
when examined by appropriate Parliamentary Committee would be
opened up for wider debate and discussions for shaping the draft
legislation into a model regulatory framework.” All concerned
departments/ministries had agreed with these views as the Bill also
took into consideration the collaborative and coordinated mechanisms
across different existing legislations and authorities. The BRAI Bill had
provided for constitution of pan-Government Inter-ministerial
Governing Board with 15 Ministries/Departments/Agencies/Authorities
as an umbrella mechanism to provide oversight on cross cutting
mandates and policies.
1.84 The Committee had, inter-alia, highlighted the absence of
any liability clause or mechanism in the system which could
compensate the poor farmers and the consumers in the eventuality
of crop loss and harm to bio-diversity health, environment, etc. The
Committee further pointed out that with the various crop insurance
schemes also not being of much help to a majority of farmers any
prospective losses to the farmers due to cultivation of transgenic
agricultural crops would have crippling effects on their fortunes, as
they are already under severe agrarian crisis for years together now.
The Government‘s reply has not given any response on this very
crucial point. The Committee urge the Government to take
appropriate action in this regard under intimation to the Committee.
Ethical Dimensions of Transgenics
Recommendation (Para No. 8.125)
1.85 The Committee observed that on a major issue that had
escaped the attention of the Government during all these years has
been question of ethics. In the extant social-cultural milieu, a serious

32
thought has been required to be given to the ethical dimensions of
transgenics in agricultural crops. Even a miniscule degree of
insensitivity on this matter could lead to avoidable discontent which
apart from causing societal tensions would also have grave socio-
economic repercussions.
1.86 The Department in their Action Taken Note have clarified
that the GM crops are assessed for safety and efficacy . Efficacy means
that whether the biotechnology intervention made in a particular crop
is providing additional benefit as claimed by the developer. The
effectiveness of a GM crop under given agro-climatic condition is
assessed by elaborate confined field trials by taking care of all biosafety
measures as per Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). Since, the
regulatory framework approves for commercial use only those
technologies which go through these stringent tests are approved.
Therefore, the issue of socio-economic repercussions does not arise.
Further, all the information is also made available to the farmer by
developer at the time of sale and finally it is farmer‘s choice that
determines the adoption.
1.87 The Committee had pointed out that a serious thought
requires to be given to the ethical dimensions of transgenics in
agricultural crops. The Government’s reply is completely silent on
the ethical issue and speaks only about safety and efficiency of GM
crops. The question relates to appropriateness of modifying the
genetic structure of naturally endowed with plants. The Committee
would await the Government’s response in this regard.
Cultivation of Bt. Cotton Compounding the Miseries of the Small
and Marginal Farmers
Recommendation (Para No. 8.126)
1.88 The Committee during the course of their study visit held
extensive interactions with farmers and had observed that there had
been no significant socio-economic benefits accruing to farmers due to
introduction of Bt. Cotton. On the contrary, being a capital intensive
agriculture practice, the indebtedness of the farmer had grown
massively, thus exposing them to greater risks. Thus, Bt. Cotton
cultivation had only added to the miseries of small and marginal
farmers who constitute more than 70% of tillers in India.
1.89 The Ministry in their Action Taken Note stated that it is
unfortunate to attribute the problems to Bt. Cotton. Bt. Cotton
effectively controlled bollworms preventing yield losses from an

33
estimated damage of 30% to 60% during 2002 to 2011 period. Yields
are estimated to have increased at least by 30% due to effective
protection from bollworm damage. All India average yield, which was
189 kg lint/per ha in 2001 increased to 491 kg lint/ha in 2011. About
9400 M tonnes of insecticides were used for bollworm control in 2001,
which reduced to only 222 M tonnes in 2011. The per ha income of
the farmers, which was Rs. 7058/- in 2000 increased to Rs. 16125/- in
2010 under rainfed conditions and from Rs. 15370/- in 2000 to
Rs. 25000/- in 2010 under irrigated conditions. Increase in income of
farmers have definitely increased the capacity of the farmers to invest
in their well being and hence improved their socio-economic status.
1.90 The Government’s claim of farmers’ income having increased
on account of cultivation of Bt. Cotton is not borne out by farmers
who interacted with the Committee during their study visit. The
first hand experience gained by the Committee is ample proof to
show that the miseries of farmers have compounded since the time
they started cultivating Bt. Cotton. The Committee would like the
Government to appreciate the ground reality and not to thrust
commercial cultivation of Bt. Cotton on farmers.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics
Recommendation (Para No. 8.127)
1.91 The Committee observed that while the introduction of
transgenics in India had extensively benefitted the industry, yet the
trickle down for the poor farmers was not visible at all. They had,
therefore, recommended that till all concerns voiced by the Committee
are fully addressed and decisive action is taken by the Government
with promptitude to put in place all regulatory, monitoring, oversight,
surveillance and other structures, further research and development
on transgenics in agricultural crops should be done in strict containment
and field trials under any garb should be discontinued forthwith.
1.92 In their Action Taken Note, the Department have submitted
that this recommendation is contrary to the recommendation that there
is a need for generating data on long term impacts on biodiversity
and human health.
There is a mix-up in the recommendations for field trials and
commercial release. Parameters that need to be taken into consideration
for taking a decision on field trials are different from that of a decision
on commercial release. Field trials are integral part of research and
development and therefore decision on field trials are based on scientific

34
facts. However, decision on commercial release may go beyond scientific
facts to include need, socio-economics, public perception, corporate
rivalry and political will; all of which fall beyond the scope of the
purpose for which field trials are meant. Biosafety research cannot be
conducted in glass house as the safety efficacy and performance of
GM crop would vary depending on the host environment, host crop
and inserted gene.
Bt. Cotton was commercially released in other countries and has a
robust record of safety and performance for about sixteen years. The
situation in India has been no different. Globally, India is the second
largest exporter of cotton. In spite of the controversy regarding
Bt. Cotton, the ground reality is that Bt. Cotton has been beneficial to
farmers as none of the State Government have requested for withdrawal
of the approval granted for Bt. Cotton.
The discontinuation of field trials undermine the existing two
decade global experience and is completely arbitrary and without basis
in the context of confined experimental field trials. Discontinuation of
GM crops field trials has serious implications. It will virtually stop the
attempts of public sector institutions to test and introduce GM crop
varieties that can be inexpensive, reusable-seeds, and cost effective.
Such a move will discourge and demotivate the public sector
GM crops research. Discontinuation of field trials will also discourage
all other technology providers, from introducing competitive GM crop
events in cotton, thus reinsuring the monopoly of the existing
technology provider. The move will also deprive farmers of useful
GM crops with new genes and enforce them to repeatedly use the
same gene events thus rendering the existing genes and Bt. Cotton
unsustainable soon.
1.93 The Government’s reply does not appreciate the ground
realities mentioned by the Committee and does not inspire any
degree of confidence in the Committee to change their well
considered opinion on the subject. They, therefore, reiterate their
earlier recommendation that further research and development on
transgenics in agricultural crops should be done only in strict
containment and field trials should not be undertaken till the
Government puts in place all regulatory, monitoring, oversight,
surveillance and other structures.

35
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Policies and Strategies in Agriculture and Allied Sectors to be
Sustainable for Growth and Prosperity of the Farming Community
Recommendation (Para No. 1.21)
There is, therefore, a pressing need for policies and strategies in
agriculture and allied sectors which not only ensure food security of
the nation, but are sustainable and have in built deliverable components
for the growth and prosperity of the farming community. It is also
imperative that while devising such policies and strategies the
Government does not lose track of the fact that 70% of our farmers
are small and marginal ones. As the second most populous Country
in the world, with a growing economy ushering in its wake newer
dietary habits and nutrition norms, a shrinking cultivable area, a
predominantly rainfed agriculture, the task is indeed enormous.
Reply of the Government
Advances made in agricultural research and development activities
have benefitted all categories of the farming community in India which
is amply demonstrated with the facts that the country not only achieved
self sufficiency in agricultural production, maintains huge buffer stock
of foodgrains and exports some commodities at times.
Growth of agriculture sector depends on a number of factors
comprising the natural resources endowments especially land, soil
quality, water, climate and biodiversity, infrastructure development,
investment and human efforts to effectively and efficiently use the
various resources. Since agriculture is a State subject, performance of
the agriculture sector in India largely depends on what occurs at the
States level in terms of seed distribution, extension and training of
farmers, pricing of inputs, policies etc.
For meeting the growing demand of food, feed and fiber
technologies and extension approaches need to continuously evolve to
make Indian Agriculture competitive. The Ministry of Agriculture is
implementing various programmes such as the National Food Security

36
Mission (NFSM), Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY), National
Horticulture Mission (NHM), etc. with a view to increase agriculture
production, productivity and income of the farmers and the priority is
always accorded to small and marginal farmers.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Promise held by Biotechnology in Ensuring Sustainable Growth in
Agriculture and Allied Sectors
Recommendation (Para No. 1.22)
In the considered opinion of the Committee biotechnology holds a
lot of promise in fructification of the above-cited goals. Several of
conventional bio-technologies viz. plant breeding techniques, tissue-
culture, cultivation practices, fermentation, etc. have significantly
contributed in making agriculture what it is today. The Committee
note that for some years now transgenics or genetical engineering is
being put forward as the appropriate technology for taking care of
several ills besetting the agriculture sector and the farming community.
It is also stated that this technology is environment friendly and,
therefore, sustainable. Affordability is another parameter on which
policy makers and farming communities world over are being
convinced to go for this nascent technology. The Committee further
note that in India, transgenics in agriculture were introduced exactly
a decade back with the commercial cultivation of Bt. Cotton which is
a commercial crop. With the introduction of Bt. Cotton, farmers have
taken to cotton cultivation in a big way. Accordingly, the area under
cotton cultivation in the country has gone up from 24000 ha in 2002
to 8.4 million ha at present. Apart from production, productivity has
also increased with the cultivation of the transgenic cotton. The
Committee also take note of the claim of the Government that input
costs have also gone down due to cultivation of transgenic cotton as
it requires less pesticides, etc.
Reply of the Government
Development of Bt. Cotton hybrids and their adoption by farmers
globally, is the land mark achievement similar to the discovery and
exploitation of dwarfing genes in wheat and rice and development of
hybrid vigour in maize and pearl millet, contributing towards
revolution in achieving higher production and productivity in these
crops.

37
Bt. Cotton was released during 2002-03 initially for Central and
South Zone States and in 2005-06 for North zone. The Bt. technologies
proved to minimize the damages caused by boll worm, reduced
pesticide use, increased production, yield and net income of the farmers.
As a result, the adoption of Bt. hybrids took a faster rate and within
a short span of time, area under Bt. Cotton, which was 29,000 ha in
2002-03 (0.38% of total cotton area) increased to 111.39 lakh ha in
2011-12 (91.47% of total cotton area).
Since the introduction of Bt. Cotton in farmers‘ fields in 2002,
there has been near doubling of cotton production from 158 lakh bales
in 2001-02 to 356 lakh bales in 2011-12. This increase in cotton
production has mainly been attributable to increase in cotton
productivity from 308 kg/ha in 2001-02 to 496 kg/ha in 2011-12 due
to introduction of Bt. Cotton in India. On the other hand, world wide
area under GM crops has been increasing at fast pace every year for
the last 16 years, with remarkable 94 fold growth since the
commercialization began in 1996. Nearly 14 million farmers have grown
GM crops in 25 countries in 2009. It is estimated that about 16.7 million
farmers from 29 countries planted GM crops in 160 million hectare
land in 2011. India has become the fourth largest adopter of biotech
crop in the world, displacing Canada, in 2008. At present, a number
of different GM crops for insect resistance, herbicide tolerance, altered
oil composition, virus resistance etc. are under commercial cultivation
worldwide.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Pros and Cons of Introduction of Genetical Modification/Transgenics
in our Food Crops
Recommendation (Para No. 1.23)
Notwithstanding the claims of the Government, the policy makers
and some other stakeholders about the various advantages of
transgenics in agriculture sector, the Committee also take note of the
various concerns voiced in the International Assessment of Agriculture,
Science and Technology for Development Report commissioned by the
United Nations about some of the shortcomings and negative aspects
of use of transgenics/genetical engineering in the agriculture and allied
sectors. The technical, social, legal, economic, cultural and performance
related controversies surrounding transgenics in agriculture, as pointed
out in IAASTD report, should not be completely overlooked, more so,
when India is a signatory to it. The apprehensions expressed in the
report about the sustainability and productivity of GMOs in different

38
settings; the doubts about detected benefits of GMOs extending to
most agro-eco systems or sustaining in long term; the conclusion that
neither costs nor benefits are currently perceived to be equally shared,
with the poor tending to receive more of the costs than benefits all
point towards a need for a revisit to the decision of the Government
to go for transgenics in agriculture sector. This is all the more necessary
in the light of Prime Minister‘s exhortion on 3 March, 2010 at the
Indian Science Congress about full utilisation of modern biotechnology
for ensuring food security but without compromising a bit on safety
and regulatory aspects. The present examination of the Committee, as
the succeeding chapters will bear out, is an objective assessment of
the pros and cons of introduction of genetical modification/transgenics
in our food crops which happened to be not only the mainstay of our
agriculture sector but also the bedrock of our food security.
Reply of the Government
While referring to the benefits and concerns of GM crops, the
Committee has referred to IAASTD report. It may be noted that IAASTD
report is not a consensus report and fraught with controversies. The
IAASTD was created in 2002 to address global problems of agriculture
and food security. The advisory bureau comprised of representatives
from government, consumer groups, industry and NGOs such as Green
Peace. Although, the panel was launched with high expectations, there
were serious disagreements between the stakeholders. This also led to
broadening of the purview beyond food production to include social
justice and the environment. The discussion on GM crops was also
highly polarized with groups speaking for and against GM crops with
no resolution in sight. This led to walkout by industry representatives,
academics and some NGOs. Some of the key agricultural producers
countries declined to endorse the final synthesis report.
In view of the above, it is not appropriate to base the agricultural
policies only on the basis of IAASTD report. It is important to note
that the potential of GM crops to improve crop productivity , increase
crop adaptation to climatic stresses such as drought, and mitigate
greenhouse gas emissions has been recognized by many national and
international bodies, including the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization, and was addressed in the World Development Reports
in 2008 and 2010.
1. http://www.fao.org/docrep/meeting/019/al295e.pdf
2. World Bank (2008). World Development Report 2008:
Agriculture for Development. World Bank, Washington, D.C.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDR2008/
Resources/WDR_00_book.pdf

39
3. World Bank. (2010). World Development Report 2010:
Development and Climate Change. World Bank, Washington,
D.C. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDR2010/
Resources/5287678-1226014527953/WDR10-Full-Text.pdf
Government of India is committed to the safe use of GM crops
and accordingly has established a regulatory system way back in 1989
to regulate the use of GM technology . There have been several pro
active measures involving multidisciplinary stakeholders for
strengthening the governance, management and scientific risk
assessment processes in view of newer scientific developments and
regulatory challenges.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Present Regulation of Genetically Modified Organisms and Products
Recommendation (Para No. 2.74)
The Committee note that as on date genetically modified organisms
and products, thereof, including genetically modified crops are regulated
under the ‘Rules for the Manufacture, Use/Import/Export and Storage
of Hazardous Micro Organisms/Genetically Engineered Organisms or
Cells’ notified by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on
5 December, 1989. These Rules also called Rules 89 have been framed
under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. The Rules intend to
ensure sound application of biotechnology, making it possible to accrue
benefits arising from modern biotechnology , while minimizing the risks
to environment and human health. These Rules are supplemented by
various guidelines issued from time to time to keep pace with
international practices and developments in the field of biotechnology.
Reply of the Government
Statement of facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Composition of Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics
Recommendation (Para No. 2.75)
The Committee further note that the regulatory mechanism to
enforce these rules consists of six Committees. The chain begins with
the Institutional Bio-Safety Committee, which is established under the

40
institution engaged in GMO research for oversight and to interface
with Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM). RCGM
functions under the Department of Biotechnology and is mandated
with the responsibility of monitoring and regulating safety related
aspects of ongoing research projects and activities including small scale
field trials. There is a recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RDAC)
which is of an advisory nature and which recommends suitable and
appropriate safety regulations in recombinant research, use and
applications from time to time. The Genetic Engineering Appraisal
Committee (GEAC) previously known as Genetic Engineering Approval
Committee is the apex body to accord approval of activities involving
large scale use of hazardous micro-organisms and recombinants in
research and industrial production from environmental angle. More
importantly it is also mandated with the authority for approving release
of genetically engineered organism and products into the environment
including experimental field trials. GEAC functions under the Ministry
of Environment and Forests. Then there are State Bio-technology
Coordination Committees (SBCCs) who are mandated with the power
of State level monitoring. SBCCs also have powers to inspect,
investigate and take punitive action in case of violations. The last tier
of the regulatory mechanism are the District Level Committees (DLCs)
who are tasked with the role of monitoring the safety regulations in
installations engaged in the use of GMOs/hazardous micro-organisms
and their applications in the environment. Apart from these six
Committees, the Committee note there is a Monitoring-cum-Evaluation
Committee which monitors the compliance of regulatory procedures
during field trials of GM crops.
Reply of the Government
The para refers to statement of facts regarding the current
regulatory framework. However, it may be clarified that “RCGM does
not function under the Department of Bio-technology (DBT). It is a
statutory committee set up as per Rules, 1989 notified under
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. RCGM is not under administrative
control of DBT, which only services RCGM in terms of infrastructure
and human resource.”
RCGM does not report to Secretary, DBT directly or indirectly. No
official of DBT has any influence on the functioning of RCGM. It
directly reports to GEAC.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

41
Procedure for Assessment and Evaluation of GM Crops before
Granting Approval
Recommendation (Para No. 2.76)
The procedure in vogue preceding approval is that the company
involved in development of GM crop undertakes in containment,
several bio-safety assessment including environmental safety , food and
feed safety assessments. This is followed by Bio-safety Research Trials
in two stages BRL-I and BRL-II which require prior approval of RCGM
and GEAC respectively. Approval for environmental release is accorded
by GEAC after taking into consideration the findings of bio-safety and
agronomic studies as well as recommendations of RCGM, ICAR and
MEC. Finally commercial release is permitted by GEAC for only those
transgenic crops which are found to be safe for human consumption
as well as the environment. The Committee note that the Government
have also put a strict regimen in place at all stages of assessment and
evaluation procedure.
Reply of the Government
It may be clarified that the process is applicable to products
developed by not just the ‘company’ as stated but to all organizations
including public sector academic and research institutions and private
sector.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Renaming of Genetic Approval Committee as Genetic Engineering
Appraisal Committee
Recommendation (Para No. 2.80)
The Committee find that the Bt. Brinjal controversy also led to
renaming of Genetic Engineering Approval Committee as Genetic
Engineering Appraisal Committee. The Ministry of Environment and
Forests issued a notification on 16 July, 2010 effecting the change. The
notification which was published in the Gazette of India dated 22 July,
2010, inexplicably does not mention any reasons for the renaming nor
does it mention any change in the role and responsibility and the
mandate of GEAC. On a query of the Committee, the Government has
justified the change on the ground that the old name gave GEAC the
aura of being the approval agency and the new one would suggest
that it is meant to appraise the safety of GMO. To another query of

42
the Committee the Government have also clarified that there is no
change in the mandate of GEAC due to rechristening. The Committee
are, however, not satisfied with the apparently contradictory stands
taken by the Government in the matter. As per Rules 89, GEAC is the
apex approval body in the regulatory mechanism for GMOs related
matters. How the Government has then chosen to rename it with a
view to convey that it is doing appraisal only defies logic. They,
therefore, expect a detailed clarification from MoEF in the matter
including the inputs and decision making leading to the issue of
Notification No. GSR 613(E) dated 16 July, 2010.
Reply of the Government
The decision to rename GEAC was taken by the then Minister for
Environment & Forests Shri Jairam Ramesh, in the Decision Document
dated 9th February 2010 while imposing moratorium on Bt. Brinjal.
The decision of the Minister to change the name of GEAC from
‘approval’ to ‘appraisal’ is reflected in Para 30, last line of the decision
document, which reads as:
“Meanwhile, I also intend to change the name of the Genetic
Engineering Approval Committee to Genetic Engineering Appraisal
Committee”.
Accordingly, MoEF issued the Gazette Notification No. GSR 613(E)
dated 16 July, 2010.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Review of Organizational set-up of GEAC and Review Committee
on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.82)
The Committee note with concern that both GEAC and RCGM
who are in existence for several years now and are mandated with
very-very sensitive functions have no organizational set-up and
infrastructure worth mentioning. Due to these severe and debilitating
impediments, both the agencies have to depend on a Committee based
approach, which in the opinion of the Committee, is not the most
optimal way of functioning for agencies tasked with such sensitive
responsibilities. The Committee are in full agreement with GEAC that
the ever evolving dynamics of modern bio-technology cannot be kept
fully tracked of with the Committee based review approach and

43
a more robust and dedicated review mechanism is urgently called for.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that an immediate review of
the organizational set-up and infrastructure of GEAC and RCGM be
got done by the Government and necessary augmentation, both in
terms of men and material be carried out immediately and without
linking it to the proposed omnibus regulatory authority that may still
take years to come into existence.
Reply of the Government
Bio-safety assessment of GM crops is a multidisciplinary and
scientific endeavour and so requires multiple kind of expertise. The
important scientific subjects include molecular biology, agronomy,
breeding, plant pathology, bio-chemistry , toxicology, etc. ( Annexure-I).
In the current, regulatory framework the safety assessment is carried
out by statutory committees at three levels; institutional Bio-safety
Committees (IBSCs) at the institution level and the Review Committee
on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) and Genetically Engineered Appraisal
Committee (GEAC) at the national level. Each application is examined
critically by about 60 experts covering all the above disciplines, most
of whom are external experts from public sector institutions and
universities. Composition and expertise of the IBSC and RCGM is
placed at Annexure-II.
Regarding the Committee approach, it may be noted that in many
countries the risk assessment expertise lay in academic and other public
sector research institutions. Accordingly most of the countries couple
in-house expertise in the regulatory agency with expert advisory
committees for development of polices and guidelines as well as for
case by case decision making.
MoEF and DBT provides administrative support to the Committee
for its operations, for which the manpower and infrastructure
requirements are in place.
Further, pending BRAI Bill, 2012 in the Parliament, proactive steps
have been taken to strengthen required support system for RCGM
and GEAC. As mentioned above, a recent review by SAC-PM has
already suggested certain measures, which shall be implemented at an
early date.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

44
Conflict of Interest in Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee
(GEAC)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.87)
While making enquiries in the light of some media reports of
conflict of interest in GEAC, the Committee have come to know that
GEAC has laid down a criteria to address the conflict of issue matters
in December, 2010. After the said media report the ambit of conflict of
interest criteria has been extended to apart from a member of GEAC
to his/her spouse or children. The Committee feel that considering
the slew of activities that GEAC is concerned with, the present conflict
of interest criteria would not suffice. The situation demands a delinking
of interest groups/individuals from the decision making tiers of the
regulatory mechanism without the regulatory mechanism being
deprived of the professional inputs of the groups/individuals in
question. The Committee would like the Government to come up with
their well considered views on this vexed issue.
Reply of the Government
Recognising this constraint, a mechanism to avoid conflict of interest
has been put in place by the GEAC. As per the prescribed conflict of
interest criteria, professionals/individuals who are members of the
GEAC but also involved in the development of a specific GM crop
expressing a specific trait is not allowed to participate in the review/
decision making process when the concerned application is discussed.
The conflict of interest criteria is also triggered if the spouse or children
of a member are involved. This is as per the international practice.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Controversy Surrounding Development of BN Bt. and Bt. NHH 44
Recommendation (Para No. 2.88)
During the course of the examination of the Subject the Committee
were seized of controversy surrounding the development of BN Bt.
variety and Bt. NHH 44 hybrid cotton variants by University of
Agricultural Science, Dharwad. CICR, Pune is also involved closely
with the project. It was reported in the media on 30 December, 2011
that these two variants were found to be carrying genes from the
original patented product of a multinational. The Committee sought
explanation of concerned players including ICAR, DBT and MoEF. It

45
transpires that the gene construct for the event was provided to UAS
Dharwad by National Research Centre on Plant Biotechnology. UAS
Dharwad carried out the genetic transformation of the cotton variety
Bikaneri Narma using this cry1AC gene construct. CICR was involved
in undertaking and coordinating RCGM and GEAC regulatory trials
as well as generation of bio-safety data. The presence of the
controversial gene was, however, according to ICAR, not detected either
in southern analysis carried out by NRCPB when they confirmed gene
integration and copy number or by M/s Avesthagen, who characterized
the BN Bt. event in 2006-07. GEAC approved commercial cultivation
of BN Bt. variety on 2 May, 2008 and hybrid Bt. NHH 44 on 13 May,
2009. In September-October, 2009 representatives of M/s Mahyco-
Monsanto met ICAR officials and pointed out the presence of Monsanto
gene and event, MON 531 in BN Bt. and Bt. NHH 44 seeds. On
10 December, 2010 ICAR decided to stop production of seeds of these
two variants. It was also decided that production could only be
restarted, after complete purification for uniformity and homozygosity
of cry1AC gene BNLA106 original event. UAS, Dharwad was entrusted
with this task. CICR, who had applied to Protection of Plant Variety
and Farmers Rights Protection Authority in May, 2009 for
commercialization, withdrew its application from the Authority on
3 August, 2011. The permission was granted by the Authority on
16 January, 2012. UAS Dharwad and NRCPB are working on
purification of BN Bt as of now. ICAR has also decided to set-up an
expert Committee consisting of experts from outside ICAR to look
into the entire issue and advise further course of action.
Reply of the Government
The expert Committee has submitted its report to the ICAR. The
ICAR is examining the report in light of the evidences supporting the
observations of the Committee report.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Inadequate Present Regulatory Mechanism
Recommendation (Para No. 2.92)
Having gone through the voluminous evidence gathered by them
the Committee can safely conclude that all is not well with the
regulatory mechanism put in place by the Government for oversight
of cutting edge technology as sensitive as GMOs and products thereof.
Firstly, GEAC being an entity created under rules rather than an Act

46
of Parliament deprives it of the status, powers and more importantly
autonomy and independence that a statutory regulator ought to have.
The enforceability of Rules, albeit made under some Act only, does
not have as much definitiveness and clarity as under an Act.
Furthermore, unlike an Act, there is a lot of scope for varied
interpretation of Rules as also flexibility to implement them. The
confusion about the recommendatory/approving authority of GEAC
whether due to genuine confusion or deliberate; the confession of the
Co-Chairman of GEAC, the only technocrat in the top three positions
of GEAC, about minister/GEAC/industry pressuring him to favour a
bad technology; the various acts of omission and commission of GEAC
that have been documented in various chapters of this Report, all go
on to cement the view of the Committee that the regulatory mechanism
definitely requires the protection and support of an Act of the
Parliament which leaves no scope for ambiguity or complacency. The
problem, however, is that the Government has inordinately dithered
in bringing an appropriate bio-safety friendly legislation in the matter
before the Parliament. Nonetheless, the Committee feel that the failure
of the Government to bring a legislation on the subject till now should
not in any way prevent or pre-empt the monitoring, oversight and
evaluation of the extant regulatory system by the Parliament and its
entities. Given the fact that the two major constituents of the present
regulatory system viz. GEAC and RCGM are under the Ministry of
Environment and Forests and the Department of Biotechnology
respectively and both MoEF and DBT are under the jurisdiction of the
Department- related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests. The Committee request their
sister Committee to take up GEAC and RCGM for an indepth and
comprehensive examination at their earliest convenience.
Reply of the Government
It may be clarified that existing regulatory mechanism for GMOs
is working adequately.
Globally all regulatory frameworks comprise of Acts, rules and
regulations, decrees, or guidelines, etc. that support and empowers the
administrative and institutional mechanisms for decision making to
approve or reject a GM crop. For example existing Statutory instruments
are utilized in USA, Canada, Argentina and Philippines and new laws
were passed to specifically address gene technology in Australia, South
Africa, Japan, Malaysia and at regional level by European Union.
In fact India has been one of the earliest countries to implement
such regulatory measures under the Environment Protection Act,1986
and Rules 1989 to address safety issues emerging from global

47
developments and beginning of biotechnology research in India.
Therefore the Government of India has always been on the forefront
to ensure safe use of newer technologies including GM technologies.
Further, several initiatives have been taken up subsequently to ensure
that regulatory system is geared up to meet newer developments in
research in biotechnology. The Ministry of Agriculture had set up a
Task Force on Application of Agriculture Biotechnology in 2002, which
submitted its report in 2004. MoEF had also set up a Task Force on
Recombinant Pharma in 2005 In addition, both RCGM and GEAC
continuously review and update the guidelines through consultative
process and harmonising with international best practices.
However, in view of the future challenges of increased complexities
of biotech product development involving second and third generation
technologies and array of converging technologies for preparedness in
future as directed by the Government of India and the above referred
task forces, the Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science &
Technology has been entrusted to act as the nodal agency to facilitate
establishment “National Biotechnology Regulatory Authority” (NBRA)
through an act of Parliament. Accordingly, a consultative group of
experts have prepared draft organization plan of NBRA and the
proposed Bill. Both the draft documents were put in public domain
for review and comments. Several consultative meetings were held
with concerned stakeholders representing farmers and consumer‘s
organizations, industry, legal experts, media and academia/scientists
from research institutions/universities. State Governments were also
consulted for their feedback. An Interdisciplinary and Inter-ministerial
Advisory Committee was also constituted to oversee and advise on all
matters related to drafting, reviewing the comments of experts and
stakeholders as well as preparing final documents. The governmental
process of inter-ministerial consultation has been completed including
the finalization of bill by Union Ministry of Law & Justice. Thus,
NBRA became the “Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India”
(BRAI) in the process and the BRAI Bill, 2012 to empower the same,
has been submitted to Parliament for introduction in Lok Sabha.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Regulatory Mechanisms for Release of GM Crops in other Countries
Recommendation (Para No. 3.35)
The Committee have examined the regulatory mechanisms for
release of GM crops and other products in some of the countries. The
issue of GMOs and genetically modified micro organisms in the

48
European Union States were initially being addressed under the
Directive 90/220/EC (since 1990) until a new framework under the
Directive 2001/18/EC replaced it on 17 April, 2001. Basically the
Regulatory System in EU States consists of a step by step approval
process on a case by case assessment of risk to human health and
environment before any GMOs or product thereof or a product
containing GMOs is released into the environment or placed in the
market. The procedure involves notification to the competent authority
in the member State where the GMOs will be field tested/marketed.
The assessment report of the competent authority is, thereafter,
forwarded to the EU Commission and competent authority of all
member States. With a view to reach agreement general public is also
provided an opportunity to express their views. The review process
culminates with the competent authority providing consent for
marketing of the GMOs for a period not exceeding ten years. The EU
Directive mandatorily requires the labeling of such products to include
the words ‘this product contains genetically modified organisms’. Some
of the salient features of the EU directive include phasing out of
antibiotic resistant genes; requirement to trace the GMO at all stages
to market; taking into consideration ethical aspects when reviewing
GMO.
Reply of the Government
Statement of facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Bio-Safety Guidelines in China
Recommendation (Para No. 3.36)
In case of China, their first Biosafety Guidelines were worked out
in December, 1993 by the State Science and Technology Commission.
Under these guidelines the responsibility for biosafety of various
products vests with the relevant administrative department. With a
view to strengthen the safety and management of genetically modified
products China has also framed rules on GMOs in 2002. A notable
feature of all these rules is that all genetically modified products are
required to be labelled in China.
Reply of the Government
Statement of facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

49
Regulatory Mechanism for Bio-technology Products in China
Recommendation (Para No. 3.37)
In Canada, the regulatory mechanism for biotechnology products
consists of Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA), Health Canada
and Environment Canada. The CFIA is responsible for regulating
import, environmental release, variety registration and use of plants
with novel traits in livestock feeds. An assessment of human health
safety of foods is mandated with Health Canada. The administration
of new substances notifications/regulations and for performing
environmental risk assessment of toxic substances, including organisms
and micro-organism that may have been derived from biotechnology
are responsibility of Environment Canada. These three agencies derive
their authority atleast from ten legislations for the purpose of regulating
biotechnology products. The Committee also note that another agency
for fisheries and oceans with a view to regulate potentional
environmental release of transgenics aquatic organisms is under
development in Canada. In Canada genetically modified plants or foods
are typically referred to plants with novel traits and novel foods. Under
the Canadian regulatory system all agricultural commodities and food
products whether produced using conventional technologies or modern
biotechnologies are covered under the same Act.
Reply of the Government
Statement of facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Regulatory Mechanism for Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs)
and Products in United States of America (USA)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.38)
As in the case of Canada, the US regulatory system for GMOs
and products, thereof, involves three different Government Agencies
viz. United States Agriculture Department (USDA), US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The jurisdiction of USDA extends to plant pests, plants and veterinary
biologies. The FDA is responsible for food, feed, food additives,
veterinary drugs, human drugs and medical devices. Similarly, EPA
has the jurisdiction over the microbial and plants pesticides, new uses
of existing pesticides and novel micro-organisms. While in the case of

50
several products these agencies have exclusive jurisdiction, some
products are regulated by more than one agency e.g. pesticidal plants.
The Committee also find that in case of USA no new law was enacted
for regulation of GMOs or products, thereof, albeit, suitable provisions
have been made in the existing laws. However unlike in Canada,
products developed using genetic engineering are subjected to much
higher degree of scrutiny as compared to those derived through
traditional methods. All the three agencies are vested with the powers
to order immediate recall from the market of any product, if any new
and valid data indicates involves a question of safety for consumer or
environment.
Reply of the Government
Statement of facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Regulatory Mechanism in Japan
Recommendation (Para No. 3.39)
Japan follows a number of voluntary guidelines administered
through four different Agencies of the Government. The Ministry of
Science and Technology oversees laboratory level work, the Ministry
of International Trade and Industry takes care of industrial applications,
the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry’s and Fisheries oversees the safety
of animal food, feed and environmental release of GMOs and the
Department of Health and Family Welfare is responsible for food and
food additives produced by recombinant DNA technology.
Reply of the Government
Statement of facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Role of Institutional Bio-safety Committees (IBSC)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.43)
As has been stated previously in this Report the regulatory
mechanism in India derives its authority from Rules 1989 and the
guidelines and regulations made thereunder from time to time. As the

51
Rules 1989 were drafted more than two decades ago based on the
then prevalent global best practices modifications have been carried
out from time to time to keep the regulatory mechanism update and
in tune with latest developments. The regulatory mechanism, as stated
previously, consists of six committees, (i) Genetic Engineering Appraisal
Committee, (ii) Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM),
(iii) Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RDAC), (iv) State
Biosafety Coordination Committees (SBCC), (v) District Level
Committees (DLC), and (vi) Institutional Bio-safety Committees (IBSC).
While GEAC is at the apex to accord approval for environmental release
and commercial release, IBSC is where primary studies and assessments
are undertaken and data generation takes place. This IBSC is within
the company which intends to market the GMO product being worked
upon. RCGM is the body to assess and evaluate the studies undertaken
and data generated by IBSC. RDAC is advisory in nature, while SBCC
and DLC are tasked with monitoring at State and district levels
respectively.
Reply of the Government
Some clarifications may be noted regarding role of IBSC.
It is mandatory for any company/organisation/institution involved
in GMO research to set up an Institutional Bio-safety Committee (IBSC)
with a nominated external expert by the regulatory system. The
mandate of IBSC is of a supervisory nature to ensure that research
and development is carried out in a safe manner and regulatory
compliance is strictly followed. Therefore on the contrary to statement
in the report that “IBSC is where primary studies and assessments are
undertaken and data generation takes place”, it may be clarified that
IBSC does not generate safety data.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.27 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Institutional Bio-safety Committee (IBSC) being the Weakest Link
in the Regulatory Framework
Recommendation (Para No. 3.44)
From the evidence placed before the Committee and their
interaction with eminent scientists and experts IBSC is the weakest
link in the chain. Modern bio-technology research and development

52
are mostly in the private sector. The capital intensive nature of the
R&D in this sector and the compelling need to make such ventures
commercially profitable at the earliest opportunity, is the driving force
for the private sector institutions to get their product in market at the
soonest. Similarly the charm of patent and IPR is too strong a
motivation for not only the private sector, but public sector as well,
for quick commercialisation of such products.
Reply of the Government
IBSC is the only statutory committee which operates from the
institution in the private and public sector laboratories working on
GM technology across the country and is a vital link for compliance
of safety regulations. It has a first-hand view on the availability of the
relevant infrastructure and manpower for undertaking the proposed
activities by any organization. The external nominated expert in each
IBSC shares his/her observations directly with RCGM. As per the
guidelines stipulated by RCGM, the presence of nominated external
expert is a must for each meeting of IBSC. RCGM does not accept the
minutes of the meeting unless they are signed by the RCGM nominee,
in addition to the Chairperson and members of the committee including
a medical officer. It may be noted that there are about 500 IBSCs
registered so far in covering basic research, agriculture and healthcare
applications. IBSCs have nothing to do with the IPRs or publications
and are completely dedicated for the mandate of safety assessment. It
is therefore not acceptable to say that IBSCs clear projects due to
pressure of developer in gaining name and fame due to quicker gains
from IPR and commercialisation.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
International Conventions
Recommendation (Para No. 4.28)
The Committee have taken note of various international conventions
which have in some way or the other a significant bearing on the
subject and related matters.
Reply of the Government
Noted.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

53
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (CPB)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.30)
The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (CPB) which India acceded to
on 17 January, 2003 exhorts the signatories to contribute to ensuring
adequate level of protection in the field of safe transfer, handling and
use of LMOs resulting from modern biotechnology that may have
adverse affects on the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity,
taking also into account risks to human health and specifically focusing
on trans boundary movements. The Committee find that unfortunately
even after the adoption of the Protocol, several critical issues such as
risk assessment, liability and redress, documentation and identification
of LMOs for food, feed and processing are still being discussed. Thus,
globally the progress in the implementation of protocol is slow due to
complexity of the issues involved and lack of capacity.
Reply of the Government
It is standard procedure in international treaties for issues covered
by those treaties to be further negotiated during the years following
entry into force. The CPB is no exception to this rule, and Parties
continue to discuss implementation of its provisions in regular meetings
of the Parties. These continued implementation discussions are not
necessarily due to the complexity of issues; they are simply part of
the on-going process of treaty implementation. The level of capacity of
Parties in any international treaty will always vary drastically, and the
process of treaty implementation is intended to allow those Parties
with greater capacity to provide assistance in treaty implementation to
those with less capacity.
In the case of CPB, there are numerous instances, in fact, where
the Parties issued clear guidance on CPB provisions early after entry
into force, and those decisions still stand today. For example, at their
second meeting, Parties agreed to detailed guidance on implementation
of Paragraph 2 of Article 18, which addresses documentation
requirements for shipments of LMOs for contained use intended for
intentional introduction into the environment. Parties considered this
guidance at their fourth and sixth meetings, acknowledging each time
that the guidance was working well and need not be revised as a
result.
Additionally, Parties completed their negotiations on liability and
redress in 2010 when they finalized the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur
Supplementary Protocol on Liability and Redress (N-KL SP). With the

54
completion of the N-KL SP , Parties finalized rules on damage to the
conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity resulting from
LMOs that find their origin in transboundary movement.
Implementation discussions of N-KL SP will continue, as in any
international treaty, but its completion was a significant step forward
for Parties to conclude outstanding concerns regarding Article 27 of
the CPB.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
The Nagoya Protocol
Recommendation (Para No. 4.31)
The Nagoya Protocol on access and benefit sharing in which India
has made significant contributions, lays down fair and equitable sharing
of resources arising from utilization of genetic resources. The Nagoya
Protocol is expected to address the concerns of biodiversity rich
countries like India relating to misappropriation of genetic resources
and associated traditional knowledge and lead to a more balanced
implementation of CBD. The domestic regulatory framework on access
and benefit sharing is already in existence in India in the form of
Biological Diversity Act and Rules.
Reply of the Government
Statement of facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Process of Examining Domestic Laws
Recommendation (Para No. 4.32)
Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and
Redress in the context of CPB is of special importance to India. Being
a megadiverse country, which is also centre of origin/diversity to
several crops, the Supplementary Protocol is meant to contribute to
the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity by providing
international rules and procedures on liability and redress damage
resulting from LMOs. The Committee understand that as a party to
the Supplementary Protocol a special legislation, in the field of liability
and redress for damage resulting from LMOs would need to been

55
acted to meet the obligations under the Supplementary Protocol as
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and Rules, 1989 as also the proposed
BRAI Bill do not address the concept of damage and sufficient
likelihood of LMOs and the response for measures including financial
security to take preventive measures.
Reply of the Government
MoEF has already signed the N-KL SP and initiated the process of
examining the provisions before ratification. The Government is going
through a process of examining domestic laws to determine whether
domestic rules and procedures already exist that address potential
damage, as defined in Article 2 of the N-KL SP . If applicable rules
exist, they shall be carefully analyzed to ensure compliance with all
aspects of the N-KL SP . Where rules do not exist, or are insufficient
or contrary to the N-KL SP , a comprehensive plan for amendment
and/or creation of new legal instruments could be developed. This
plan will address all aspects of referenced applicable domestic laws on
both the mandatory and discretionary rules and procedures set forth
in the N-KL SP .
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.33 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
The World Trade Organisation Agreement
Recommendation (Para No. 4.33)
The World Trade Organisation Agreement on Application of
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures is related to procedures of risk
analysis of plant, health regulations which should be based on science,
applied only to the extent necessary and not discriminate between
countries with similar conditions. This apart the guidelines for pests
risks analysis ensure that of restriction in trade are based on the
assessment of risks and are not arbitrary or discriminate against any
exporting country with the same pest status.
Reply of the Government
Statement of facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

56
Studies and Reports on the Subject by various Stakeholders
Recommendation (Para No. 5.43)
The Committee were furnished with several studies and reports
on the subject by various stakeholders. The Committee would like to
dwell upon a few of them which have significant contextual bearing
on Indian agriculture sector.
Reply of the Government
No comments.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Report of International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge,
Science and Technology for Development (IAASTD)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.44)
First and foremost the Committee take note of International
Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for
Development (IAASTD) Report - Agriculture at a Crossroads. The
Report is a painstaking, indepth and accurate assessment of agricultural
knowledge, science and technology (AKST). Compiled by 400 experts
after working on the project for four years the Report contains several
recommendations which are very germane to Indian agriculture sector.
Reply of the Government
The IAASTD study was initiated in 2002 by the World Bank and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
as a global consultative process to determine whether an international
assessment of agricultural knowledge, science and technology was
needed.
The first part of the report covers a wide range of issues relating
to reduction of hunger and poverty, improvement of rural livelihoods
and human health, equitable, socially, environmentally and economically
sustainable development. The second part of the report deals with
cross cutting themes which include bio-energy, biotechnology, climate
change, human health, natural resource management, trade and market,
traditional and local knowledge, community based innovation, and
women in agriculture. The report suggested strategies like Integrated
Pest Management, organic agriculture and conservation agriculture for
achieving sustainable agriculture.

57
Government of India recognises importance of the issues related
to bio-energy, biotechnology, improvement of rural livelihoods, poverty
alleviation, food security and health care issues, in context of
conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity. In matters
related to sustainable agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture follows the
policy guidelines of National Policy of Farmers with major goals such
as improving economic viability of farming, conserving land, water
biodiversity and genetic resources to provide quality inputs for farming,
strengthening bio-security of crops, and creating sustainable rural
livelihoods etc., which are also the objectives of the schemes
implemented by Government of India.
An independent evaluation group within the World Bank
(Global Programme Review V ol. 44, No. 2) has critically analysed the
IAASTD report and arrived at the following conclusion with respect
of effectiveness of the report:
“The IAASTD was a useful experience at the nexus of politics and
science. However, agricultural technology, with its complexity,
diversity and politics, proved to be a bridge too far. The process
itself was instructive and there is much useful information in the
reports” further the review concludes that, “for the substantial
resources used, the program (IAASTD) did not offer sufficient new
knowledge or conceptual frameworks for decision makers. It gave
conflicting messages, and, for a 50 year time span, it under-
estimated the potential of new technologies relative to existing
technologies. Attributable impact (of the IAASTD report) at the
international level has so far been modest at best, and at the
national level and below, negligible.”
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Findings of the Report of IAASTD
Recommendation (Para No. 5.45)
The Report has devoted an exclusive theme on biotechnology with
particular reference to modern biotechnology that includes genetic
engineering/transgenics. While supporting the use of modern
biotechnology to some extent in the pharma and human health sector,
the Report has expressed its serious reservations about the application
of modern biotechnology including transgenics in agriculture sector.
A major finding of the Report is that while modern biotechnologies
used in containment have proved advantageous viz. industrial enzymes,

58
they have yet to prove their efficacy, safety and sustainability outside
containment such as genetically modified crops. Furthermore, the Report
has expressed serious concerns about the adequacy of efficacy and
safety testing or regulatory framework of testing GMOs; suitability of
GMOs for addressing the needs of most farmers while not harming
others, at least within some existing IPR and liability framework; ability
of modern biotechnology to make significant contributions to the
resilience of small and subsistence agricultural systems, etc. The
Committee during their Study Visit in February - March, 2012
extensively travelled in rural areas of Vidharbha to have a first hand
assessment of the worst agrarian crisis affecting the region. From what
they saw during the Study Visit, they are in concurrence with the
findings of IAASTD Report. They are also in agreement with the
question raised in IAASTD Report as to whether detected benefits of
GMOs will extend to most agro ecosystems or be sustained in the
long run as resistances developed to herbicides and insecticides.
Reply of the Government
The section on biotechnology with particular reference to modern
biotechnology has been one of the contentious issues while formulating
the IAASTD report. The Standing Committee in addition has quoted
selective statements to justify the suggested action. In fact, the countries
at the forefront of biotechnology and embracing agricultural
biotechnology in a big way viz. USA, Canada and Australia have
expressed their serious reservations on these recommendations. It may
also be noted that the concerns expressed regarding adequacy of safety
testing or regulatory framework of testing GMOs have led to efforts
by various countries in improving their regulatory framework and
triggered the formulation of additional guidance and capacity building
activities by agencies like FAO, UNEP and World Bank. There is no
example of any country, having predominance of agriculture, putting
ban on conduct of field trials or open field research of GM crops, as
a follow up of recommendations of IAASTD.
Several studies have been conducted on Vidarbha region. In the
year 2010, DAC brought out “Report on Integrated Development of
Agriculture in Vidarbha Region”. The DAC report analyzed that there
is general agreement among academicians and researchers that the
incidence of farmers’ suicides can be traced back to a deeper agrarian
crisis. While failure of village as a social community and growing
disintegration of the joint family which earlier acted as a protective
and supportive social structure may have a significant contribution to
the incidence of farmers’ suicides, the context of such crisis can be in

59
the form of increasing input cost, decreasing farm profitability, volatile
commodity prices, growing risks in rainfed and dryland farming,
degradation, depletion of natural resources, indebtness, social and
personal reasons etc. Due to scarcity of irrigation and lack of micro-
nutrients in the soil, the productivity of cotton in this region is one of
the lowest in India. Moreover, dependency on rain and adoption of
Bt. cotton which is more sensitive to shortage of water has made
cotton cultivation a high risk - high cost cultivation system.
The Indira Gandhi Institute for Development Research, Mumbai,
which investigated the agrarian crisis in Maharashtra, reported
indebtedness as one of the major drivers for suicide. It also brought
out that the role of agricultural input dealers, the possibility of informal
debts being much higher than the formal debt and feeling of
helplessness that one is trapped in perpetual debt etc. are some of the
primary causes of farmers’ suicides.
A fact finding report of Planning Commission (2006) also pointed
out that while Bt. cotton does quite well in irrigated conditions, as in
Vidarbha region. However, it does not do as well in rainfed conditions.
Besides, the farm practices followed were questionable as there was
“inadvertent mix up” of different quality of seeds in an attempt to
fully sow the land under cotton. Farmers often mix Bt. cotton seeds
with other hybrid or local cotton seeds thereby resulting in poor quality
of products and lesser price realization. Hence rather than faulting
GM technology, the resilience of small and medium farmers can be
built up by various initiatives that Government and particularly
Ministry of Agriculture have been undertaking. DAC in its report on
integrated development of Vidarbha has suggested numerous measures,
significant being schematic interventions (NFSM, RKVY, RADP), need
for convergence of various schemes and undertaking new interventions
such as community based livelihood support system (CBLSS),
development of protective irrigation, rainfed area development in
soybean, pulses, cereal belt and establishing custom hiring centres for
agricultural machinery and implements through self help groups
(SHGs). Currently, irrigation component has been undertaken as a
special scheme under RKVY. The present year allocation is Rs. 300
crores. Proposed 12th Plan allocation for integrated irrigation
development is Rs. 3250 crores.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

60
Recommendations of the Six Academies to be Studied
Recommendation (Para No. 5.54)
Similarly, CSIR have opined that the six academies have arrived to
some recommendation which requires due deliberation. India has rich
biodiversity and agroclimatic zones; detailed studies are required now
to arrive at a policy decision. The Committee note that Ministry of
Environment and Forests as a follow-up to the moratorium on
Bt. brinjal had received several reports from both national and
international experts on the merits and demerits of GM crops in general
and Bt. brinjal in particular and GEAC in consultation with eminent
experts and scientific is examining alongwith other reports, the contents
of this report as well.
Reply of the Government
Noted.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Involvement of various Agencies in Agriculture and Allied Activities
Recommendation (Para No. 6.141)
The Committee note that research and development and extension
services in agriculture sector in the Government domain is the
responsibility of National Agricultural Research System headed by
Department of Agricultural Research and Education/Indian Council of
Agricultural Research. The policy matters rest with Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation. The Department of Biotechnology in the
Ministry of Science and Technology are the promoter Department of
biotechnology including transgenics/genetical engineering in
agricultural crops. Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee under
Ministry of Environment and Forests is the apex regulator which has
the authority to accord approval for environmental/commercial release
of transgenic agricultural crops. Some laboratories under institutions
like Department of Science and Technology, Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research/Council of Scientific and Industrial Research,
also undertake research and development activity in the field.
Reply of the Government
Statement of facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

61
System of Concurrent and Continuous Oversight of Agricultural
Produce
Recommendation (Para No. 6.142)
Apart from these R&D, regulatory and promotional structures, any
agricultural produce as it moves upwards with value addition in the
food chain, moves into oversight, monitoring, evaluation and
assessment and regulatory domains of several other agencies of the
Government for assessment of its safety, quality, etc. This system of
concurrent and continuous oversight is essential since food is a basic
necessity of the mankind. Furthermore, the methods and technologies
adopted for producing the food also have a profound and lasting
impact, both positive and negative, not only on human and livestock
health but also on environment, bio-diversity, bio-safety and
sustainability. In this connection the Committee note that the
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 (as modified
from time to time) have laid down clear cut instructions for all
ministries/departments of the Government about what all is their
individual role and responsibility in the scheme of governance. The
Committee analysed and evaluated the performance of some of the
ministries/departments/agencies in the context of what was expected
of them with regard to the introduction of transgenics agricultural
crops more specifically food crops in India and matters incidental to
it. The Committee note that the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation is the nodal Department for agriculture and cooperation.
The National Policy on Farmers, 2007 which is based on the
recommendation of the National Commission of Farmers is to be
implemented under its aegis. Under the NPF-2007, DAC is vested
with the task of protecting and improving land, water, biodiversity
and genetic resources, developing support services including provision
for seeds, irrigation, power, machinery, fertilizers, implements and credit
at affordable prices. The Policy also lays emphasis on paying explicit
attention to sustainable rural livelihoods. NPF-2007 also specifies that
efforts shall be made to conserve as well as to develop bio-resources
to ensure their sustainable use with equitable sharing of benefits. The
Committee note that the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers‘
Right Act, 2001 and Biological Diversity Act, 2002 have been enacted
to achieve some of these objectives.
Reply of the Government
Statement of facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

62
National Policy on Farmers, 2007
Recommendation (Para No. 6.143)
The Committee further note that NPF-2007 elaborates importance
of science and technology as the key drivers of change in farm
operations and outputs and application of frontier technologies viz.
Biotechnology, ICT, renewable energy technologies, space applications
and nano technology for improving productivity in agriculture. All
this, however, has to be done with extreme caution and without
compromising on bio-diversity, environment, human and livestock
health.
Reply of the Government
Statement of facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Special Medicinal Properties in Traditional Brinjal
Recommendation (Para No. 6.150)
The Committee while appreciating the candid admission of the
Department of AYUSH before them would like to convey their
unhappiness over the Department‘s failure to bring all these matters
viz. their advice on Bt. brinjal not being heeded by Ministry of
Environment and Forests, their representation in GEAC being staggered
to subsequent years, etc. to the appropriate authorities meant to sort
out such inter-ministerial issues. The Committee further desire a
detailed explanation from GEAC as to what action they had taken on
the serious reservations expressed by Department of AYUSH in regard
to commercialisation of Bt. brinjal and other plants having medicinal
properties. The Committee also desire a detailed explanation from
Ministry of Environment and Forests on their refusal to co-opt the
representatives of Department of AYUSH on GEAC right away when
Bt. brinjal had been approved for commercial release and several other
crops having medicinal properties are already being assessed for
approval by RCGM/GEAC.
Reply of the Government
The representatives of the Department of AYUSH (Ayurveda, Unani
and Medicinal Plant Board), in the meeting of the GEAC with experts
on 27.4.2011 opined that their concern is limited to the fact that brinjal

63
had a special medicinal advantage in traditional system of medicine.
They suggested that compositional comparative analysis of both
traditional brinjal and Bt. brinjal to ascertain the alteration, if any, in
the bioactivities, nutritional and medicinal values. It was further
recommended by A YUSH that such studies may be conducted in public
sector institutions such as Central Drug Research Institute (CDRI),
Lucknow, National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Indian Institute of
Integrated Medicine (IIM) and others.
In response to the above observations, Deptt. of AYUSH was
requested to provide the following information based on which
appropriate follow up action to identify and estimate such components
in the Bt. Brinjal under consideration will be carried out as additional
components of compositional equivalence studies:
• Nature of medicinal properties of brinjal.
• The specific varieties which have been documented in
literature to have such properties.
• The active ingredients/ingredient which have such properties.
• Their chemical nature, mode of action, clinical indications
etc. if information is documented.
• The standardized methodology to measure these components
and/or their active/inactive metabolites which could act as
fingerprints for identification.
• The methodology for estimation as accepted based on their
sensitivity and specificity limits of detection etc.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.57 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Responsibility of the Department of Commerce
Recommendation (Para No. 6.151)
The Department of Commerce are entrusted with the responsibility
of attending to policy matters relating to international trade in goods
and services including agreements with other countries/various

64
international trade body but excluding agreements relating to wheat,
sugar, jute and cotton. The Committee note India exported agricultural
products worth Rs. 89523 crore during the year 2009-10. From the
data submitted by the Government to Committee it is observed that
exports of agricultural products have shown a continuously rising trend
in the last decade. A major chunk of our exports have been of rice
mostly basmati. EU is one of the important importers algonwith several
Middle East countries. The Department of Commerce admitted before
the Committee that exports of transgenic crops will depend upon
international acceptance to transgenic food and food products. The
Department also stated that there may be no real demand for GM
crops when the emphasis is on organic production. It needs to be
pointed out that the Department of Commerce are also a member of
GEAC. From the inputs provided by the Department, the Committee
feel that cultivation of genetically modified food crops will have a
debilitating effect on the export of agricultural products. EU already
has a strict regime for not permitting import of genetically modified
crops. With the awareness about the safety and other concerns about
transgenic crops taking centre stage now, there is a strong possibility
of several other countries following suit. The volume of global trade
in GM food and food products being of the order of a paltry US
dollar 4 billion speaks volumes about the acceptability of GM products.
The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that the negative impact of
genetically modified crops on the country’s agricultural exports is
another important aspect that needs to be factored in while taking a
decision in regard to introduction of genetically modified crops. The
Committee desire the considered views of the Government in the
matter.
Reply of the Government
The Department of Commerce (DoC) favours the stand that export
policy for agriculture produce should always be open and stable in
long term. To the extent that GM food grains are found safe,
commercially viable and are in compliance with domestic and
international policies on the subject and remunerative to the farmers
and enhances yields productivity of the crops, DoC is of the view that
international trade in such products can take place. This will also
depend upon international acceptance to the GM food and food
products.
It may be further clarified that EU has a tolerance level of 0.9%
for adventitious presence of GM product in non-GM consignments.
Similarly many countries have such threshold levels. Thus there is no

65
absolute ban as stated in the report in EU as evidenced by large
imports of GM crop derived oil seed cakes, etc. provided the
consignments are properly labelled as per EU prescription.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
National Biodiversity Authority of India
Recommendation (Para No. 6.152)
The National Biodiversity Authority of India (NBA) administers
the Biological Diversity Act, 2002. The Committee note the aims and
objectives of NBA are reaffirming the sovereign rights over its biological
resources of India; preventing misappropriation of bio-resources and
or associated knowledge; protecting biodiversity in general in a holistic
manner; regulating use of biological resources; ensuring sustainable
utilization and equitable benefit sharing; providing legal recognition
and support to the bio-resources and associated traditional knowledge.
Amongst the various powers conferred on NBA to achieve the above-
mentioned aims and objectives, NBA is vested with the power to advise
the Government on matters relating to conservation of biodiversity,
sustainable use of its components and equitable sharing of benefit
arising out of utilization of biological resources. Being a highly
specialized scientific body which has quasi-judicial powers, the
Chairperson of NBA as per the Act shall be an eminent person having
adequate knowledge and expertise in the conservation and sustainable
use of biological diversity and in matters relating to equitable sharing
of benefits. The Authority had its first Chairman appointed on
1 October, 2003. The present Chairman who is an eminent geneticist
is the seventh Chairman of the Authority. It is indeed a matter of
regret that out of these seven Chairmen of this very important body
only three were regular/full time Chairmen. Of the remaining four,
two were from Indian Administrative Service and the other two from
Indian Forest Service, who all held the charge of the Chairman
additionally. To what extent the authority would have been able to
achieve its hallowed aims and objectives during last nine years plus
of its existence with such a pathetic situation at the helm of its affairs
is a moot point.
Reply of the Government
Noted.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

66
Strengthening of National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) in terms of
Scientific, Technical and Legal Human Resource
Recommendation (Para No. 6.153)
The Committee regret to note further that NBA which has been
mandated with the responsibility of safeguarding the biodiversity of
one of the richest country in terms of biodiversity, functions from a
rented accommodation in Chennai. As regards the manpower at its
disposal the less said the better. Leaving aside the administrative
components, personal staff, etc. apart from the Chairman, there is only
one technical officer in position and lone advisor for legal matters.
In all, this high sounding Authority has a total sanctioned strength of
16 with 14 positions occupied as on date. From the manpower and
wherewithal at the disposal of NBA, the Committee can very well
gauge out the seriousness of the Government towards this very
important responsibility of theirs. The Committee wonder, as to how
NBA with such rudimentary existence would be able to ensure India’s
interest in the context of Nagoya Protocol on access and benefit sharing.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that with most of the
international conventions and protocols increasingly revolving around
biodiversity and related matters it is but imperative that the National
Biodiversity Authority should be sufficiently strengthened with
scientific, technical and legal human resource of best quality so that
the Country’s rich biodiversity is adequately safeguarded. The
Committee, as an alternative, would also like the Government to
explore the possibility of amalgamating the mandate of NBA with the
proposed Bio-Safety Authority when it comes into being so that the
multiplicity of authorities and the resultant working at cross purposes
is avoided. The Committee would like to have a definite roadmap in
this regard from the Government within three months of presentation
of this Report to the Parliament.
Reply of the Government
• As mentioned in Section 6.144, as a Party to the CBD, India
was one of the first few countries to have enacted a
legislation in 2002, the Biological Diversity Act, to give effect
to the provisions of the CBD, including those relating to
ABS.
• ABS issues are still emerging and evolving. There are many
grey areas which the world in grappling with, and there is
no set model in the world that can be followed. We are
learning by doing things.

67
• Biological Diversity Act is a path-breaking and progressive
legislation, and NBA is an important statutory body. In the
last nearly seven years of its existence, the NBA has done
some credible work, however, there is much more that needs
to be done.
• Strengthening the implementation of this Act is a priority.
This would inter alia require substantial financial support to
the state and local level bodies, as well as enhancing
awareness and capacity building. The MoEF has proposed
proactive measures for the same including increasing
manpower and infrastructure.
Prima facie, the objectives of Biological Diversity Act and the
Biosafety regulation are quite different, and so are the mandates of
NBA and the GEAC. Therefore, working at cross purposes and
amalgamation does not arise.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.154)
With a view to regulate food multiple regulations have been
enacted in India from time to time. The Committee, therefore, in their
Twelfth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) which was presented to the
Parliament on 20 April, 2005 had laid stress on the need for a single
regulatory body and an integrated food law to obviate the confusion
and problems create by the multiplicity of laws. The Committee note
that the Food Safety and Standards Act was enacted on 24 August,
2006. However, the mechanism to enforce it was badly delayed and
the Authority came into being only on 5 September, 2008. Due to
teething troubles the Authority could start functioning only from
January-February , 2009. The Committee are surprised to note that FSSAI
which has been given an omnibus mandate in food sector regulation
has been allocated sums of Rs. 8.00 crore, Rs. 21.00 crore and
Rs. 32.37 crore respectively in the first three fiscals of their existence
viz. 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11. The FSS Act, 2006 has come into
force w.e.f. 5 August, 2011 and the Authority is functioning without
any worthwhile infrastructure and manpower at the Central and State
levels to enforce the Act which is a very worrying situation. All work
pertaining to strengthening of FSSAI Headquarters; development of
science based standards; food testing facilities; surveillance mechanism

68
both Central and State levels are being badly delayed because of
paucity of funds. The Food Safety and Standards Regulations which
were published way back on 20 November, 2010 for inviting public
comments are yet to be finalized. The data base for the Risk Based
Food Clearance system is still being developed. Food Testing
Laboratories network is in shambles, accredition procedure for referral
labs is not yet devised.
Reply of the Government
The FSSAI and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are
fully apprised of this situation and during 12th Plan adequate financial
support and expansion plans have been proposed.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.62 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Absence of Monitoring Mechanism
Recommendation (Para No. 6.155)
In the opinion of the Committee the Government should realize
the magnitude of the task to be performed by FSSAI. Apart from
regulating local food and food products, the Authority has to ensure
food safety of food items imported into the country. Imparts in India
are permitted through 255 entry points. These include 82 custom ports,
32 customs airports, 132 land customs stations and 9 foreign port
offices, sub foreign post offices. During 2007-08 and 2008-09, 76 lakh
metric tonnes of food items were imported into the country. For the
Committee the most worrying aspect in the matter is the admission of
the representative of Directorate General of Foreign Trade before the
Committee during Oral-Evidence that there was absolutely no
monitoring of the food items being imported into the country.
Reply of the Government
The FSSAI and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are
fully apprised of this situation and during 12th Plan adequate financial
support and expansion plans have been proposed.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

69
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.65 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.156)
The Committee had asked the Authority to spell out their
requirements of finances for the projected activities. The Authority have
projected a requirement of Rs. 4557.00 crore for the entire Twelfth Five
Year Plan. The Committee exhort the Government to allocate the
requisite funds to the Authority on priority basis, as unless the edifice
is built, it will not be possible for it to function optimally, a possibility
the Country can ill afford in the food sector.
Reply of the Government
Noted.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.62 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Handling of Regulation and Labelling of Transgenic Food Products
by the Government
Recommendation (Para No. 7.59)
The handling of the twin issues of regulation and labeling of
transgenic food products by the Government speaks volumes about
their casual attitude towards such sensitive and important matters. As
per Rule 11 of Rules 89, the food stuffs, ingredients in food stuffs and
additives including processing aids containing or consisting of GMOs
could not be produced, sold, imported or used without the approval
of GEAC. However, MoEF on 23 August, 2007 exempted all these
categories from Rule 11 if the end product was not an LMO. This
according to the Government was done as only Living Modified
Organism have property to propagate and pose risk to environment;
the Task Force on recombinant pharma under Dr. R.A. Mashelkar,
former DG, CSIR and the Task Force on Agriculture Biotechnology

70
under Prof. M.S. Swaminathan, have recommended that GEAC should
be involved only in the regulation of LMOs to avoid regulatory overlap;
FSSAI Act had a special provision for dealing with GM food and food
products and to address health concerns/risks in line with codex
guidelines.
Reply of the Government
The issue of regulations on labelling of transgenic food products
is complex and sensitive matter in terms of trade, farming practices
from land to markets, export and import and challenges of
implementation being an inter-ministerial matter. It requires techno-
economic feasibility study on a large scale including implication on
price of food and affordability due to additional cost. Studies published
in Australia, India (from JNU policy research group) and Philippines
have shown that consumer has to bear additional cost (a minimum of
10%) in case GM labelling is introduced. In many countries where
labelling regulations are in place, the implementation and monitoring
is highly challenging task and has shown mixed results.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Potential of Transgenic Food Crops to ensure Country’s Food Security
Recommendation (Para No. 7.71)
A major argument extended in favour of transgenic food crops by
DAC before the Committee is their potential to ensure country‘s food
security in coming years due to increase in population. The Committee,
therefore, analysed the food production and availability scenario during
last decade alongwith population trends. The foodgrains production
during the last decade has more than kept pace with the growth in
population. The total foodgrains production rose from 197 odd million
tonnes in 2000-2001 to 241 million tonnes in 2010-11. The production
of fruits has gone up steeply from 430 lakh tonnes to 759 lakh tonnes
during this decade. Similarly, the production of vegetables has also
shown a significant rise from 886.22 lakh tonnes to 1376.32 lakh tonnes.
Throughout this decade barring a year or so India has been a net
exporter of foodgrains and vegetables. The rise in foodgrains and fruits
and vegetable production has continued inspite of two major droughts
during this decade. The toil of the farmer and the significant
contribution of the agricultural scientists have ensured that food security
is not a problem. In the opinion of the Committee the problem today
is in no measure comparable to the ship to mouth situation of early

71
sixties as today we are only faced with a serious deceleration in
availability of food. Inspite of sufficient production and more than
double the amount of buffer norms food stocks with the Government
there is a huge disparity in availability of food. A large majority does
not have access to food due to extreme poverty while colossal amounts
of foodgrains, fruits and vegetables are being lost during post harvest
storage. As Secretary, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
confessed before the Committee that a saving of 10% in post harvest
crops losses would mean 23 million tones of extra foodgrains. Primarily
faulty procurement policy, mismanagement of stocks, lack of adequate
and proper storage, hoarding and lopsided distribution, massive
leakages in the public distribution delivery system, etc. are more
responsible for the present worrisome situation. If these shortcomings
and problems are attended to alongwith liberal financial assistance to
agriculture and allied sectors, proactive measures are initiated to arrest
the decreasing trend in cultivable area and farmer friendly and
sustainable agricultural practices are put in use, there would not be
any compelling need for adopting technologies which are yet to be
proven totally safe for biodiversity, environment, human and livestock
health and which will encourage monoculture, an option best avoided.
The Committee would, therefore, recommend the Government to come
up with a fresh road map for ensuring food security in coming years
without jeopardizing the vast bio-diversity of the country and
compromising with the safety of human health and livestock health.
Reply of the Government
MoA is in strong agreement with the view that biodiversity
considerations and biosafety concerns will be paramount pre-requisites
for utilization of genetic resources for future crop improvement.
As per the present procurement policy, the Central Government
extends price support to paddy and wheat through Food Corporation
of India (FCI) and State Agencies. All the foodgrains conforming to
prescribed specifications offered for sale at specified centres are
purchased by the public procurement agencies at the Minimum Support
Price (MSP). The farmers have the option to sell their produce to FCI/
State Agencies at the MSP or in the open market, as is advantageous
to them.
The Central stocks of foodgrains are stored by the FCI and the
State Government Agencies in covered godowns and in Cover And
Plinth (CAP). The total storage capacity available with the Food
Corporation of India (FCI) [owned and hired] as on 1.8.2012 was

72
372.79 lakh MTs. However, total storage capacity available with FCI
and State agencies is 714.14 lakh MTs against the current central pool
stocks of 760 lakh MTs in the form of wheat and rice. During
procurement season, stock of foodgrains do exceed the available storage
capacity for which temporary arrangements are made. However, to
increase the covered storage capacity in the long run, the Government
formulated the Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee (PEG) Scheme in 2008.
Assessment of additional storage needs under the PEG scheme is
based on the overall procurement/consumption and the storage space
already available. For the consuming areas, storage capacity is to be
created to meet four month’s requirement of PDS and Other Welfare
Schemes in a State. For the procurement areas, the highest stock levels
in the last three years are considered to decide the storage capacity
required.
Under this Scheme, a capacity of 181.08 lakh tonnes is being created
in 19 States through private entrepreneurs and Central and State
Warehousing Corporations. FCI has already sanctioned a total storage
capacity of about 120 lakh tonnes out of which a capacity of about
95.79 lakh tonnes has been sanctioned to the private entrepreneurs.
CWC and SWCs have been sanctioned 5.50 lakh tonnes and 19.38 lakh
tonnes respectively. A capacity of about 61.09 lakh tonnes is under
construction. At present 25.12 lakh MTs have been completed out of
which 17.86 lakh MTs has been taken over and the balance is expected
to be taken over shortly. It is expected that by March, 2013, further
about 48 lakh tonnes would be completed and taken over.
Besides PEG scheme, following steps have been taken by the
Government for creating additional storage capacity:—
•A  storage capacity of 5.74 lakh tonnes [5.34 lakh tonnes for
North-East (NE) Region and 40,000 tonnes for other than
NE] has been proposed for construction at a cost of
Rs. 551.50 crore during 12th Five Year Plan.
•A  capacity of 20 lakh tonnes is being created through
modern silos in different parts of the country.
Thus it can be seen that the Department is already taking effective
measures to improve the storage capacity for foodgrains being supplied
under PDS.
Further, there is a well established quality control mechanism for
scientific storage of foodgrains followed in FCI godowns for proper

73
storage and to avoid damage during storage. Department of Food and
Public Distribution has issued instructions to all State Governments/
UT Administration and Food Corporation of India from time to time
to take required measures, for proper enforcement of quality control
mechanism of foodgrains during procurement, storage and distribution.
Recently the instructions were reiterated on 8th June, 2012 to the
Principal Secretaries (Food) of the States where the wheat stocks are
stored in CAP to ensure that field functionaries engaged in the
preservation of foodgrains strictly follow the code of practices of
scientific storage of foodgrain, First-In-First-Out (FIFO) principle and
issue the stocks stored in kutcha/unscientific plinths etc. on priority
basis to prevent any damage.
Some quantities of foodgrains may get damaged during storage
due to various reasons such as storage pest attack, leakages in godowns,
procurement of poor quality stock, exposure to rains in case of
unscientific storage because of lack of storage space, floods, negligence
on the part of concerned officials in taking precautionary measures
etc. A quantity of 6702 tonnes, 6346 tonnes and 3338 tonnes of
foodgrains got damaged/became non-issuable in FCI during 2009-10,
2010-11, 2011-12 respectively. During the current Financial Year—
2012-13 (as on 01.08.2012), the stock of damaged/non-issuable
foodgrains amounts to 1324 tonnes only. In percentage term, accrual
of Non-issuable/damaged foodgrains vis-à-vis off take from FCI stocks
for the last five years (2007-08 to 2011-12) was 0.10, 0.07, 0.02, 0.014
and 0.006 respectively. It may, therefore, be seen that the percentage of
damaged foodgrains has been declining and is extremely low.
So far as the distribution of foodgrains is concerned the Targeted
Public Distribution System (TPDS) has been one of the major initiatives
of Government of India in its efforts to provide food security to millions
of poor in the country. Government of India makes allocation of
foodgrains (rice/wheat) to States/Union Territories at highly subsidized
Central Issue Prices (CIPs) through Targeted Public Distribution System
(TPDS) @ 35 kg. per family per month for 6.52 crore Below Poverty
Line (BPL) families, including among them 2.43 crore Antyodaya Anna
households, the poorest of the poor across the country. Allocation of
foodgrains for Above Poverty Line (APL) families are made based on
availability of stocks of foodgrains in the Central Pool and past offtake.
Presently, APL allocations range between 15 and 35 kg. per family/
month in different States/UTs.
Apart from normal TPDS allocations, Government of India also
makes additional allocations of foodgrains to the States/UTs from time
to time. During the current year 2012-13, the Government of India has

74
so far allocated 573.79 lakh tonnes of foodgrains to the States/UTs
under TPDS and including additional allocation of 134.37 lakh tonnes
comprising of 17.66 lakh tonnes for additional BPL/AAY families in
the poorest/backward districts in 21 States, 50 lakh tonnes to all States/
UTs for additional BPL families, 60 lakh tonnes to APL families and
5.43 lakh tonnes for flood/drought relief, festivals, etc.
However, TPDS is operated under the joint responsibility of the
Government of India and State Governments/UT Administrations. The
responsibility for lifting of the allocated food grains, their further
distribution to eligible ration cardholders through fair price shops rests
with the State Government/UT Administration.
Government of India has introduced the National Food Security
Bill, 2011 (NFSB) in the Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2011 with the
objective to provide for food and nutritional security, in human life
cycle approach, by ensuring access to adequate quantity of quality
food at affordable prices to the people to live a life with dignity .
Some of the key issues that need attention are:
• Stagnation in yield potential is noticed in food crops over
the past ten years. Punjab and Haryana have already reached
their plateau without any new infusion of technologies.
• Overcoming various abiotic and biotic stresses in Eastern
Region or rainfed areas would require better breeding
techniques for new varieties that stabilizes yield gains.
• Focus on practices is knowledge intensive with difficulty in
monitoring the expected gains.
• Nutritional security through pulses and millets improvement
would require control over pests and also to develop better
plant types that improves harvest index and is amenable to
mechanization stresses.
• Bio fortification through Nutrient rich rice like golden rice
has been developed to overcome iron and beta carotene
deficiency
•W ith increasing demand of food grains for the size of Indian
population, sustained production of sufficient food grains
would require major technological inputs which molecular
marker assisted plant breeding, Genetic engineering
including transgenics offer.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

75
Contributions made by Bio-technology to the Agriculture Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 8.115)
The Committee note that Biotechnology has made salutary
contributions to the agriculture sector for decades together. Plant
breeding, tissue culture, cropping practices, etc. are all practiced
worldwide by farmers. Most of these biotechnologies are locally
developed with local research support and have significantly
contributed to the farmers well being. The Committee further note
that in last two decades or so transgenics in agriculture crops is being
propagated as the panacea for several ills besetting the agriculture
sector. Several Ministries/Departments/Agencies in their submissions
before the Committee have expounded the virtues of this comparatively
new technology. The Industry has also been very supportive of
transgenics in agricultural crops. According to ICAR transgenic crops
by nature are eco-friendly, sustainable and protective to environment
and biodiversity; increase productivity, thereby, contributing to national
food, feed and fibre-security, lower production costs, conserve bio-
diversity as a land saving technology capable of higher productivity
on a per unit land basis; efficiently utilize inputs such as fertilizers
and water; increasing stability of production to lessen suffering during
famines due to abiotic and biotic stresses, improving economic and
social benefits, ensuring safer human health through reduction of
chemical inputs in agriculture alongwith safer soil, water and food.
The Department of Science and Technology have also recommended
recombinant DNA technology as one of the breakthrough technologies
like nuclear energy, super computers, etc. and have stated that such
breakthrough technologies have revolutionary potential to bring
paradigm shifts in the existing systems. Ministry of Environment and
Forests, DBT, DHR/ICMR, GEAC have all supported transgenics/
genetical engineering in agricultural crops, including the food crops
more or less for the same reasons. All of these Ministries/Departments/
Agencies have also assured the Committee that the assessment and
evaluation protocols and regulatory mechanism in place are adequately
robust albeit, they will need to be upgraded as the technology acquires
more finesse. The Government have also cited the success of transgenics
crops cultivation in countries like USA, Argentina, China, etc. as a
justification for introducing transgenics in India. Locally, the substantial
increase in the cultivation of Bt. Cotton during the last decade or so
has been showcased before the Committee as the measure of success.
It is being said that the area under Bt. cotton cultivation has gone up
from 24000 ha. in 2001 to 8 million ha. plus now. The Committee have
also been informed by the Government that apart from production,

76
productivity has also increased due to cultivation of Bt. cotton. The
drop in usage of pesticide due to Bt. cotton cultivation is also being
quoted as a plus point of the transgenics technology. The Government
have also informed the Committee that Bt. cotton has not affected bio-
diversity, is a sustainable crop and has improved the income of the
farmers.
Reply of the Government
It is stated by Committee that in last two decades or so transgenics
in agriculture crops is being propagated as the panacea for several ills
besetting the agriculture sector. Several Ministries/Departments/
Agencies in their submissions before the Committee have expounded
the virtues of this comparatively new technology.
However, it may be clarified that if one examines the Annual
Reports and other documents made available in public domain of the
departments/ministries, none of them seems to have “propagated
transgenics as panacea“. In fact investment on transgenics is a small
portion of total investment. Although, the potential applications of
transgenics technology in agriculture cannot be denied in future,
transgenic technology has been the choice only when all the
conventional or modern non-recombinant technologies have been
exhausted to solve a problem or where eco-friendly, sustainable and
protection to environment and biodiversity are needed. Care has also
been taken not to employ transgenic technology in crops or varieties
where there are trade and traceability implications.
It may also be noted development of transgenic in particular crop
addressing a trait is not cheap. From discovery to markets, it estimated
that an investment of upto Rs. 50 crores covering costs of transgenic
crop research, technology development, regulatory tests and
commercialisation is required and would take anywhere from 10 to 12
years from laboratory to land. Further, long drawn legal cases, petitions
and protests, burning experimental fields by activists, rumours and
stories spread by Quack-scientists have already made investment in
GM research slow down and unpredictable in terms timely availability
of technologies for the benefit of farmers and reap any profits by the
developer.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

77
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT‘S REPLIES
Disclosures made by Supreme Court nominee on GEAC to be looked
into
Recommendation (Para No. 2.77)
While everything appears to be in order on paper, the disclosures
made by Dr. P .M. Bhargava, founder Director of Centre for Cellular
and Molecular Biology and the Supreme Court nominee on GEAC
have alarmed the Committee no end. His testimony that the requisite
number of tests were not done on Bt. Cotton in the Country and even
those tests that were performed were done either by the company
itself or by an accredited laboratory but on the samples provided by
the company. The same thing happened in case of Bt. brinjal also. In
both the instances, the promoter company is same and according to
Dr. Bhargava it is known for unethical practices the world over
including bribery charges in Indonesia, hiding data, falsifying data or
presenting wrong data. If the regulatory mechanism including RCGM
and GEAC faltered on these counts, it is a serious lapse in the opinion
of the Committee and needs to be investigated indepth.
Reply of the Government
The claims made by Dr. P .M. Bhargava needs to be substantiated
with evidence. In the absence of such evidences, the allegation made
on globally reputed institutions and companies engaged in safety testing
do not merit consideration.
Government of India is committed to the safe use of GM crops
and accordingly robust evaluation systems are in place. Bt cotton was
approved in 2002 after an elaborate safety assessment exercise spanning
over 7 years.
India has a robust regulatory framework in place for regulation of
GMOs and products thereof. The approval of Bt. cotton and Bt. brinjal
by RCGM and GEAC has been accorded on the basis of elaborate set
of guidelines and procedures. It may also be noted that these guidelines

78
are based on state-of-the-art international guidance developed after
years of consultations by agencies like FAO, WHO, OECD and Codex
Alimentarius (Annexure-III).
The RCGM and GEAC together involve more than 60 experts
covering multi-disciplines to examine the safety assessment data
submitted by the applicant at every step of the regulatory process.
Globally, regulatory tests are conducted by notified or accredited testing
institutions in both public and private sector. The testing and data
submission from these laboratories are according to international best
practices and ethical procedures.
 The regulatory mechanisms have not faltered and acted in a most
transparent manner. In fact all the data, reports, decisions etc. have
been made available on these website for information of the public.
Views of Dr. P .M. Bhargava are his personal opinion and not subscribed
to by majority of scientists in India and in the world.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Conflict of Interest in the present Regulatory Mechanism in RCGM
Recommendation (Para No. 3.45)
Under such circumstances when the stakes are so high, the
Committee have strong reasons to agree with the apprehensions
expressed by several stakeholders who deposed before the Committee
that the basic assessments and data generation by IBSC as also the
evaluation of these assessments and data by the accredited laboratories
and regulatory agencies based on the samples provided by the company
cannot be relied upon fully. The case of Bt. BN and Bt. NHH44
mentioned in the Report is a case in point. Another tier in the
regulatory mechanism viz.  the RCGM functions under the
administrative control of DBT which is the promoter Department for
biotechnology particularly modern biotechnology in the Government
of India. Quite obviously inspite of their best efforts to do justice with
their mandate to assess biosafety, environmental safety, human health
safety, food and feed safety, there is a strong possibility of conflict of
interest creeping in.
Reply of the Government
It may be clarified that:
“RCGM does not function under the Department of Biotechnology
(DBT)”. On the other hand “RCGM functions under the GEAC as
per rules 1989 of EPA Act, 1986. RCGM is not under administrative

79
control of DBT. DBT services RCGM in terms of infrastructure and
human resource”.
RCGM does not report to Secretary, DBT directly or indirectly. No
official of DBT has any influence on the functioning of RCGM. It
directly reports to GEAC.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Government to bring forth on all Encompassing Umbrella Legislation
on Bio-Safety at the earliest
Recommendation (Para No. 3.47)
The Government time and again justified, before the Committee,
the existing regulatory mechanism as based on best global practices
and systems which are followed successfully in the pharmaceutical
sector also. It is common knowledge that the regulatory mechanism in
the pharmaceutical industry is beset with several problems and
shortcomings. In fact the Department Related Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare in their 59th Report on “The Functioning
of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO)“
presented to the Parliament on 8 May, 2012 have severely criticized
CDSCO for several malpractices including working against the interest
of patients, collusion with industry and numerous other acts of
omission and commission and have recommended to the Government
a complete overhaul of the regulatory mechanism for the
pharmaceutical industry. Since the Government have drawn a parallel
between the regulatory mechanism for GMOs and products thereof
with the regulatory mechanism for the pharmaceutical industry, the
Committee are of a very strong view that the former also requires to
be overhauled, even created de novo in the interest of biosafety,
environmental safety, human and livestock health safety. Albeit, it is
to be ensured that due concern is paid to the interest of the industry.
From their examination of the subject the Committee have found that,
hitherto, the tendency of the regulatory mechanism in the absence of
specialized infrastructure and R&D facilities in the Country is to base
their decision making on practices and studies elsewhere, as also on
the assessments and data generated by the company concerned. This
type of precautionary approach has lot of scope for mistakes, errors,
misrepresentation and misinterpretation. It is, therefore, not at all an
ideal regulatory mechanism for a County like India which is the centre
of origin, as also one of the richest centres of biodiversity in the world.
We should also not forget that we are the second most populous

80
country in the world and have a huge population of livestock, as
well. The present state of our health services and various other social
sector services also does not inspire confidence that remedial action,
post commercialization would be forthcoming, with any degree of
alacrity. In such a situation what the Country needs is not a
biotechnology regulatory legislation but an all encompassing umbrella
legislation on biosafety which is focused on ensuring the biosafety,
biodiversity, human and livestock health, environmental protection and
which specifically describes the extent to which biotechnology, including
modern biotechnology, fits in the scheme of things without
compromising with the safety of any of the elements mentioned above.
The Committee, therefore, recommend to the Government with all the
power at their command to immediately evolve such a legislation after
due consultation with all stakeholders and bring it before the
Parliament without any further delay. In this context the Committee
would advise Government to duly consult the Norwegian Law which
emulates this spirit to a large extent.
Reply of the Government
It is reiterated that the present regulatory system has been working
satisfactorily in terms of dealing with the regulation of modern
biotechnology products and processes.
However, it may be noted that India is still dealing with first
generation GM crops and human and animal health products. In the
recent past following complete DNA sequencing of human genome,
rice, sorghum and several beneficial and pathogenic micro organisms
along with array of tools and techniques of molecular biology,
immunology, chemical biology, system biology, synthetic biology, nano
biotechnology and stem cell biology have opened up opportunities for
development of range of complex products such as crops with complex
genetic interventions, biopharmaceuticals, biologicals and gene therapies
etc. The global biotech industry is growing at healthy 10-15% and
Indian public and private sectors would be registering a growth of US
$ 20 billion in the next decade at the current growth rate.
In view of the future challenges of increased complexities of biotech
product developments involving array of converging technologies and
responding to public concerns on safety and benefits of these
technologies, Government of India has been proactive in recognizing
need for reforms to have preparedness for future. Accordingly the
Biotech Regulatory Authority of India (BRAI) Bill 2012 has been
submitted to the Lok Sabha for introduction. The BRAI Bill is aimed

81
at addressing safety and efficacy issues following international best
practices followed in countries with functional regulatory systems.
The issue of whether or not an “umbrella” biosafety law would be
useful in India will depend on a variety of factors. No compelling
evidence or logic has been offered to support the supposition that
such legislation would make regulatory implementation in India more
effective. A look at the experience around the world shows mixed
results. Many well implemented systems have used existing legislation
related to the environment and agriculture in combination with new
or existing regulations (e.g. Argentina, United States, Canada) to form
the core of their biosafety regulatory system. Others (e.g. Australia,
Brazil) have relied on new legislation. In India already there are relevant
legislations on environment, biodiversity, food safety and standards,
seed registration and certification, drugs and cosmetics. Accordingly,
the BRAI Bill takes into account biosafety and efficacy assessment of
GM products in agriculture, human and animal healthcare, industry
and environment in harmony with the existing acts administered by
various departments. Considering the requirements for central
coordination on functioning and oversight of various authorities, BRAI
Bill provides for constitution of inter-ministerial governing board with
members from 15 central ministries. It has also a pragmatic coordinating
and feedback system involving all the State Government. In addition
the authority will be advised by a National Biotechnology Advisory
Committee as a part of the Bill consisting of representatives from civil
society, industry, farmers and consumers organisations to provide
constant feedback from time to time on the performance and problems
related to commercial use of biotechnology products in healthcare and
agriculture. Elaborate monitoring systems at authority and state level
with financing and technical support and stringent punitive actions
and punishments for non compliance are integral to Bill.
The Parliamentary Committee chooses once again to highlight the
policies of Norway, a country with a small, wealthy population heavily
reliant on fossil fuel exports and with inconsequential agricultural
production. This despite the fact that there are plenty of developing
and newly industrialized countries that have population demographics
and agricultural needs much more closely aligned with those of India,
and which have accrued considerable experience with the use of LMOs.
These countries include Brazil, China, Mexico and South Africa. The
obscure choice of Norway as an appropriate model for India suggests
a bias in favour of Norway’s regulatory mechanism ( a de facto  ban on
the testing and use of LMOs) rather than an understanding its
function—particularly since the Norwegian Act has resulted in

82
essentially no decisions on the use of LMOs and is therefore one of
those with arguably the least experience in the world (see response to
section 3.40).
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.29)
The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) adopted at Rio Earth
Submit was signed by India on 5 June, 1992 and ratified on 18 February,
1994. CBD very unambiguously reaffirms sovereign rights of nations
over their natural resources and establishes three clear goals  viz.
conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of its components
and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of
genetic resources. The access and benefit sharing objective forms the
core of CBD. CBD, which are likely to have adverse environmental
also directs the members to establish or maintain means to regulate,
manage or control risks associated with the use and release of LMOs
resulting from biotechnology impacts affecting the conservation and
sustainable use of biodiversity as also human health.
Reply of the Government
The report has stated that “CBD, which are likely to have adverse
environmental impact also directs the members to establish or maintain
means to regulate, manage or control risks associated with the use
and release of LMOs resulting from biotechnology impacts affecting
the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity as also human
health”.
It may be clarified that CBD does not “direct the members to
establish or maintain means to regulate, manage or control risks
associated with the use and release of LMOs…”. Rather, Article 19.3
of the CBD calls on Parties to “consider the need for and modalities
of a protocol setting out appropriate procedures, including, in particular,
advance informed agreement, in the field of the safe transfer, handling
and use of any living modified organism resulting from biotechnology
that may have adverse effect on the conservation and sustainable use
of biological diversity”. Article 19.3 is an enabling provision, not a
directive to Parties. Parties elected to create the CPB in response to
this provision, but it is important to note that it did not prejudge the
outcome in this regard.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

83
Need for an all Encompassing Bio-safety Authority at the earliest
Recommendation (Para No. 4.34)
Apart from these major conventions and treaties there are several
more conventions/protocols/treaties/agreements pertaining to the
subject. The Committee note that other than the WTO whose primary
focus is facilitation of trade, all other relevant treaties, conventions,
protocols and agreement very unambiguously under line the need for
ensuring biological diversity and sustainability and eliminating any
risk to the human health due to use of LMOs, GMOs and products
thereof. The Committee are however appalled by the existing state of
affairs in these matters in the Country. While we have become
signatories to these conventions/protocols/agreements/treaties with
alacrity, we have simultaneously not ensured that the necessary
wherewithal, scientific expertise, infrastructure and manpower for
ensuring compliance is also created. As the succeeding narrative will
prove, the Biological Diversity Authority and PPV and FRA could
have played a crucial role as an advisor and regulator in several matters
pertaining to safety and sustainability of biodiversity but they are just
a cosmetic presence. The Committee need not reiterate their observation
regarding the state of affairs in the extant regulatory mechanism for
the LMOs and products thereof, as it has been already commented
upon in one of the previous chapters. However, hugely concerned
with the situation on the ground, the Committee cannot but reiterate
that the Country requires an all encompassing Bio-safety Authority
without any further loss of time.
Reply of the Government
The Parliamentary Committee report states that there are “several
more conventions/protocols/treaties/agreements pertaining to the
subject.” However it is simply not the case that “all other relevant
treaties, conventions, protocols and agreements very unambiguously
underline the need for ensuring biological diversity and sustainability
and eliminating any risk to human health due to use of LMOs, GMOs
and products thereof”. In fact, the only international treaties that
address LMOs and their potential impact on biological diversity directly
are the CPB and N-KL SP. Importantly both recognize that modern
biotechnology has great potential for human well-being if developed
and used with adequate safety measures for the environment and
human health.
The Parliamentary Committee is correct to point out that ensuring
compliance with international treaty obligations should be a priority .
However it is important to note that the mechanism being suggested

84
by the Parliamentary Committee (“an all-encompassing Bio-safety
Authority”) is not required under any of the relevant international
agreements. Further in India several relevant legislations on
bio-diversity, PVPFR, environmental protection and food safety are
already in place and therefore BRAI Bill proposes an umbrella
inter-ministerial governing board for coordination and oversight of
bio-safety aspects of GMOs in a comprehensive manner.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Challenges Posed by Cultivation of GM Crops on a Commercial
Basis
Recommendation (Para No. 5.47)
The Committee strongly feel that given the reach and spread of
outside containment applications of modern bio-technology viz.
cultivation of GM Crops on commercial scale, containment of harm
would be a very challenging task even for some of the most well
equipped developed countries and simply impossible in a country like
India. The Committee also fully concur with the assessment of the
Report that the integration of bio-technology must be within an
enabling environment supported by local research and education that
empowers local communities. Bio-technology must work with the best
production system for the local community for example agro systems
of even the poorest societies have the potential through ecological
agriculture and Integrated Post Management to meet or significantly
exceed yield produced by conventional methods, reduce the demand
for land conversion for agriculture, restore ecosystems services
(particularly water), reduce the use of and need for synthetic fertilizers
derived from fossil fuels, and the use of harsh insecticides and
herbicides.
Reply of the Government
Such fear is uncalled for, if the adoption of the new technology is
carefully managed. GM crops approved after extensive safety evaluation
processes, have been grown commercially (outside containment) in
29 countries over 160 million hectares without any reports of adverse
effects. Food and feed derived products derived from such crops are
being used in 55 countries across the world. There are well established
scientific processes arrived at, after years of consultations and
successfully adopted in India. Government of India is committed to
safe use of GM crops and there are enough capabilities in the country
to deal with GM crops. The scientific and regulatory capacities are
constantly being strengthened in line with the global developments.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

85
Apprehensions Raised in IAASTD Report to be Addressed
Immediately by the Government
Recommendation (Para No. 5.48)
The Report has also drawn attention towards the threat of IP and
globalization to public plant breeding institutions in developing
countries as privatization fuels transfer of knowledge away from
commons. There is a contraction both in crop diversity and numbers
of local breed. In many parts of the world, women play this role and
thus a risk exists that privatization will lead to woman losing economic
resources and social standing as their plant breeding knowledge is
appropriated, simultaneously the entire communities run the risk of
losing their control over the food security. Based on their Study Visit
to Vidharba the Committee are fully in agreement with these
apprehensions of IAASTD Report and desire the Government to take
immediate steps to remedy the situation in the Country. This Committee
find this very true in the context of India also.
Reply of the Government
The Union of India firmly believes that strengthening public sector
research institutions in advanced sciences such as molecular biology
and bio-technology to foster an enabling environment will ensure that
intellectual property issues can be properly managed. The Government
has invested significantly in the R&D in public sector research
institutions primarily under the aegis of ICAR and DBT for
development of technology including GM crops for local needs.
In fact public perception on the fear of unknown and consistent
attempt by certain sections of society to spread unfounded fears with
no scientific or data based evidence severely affect public sector research
demoralising dedicated scientific community. Already due to these
factors, the Indian R&D in agriculture bio-technology has slowed down.
If India continues to lag behind, other countries/multinational
companies (MNCs) will move forward with research and in due course
we may have to import GM technology/seeds by paying higher cost.
This may also make India more dependent on newer technologies and
affect food security.
Recent initiatives of Indian industry in field of pharmaceutical
related intellectual property rights (IPR) show the proactive role that
Government can play. For example the case of recombinant hepatitis
B vaccine, erythropoietin, interferons and other bio-simillars, the costs
have drastically come down by 40-60% Similar initiative in 12th Plan

86
in DAC‘s mission on seed and planting material envisage providing
financial assistance to public sector seed producing entities either
individually or collectively for acquisition of new technology. These
seed producing entities can utilize the services of IPR managers for
acquiring varietal licences. These initiatives will be the way forward
towards ensuring that IPR/technology is accessible to masses within
reasonable prices. The PPV&FR Act has adequate provision to recognize
farmers’ communities effort towards germplasm conservation. It not
only rewards communities for these efforts but also provides safeguards
for benefit sharing. The statement that “privatization will lead to
woman losing economic resources and social standing”, is highly
generalized. In 2010, researchers at University of Warwick published a
peer reviewed research paper titled “GM crops and Gender issues”.
The study reported that employment for cotton picking increased
significantly for hired females who benefitted 55% more than male
labourers, which translates to about 424 million additional employment
opportunities for female earners for the total Bt. cotton area in India.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Report of Six Science Academies
Recommendation (Para No. 5.55)
From the sequence of events narrated above and the views and
counter views expressed by various stakeholders, the report by the six
science academies is a job hastily done. In view of the high expectations
from these very respected bodies, the country expected a well
considered and more professional outcome on this highly sensitive
matter rather than a cut and paste effort which invited ridicule and
revision and avoidable criticism.
Reply of the Government
As mentioned above in section 5.53, it is reiterated that the report
by the six academies is science based and not a cut and paste effort.
In fact, the issues raised regarding plagiarism, non-citation of references
etc. were raised by specific groups with an intention to divert attention
and in no way related to safety of Bt. Brinjal. All such issues were
subsequently resolved. The findings of the committee were sound and
cannot be disputed.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

87
Central Government to Apportion Appropriate Responsibilities on
the States in the Bio-Safety Law
Recommendation (Para No. 7.18)
The Committee take note of the fact that under the constitutional
scheme of things agriculture is a State Subject. Article 246 of
Constitution of India explicitly assigns ‘agriculture, including
agricultural education and research, protection against pest and
prevention of plant diseases to the States of the Union. In such a
situation, there is no scope for any misinterpretation of role and
responsibility of the State Governments with matters concerning or
having a bearing on agriculture. In case of field trials of transgenics
crops the Committee find that a peculiar situation obtains. For a thing
as crucial as field trials till recently the State Governments were not
even consulted. The Ministry of Environment and Forests have without
any appreciation of the constitutional positions defended their decision
on the specious plea that as monitoring during the field trials is the
responsibility of SBCCs and DLCs which are entities of State
Governments prior approval of State is not necessary. The Committee
are not at all convinced by the flawed logic extended by Ministry of
Environment and Forests. In view of the diverse opinions about
transgenic crops and controversies surrounding their induction a
mandatory consultation process with the State Governments culminating
into seeking their permission for field trials, in the opinion of the
Committee should have been inbuilt in the regulatory mechanism. This
was inexplicably not done by Ministry of Environment and Forests
leading to several States being compelled to voice their objections to
the apparently flawed procedure being followed in a matter, which is
in the domain of the State Governments. The Committee note that the
Ministry have, thereafter, taken remedial action and from last year
onwards the applicant is required to obtain a no objection certificate
from the State where the trial is proposed to be conducted. The
Committee also recommend that since States have a major role in
agriculture sector and most of the responsibility at field level devolves
on them, the Government should apportion appropriate responsibilities
on the States in the Bio-safety Law recommended by the Committee.
This will not only be in consonance with the Constitution and the
Government will be saved the embarrassment of a Bihar type incident,
but would be a practical and pragmatic approach to deal with various
developments in the agriculture sector where at the ground level the
Central Government at best has a peripheral role.
Reply of the Government
The information provided to the Committee by MoEF is with
respect to the legal position on the requirement of NOC from the
State Government under Rules, 1989.

88
The recent practice of seeking approval from States has led to a
piquant situation wherein research trials face uncertainty. States while
agreeing to cultivation of Bt. Cotton, have been denying trials for
other crops. Recently Ministry of Agriculture has written to all States
to allow trials and some States are working on the issue.
While it may not be appropriate to assume the role of Central
Government as peripheral, yet the point of the Committee regarding
importance of States in decision making is well taken. In a federal
structure like India, States are important partners. The SAC—PM report
gives important suggestions that will ensure constructive dialogue with
the States on related issues. The report suggests the following:
• High Level dialogue with State Governments to streamline
clearances for conduct of multi-location “Confined field
trials”—a scientific pre-requisite in all countries for
meaningful decision making on approvals or otherwise.
• Research and infrastructure of State agriculture universities
and colleges be strengthened for addressing the locations-
specific needs of the States and regions and generate
expertise.
• Priority should be given to strengthen State Government
departments and laboratories dealing with agriculture inputs,
including GM or non-GM seeds, extension and education
of farmers through major programmes and investments for
capacity building tailor made to the needs of the region.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Research and Development Activities on Transgenics to be carried
out only in containment and ongoing Field Trials in all States be
Discontinued Forthwith
Recommendation (Para No. 7.21)
Considering the flaws and shortcomings noticed by the Committee
in the functioning of the regulatory mechanism meant for the purpose,
the lack of preparedness of various agencies who should ideally be
involved in various oversight and both, pre and post commercialization
surveillance responsibilities in the context of transgenic crops, the still
unclear ramifications of transgenic crops on bio-diversity , environment,
human and livestock health and sustainability, the Committee desire
in consonance with their recommendation in a previous Chapter that

89
for the time being all research and development activities on transgenic
crops should be carried out only in containment, the ongoing field
trials in all States should be discontinued forthwith.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation to conduct all research and development
activities only in the containment is contrary to the recommendation
that there is a need for generating data on impacts on bio-diversity
and human health. Bio-safety research cannot be conducted in glass
house as the safety efficacy and performance of GM crop would vary
depending on the host environment, host crop and inserted gene.
It is also clarified that ban on GM crop field trials will be highly
detrimental and not in the national interest. Adoption of this
recommendation would bring to a halt the process of testing/
assessment of the safety of GM crops. The entire working of the
regulatory agencies, the research activities on GM crops and in turn
the need of the country to realize the potential benefit of modern
bio-technology in terms of food security would come to a virtual halt
if field trials of GM crops are stopped in the country. Stopping of GM
crop trials in the States will be a blow to Indian science as it would
push the country behind in scientific research in comparison to fast
growing economies who are developing GM crops like Brazil, China,
etc. This will have several cascading implications. The country will
fail to attract scientific talent from the younger generations in the
absence of opportunity. Over a period of time lack of expertise in a
critical area such as food security will set India backward by 30-40
years.
Indian farmers and the Indian economy as a whole will be the
biggest looser by stalling the research and development in the area of
GM technology because eventually India will be forced to import
technology by paying much higher price due to lack of its partnership
in the IPR and by losing out on the human resource development
required for being in the race of global technological development,
that is so essential for maintaining the superiority of the nation.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

90
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 1.20)
The Committee note with great appreciation the fantastic
achievements of India’s farmers and agriculture scientists leading to
an almost five times growth in food grains production in the country
during last six decades or so. From a paltry 50 million tonnes in 1950
the country has produced a record 241 million tonnes in 2010-11. In
spite of this spectacular achievement that has ensured the food security
of the nation, things continue to be bleak on several fronts. Agriculture
sector’s contribution to GDP has slid down from 50% in 1950 to a
mere 13% now, though the sector continues to provide employment
and subsistence to almost 70% of the workforce. The lot of the farmer
has worsened with increasing indebtedness, high input costs, far less
than remunerative prices for his produce, yield plateau, worsening
soil health, continued neglect of the agriculture sector and the farmer
by the Government, dependence on raingods in 60% of cultivated area,
even after six and a half decades of country’s independence, to cite a
few. All these factors and many more have aggravated the situation to
such an extent that today a most severe agrarian crisis in the history
is staring at us. The condition of the farming-community in the absence
of pro-farmer/pro-agriculture policies has become so pitiable that it
now sounds unbelievable that the slogan Jai Jawan-Jai Kisan was coined
in India.
Reply of the Government
India is the second most populous country in the world and with
the present rate of increase in population, is soon going to become the
most populous country in the world. This increase in population is
continuously pushing for enhancing foodgrain production. With limited
land and water resources, climatic changes and available technical
knowhow, every effort is being made to increase agricultural production
and farmer’s income and present level of food production in the
country is the testimony of such efforts. It is a fact that, in the process

91
there has been more pressure on land and on exploitation of available
resources. However, the interest of farmers and their well being has
always been the priority of the Government.
As is evinced from the status of increase in agricultural production,
there has also been commensurate increase in the income of the farmers.
Department of Agriculture and Co-operation through its initiatives
extending through Tenth and Eleventh Five Year Plan, has implemented
several new schemes such as National Food Security Mission (NFSM),
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY), Bringing Green Revolution to
Eastern India (BGREI), Intensive Millet Programme (INSIMP), National
Horticulture Mission. These schemes have made significant efforts to
bring new technology in agriculture thereby enhancing production and
productivity. This enhancement has directly benefited the farmers
thereby increasing their farm income. Moreover several schemes have
been conceptualized which are operated in times of calamities such as
droughts, floods, etc. There are special provisions wherein enhanced
seed subsidy is provided during drought situation, providing diesel
subsidy and also National Disaster Relief Fund wherein farmers‘ input
costs are taken care of during natural calamities. This illustrative list
of initiatives shows that Government has been continuously formulating
and implementing schemes, which aim at well being of farmers and
also aims at ameliorating their losses during natural calamities, etc. It
may not be correct to say that the country is at the threshold of
severe agrarian crisis.
Also keeping in mind the complex socio-economic situation of the
farmers the Government has been implementing several measures to
improve financial condition of the farmers. These inter-alia include
implementation of rehabilitation package covering 31 districts in Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Maharashtra. Implementation of
agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief, increasing credit flow to
agriculture, providing Kissan Credit Card to all eligible and willing
farmers, etc. Government has also been providing interest rate
subvention for timely payment of crop loans and benefit of pre-harvest
interest rate subvention available to small and marginal farmers.
In addition the announcement of Minimum Support Price (MSP)
for identified agricultural commodities every year to ensure
remunerative price and increase farmers’ income. MSP of major
agricultural commodities has been stepped up significantly e.g. during
2004-05 to 2012-13. There are also facilities for providing micro finance
service through apex institution like National Bank for Agriculture

92
and Rural Development (NABARD), Small Industries Bank of India
(SIDBI), Commercial Banks,. Regional Rural Banks, Cooperative Banks,
etc.
Hence it may not correct to say that there is an absence of pro-
farmer, pro-agriculture policies in the Government domain.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Increase in Toxic Alkaloid in Bt. Brinjal
Recommendation (Para No. 2.78)
Furthermore, Dr. Bhargava has also pointed out that the growing
failures of Bt. cotton on the front of resistance to pests it was supposed
to kill, increasing attacks of secondary pests, etc. prove that the
technology is not sustainable. The death of cattle and other livestock
in Andhra Pradesh after grazing on Bt. cotton fields, which apart from
Dr. Bhargava was also brought to the notice of the Committee by
Dr. Sagari Ramdas of Anthra and Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti of Kheti
Virasat Mission, also raise doubts about the safety of Bt. cotton as
feed. Similarly, how the regulatory mechanism has missed the 30%
increase in toxic alkaloid content in Bt. brinjal and approved it for
environmental release are all perplexing questions which need honest
answers, as all these developments could have devastating effects on
environment and human and livestock health.
Reply of the Government
The observations of Dr. Bhargava on the growing failures of
Bt. cotton due to development of insect resistance is contrary to the
field situations and appear to be based on allegations made by some
activists.
The concerns raised regarding are unfounded and misleading as
may be seen below:
• Resistance to pests it was supposed to kill:  Development
of resistance to Bt. protein, pesticide etc. in agriculture crops
is recognized as a natural phenomena requiring various

93
Insect Resist Management Strategies (IRM) to delay the
development of resistance. However, there are no reports of
development of resistance to Bt. protein anywhere in the
world so far under cultivated field conditions. All the reports
are based on laboratory experiments for understanding the
phenomena of resistance development and interpreting these
laboratory observations in the context of field situation is
not scientifically justified.
• Increasing attack of secondary pests: The main purpose of
Bt. cotton is to control bollworms. Bt. cotton effectively
controlled bollworms, especially the American Bollworm,
Helicoverpa armigera , thus preventing yield losses from an
estimated damage of 30 to 60% each year in India thus far
from 2002 to 2011. Increasing attacks of sucking pests are
because of susceptible hybrids and not related to
Bt. technology. Yields are estimated to have increased at
least by 30% due to effective protection from bollworm
damage.
A recently published high quality analysis based on long-
term data collected from India (2006-2008 periods) concludes
that Bt. cotton cultivation has caused an increase of 24% in
cotton yields per acre in form of reduced pest damage and
a 50% gain in profits. The study also documents that the
gains are stable and have also increased over time resulting
in rising of household living standard by 18% that led to
the conclusion that “Bt. cotton has created large and
sustainable benefits, which contribute to positive economic
and social development in India”. A copy of the study
published in a reputed peer reviewed journal i.e. Proceedings
of National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) is enclosed at
Annexure-IV.
• Death of cattle and livestock in Andhra Pradesh after
grazing of Bt. cotton feed: Globally there is adequate peer
reviewed scientific literature over two decades as an
evidence to state that cry proteins have not been reported
to be toxic to higher animals such as goats, sheep and cattle
in any part of the world. However, it is only in India that
such apprehensions were expressed by certain civil society
organisations and individuals regarding cattle/livestock and
sheep mortality in Andhra Pradesh due to grazing in
Bt. cotton fields. The Andhra Pradesh State Department of
Agriculture, which investigated the case at the behest of

94
GEAC had the Bt. cotton samples analyzed by four public
sector laboratories. The samples were found to contain high
levels of nitrates, nitrites, hydrogen cyanide residues and
organophosphates, which may have come from the soil,
fertilizer or pesticides used in cotton cultivation and were
the cause of animal deaths.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.8 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Thorough Probe into the Bt. Brinjal Case
Recommendation (Para No. 2.79)
The most damaging piece of evidence about the functioning of the
extant regulatory mechanism provided by Dr. P .M. Bhargava in his
testimony before the Committee is about the confession of the
Co-chairman of GEAC (Prof. Arjula Reddy) to him that the tests asked
for by Dr. Bhargava for assessing Bt. Brinjal were not carried out and
even the tests undertaken were performed badly. And that he
(Co-Chairman, GEAC) was under tremendous pressure as he was
getting calls from industry, GEAC and from the Minister to approve
Bt. Brinjal. Nothing can be more disconcerting to the Committee than
these goings on as they are not merely slippages due to oversight or
human error but indicative of collusion of worst kind. The Committee,
therefore, recommend a thorough probe into the Bt. Brinjal matter
from the beginning upto the imposing of moratorium on its
commercialization by the then Minister of Environment and Forests
(I/C) on 9 February , 2010 by a team of eminent independent scientists
and environmentalists.
Reply of the Government
This allegation of Dr. P .M Bhargava has surfaced time and again.
Ministry of Agriculture decided to get into the depth of this issue.
Accordingly, both Dr. Bhargava and Dr. Arjula Reddy were addressed
asking them to clarify specific issues. Dr. P .M Bhargava was asked to
give specific comments on the following two issues:—
(i) “in retrospect, the only conclusion is that he ‘succumbed’.
You are requested to kindly elaborate as to how this
conclusion was arrived at.”
(ii) “Knowing Monsanto’s record and our own, it can be
surmised as to how he was brought around.”

95
In response to this letter Dr. Bhargava chose not to respond himself
and asked someone else who sent a reply on the Anveshna letter
head. For query No. (i) Dr. Bhargava’s reponse as indicated to DAC
was that Oxford English Dictionary clearly gives the meaning of the
word ‘succumb’. For query No. (ii) Dr. Bhargava responded by citing
Monsanto’s record for the last half-a-century and government records
for dealing with GM crops. Dr. Bhargava mentioned that large number
of scientific papers that have been published in well known scientific
journals confirm this fact. Also Dr. Bhargava referred the Oxford
Dictionary to explain the meaning of the word “surmise”.
On the other hand Dr. Reddy gave a detailed response, in response
to the following three points raised by DAC:
(i) “The Chairman of EC-II, Dr. Arjula Reddy….was making
totally confidential call to tell me that eight of the tests that
I had said should be done on Bt. Brinjal and with which he
agreed, had not been done.”
(ii) “Even in the case of tests that have been done, many have
not been done satisfactorily and adequately.”
(iii) “He was, however, under ‘tremendous pressure’ to clear
the Bt. Brinjal and had calls from Agriculture Minister, GEAC
and industry.”
The response of Dr. Reddy is reproduced below:
(i) “As Dr. P .M. Bhargava himself claims that it was a totally
confidential call, he breached it by making it public.
Nevertheless, it was a normal conversation in which I said
that the eight tests suggested by him were not done as
those are not actually in the approved protocols by GEAC.
It does not certainly mean that I have agreed for these
tests. My intention of talking to him was to appraise him
about the scientific aspects of several questions he usually
raises at the GEAC meetings and it was in the back of my
mind that he is going to raise these questions at the GEAC
meeting any way. The GEAC discussions earlier also entered
on the view that these tests are not expected to contribute
significantly.
(ii) This statement is out of context. I said that I am seriously
going through the draft report to see whether the tests data
and interpretations were done properly. I said that some
data were badly interpreted in draft text (sentences were

96
rather awkward) which were corrected later and that took
time. I also said that I am also seeking clarifications on
certain tests from the concerned Government laboratories
such as NIN, Hyderabad.
(iii) I said I was under pressure as I was to meet the deadline
of the forthcoming GEAC meeting and I already took a lot
of time because of my pre-occupation with my official duties
as the Vice Chancellor of a new University. There were no
specific calls from Agricultural Minister nor from the
industry for approval of Bt. Brinjal. Only calls were from
the GEAC office to expedite the report as I was taking
quite a long time in going through it.
It is unfortunate that he did not understand my intention
of calling him and also did not take it in the right scientific
perspective. In any event, I do not wish to dwell further on
this matter.”
As can we see the above two responses received from Dr. Bhargava
and Dr. Reddy, it is clear that the statement of Dr. Bhargava cannot be
relied upon as it has been refuted by Dr. Reddy, the person who he
has been quoting, often out of context.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.11 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Change in the Role of GEAC
Recommendation (Para No. 2.81)
These contradictory stances are not restricted to the renaming issue
only, but permeate in several other aspects. To say the least, the
demarcation of roles and responsibilities between MoEF and GEAC
seems to be hazy. While Rules 1989 are very clear and unambiguous
about the authority of according approval for environmental and
commercial release vesting with GEAC, the information submitted to
the Committee by MoEF and GEAC from time to time, for and in
connection with the examination of the subject, conveyed an intent to
obfuscate the matter. At some places the authority of GEAC to accord
approvals was truly reflected, at others it was couched as
‘recommendation of GEAC to accord approval’ and at still others it

97
was stated that GEAC accorded approval for environmental release
and had no role in commercialization of GM crops. The Committee,
therefore, strongly feel that this uncertainty is not in the interest of the
regulatory mechanism in place for such a sensitive matter. They,
therefore, recommend the Government to come up with a detailed
statement clarifying on all aspects of the matter so as to put the
ongoing controversies to rest.
Reply of the Government
As per Rules 1989, under the EPA, 1986, regulatory powers for
environmental release of GMOs rest only with the GEAC. It is further
clarified that the commercial use of technology is subject to the laws,
regulations and policies of line Ministries in the Central Government
and State Governments, who are responsible for deployment of modern
technologies in agriculture, healthcare, process industry, environment
protection etc. suitable to societal and local needs.
Concurrent to the Parliamentary Committee deliberations, the
Scientific Advisory Council to the Prime Minister (SAC-PM) has been
discussing the matters related to biotechnology and agriculture and
has recommended that
“RCGM and GEAC should be the sole authority for bio-safety and
bio-efficacy assessment of all recombinant products. Decision on
commercial use of biotechnology produced crops should be taken
by the Agriculture Ministries/Department of Central and State
Governments as per existing policies and regulations on crops. For
medical products, Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(CDSCO) of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government
of India would approve commercialization as of now.”
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.14 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Organizational Setup of GEAC
Recommendation (Para No. 2.83)
While on the aspect of organizational structure, the Committee
also feel it their duty to point out to the composition of GEAC. It is
chaired by civil servant who also doubles up as Additional Secretary

98
in the MoEF. The Vice-Chairman is also a civil servant, who is
concurrently a Joint Secretary in MoEF. The Co-Chairman of GEAC,
a nominee of DBT, is a biotechnologist, whose primary vocation is
Vice-Chancellorship of a University in Andhra Pradesh. What directional
support and policy guidance would be forthcoming from these top
functionaries to GEAC is a moot point. The Committee shudder to
think that ensuring environmental safety, health safety, food and feed
safety of the entire country from induction of GMOs has been left at
the mercy of such a disparate setup for these many years without an
eye being raised. They, therefore, recommend that while reviewing the
organizational setup of GEAC the Government should also keep this
aspect in mind.
Reply of the Government
The composition of GEAC has been prescribed in Rules, 1989
notified under EPA, 1986.
The GEAC consists of both scientific experts as well as
inter-ministerial representatives. Further expert committees or
Sub-Committees are constituted on a case by case basis providing the
necessary support. The decision making process provides adequate
opportunity to each member to express and record their views, if any.
Besides, scientific evidence and data available on each case is also a
key factor in decision making.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.17 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Formulation of a Policy regarding Marker Gene Technology
Recommendation (Para No. 2.84)
The Committee note that FAO/WHO expert panel, IAASTD report
and several other studies have recommended the use of anti-biotic
resistant marker free genes technology while creating GMOs. According
to such studies though the possibility of such a transfer is low but
any transfer of such genes from GM crops/commodities to cells of the
body or to bacteria in the gastro-intestinal tract would be of concern.
In our context, while GEAC has stuck to the argument that such

99
possibilities are remote, most of the other ministries/departments whose
views were sought by the Committee have shown a marked inclination
for technologies without antibiotic resistant marker genes. Most of the
independent scientists and other witnesses appearing before the
Committee have also expressed their concern on use of ant-biotic
resistant marker gene in developing GMOs.
Reply of the Government
There is ample scientific evidence that there is no significant, real
world hazard associated with the markers that are commonly used.
Hundreds of regulatory decisions have considered antibiotic resistance
marker genes and they have found the use of antibiotic resistance
marker genes is safe for human and animal health. Regulatory decisions
for plants containing one antibiotic resistance marker (nptII) have been
issued in 15 countries including at least one from every continent.
Decisions have been made for 12 species of plants representing more
than 30 separate transformation events (source- www.ogtr.gov.au/). This
includes more than 200 food or feed safety decisions and
80 environmental safety decisions (for nptII). These all have agreed
that the potential for harm from HGT of antibiotic resistance markers
from these GE plants is negligible. Likewise, food and feed safety
decisions have determined that the consumption of expressed proteins
from antibiotic resistance markers does not present any risk to human
or animal health and safety.
In fact several international agencies such as International Food
Biotechnology Council, FAO/WHO, USFDA, EFSA, etc. have
deliberated on the issue and given statements with regard to safe use
of antibiotic resistance markers. For example, in 1996 joint consultation
by FAO and WHO stated that there is no recorded evidence for the
transfer of genes from plants to micro-organisms in the gut and that
there are no authenticated reports of such bacterial transformation in
the environment of the human gastrointestinal tract.
In 2009 European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) requested the Panel
on Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO) and the Panel on Biological
Hazards (BIOHAZ) to deliver a joint scientific opinion on the use of
antibiotic resistance genes as marker genes in Genetically Modified
(GM) plants. From all the evidence gathered, the two Panels came to
the conclusion that “The current state of knowledge indicates that
adverse effects on human health and the environment resulting from
the transfer of these two antibiotic resistance genes [aph(3’)-IIa (nptII)
and ant(3”)-Ia (aadA)] from GM plants to bacteria, associated with use
of GM plants, are unlikely”.

100
Regarding the development of marker free transgenic plants, it
may be noted that technology for marker free GM crops is available
only for few traits and may not be feasible for all GM crops/traits.
In the global context, there is no ban on GM crops containing
Antibiotic Resistance Marker (ARM) even in countries like EU.
Recognising new technologies available at proof of concept stage,
the phasing out of ARM in GM crops has been considered by various
countries as a future option. The GEAC decision dated December 8,
2011 is also on similar lines.
RCGM had also deliberated on this issue taking into consideration
the scientific reports and international guidance. RCGM opined that
use of markers for antibiotic resistance is not an issue, since transfer
of these genes from transgenic crops to bacteria living in the gut of
humans and livestock is an extremely rare event under natural
conditions and that antibiotic resistance genes are already found in
some bacteria. Furthermore, none of the transgenic crops released for
cultivation in the past is marker-free, and no case of any transfer of
marker gene or its toxic effect has ever been reported during the last
15 years of commercialization of crops.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.24 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Formulation of a Policy regarding Marker Gene Technology
Recommendation (Para No. 2.85)
Inspite of some of the stakeholders emphasising about the remote
possibility of the antibiotic resistant marker gene transferring from
GM crop or commodity to cells of body or to bacteria in gut, an
overwhelming majority of stakeholders who appeared before the
Committee are in favour of use of antibiotic marker resistant gene free
technology. GEAC has, however, taken the stand that since technology
for generating marker free technology is available it is a matter of
policy whether to allow GM crops with antibiotic resistance markers.
Side by side GEAC has also informed the Committee that it had taken
note of this matter in its meeting held on 8 December, 2010 and had

101
found that any decision to disallow release of GM crops with antibiotic
resistant genes would make almost all transgenic plants that are under
consideration of GEAC/RCGM ineligible for release. GEAC has further
given its mind on this crucial matter by stating that technological
interventions and improvements are ongoing process and would be
made available for newer products.
Reply of the Government
The perception of stakeholders on possibility of transfer of ARM
genes from GM crops to other organisms has no scientific evidence as
explained in detail above.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.24 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Formulation of a Policy regarding Marker Gene Technology
Recommendation (Para No. 2.86)
The Committee cannot but express their extreme displeasure at
this mindset of a regulatory agency which is mandated with ensuring
safety of environment, human health, food and feed of the country.
The above-cited response of GEAC betrays a complete lack of concern
towards its role and responsibility. Rather it conveys in unequivocal
terms its strong inclination towards the benefit of industry. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to not leave such a
crucial decision in the hands of GEAC but come up with a clear-cut
policy in this regard without any further loss of time.
Reply of the Government
The statement in the GEAC minutes quoted in the report in
Para 2.85 that “any decision to disallow release of GM crops with
antibiotic resistant genes would make almost all transgenic plants that
are under consideration of GEAC/RCGM ineligible for release”, is not
directed for the products in pipeline of companies alone as many
public sector institutions are also having GM crops with antibiotic
markers in advanced stages of regulatory pathway. The use of antibiotic
marker gene has been the first generation technology with history of

102
safe use as described above and therefore, even the public sector
institutions employ these markers for development of GM crop varieties
addressing problems of Indian agriculture.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.24 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 3.40)
The Committee have been informed that Norway has a very
comprehensive law for regulation of GMOs and products thereof. The
primary focus of the Act No. 38 of 2 April, 1993 relating to the
production and use of Genetically Modified Organisms is biosafety,
ethics and sustainable development without any adverse effects on the
health and the environment. It also has separate provisions for impact
assessment; making public methods and plans for monitoring and
emergency response and also assessment of forseable effects; public
consultation; compensation; coercive fines; penal measures; etc.
Reply of the Government
While the Norwegian Act may accurately be called
“comprehensive”, it is not a functional legislation for assessing the
safety of LMOs. Rather, it is a de facto ban on the use of the technology.
As such, the government of Norway has arguably the least experience
of any developed country with the development and use of agricultural
biotechnology. A search of the Biosafety Clearing House (the primary
information sharing centre for Parties to the Cartagena Protocol) reveals
that Norway has issued 0 (zero) decisions under the AIA clause of the
Protocol, posted 0 (zero) risk assessments, and made 0 (zero) decisions
under article 11 (imports of LMOs for food and feed). In fact, the only
decision Norway has made available at the Biosafety Clearing House
is a justification document for a ban on the import of a LMO maize
for food and feed which dates back to 2000 (prior to entry into force
of the Protocol). Norway currently has no on-going field trials of LMOs
for research or product development purposes.
Norway has no interest in the development and use of agricultural
biotechnology, and hence has pursued a policy of avoidance. Norway
is one of the wealthiest countries in the world, primarily due to oil

103
and gas exports, while agriculture makes up only 2% of GDP
(http://www.nationsencyclopedia.com/economies/Europe/Norway-
AGRICULTURE.html). These policies are supported by Norway’s small
population of fewer than 5 million people.
The Parliamentary Committee’s decision to highlight Norway as a
model for Indian regulation of LMOs cannot be justified either by any
demonstrated competence on the part of the Norwegian system for
regulating LMOs (as Norway has essentially no experience in
implementing their regulation), or by the close alignment of Norway’s
agricultural policies with respect to those of India. In fact, it would be
difficult to identify any country in the world that was less aligned
with the agricultural needs and interests of the people of India. The
fact that the PC has chosen to highlight the policies of a single country
with no expertise in LMO risk assessment or regulation, rather than
the many other countries with robust and effective biosafety systems
that have actually issued decisions, is not acceptable to say the least.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 3.41)
In Argentina transgenic plants and genetically engineered food
products are regulated with the help of a GMOs specific law and
pre- existing laws covering seeds and veterinary products. Furthermore,
the regulation concerning the environmental release of GMOs which
have been developed by the National Advisory Committee on
Agricultural Biosafety, are based in the form of non-legislative resolution
that are integrated in the overall regulatory system and there is no
specific law to make the resolutions legally binding.
Reply of the Government
Argentina does not have a GMO specific law. The regulatory
requirements for GMOs are found in guidelines in the form of
non-legislative resolutions that are integrated into the overall regulatory
system that governs the release of products in the agricultural sector.

104
Although the system is not considered as voluntary, there is no specific
law that makes the resolutions legally binding. Under this framework,
specific guidelines have been developed to establish conditions under
which environmental releases of transgenic materials may be conducted.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 3.42)
South Africa has in the form of Genetically Modified Organism
Act a legal instrument specifically to regulate GMOs. The Act which
came in force in 1999 created an executive council, a scientific advisory
committee and an inspectorate for implementation of its provisions.
Apart from this Act, South Africa has Foodstuff Mechanism and
Disinfectants Act, 1972 to regulate the safety of all foods including
foods derived from biotechnology.
Reply of the Government
Statement of facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Conflict of Interest of Agencies involved in Existing Regulating
Mechanism
Recommendation (Para No. 3.46)
RDAC, which is an advisory committee incidentally also functions
under the administrative control of the Department of Biotechnology .
Coming to GEAC, as the Committee have also mentioned in the
previous Chapter, it is headed by a civil servant who is also functioning

105
in another capacity in the Ministry of Environment and Forests, the
controlling authority of GEAC. The Co-Chairman of GEAC is a
biotechnologist who though purportedly from outside, is nominated
by DBT, the promoter Department. The Vice-Chairman is again a civil
servant, simultaneously discharging a few more responsibilities in
another role in the Ministry of Environment and Forests. By its very
composition, the Committee does not have regular existence and meets
monthly, only when some decisions are to be taken. It is also a sad
reality that modern biotechnology being a nascent discipline in the
Country, we have a serious dearth of scientists of eminence in sufficient
numbers, therefore, more or less the same set of people sit on both
the sides  i.e. to develop technologies and products as also to assess,
evaluate and approve them.
Reply of the Government
RDAC was set up by DBT in the early years to assist in framing
of initial set of guidelines for biotechnology research. Due to diverse
and specialized needs of various sectors, subsequently, various other
mechanisms such as setting up of task forces, expert committees etc.
have been used by various ministries to seek advise with respect to
issues on GMOs in agriculture and healthcare.
Further, it is already mentioned in Para 2.82 that Biosafety
assessment of GM crops is a multidisciplinary and scientific endeavour
and so requires multiple kind of expertise. The important scientific
subjects include molecular biology, agronomy, breeding, plant pathology,
biochemistry, toxicology, etc. In the current, regulatory framework the
safety assessment is carried out by statutory Committees at three levels;
Institutional Biosafety Committees (IBSCs) at the institution level and
the Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) and
Genetically Engineered Appraisal Committee (GEAC) at the national
level. Each application is examined critically by about 60 experts
covering all the above disciplines, most of whom are external experts
from public sector institutions and universities.
It may also be noted that Global Biotechnology Industry in
Agriculture, Healthcare and Industrial applications is about US$ 100
billion and Indian Biotech industry recorded a revenue of around
US$ 5 billion in 2012 with average growth rate of 21% per year. About
US$ 1 billion worth biotech pharmaceuticals are exported from India
after regulatory and safety clearances from Indian regulatory system
which includes RCGM and DCGI. Therefore, questioning the credibility
and expertise available in the country on issues of safety assessment
is not appropriate.

106
DBT and DST along with CSIR, ICAR and ICMR have invested
heavily in human resource development and sufficient expertise is
available in the country to take care of the regulatory functions. In
addition, DBT and MoEF has organized series of training programmes
and capacity building activities to create expertise in the safety
assessment of GM crops.
About 600 universities, institutions and private sector laboratories
with an estimated 3000 scientific and technical people are engaged in
R&D and regulatory testing including research field trials. About 120
public sector universities/institutions and 320 private sector colleges
and universities are engaged in biotechnology education.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.30 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 3.48)
In their tearing hurry to open the economy to private prospectors,
the Government should not make the same fate befall on the agriculture
sector as has happened to the communications, pharma, mineral wealth
and several other sectors in which the Government’s facilitative
benevolence preceded setting up of sufficient checks and balances and
regulatory mechanisms, thereby, leading to colossal, unfettered loot
and plunder of national wealth in some form or the other, incalculable
damage to environment, bio-diversity, flora and fauna and unimaginable
suffering to the common man.
Reply of the Government
Adopting pro-industry, pro-rich and against the nature, policies, in
the agriculture sector may adversely affect the sustainability of farming
is just a presumption. Indian farmers have adopted all the agricultural
technologies which he found beneficial and profitable to him. Therefore,
we should not deprive them from the benefits from biotechnology.
We should aspire to make Indian Agriculture Competitive.
We can’t simply lament and not adopt technologies only because
they are produced by private sector for profit.

107
Further, as mentioned in the response to Para 3.47 Government
departments have made large investments to develop public sector
laboratories for development of technologies relevant to Indian needs
and several products are in advanced stages of the regulatory pipeline.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 5.46)
A significant finding made in the Report is about modern
technology creating both costs and benefits, depending upon the
manner in which it has been incorporated into societies and eco-systems
and whether there is the will to share benefits as well as costs because
sometimes benefits are at the expense of reducing biodiversity or access
to traditional foods. The Report has also found that neither costs nor
benefits are currently perceived to be equally shared, with the poor
tending to receive more of the costs than the benefits. Extensive
interactions of the Committee during their above mentioned Study
Visit to Vidharbha proved that this observation of experts in IAASTD
Report has a sound basis. Due to initial increase in production as a
consequence of reduction in yield loss, the simple farmers of the area
went in a big way for cultivation of Bt. cotton. However, because of
very high input costs, yield loss due to development of resistance in
the targeted pests, the local agrarian economy has been totally shattered
within a few years with great losses, mostly to the small and marginal
farmers. There have been 7992 farmers suicides in the region during
2006 to 2011. In several of them, caused due to agrarian reasons, the
indebtedness and a multitude of other problems caused by sowing of
Bt. cotton have been a contributory factor. Furthermore, due to the
craze for cultivating Bt. cotton because of its perceived advantages,
the traditional local cotton varieties have been almost wiped out. Seeds
of traditional varieties are available even to farmers desperate to return
to their old agricultural practices. The Committee during their Study
Visit to Vidharbha have seen with their own eyes that while the seed
companies have benefited from the transgenic Bt. cotton, the poor and
hapless farmers have received more of the costs than the benefits. The
situation is grim today inspite of the massive loan-waiver scheme of
the Government in 2009 and several other financial packages for the
indebted farmers.

108
Reply of the Government
Information asymmetry is omnipresent in the system. It is true for
all new patents filed, research costs have to be recovered as also the
exploitation of segmented market. It has nothing to do with GM crops
in particular. Cost benefit when examined for a widely accepted
technology will always be exhibiting beneficial; else the technology
could not have been adopted or will not be adopted by the masses.
The case of wide adoption of Bt. cotton is an example. Numerous
studies have concluded that there have been no relation between
adoption of Bt. cotton cultivation and suicide of the farmers. Implicating
the GM technology for all that happens in farming communities on
the ground is biased and a strategy designed by trade related lobbies
and vested interests to discourage India becoming a technology lead
in the world.
The success story of transgenic (Bt. cotton) cotton in India is
spectacular. Inputs received from States show that farmers’ suicide are
attributed to a host of reasons which inter alia , include, indebtness,
crop failure, drought, socio-economic and personal reasons. Numerous
measures that have been taken by Government of India to prevent
suicide by farmers, improve financial condition to overcome indebtness
include implementation of Rehabilitation Package of 31 districts of
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Maharashtra, implementation
of Agricultural Debt Wiaver and Debt Relief Scheme, increasing credit
flow to agricultural sector, providing Kissan Credit Cards, providing
interest rate subvention for timely payment on crop loans. In addition
yearly announcement of Minimum Support Prices (MSP) and providing
Microfinance through apex institutions, are some of the steps taken by
the government to help the farmers of the country.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 5.49)
The Report also States that since in private sector commercial
drivers determine supply, therefore, the public sector engagement in
biotechnology should be increasingly emphasised upon for R&D
capacities or achieving some goals for which there is no market.

109
Reply of the Government
Noted. As stated earlier, Government of India has already initiated
several projects in public sector research institutions under the aegis
of ICAR and DBT. Public Private Partnership schemes are also being
implemented to increase R&D capabilities to ensure that products and
processes are developed for the benefit of large section of society with
access and affordability.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Post Marketing Surveillance
Recommendation (Para No. 5.50)
The IAASTD Report, has therefore, very rightly concluded about
the need for a systematic direction of AKST including a rigourous
rethinking of biotechnology and specially modern biotechnology in
the decades to come, effective long term environmental and health
monitoring and surveillance programmes and training and education
of farmers to identify emerging and comparative impacts on the
environment and human health and to take timely counter measures.
According to IAASTD Report no regional long term environmental
and health monitoring programmes exist to date in the countries who
are most concentrated with GM foods. Hence long term data on
environmental implications of GM crop production are at best deductive
or simply missing and speculative.
Reply of the Government
The area under GM crops has been increasing exponentially since
these were first commercialized in 1996, with more and more countries
adopting the modern biotechnology. The global area under GM crops
in 2011 has reached to 160 million hectares in 29 countries, thus
indicating their acceptance globally. No product has ever been
withdrawn by regulatory authorities in any country.
As clarified in earlier paras the IAASTD report has underestimated
the potential of new technologies relative to existing technologies. Hence
rigorous rethinking of biotechnology and specially modern
biotechnology as suggested to by the committee seems out of place.
GoI is committed to continuously learn and evolve its regulatory

110
procedures based on its home grown experience and scientific data
generated worldwide. In addition, GoI in accordance with its accepted
policies is open to exploring all options that leads it towards food
security, well being of farmers and making agriculture an economically
viable proposition.
Regarding the issue of long term environmental and health
monitoring programmes, it is clarified that the safety assessment of a
GM crop encompasses two components viz. food and feed safety and
environmental safety. Regulatory authorities undertake a detailed
pre-release assessment on both aspects before permitting their
commercial cultivation. Regarding food and feed safety, the post release
marketing of GM foods or any food in terms of safety aspects is not
scientifically feasible. While post approval monitoring in case of drugs
or any single chemicals produces useful sentinel data on drug safety
and adverse effects, in such cases, people who provide a detailed
history are taking a highly defined substance where there is already
an idea of the types of adverse health effects that may be found. In
contrast, any post-market monitoring of GM foods would be of a
population consuming different amounts at different times and in
different ways amongst all other food intake, and with no particular
health outcome in mind. The health effects observed may be vague,
and may not be attributed to a particular cause. These factors make
it unlikely that an adverse health effect due to any food or GM food
could be detected above all the other health effects in the general
population. In the light of above, regulatory authorities across the world
focus on safety assessment before the food is placed on the market
and the same is also reflected in the consensus documents by FAO,
WHO, Codex, OECD etc.
The need for post-release environmental monitoring is determined
on a case-by-case basis, taking into account familiarity with the plant
species and trait. Bt. cotton, with a history of safe use has been
subjected to post release monitoring by Central Institute of Cotton
Research with respect to monitoring of development of insect resistance
in the target insect population.
Regarding the general surveillance of GE crops, while countries
like USA, Canada and Australia have no specific requirements, an
attempt was made by Brazil to enforce a general monitoring, in case
of herbicide tolerant soybean, but even after four years of detailed
field studies no harm was observed, as expected. In the light of this
experience, Brazil has already modified its guidance and done away
with the complex requirements.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

111
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.39 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 5.52)
The Committee would like to remind the Government of India
that they are a signatory to this path breaking effort and in the opinion
of the Committee, the Government would do well if they adopt this
Report as the way forward for development of agriculture and allied
sectors in India, in a sustainable and environmental friendly manner,
and with no unwanted risks to biodiversity, human and livestock
health, flora and fauna. The Committee also desire to be apprised of
the concrete action taken by the Government on each of the findings
contained in IAASTD Report during the four years after the release of
the Report.
Reply of the Government
In fact due to controversies surrounding this report, it is not
advisable to depend on or to follow it exclusively. Subsequent to this
report several international agencies including FAO and World Bank
have recommended the use of biotechnology in agriculture as
elaborated in Section 1.23.
Government of India is guided by its own national policies framed
after extensive consultative process such as National Seeds Policy and
National Policy for Farmers, which are in conformity with the Indian
agricultural conditions addressing the requirements of the farming
community while ensuring food security for the nation. As already
indicated in the Parliamentary Committee report, several of its
recommendations are already part of policy initiatives and hence
adopting the report is not required.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.

112
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 5.53)
The Committee also examined the report of the Six Science
Academies on Bt. brinjal. This report had been prepared on the
instructions of the then Minister of Environment and Forests (I/C) in
order to assess the environmental and bio-safety aspects of Bt. brinjal.
The report got mired in controversies at the outset itself as allegations
of plagiarism were leveled about some of its content. A revised report
had to be, thereafter, brought out. The report has given an emphatic
clearance for commercial release of Bt. brinjal on the basis of ‘the
overwhelming view (amongst members of academies) that the available
evidence has shown, adequately and beyond reasonable doubt that Bt.
brinjal is safe for human consumption and that its environmental effects
are negligible‘. While doing so, inexplicably the six academies relied
upon available data which had become suspect in view of other
scientific reports prepared on the Subject. Doubts had already been
expressed about the environmental risk assessment performed in respect
of Bt. brinjal, it was also being pointed out that chronic toxicity tests
had not been performed. Moreover, all the recommended tests and
protocols had also not been followed. Several stakeholders were of the
opinion that Bt. brinjal being the first GM Food crop in the country
ought to have been put through a far more vigourous assessment and
evaluation regime by the regulatory authorities in view of the human
health dimensions as also the fact that India is the centre of origin of
brinjal. Due to very strong opposition to the commercial release of Bt.
brinjal the then Minister of Environment and Forests (I/C) had seven
consultations across the Country with stakeholders from all walks of
life and after careful evaluation a moratorium on Bt. brinjal was placed.
The Committee find that inspite of these developments DARE/ICAR
have fully endorsed the report of six science academies. That too when
two of their own events for cotton viz. BN Bt. and Bt. NHH44 which
were generated through their own inhouse efforts and assessed in
their own network of institutions, have been embroiled in controversies.
As referred to in previously in this Report, ICAR is now setting a
Committee of outside experts to investigate the entire matter pertaining
to BN Bt. and Bt. NHH44. DBT and DST have also inexplicably come
in support of the report of six science academies ignoring several
glaring lapses pointed out by various stakeholders in the evaluation
and assessment of Bt. brinjal. The Department of Health Research
without being overtly critical of the report have clearly advised the
need for chronic toxicity and other associated tests, independently after
exposure for sufficient period. The Department of AYUSH who, inspite

113
of their huge stake in the Subject, had been kept out of loop by
GEAC as mentioned previously in this Report, have also brought to
the notice of the Committee the need for several further studies in the
matter as brinjal is used in several medicinal preparations under the
Indian System of Medicine. They have also emphasized the need for
having these studies being undertaken in Public Sector Scientific
Institutions to avoidany conflict of interest.
Reply of the Government
MoA and ICAR along with DBT and DST fully endorse the
recommendations of Inter-Academy Report on GM Crop especially with
reference to Bt. brinjal. Bt. crops have an exemplary record of safety
as evidenced by the extensive body of literature of studies undertaken
by academic and government research organizations, and by the
accumulated experience gained globally in the many countries where
these are grown and consumed since these crops were first cultivated
over 15 years ago.
The issues raised regarding plagiarism, non citation of references
etc. were raised by specific groups with an intention to divert attention
and in no way related to safety of Bt. brinjal. All such issues were
subsequently resolved. The findings of the committee were sound and
cannot be disputed.
The post moratorium review of Bt. brinjal so far by the experts
has also confirmed the findings of Academies’ report.
The observations of AYUSH with respect to safety assessment
process have been very general e.g. it has been indicated that Bt. brinjal
could lead to cross pollination with wild relatives. It has been
established through extensive literature search as well as crossability
experiments conducted by Indian Institute of Vegetable Research,
Varanasi that such concerns are not valid. Regarding other concerns,
it is clarified that the ICMR guidelines based on Codex Alimantarius
take into account unintended effects through suggested test protocols.
The controversy regarding BN Bt. does not in any way impact the
findings contained in the Academies report as those are not safety
issues. The BN Bt. issue is under examination with ICAR.
Regarding the involvement of AYUSH in GEAC, it is clarified that
the composition of GEAC is as per statutory requirements of Rules,
1989. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (of which AYUSH is a
part) is represented in GEAC.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

114
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Merits and Demerits of GM Crops
Recommendation (Para No. 5.56)
The Committee would also like to say a word about the
examination of the various reports on the merits and demerits of
GM crops by GEAC in consultation with eminent experts and scientists.
GEAC had approved the commercial release of Bt. brinjal on the basis
of its own assessments as the apex regulatory body for the purpose in
the country. The same agency is now sitting on the judgment of its
own decision and also of the various reports on the merits and demerits
of GM crops in general and Bt. brinjal in particular. In the opinion of
the Committee, it is a clear case of conflict of interest. They, therefore,
recommend that evaluation of the various reports on this matter should
be done by some other agency such as CSIR, since they not only have
sufficient expertise in this regard but also have minimum conflict of
interest in the matter amongst the various public sector scientific
institutions. The Committee also feel that the examination of various
reports has to be expedited and results conveyed to the them at the
earliest so that a final view in the matter is facilitated without any
further delay.
Reply of the Government
In this regard, it may be noted that the GEAC is a statutory body
under Rule 1989 for according approval for environmental release of
GMOs. The GEAC is well represented by CSIR. DG, CSIR is a statutory
member of the GEAC as also its nominee.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.45 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Evaluation of Environmental Risks
Recommendation (Para No. 5.57)
The Committee note that the report of Prof. David A. Andow on
Bt. brinjal is a scientific evaluation of the scope and adequacy of
environmental risk assessment of transgenic EE-1 Bt. brinjal. This report

115
had been cited before the Committee by several stakeholders who are
against transgenics in crops. The report has criticized GEAC for setting
too narrow a scope for environmental risk assessment of Bt. brinjal
due to which the assessment of Bt. brinjal by Expert Committee-II was
not adequate. Amongst the possible environmental risks that have not
been adequately evaluated include risks to local varieties and wild
relatives, risk to biological diversity and risk of resistance evolution in
brinjal fruit and shoot borer.
Reply of the Government
Information generated on GM crops from discovery to market
involves three important aspects  i.e. biosafety assessment on scientific
basis, bioefficacy of targeted genetic intervention and other technology
transcending issues such as farming conditions, socio-economic analysis
etc. The reports referred to by the petitioners quote large mix of all
these issues lacking clarity and with theoretical and non-pragmatic
approach. The Committee‘s report itself states that several stakeholders
who are against transgenic crops have cited this report. The
environmental safety assessment by GEAC is in line with international
approaches and Indian regulatory requirements. The risks mentioned
by the committee have been adequately covered in EC-II report.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.48 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Evaluation of Environmental Risks
Recommendation (Para No. 5.58)
The Committee also note the views of various ministries and
departments on this report. Most of them have expressed their
disagreement with the observations made in the report regarding the
shortcomings in the parameters set out by GEAC for the Experts
Committee-II to conduct environmental risk assessment of Bt. brinjal.
Some of them have even gone to the extent of justifying their views
on the report on the ground that ‘if simple, reproducible, cost effective
and interpretable scientific processes and procedures are able to assess
and predict possible risks it is time consuming and expensive to use
concepts and tools which are not validated and have no rational for

116
the purpose’. It has also been put forth before the Committee that ‘it
is true that regulation should flow from an ideal standpoint and may
have to consider application of every known scientific concept, tool
and technique for assuring that new genetic modifications in crops are
safe as enshrined in the said report. However, decision support systems
should also be careful to take into account that the suggested tools
and concepts are pragmatic and is sure to lead to interpretable and
unambiguous conclusions’.
Reply of the Government
Indian regulatory authorities regularly review available scientific
information as well as approaches followed internationally to ensure
that the decision making framework are in accordance with global
best practices incorporating key findings of scientific research from
above databases.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.48 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Expeditious Evaluation of Reports
Recommendation (Para No. 5.59)
In the opinion of the Committee the above justifications betrays
hint of a cavalier attitude towards this highly sensitive issue. Bt. brinjal,
unlike Bt. cotton is a food crop and it would have been the first such
endeavour in India of a technology on whose safety and sustainability
the last word is yet to be heard. Moreso, the contents of the report are
still under examination as post moratorium follow-up. In the considered
opinion of the Committee since the matter pertains to as a vital issue
as human health safety any amount of time and money spent on any
number of studies and analysis to evaluate the product is perfectly
justified. And taking refuge behind global best practices and
internationally laid down norms would not at all suffice. The
Government also ought not forget the admission of one of the witness
before the Committee that his having put one gene into a rice plant
is affecting 600 other genes as well. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should come out of this stereotyped
mindset and for the reason enumerated previously in this Chapter get

117
all these reports evaluated and examined by any agency other than
GEAC like CSIR, etc., strictly in national interest on the basis of sheer
scientific merits.
Reply of the Government
Regulatory guidance and evaluations are the result of a long period
of consultations and consensus building based on participation of large
number of subject specific experts and other stakeholders at both
national and international level. Published literature from peer reviewed
journals is taken into account while deliberating on various issues.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.51 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 6.144)
In view of the Committee, Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation has not discharged its mandated responsibility in a
professional manner, in so far as, the introduction of transgenic
agricultural crops in India as a policy matter is concerned. At that
point of time it was a technology that was being applied in hardly a
few countries whose agricultural practices, farmers profile, populations
dependence on agriculture and allied sectors was totally different from
the situation obtaining in India. Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation failed to appreciate the fact that India has 70% population
surviving on agriculture and allied activities against 2% or so farming
community in USA, Canada, etc. It also failed to appreciate the huge
difference in size of land holdings in India where 70% of farmers are
small and marginal ones with average land holding of about 1.25 acre
against hundreds of hectares of land owned by individual farmers in
USA. The huge differences in farmers’ incomes, levels of mechanization,
availability of irrigation facilities, etc. were also not properly analysed.
The ineffectiveness of PPV & FRA Authority and National Biodiversity
Authority which are virtually non-existence even now was also ignored.
Reply of the Government
DAC is fully aware of its responsibilities and does not promote
any technology, which adversely affects the farmers and environment.
Guided by NPF, DAC takes up technology or related initiatives that

118
have potential to improve the well being of farmers as well as enhance
agricultural production in the country. The fact that farmers have
enthusiastically adopted Bt. cotton cultivation is a testimony to this
fact.
Making agriculture a sustainable and economically viable activity
for farmers has been Ministry of Agriculture’s concern. Fact that a
large population depends on agriculture makes it important that we
adopt modern biotechnology, which is both, inclusive and safe.
As regards the Committees observation on the PPV & FRA and
NBA, the following information is provided for clarification.
Considering the national requirements and the obligations under
international agreements, Government of India enacted the Protection
of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights (PPV & FR) Act in 2001. It
provides an effective legal system of protection of plant varieties and
rights of farmers, communities, plant breeders and researchers. The
Act is the first of its kind in granting intellectual property rights not
only to plant breeders but also to the farmers by protecting new,
extant and farmers’ varieties. For implementing the various provisions
of the Act, the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights
Authority was established in November 2005.
The establishment of Authority and notification of PPV & FR Rules
2003, PPV & FR Regulations 2006 & 2009, Tribunal Rules 2010, PPV &
FR (Recognition and Reward from the Gene Fund) Rules, 2012,
Amendments to the PPV & FR Rules, 2003 and various other gazette
notifications have enabled the Authority to implement the various
provisions envisioned under the Act. They have made significant
achievements such as:—
Registration of plant varieties was started by the Authority with
twelve crop species in 2007, which in due course has been extended
to 57 crop species. 4070 applications have been received for registration
of different varieties under various categories and 502 certificates of
registration have been issued.
The Authority maintains its website in English and Hindi
(http://www.plantauthority.gov.in). Provision for online filing of
application for registration and Authority portal has also been initiated.
Regarding NBA, it is submitted, India was one of the first few
countries to have enacted a legislation in 2002, the Biological Diversity
Act, to give effect to the provisions of the CBD. India has also recently
ratified the Nagoya Protocol on ABS.

119
The National Biodiversity Authority (NBA), 2003 was set up to
implement the Biological Diversity Act 2002 (BD Act) and Biological
Diversity Rules, 2004. The BD Act provides a legal mechanism for
establishing sovereign rights over the Indian biodiversity and its
conservation, protection against misappropriation, regulation of access
and sustainable use of biodiversity and associated knowledge. The Act
is implemented engaging decentralized regulation of activities through
Biodiversity Management Committees (BMCs), State Biodiversity Boards
(SBBs) and the NBA, each with well-defined functions. Accordingly, it
is being operated at national, State and local levels, as a three-tier
system. Besides NBA, 26 SBBs have been established and 32,796 BMCs
have been formed as on December, 2011.
Hence, it is clarified that both the authorities i.e. PPV & FRA and
NBA have made commendable progress considering the challenges that
emerge in a country as large and diverse as India. The comments of
the Standing Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture about PPV &
FRA and NBA appear not to be based on the above facts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 6.145)
Another aspect on which Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation failed miserably was the cost of seed and other inputs
that the introduction of transgenics in agricultural craps would entail.
The cost benefit analysis was clearly in favour of industry and not the
farmers. Resultantly, Bt. cotton seed was sold at a whopping Rs. 2200
per kg. when local seed cost hardly a fraction of it. The difference was
so outrageously high that a judicial intervention was required to force
the company in question to lower the price of seed. Even now at
Rs. 1500 per kg. or so the cost of seed in the opinion of the Committee
is still very high considering that for a majority of farmers in India
for whom even a single rupee matters in these several distressful years
of agrarian crisis this amount is a tall order. The decline in yield after
initial two three years of increase due to reduction in yield loss caused
by pests caused additional distress to the farmers. Furthermore, the

120
exorbitantly high input costs, as one of the witnesses, who has been
closely monitoring Vidharbha region for years together, apprised the
Committee that from an average Rs. 8000 to Rs. 12000 per acre
investment in cultivating traditional varieties of cotton the farmer had
to invest a massive Rs. 48000 to Rs. 54000 per acre for Bt. cotton
cultivation. Thus the input cost escalated almost five times the yield
did not increase in commensurate measures and even fell after the
initial years. Bt. cotton has also not been a sustainable agriculture
technology. The Committee have been informed by farmers that it
uses massive quantities of water and other outputs. Though farmers
in Gujarat, where availability of water is better than Vidharbha, were
benefitted to some extent, in Vidharbha, however, Bt. cotton has only
contributed towards agrarian crisis. The better productivity of Bt. cotton
also has not stood the test of time as in the latest estimates productivity
figures have gone considerably down. In fact, Secretary of Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation admitted before the Committee that
several traditional varieties of cotton grown in Brazil had three times
more yield than Bt. cotton yield in India and Brazil was not
encouraging cultivation of Bt. cotton now. A team of Government was
going to Brazil to study these developments for being gainfully utilized
in India.
Reply of the Government
Bt. cotton seed supply was dominated by one company at the
time of its release in 2002. Only three Bt. cotton hybrids developed by
M/s Mahyco were then available. However, the situation has changed
considerably since then. The number of biotech events has increased
from one event in 2002 to five events. Currently cotton hybrids are
being produced by approximately 40 companies in the private sector,
most of which are Indian entities.
Any new technology when introduced comes at a higher price as
there is motive for recovering the cost for developing the technology .
As the new technology gains popularity due to its success, more and
more people take up the same and cost comes down due to economy
of scale in operation. The case of Bt. cotton technology is no different.
Moreover, cost of any advanced technology is always higher than the
existing local technology. Hybrid and High yielding varieties seed cost
more than the local variety. Adoption of Bt. cotton in India is reflection
of farmers’ free will in view of its advantages, there was no proactive
effort on the part of the Government to push the same.
As regards prices of Bt. cotton seeds is concerned, seeds were
initially sold between Rs. 1650 to Rs. 1850 per packet of 450 gm
including trait value, which was around Rs. 1250. Later the cost of

121
Bt. cotton was reduced to Rs. 1250 per packet by the company including
Rs. 900 as trait value for 450 gm of Bt. cotton seed per packet.
Consequent upon the intervention of MRTPC; legislative intervention
by some States and the existing competition in the sector, Bt. cotton
seed is being sold at much lower rates. Prices of Bt. cotton seeds
during the period 2004 to 2012 have not been increased rather
decreased. Table below gives prices in Rs. per packet of Bollgard I
and Bollgard II Bt. cotton seeds in 2004-05 & 2011-12.
Year BG-1 BG-II
North Central South North Central South
PUN, MH, A.P ., PUN, MH, A.P .,
HAR & MP & KAR & HAR & MP & KAR &
RAJ* GUJ** TN*** RAJ* GUJ TN
2004-05 — 1600 1600 NA NA NA
1525(GUJ)
2011-12 825 830- 830 1000 930 930
NA- Not applicable
*Punjab, Haryana & Rajasthan
**Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh & Gujarat
***Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka & Tamil Nadu
It is also submitted that input costs have increased in similar
proportion for other crops like cereals and pulses as well, if Minimum
Support Price (MSP) increase over the years, is any indication. Further
through declaration of MSP , Government do take necessary steps to
cover the cost of production of the farmers for the particular crop,
including cotton.
Prior to the introduction of Bt. cotton, about 9400 metric tonnes
(mt) of insecticides were used for bollworm control in India. In 2011,
only 222 mt were used for bollworm control. The reduction is from
1.08 Kg/ha in 2001 to only 18g/ha in 2011. Had the Bt. not been
there, India would have pumped 12,960 tonnes of pesticides for
bollworm control. The saving is therefore, 12,738 tonnes of pesticides
getting released annually into the environment ( Annexure-IV).
It is true that Bt. cotton adoption rate in Brazil is hardly 20% and
they cultivate cotton varieties only. The yield level of cotton production
in Brazil is 2.5-3 times more than Indian yield level with even
90% Bt. cotton adoption. Brazil follows the High Density Planting
System (HDPS) and maintains nearly 1.0 lakh plants/acre as compared
to 8000 plants/acre of India. Their farming system is fully mechanized

122
followed by use of high dose of inputs. An Indian delegation visited
Brazil during middle of April, 2012 to study cotton cultivation in Brazil
and identify practices which can be adopted in India for enhancing
productivity of cotton. On the basis of the recommendation of the
delegation CICR, Nagpur has initiated trials on HDPS with cotton
varieties at different locations. Possibilities of introduction of HDPS
concept will be decided on the basis of the results of these trials.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Decision Making Process in Commercial Release of Bt. Cotton
Recommendation (Para No. 6.146)
Another very important question that needs to be answered by
DAC is about the approval for commercialization of Bt. cotton in India.
Bt. cotton is a cash crop which in no way would have contributed to
the food security of the country. The lacs and lacs of hectares of land
that have got diverted to Bt. cotton cultivation because of misconception
about its potential have obviously reduced the area of cultivation of
several food crops during all these years thus jeopardizing the country’s
food security to that extent. That the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation did not discharge its responsibility in terms of NPF 2007
even when commercialization of Bt. brinjal was approved is apparent
from the fact that brinjal though a staple food in many States of the
country has never been in short supply inspite of losses caused by
pests, etc.. Its cultivation is restricted to very small patches of farmers’
fields and in the cost benefit terms brinjal was not going to make any
noticeable difference in the fortunes of the vast majority of cultivators
in the country. DAC also failed to appreciate that both in case of
cotton and brinjal the country has countless number of traditional
varieties. Most of them have been wiped out in their natural form in
case of Bt. cotton, and had the monatorium not been placed on the
commercialisation of Bt. brinjal, the same fate would have been fallen
on the traditional brinjal varieties. The Committee feel that this is a
very serious matter and, therefore, recommend that an indepth probe
may be carried out to track the decision making involved in commercial
release of Bt. cotton right from the initial stage. It has to be found out
how Bt. cotton became priority when the avowed goal for introduction
of transgenics in agricultural crops was with a view to ensure and
maintain food security.

123
Reply of the Government
It would be to take a narrow view to link increased acreage under
cotton to jeopardising food security. Relying on figures of increased
foodgrain production it can be seen that India has made considerable
increase in foodgrain production and the year 2010-2011 accounted for
record food production of 244.78 million tonnes, as per final estimates
of the Department of Economics and Statistics under the Ministry of
Agriculture.
Further it is clarified that total acreage under cotton crop remained
almost same all these years. The area under cotton crop in India was
8.9 million hectares during 1997-98 and 9.2 million hectares during
2008-09. The productivity increased from 302 kg/ha in 1997-98 to
591 kg/ha in 2008-09. Therefore, there has been no negative effect of
cultivation of Bt. cotton on the food security in the country.
DAC has played a responsible role and attaches great importance
to NPF 2007, which is why it endorsed release of Bt. Brinjal. Brinjal
cultivation consumes maximum quantity of pesticides after cotton. As
indicated in section 6.145, experience of cotton itself shows that we
could prevent-12,738 tons of pesticides getting released annually into
the environment. Before the introduction of Bt. cotton, insecticide
quantity applied on cotton was the highest relative to other cultivated
crops. By the mid 1990s Indian cotton farmers were spending >43% of
the variable costs of cotton production on insecticides, around 80% of
that being for bollworm control and in particular Helicoverpa control.
Insecticide use on cotton was 50% of all insecticide use in the country
and as a result cotton production was being rendered uneconomic in
many regions of the country. The area under cotton in the country has
increased in recent years as compared to the coverage of 2008-09 as
farmers in the new regions are coming forward to this crop for
remunerative price and higher net income especially as compared to
Jowar, Bajra, upland rice and other crops. Recognizing, this trend DAC
has taken adequate measures to promote intercropping food crops with
cotton to maintain the area and sustainability of foodgrains production
to some extent.
Farmers also cultivate non-food crops as they have other uses for
man, like cotton, which provides clothing. Any technology, including
Bt. cotton if enhances the productivity of the crop with reduced use
of chemicals, the ultimate beneficiary will be the farmers in terms of
realisation of higher income. Therefore, there appears nothing wrong
in commercial cultivation of Bt. cotton, though as stated in the earlier
para, Bt. cotton adoption was a reflection of farmers’ free will in
choosing a technology, which he feels is right for him.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

124
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.54 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 6.147)
The Committee also examined the role of Department of Food and
Public Distribution in this regard. This Department procure colossal
amounts of foodgrains for the central pool, stores them and then
distributes the foodgrains through the Public Distribution System at
affordable prices. The Department also represent the Government of
India at various international fora on food related matters. The
Committee during their interaction with the representatives of the
Department of Food and Pubic Distribution ironically found that there
was a total lack of appreciation of their own role with regard to
procurement, handling, storage and distribution of food derived from
transgenic food crops as and when the eventuality arose. The stock
reply to some of the major queries of the Committee was that the
Department do not handle foodgrains produced from GM/transgenic
crops. Subsequently, however, they admitted to Genetically Modified
Crops posing challenges in the fields of food labeling, segregation and
identification, preservation and procurement and storage points, testing
facilities of the Genetically Modified Crops; provision of separate
storage infrastructure and handling practices; and regulation of policies
regarding such crops. The Department also admitted that they would
devise standard operating procedures and other ways and means to
address the issue of foodgrains derived from GM crops plants once
FSSAI and other concerned agencies issue their guidelines in the matter.
The Committee gathered a clear impression that the Department was
not at all geared up to face the challenges that will be posed by
transgenic food crops in the eventuality of labelling, segregation of
GM and Non-GM food crops, movement of foodgrains between GM
and Non-GM States, etc. becoming a reality in near future.
Reply of the Government
As already deposed in the oral evidence before the Committee,
the mandate of the Department of Food & Public Distribution is
procurement of specified quality of Foodgrains for central pool at fixed
MSP through FCI and State Government agencies for distribution
through Public Distribution System. The Department only deals with
wheat, rice, coarse grains and sugar. The quality specifications are
fixed by FSSAI under FSS Act, 2006.

125
It is clarified that import of all GMOs including GM foods is
governed by Rules 1989 under EPA and the importers have to take
permission from GEAC. The GEAC has also been notified as competent
authority as per the obligations under the Cartagena Protocol on
Biosafety. Therefore the decision to import any GM foods by
Department of Food and Public Distribution or any other agency would
entail seeking required permissions from GEAC and following
prescribed conditions if any . Further, it may be noted that approval of
GM crops is based on comparative approach and confirming that a
GM crop or food derived from it is as safe as its non GM counterpart.
In case any special needs evolve, the country has adequate scientific
manpower, experience and law in place to take necessary measures.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Field Trials of Transgenic Crops in various States
Recommendation (Para No. 7.19)
Coming to the position obtaining in various States in regard to
transgenic crops and field trials Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Karnataka, Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa, Uttarakhand and Madhya
Pradesh have expressed their reservations about Bt. brinjal. Kerala and
Uttarakhand have in fact decided to prohibit environmental release of
all GM seeds to keep the State totally GM free. Bihar, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh and Rajasthan have also disallowed field trials in the State.
Himachal Pradesh will take a view on Bt. brinjal once all trials are
completed and Government of India have taken a decision in the
matter.
Reply of the Government
Decisions on banning or other wise of field trials of GM crops
should be guided by a well reasoned scientific decision and guidelines
operational under the existing regulatory framework. The regulatory
framework already provide for constitution of State Biotechnology
Advisory Committees chaired by Chief Secretary with line ministries/
departments as members. The whole issue is that many States listed
have not constituted such committees or where constituted have not

126
been functional to address issues related to GMOs. Using Ad-hoc and
reactive mechanisms guided by emotions and impulses is not an
appropriate approach to prevent or agree to the conduct of field trials
when the existing regulations, under an act of Parliament, are not
complied with. The States need to analyse the issue of GM crops on
scientific basis. As indicated in section 7.18, the SAC-PM report has
also suggested measures for resolving these issues.
It may be reiterated that the evaluation of plant performance
(suitability to a condition of production) in the natural environment is
a key component of crop development, and GM crops are no exception.
Field studies enable researchers to evaluate environmental safety of
GM plants and collect biosafety data required for necessary regulatory
authorization and in addition promotion of plant materials, such as
seed and forage. These are produced using small confined field trials
and collected to perform compositional analysis and other testing
necessary to demonstrate food safety. Green house study cannot be
performed at a scale sufficient to comply with these regulatory
requirements. Without this field data, researchers cannot make
scientifically tenable predication about the performance of plants in
the field or about the environmental safety of the plant.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.68 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Field Trials of Transgenic Crops in various States
Recommendation (Para No. 7.20)
The Committee also note that Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Punjab and Haryana have allowed field
trials.
Reply of the Government
The issue of permitting field trials is entirely a science based issue.
GOI is of the view that field trials are done as per safe practices as
alluded above and accordingly the States shall have no objection in
conduct of such trials in due course.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

127
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.68 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Check on GM Processed Food
Recommendation (Para No. 7.60)
Section 22, the above mentioned special provision in the FSS Act
stipulates that no person shall manufacture, sell or import any novel
food, genetically modified articles of food, irradiated food, organic
food, foods for special dietary uses, functional foods, nutraceuticals,
health supplements, proprietary foods and such other articles of food
which the Central Government may notify in this behalf. Surprisingly,
however, the GM foods were not included when Section 22 was notified
by the Government. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare instead
asked GEAC to continue regulating GM foods under Rule 11 of Rules
1989 by keeping the notification of 23 August, 2007 in abeyance for
six months or until the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare notified
regulation of GM processed food by FSSAI whichever was earlier. The
Committee were able to track five extensions of six months and a
sixth one of one year upto September, 2011 but still the FSSAI
regulation for GM processed food is nowhere in sight though so many
years have gone by. Resultantly, there is no check on GM processed
food and other items coming from outside the country or being
produced here viz. cotton seed oil produced from Bt. cotton in the
country. To compound this inaction further, now the Government seems
to entrust this responsibility to the proposed BRAI. The Committee
wonder when actually the regulation of GM food and products thereof
will commence when BRAI itself is nowhere in sight. In the opinion
of the Committee this dilly dallying and delay in bringing GM food
and products, thereof, is not a simple act of oversight or a genuine
inability to do the needful and needs to be thoroughly investigated
and responsibility for this callous neglect of health safety be fixed at
the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the results
of the investigation and the action taken in pursuance thereof.
Reply of the Government
Same as response to recommendation at serial no. 7.59
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

128
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.71 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Post Marketing Surveillance
Recommendation (Para No. 7.61)
The Committee would also like to be apprised about what all
action has been taken by the Government with regard to post marketing
surveillance, health safety, food and feed safety of the cotton seed oil
and other products like cotton cake extracted from Bt. cotton and
whether the manufactures of the cotton seed oil and cotton cake derived
from Bt. cotton have complied with all relevant laws and regulations
laid down for production and marketing of products derived from
transgenic materials.
Reply of the Government
As indicated in response to Para 5.50, the post marketing
surveillance of GM foods or any food in terms of safety aspects is not
scientifically feasible. The relevant portion is reiterated here for ready
reference.
Regarding the issue of long term environmental and health
monitoring programmes, it is clarified that the safety assessment of a
GM crop encompasses two components viz. food and feed safety and
environmental safety. Regulatory authorities undertake a detailed pre-
release assessment on both aspects before permitting their commercial
cultivation. Regarding food and feed safety, the post release marketing
of GM foods or any food in terms of safety aspects is not scientifically
feasible. While post approval monitoring in case of drugs or any single
chemicals produces useful sentinel data on drug safety and adverse
effects, in such cases, people who provide a detailed history are taking
a highly defined substance where there is already an idea of the types
of adverse health effects that may be found. In contrast, any post
market monitoring of GM foods would be of a population consuming
different amounts at different times and in different ways amongst all
other food intake, and with no particular health outcome in mind.
The health effects observed may be vague, and may not be attributed
to a particular cause. These factors make it unlikely that an adverse
health effect due to any food or GM food could be detected above all
the other health effects in the general population. In the light of above,
regulatory authorities across the world focus on safety assessment

129
before the food is placed on the market and the same is also reflected
in the consensus documents by FAO, WHO, Codex, OECD etc.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-
operation), F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.39 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Allegation of Bio-Piracy
Recommendation (Para No. 7.75)
With a view to control unauthorized access to our precious
biological resources or knowledge associated therewith, Section 3 of
Biodiversity Act,2002 stipulates that certain categories of persons shall
not obtain any biological resources occurring in India or knowledge
associated thereto for research or for commercial utilization or for bio-
survey and bio-utilisation without prior approval of National
Biodiversity Authority. These categories include a person who is not a
citizen of India; a citizen of India, who is a non-resident and a body
corporate, association or organization not incorporated or registered in
India; or incorporated or registered in India under any law for the
time being in force, which has any non-Indian participation in its
share capital or management. In this connection a report appeared in
media about one particular case of 2010 pertaining to alleged
misappropriation of local brinjal varieties by M/s Mahyco and others.
Allegations about continued in action of the Authority in respect of
this case were also reported in the media. The Committee sought a
detailed explanation from the National Biodiversity Authority in the
matter. According to NBA on the basis of a complaint alleging biopiracy
by Monsanto and its corporate in development of Bt. brinjal, the
Authority had began investigating the matter with the help of
Karnataka State Biodiversity Board. Information and inputs from the
institutions and agencies involved in the development of said Bt. brinjal
material were procured and legal assessment of the same is being
undertaken considering the elements and extent of violation of the
provisions of Biological Diversity Act. Between August and October,
2011 further information was sought from the agencies involved in the
development of this material. NBA also informed the Committee that
a subsequent application of M/s Monsanto Holding Private Limited
for accessing onion material developed by Indian Institute of
Horticulture Research, ICAR, Bengaluru is still to be cleared.

130
Reply of the Government
NBA is in the process of resolving the issue as per the provisions
of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.75 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Allegation of Bio-Piracy
Recommendation (Para No. 7.76)
The Committee are not at all convinced by the dilatory response
of NBA on this sensitive issue. The matter is very simple as to whether
the Company in question has obtained any local biological resource
for and in connection with development of Bt. brinjal without prior
approval of NBA and violated Section 3 of Biological Diversity Act,
2002. Taking so long in coming to a conclusion on this simple issue
shows the NBA in a very poor light. It would also be worth mentioning
here that during this period Chairman, GEAC was simultaneously also
holding the charge of Chairman, NBA from 11 November, 2010 to
11 August, 2011. The Committee not only desire a thorough inquiry in
the matter of continued paralysis in decision making on a case of this
dimension but also recommend that the NBA should decide upon this
case without any further delay.
Reply of the Government
NBA is in the process of resolving the issue as per the provisions
of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.75 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para Nos. 8.116 and 8.117)
About the safety concerns, which are aplenty , transgenics being a
comparatively new technology, the Government have told the
Committee that no approval is granted to the transgenic crops unless

131
there has been a thorough analysis of its effects on the environment,
bio-diversity, bio-safety, human health and health of livestock and
animals. The Government have also informed the Committee that safety
and efficacy is evaluated by science based experimentation and analysis
on a case by case basis and, therefore, cannot be generalized as these
are product specific. Simultaneously, some of the Departments/
Ministries/Agencies of the Government viz. DSIR/CSIR, Department
of AYUSH, Department of Commerce, Department of Consumer Affairs,
Department of Food and Public Distribution, National Biodiversity
Authority and Food Safety Standards Authority of India have expressed
their serious concerns on various aspects relating to transgenics in
agriculture crops. These pertain to effect on bio-diversity, safety and
efficacy of the technology, sustainability, chronic toxicity, cost benefits
analysis, human and livestock health, environment impact assessment,
safety of GM food and food products, exports of foodgrains, etc.
The Committee also have had the benefit of well considered views
of several other stakeholders from outside the Government. These views
based on science, field experience, first hand observation, evaluation
and assessment totally go against the views of the Government and
build a strong case against transgenic in agriculture crops more
particularly in food crops.
Reply of the Government
It is stated in the report “that some Departments/Ministries/
Agencies of the Government viz. DSIR/CSIR, Department of AYUSH,
Department of Commerce, Department of Consumer Affairs,
Department of Food and Public Distribution, National Biodiversity
Authority and Food Safety Standards Authority of India have expressed
their serious concerns on various aspects relating to transgenics in
agriculture crops. These pertain to effect on bio-diversity, safety and
efficacy of the technology, sustainability, chronic toxicity, cost benefits
analysis, human and livestock health, environment impact assessment,
safety of GM food and food products, exports of food grains, etc.”.
The five elements of transgenic crop development—(i) Policy,
(ii) R&D (iii) regulatory framework (act, rules and regulations),
(iv) scientific risk assessment process of product and (v) commercial
use need to be clearly understood. GM technology development and
deployment policy is inter-ministerial/departmental and directs choice
of technology over others, investment focus and integration with
existing practices and overall policies in agriculture, food and
environment including biodiversity , trade and traceability issues and
measures. A good Policy directs focussed public and private sector

132
investments. Regulatory framework addresses process and systems to
enforce regulations, monitoring and compliance. Commercial use
depends on public understanding and acceptance, rules and regulations
of central/state governments on seed pricing, certification and
registration. Quite often in many media reports, activists slogans and
ad-hoc reports all these issues are mixed, jumbled up and generalised
to give an impression that everything is wrong without any evidence.
It may be clarified that safety assessment of GM crops/foods under
a given regulatory framework is based on the principle that these
crops can be compared with traditional crops/foods that have
established history of safe use. The objective is to establish “as safe
as“ with the traditional crops and not absolute safety. Regarding
identification of uncertainties, it is to be noted that this approach takes
into account both intended and unintended effects. Further, the inherent
precision of genetic engineering techniques for introducing specific
genetic changes enables a direct and focussed assessment of safety.
Further, globally , scientific risk assessment is based on Standard
Operational Practices (SOPs) and testing protocols. Consensus
documents of international agencies i.e.  Food and Agricultural
Organisation (FAO), Rome; World Health Organisation (WHO), Geneva;
FAO-Codex (Food Code), Organisation of Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), Paris; Secretariat to Convention on Biological
Diversity (CBD), Canada etc. developed over years off discussion and
peer reviewed research literature and regulatory guidelines/decisions
of regulatory bodies of countries which are active in regulation of GM
crops are referred for assessments case-by-case. Indian biosafety testing
guidance documents or SOPs for comprehensive food and
environmental safety assessment of transgenics have been prepared
and updated after consultation within the country and peer reviewed
scientific publications and harmonising with international best practices.
The concerns of AYUSH—whether medicinal value of crops
subjected to GM technology are altered or cross pollinations
contaminate relatives of target crop used in traditional medicine has
no scientific evidence. The current testing methods include a detailed
compositional analysis of GM and non-GM version which would
indicate such changes if any. Since the assessment is case-by-case any
additional analysis can be included to ensure the same. If any
unintended drastic changes occur, such cases are rejected by the
regulatory system. However, Department of AYUSH has representative
in Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) and has an
observer from Department of AYUSH in GEAC. Therefore more
meaningful inputs can be given by the Department of AYUSH for
clarifications for such concerns in future.

133
CSIR in their response to this report stated that it will be willing
to assist the current regulatory system in assessment of dossiers of
GM crops submitted to GEAC. It may be noted that DSIR provides
R&D recognition certificate to all private and non profit R&D
laboratories including those engaged transgenic R&D and regulatory
testing in health care and agriculture. CSIR has some capacity in GM
research, regulation and biodiversity utilisation and product
development. DBT and DST supplement the resources of CSIR system
(which is largely focussed in industrial products and technologies)
through extramural grants for R&D and product development. It has
reasonable representation in all technology development programs of
other departments proving expertise or implementing projects. CSIR
labs have successfully commercialised recombinant human health
products cleared by RCGM for example recombinant streptokinase etc.
and also represent through its members in GEAC and RCGM. Providing
or assisting inputs in such statutory forums to address the concerns
case by case or expressing concerns with adequate scientific evidence
are appropriate.
The Department of Commerce in response to the statement made
in the report clarified that it endorses that the view of the Government
that transgenics being a comparatively new technology, no approval
can be granted to the transgenic crops unless there has been a thorough
analysis of its effects on the environment, bio-diversity, bio-safety,
human health and health of livestock and enimals and the safety and
efficacy is evaluated by science based experimentation and analysis on
a case by case basis.
National Biodiversity Authority and Food Safety Standards
Authority of India have to provide evidence either from existing
scientific literature or provide experimental evidence for substantiating
their concerns. The concern about safeguarding biodiversity is
acceptable. But stretching the idea of center of origin and center of
biodiversity presumes that the transgenics will contaminate the
biodiversity in all cases and under all circumstances. It is important to
realize that even in cases such as rice where vast areas are cultivated
to improved varieties for more than five decades now, there has been
no obvious loss of native varieties or variability in nature to the point
of their getting contaminated or being lost due to genetic contamination
from the pollen from advanced varieties. It would be appropriate to
associate agencies like NBA to carry out trials on this aspect during
field testing protocols to provide evidence before concluding that a
possibility of gene flow would mean that the diversity will be lost.
This presumption has no validity because it equates GMOs with genetic

134
pollution as if they are inherently polluting and will contaminate
biodiversity. Taking a cautious approach in biodiversity conservation
is different from treating GM plants as harmful for biodiversity. The
National Biodiversity Authority has not given any evidence to the
Parliamentary Committee to prove this presumption.
Other stakeholders whose considered views have been heard by
the Committee include activists or. their nominees or written
submissions of selected international experts namely Dr. David Andow.
Even in the countries where the author reside, there is no evidence of
this report considered by regulatory authorities. It is difficult to
comprehend how a few deliberately selected publications have been
considered leading to misinformation to the Committee instead of
considering huge amount of scientific peer reviewed literature, decisions
by regulatory authorities and consensus publications of international
bodies. For example, A careful analysis of Dr. David Andow Paper,
which is cited by name and excerpts occur twice in the report, reveals
certain misconception. For example, in the sections on gene flow the
author ignores the fact, that hundreds of traditional varieties exist in
the Indian agricultural traditional system without any remarkable
hybridization over extremely long timespans, on the contrary, they co-
exist without difficulties over centuries. In the erroneous view of the
‘Genomic Misconception‘ the exclusive focus on coexistence with GM
crops is unreflected and automatic, without scientific justification. The
Committee has largely relied upon the IASSTD report (IAASTD Report,
2007) which is well known for its deep bias against biotechnology.
This has been commented extensively: (Ammann, 2008; DeGregori, 2008;
Keith, 2008; Murphy, 2008; Stokstad, 2008; van Montagu, 2008).
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Effects of Transgenic Crops on Environment, Humans and Livestock
Recommendation (Para No. 8.118)
The Committee have critically analysed the evidence placed before
them both for and against the transgenic agriculture crops. And pure
science, within its restrictive realm, has not been the only benchmark
of this analysis. Some of the most compelling concerns factored in by

135
the Committee include India being one of the richest centres of bio-
diversity, agriculture providing sustenance to almost 70% of rural
populace, more than 70% of India’s farmers being small and marginal
farmers for whom agriculture is not a commercial venture but a way
of life and a means of survival; food security and safety; manpower
intensive nature of agriculture in India; the severe agrarian crisis
afflicting the country for years now; 60 per cent of cultivated area still
being rainfed; the irretrievability of transgenic crops once released in
the environment; effects on environment, human health and livestock
and animal health, to quote a few.
Reply of the Government
Environment and Production Technology Division, International
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI ) a CGIAR institute undertook a
study in October 2008 on “Bt. Cotton and Farmer Suicides in India”
to review the evidence on the alleged resurgence of farmer suicides in
India and the potential relationship between the adoption of Bt. cotton
and suicides among Indian farmers. It is shown that “media hype
around farmer suicides, fueled by civil society organizations and
reaching the highest political spheres in India and elsewhere, there is
no evidence in available data of a “resurgence” of farmer suicide in
India in the last five years”. The report “provide a comprehensive
review of available evidence on the effects of Bt. cotton in India and
find that Bt. cotton technology has been very effective overall. Using
macro data on productivity and a synthetic review of results from
micro-level studies, it is shown that on an average Bt. cotton has had
a significant positive effect on cotton productivity in India, raising
farmers’ income via an increase in yields and a reduction in pesticide
use. Overall, analysis shows that, without a doubt, Bt. cotton is not a
necessary or sufficient condition for the occurrence of farmer suicides
or agrarian crisis. Therefore, it should not be blamed for the resurgence
of farmer suicides in the field. In contrast, other factors have almost
certainly played an indispensable role in these cases, especially the
insufficient or risky credit systems with no formal or informal support
and the wide availability of toxic pesticides”.
Study reports of Planning Commission and DAC detailed elsewhere
in this submission also explain the agrarian crisis in the same context.
Thus, it is now time to unshackle our farmers from undertaking
agriculture for survival, to making it as an economically viable option
for livelihood. To maximise returns on his inputs and labour, since
India is rainfed and water for irrigation on premium, new technologies

136
and GM crops assume greater significance. Rather, the very reasons
that are being cited for stopping transgenic research crops and release
are the very reasons why India should adopt it.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.78 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 8.119)
The experience of the country with Bt. cotton shows that with the
advent of the transgenic variants and the initial hype surrounding it,
the traditional cotton varieties have just been wiped out. The Committee
could very well sense the desperation of farmers of Vidharbha with
whom they interacted during their Study Visit in March 2012, due to
non-availability of traditional varieties of cotton. Inspite of their best
efforts, they are now not able to shift from transgenic cotton cultivation
to cultivation of traditional and more farmer friendly varieties due to
total non-availability of seeds. The Committee witnessed with their
own eyes these serious disadvantages caused by the practice of
monoculture. The National Bio-diversity Authority has further proved
with concrete instances that transgenics affect bio-diversity in a big
way. Several other stakeholders including eminent scientists, farmers’
organization, etc. have also informed the Committee about the adverse
and lasting impact of transgenic crops on bio-diversity. The
Government‘s assertions that our bio-diversity will be safely stored in
gene banks may be a museologist’s delight but do not comfort the
Committee a bit, as bio-diversity can only evolve further in nature
and not in gene banks. It has also to be borne in mind that India has
a substantial stake in Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit sharing
which will be affected adversely with any tinkering with our rich bio-
diversity.
Reply of the Government
Traditional cotton varieties have not been wiped out. It is farmers’
preference alone that Bt. cotton accounts for more than 95% acreage.
Experiences vary from region to region and farmer to farmer, although
technology performance is neutral to size of the farm under a given

137
package of practices. For example a case from Andhra Pradesh reported
recently is quoted here:
“I can’t grow cotton crop if not for Bt. cotton, we harvest 12 to 15
quintals of cotton per acre from Bt cotton field significantly higher
than 7-8 quintals harvested in the past with non-Bt. cotton hybrids”
said M. Mohammad Habibuddin, a small cotton farmer who led a
group of 40 small cotton farmers who met with delegates of
16 countries visiting his 1 acre of Bt. cotton field in the outskirt of his
village Hussainpur of Shankarpalli Mandal, Ranga Reddy District of
Andhra Pradesh, India on 3 October 2012. The COP-MOP6 delegates
of CBD conference, many of whom visited a cotton field for the first
time, interacted with small farmers who have been planting for seven
consecutive years. The 34 delegates included senior government officials
from Brazil, Canada, Switzerland, Japan, Korea, China, Philippines,
Indonesia, Iran, Kuwait, Egypt, Kenya, Nigeria, Zimbabwe, Burkina
Faso, Uganda, and India.
The Central Institute of Cotton Research, Nagpur has been
conducting a series of demonstration trials in farmers fields in 8 districts
of Vidharbha region, such as Chandrapur, Nagpur, Amaravathi, Wardha,
Yawatmal, Akola, Washin and Buldana. The demonstrations are
conducted with traditional varieties of hirsutum cotton such as Suraj,
PKV 081, NH 615 and desi cotton varieties HD 123, AKA 7. In addition
separate trials of arboreum desi cotton race Cernuum is also being
conducted, on an acre each, so that farmers can have a real time
relook into the traditional varieties to make their own judgement. The
trials are currently on, during Kharif 2012.
The native biodiversity of cotton in India is represented only in
the Desi cotton species which have evolutionary origins in India and
are known to have been cultivated in the country for the last
5000 years.
Since the Desi cotton species Gossypium arboreum and G. herbaceum
have native origins, there is high level biodiversity of the Desi species
in India. However, there is no possibility, whatsoever, of any of the
native India Desi cotton species, G. arboreum and G. herbaceum species
getting genetically contaminated with Bt. cotton, so as to threaten the
extant biodiversity. Even if there is any hybridization between Bt. cotton
and desi cotton, they will not be fertile because of cytogenetic instability
and genome differences. American cotton was introduced in India in
1790 and still, the desi cotton retains its properties, and there is loss
to diversity by gene contamination.

138
Considering the need to address the crisis In Vidharbha region,
essentially of the problem of availability of water, DAC has taken a
new initiative to boost irrigation in the region through the scheme
Vidarbha Intensive Irrigation Development Programme (VIIDP). VIIDP
programme has been started as a sub-scheme of RKVY from the XIIth
Plan period. The programme aims at developing irrigation infrastructure
in all the 11 districts of Vidarbha and was conceived in the backdrop
of low productivity of most crops and especially cotton on account of
agriculture in the area being rainfed. The broad objective of the
programme is to bring enhanced cotton area under cotton cultivation
and increase the protective cultivation area under cotton in order to
increase production and productivity and thereby increase the returns
to the farmer. For 2012-13 the allocation under the programme is of
Rs.300 crore. With creation of irrigation facility the agrarian crisis will
surely mitigate.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics and Containment of Trials
Recommendation (Para No. 8.120)
Coming to the aspect of food security, the Committee are more
than convinced that there are better options available for increasing
food production and productivity than transgenics technology about
whose safety, sustainability and a host of issues of concern, the last
word is still long long away. Most importantly, India today is not in
the situation of desperation that was obtaining before the first Green
Revolution. Hence any short cuts or desperate measures are not
required to be experimented with. Integrated Pest Management, organic
farming, bio-fertilisers, molecular breeding, increasing irrigation
potential, minimizing post harvest crop losses, efficient and leak proof
distribution system, etc. in the opinion of the Committee, are far more
simpler, easy to do, sustainable, bio-diversity friendly options which
also do not have any ill effects on human health and livestock and
animal health.
Reply of the Government
It is stated in the report that “Committee are more than convinced
that there are better options available for increasing food production
and productivity than transgenics technology about whose safety,

139
sustainability and a host of issues of concern, the last word is still
long long away.”
It may be clarified that, It is not debatable issue that all available
technologies whether conventional or modern should be employed in
addressing issues of food security. At the same time all technologies
have their own limitations and advantages. No single technology so
far has been free from any risk although only GM crops are the only
group of technologies which undergo exhaustive food and
environmental safety assessment. Therefore, it may be clarified that
adoption of GM technology for agricultural purpose has not been a
short cut way or a desperate measure. Lots of investments, time and
efforts are being made to develop this technology as clarified in 8.114.
It is also essential that India maintains its place as a leading scientific
country in the hall of nations by playing lead role in the development
of this. All these measures along with path breaking scientific tools
need to be undertaken simultaneously.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.5 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Reforms in Current Regulatory System
Recommendation (Para No. 8.121)
While summing-up, the Committee would also like to comment
further on the regulatory mechanism although it has already been
dealt with in a separate Chapter in this Report. The Internal Bio-
Safety Committee functions in the promoter company and performs
all basic assessments and evaluations of a transgenic product being
developed by that very company. It also generates data on the basis
of which RCGM and GEAC base their evaluation, as stated previously
in this Report. This mechanism does not inspire confidence for obvious
reasons. The Department of Bio-technology which is mandated with
the promotion of bio-technology in the country, funds various
transgenics research projects and activities both in public, as well as,
private sector companies. This funding is of a significant order. The
transgenic products created through these projects and activities are
then assessed and evaluated by an adjunct of DBT viz. RCGM. On top
of it, the final approval for environmental/commercial release is granted

140
by GEAC which is co-chaired by a DBT nominee. With the Chairman
of GEAC as well as the Vice Chairman being civil servants, it is not
very difficult to appreciate the primacy of DBT nominated co-Chair in
GEAC in the decision making process. The Committee, inspite of DBT’s
protestations to the contrary, have strong reasons to agree with the
opinion of several stakeholders that in a regulatory set-up where the
promoter has an overwhelming say and presence in the regulatory
mechanism, an element of subjectivity in assessment and evaluation is
unavoidable. The entire system, therefore, reflects a pro-DBT/pro-
industry tilt which is best avoided. Apart from this major shortcoming,
the Committee‘s examination has revealed that the extant system is
grossly inadequate and antiquated to face the typical challenges a
population intensive, agrarian economy like India poses when the
question of introduction of such modern technologies in agriculture
sector crops up.
Reply of the Government
The matter has been under discussion for sometime in the Scientific
Advisory Panel of the Prime Minister (SAC-PM). The following
recommendations of SAC-PM in its meeting on 9th October 2012 on
the Agriculture biotechnology are being considered to address the
issues:
“(1) The current regulatory system for recombinant products
administered under Rules (1989) of EPA Act, 1986 should be
reformed till BRAI is in place.
(i) RCGM and GEAC should be the sole authority for
bio-safety and bio-efficacy assessment of all recombinant
products. Decision on commercial use of biotechnology
produced crops should be taken by the Agriculture
Ministries/Department of Central and State Governments
as per existing policies and regulations on crops. For medical
products Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
(CDSCO) of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Government of India would approve commercialization as
of now.
(ii) High Level dialogue with State Governments to streamline
clearances for conduct of multi-location “Confined field
trials”—a scientific pre-requisite in all countries for
meaningful decision making on approvals or otherwise.
(iii) A Biotechnology Regulatory Secretariat with high level of
scientific and technical trained manpower should be
established to support RCGM and GEAC.

141
(iv) GEAC and RCGM should have full time Chairpersons. The
Chairman of GEAC, may be of Special Secretary Status for
3 year period and RCGM one level lower. Chairman of
RCGM be the Co-Chair in GEAC and not the expert
nominee of Department of Biotechnology. For greater
synergy at least three members should be common between
RCGM and GEAC.
(v) The public needs to be informed of every decision.”
It may be noted that Institutional Biosafety Committee (referred as
Internal Bio-Safety Committee) is not responsible for assessment and
evaluation of transgenic products being developed by a particular
company. The responsibility of IBSC are clearly defined and its role is
basically to ensure that organization is conducting guidelines.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.81 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Absence of Liability Clause
Recommendation (Para No. 8.122)
The Government have been for some years now toying with the
idea of a Biotechnology Regulatory Authority . The Committee feel that
regulating biotechnology is too small a focus in the vast canvas of
biodiversity, environment, human and livestock health, etc. and a
multitude of other such related issues. They have, therefore, already
recommended in a previous Chapter setting up of an all encompassing
Bio-safety Authority through an act of Parliament, which is extensively
discussed and debated amongst all stakeholders, before acquiring shape
of the law. Unless and until such an authority is in place, any further
movement in regard to transgenics in agriculture crops will obviously
be fraught with unknown consequences. While there is a lot of
apprehension about the safety of the technology, what is more worrying
is the absence of any liability clause or mechanism in the system
which could compensate the poor farmers and the consumers in the
eventuality of crop loss and harm to bio-diversity health, environment,
etc. With the various crop insurance schemes also not being of much
help to a majority of farmers any prospective losses to the farmers

142
due to cultivation of transgenic agricultural crops would have a
crippling effects on their fortunes, reeling as they already are under
severe agrarian crisis for years together now.
Reply of the Government
As explained earlier, after wide ranging stakeholders discussions
and elaborate inter-Ministerial consultation the Biotechnology
Regulatory Authority of India (BRAI) Bill has been prepared and
submitted to Parliament for introduction. SAC-PM is of the view that
“The Bill pending with Parliament,  i.e. BRAI 2012, should be debated
with open mind. It would be appropriate if administrative organization
could be Cabinet Secretariat because of the involvement of multiple
Ministries. The Bill when examined by appropriate pParliament
committee would be opened up for wider debate and discussions for
shaping the draft legislation into a model regulatory framework.” All
concerned departments/Ministries agree with these views as the bill
also takes into consideration the collaborative and coordinated
mechanisms across different existing legislations and authorities. The
BRAI bill provides for constitution of pan-government Inter-Ministerial
Governing Board with 15 Ministries/departments/agencies/authorities
as an umbrella mechanism to provide oversight on cross cutting
mandates and polices.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.84 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)
Recommendation (Para No. 8.123)
In such a situation the various players in the system of governance,
who have some role or the other in the regulation, management,
handling, oversight, distribution, consumer affairs, human health,
livestock health, etc. have to shoulder the responsibility of ensuring
that any potential harm or damages to the system are eliminated/
controlled. However, as has been very clearly brought out in a previous
Chapter most of the Ministries, Departments and other agencies of the
Government who have to shoulder major responsibility, when the
transgenic agricultural crops come into the system, are not at all ready
to optimally perform their designated roles. In fact some of the

143
Ministries/Departments have been revved into action only after the
Committee took this subject for examination and interacted with them.
FSSAI, which has to play the most important role in the scheme of
things alongwith NBA is still grappling with teething troubles and is
not in a position to deliver atleast for coming years. NBA and PPV &
FRA, as has been brought out previously in the Report, are virtually
non-existent. In such a scenario how the Government intends to deal
with the effects of cultivation of transgenic crops outside containment
defies logic.
Reply of the Government
As has been elaborated in earlier chapters, the Ministries/
Departments do have systems in place. Like any other science, in GM
technology too new issues emerge for which a continuous system of
learning, evolving is needed. The Government is fully aware of this
and acting upon making systems updated. As responded to earlier
PPV&FRA and NBA have made significant achievements even though
the legislations have been a new area. The PPV&FRA has done
commendable work to bring about awareness on farmers’ and
communities’ rights towards conserving biodiversity. As also elaborated
earlier, NBA too has contributed towards the mandate under which it
was created.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.62 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Post Marketing Surveillance
Recommendation (Para No. 8.124)
On another plane, long term environment impact assessment and
chronic toxicology studies of the effects of transgenic agriculture crops
have not even been attempted till now. The Government are yet to
take a final call on labelling. There is a complete lack of post market
surveillance, as has been pointed out in one particular example of lacs
of tons of Bt. cotton seed oil having gone into the food chain during
last ten years without anybody in the Government being aware or
concerned about it.

144
Reply of the Government
So far globally, Bt. cotton has been in cultivation for the last
16 years with no report of any negative impact on health and
environment issue. Even in the ICAR animal feeding trials on lamb, it
was noted that the animal did not exhibit any detrimental effects
attributable to Bt. cotton. This led to the conclusion that “feeding of
Bt. cotton to lambs did not alter immunity status” as evidenced by
increased RBC and decreased WBC in the gut of the lamb fed with
Bt. cotton seed. Similar studies published in international journals also
support these conclusions. Further, long term studies for over 25 months
based on cows feeding on Bt. corn whole crop silage, kernels, whole-
cobs also support these results (Ref: Steinke et al. 2010. Journal of
animal physiology and animal nutrition).
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.39 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Ethical Dimensions of Transgenics
Recommendation (Para No. 8.125)
A major issue that has escaped the attention of the Government
during all these years is question of ethics. In the extant social-cultural
milieu, a serious thought requires to be given to the ethical dimensions
of transgenics in agricultural crops. Even a miniscule degree of
insensitivity on this matter can lead to avoidable discontent which
apart from causing societal tensions would also have grave socio
economic repercussions.
Reply of the Government
It may be clarified that the GM crops are assessed for safety and
efficacy. Efficacy means that whether the biotechnology intervention
made in a particular crop is providing additional benefit as claimed
by the developer. The effectiveness of a GM crop under given agro
climatic condition is assessed by elaborate confined field trials taking
care all biosafety measures as per SOPs. Since, the regulatory
framework approves for commercial use only those technologies which
go through these stringent tests are approved. Therefore, the issue of

145
socio economic repercussions does not arise. Further all the information
is also made available to the farmer by developer at the time of sale
and finally it is farmers choice that determine the adoption.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.87 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Cultivation of Bt. Cotton Compounding the Miseries of the Small
and Marginal Farmers
Recommendation (Para No. 8.126)
During their extensive interactions with farmers in the course of
their Study Visits, the Committee have found there have been no
significant socio-economic benefits to the farmers because of
introduction of Bt. cotton. On the contrary, being a capital intensive
agriculture practice, investments of the farmers have increased
manifolds thus, exposing them to far greater risks due to massive
indebtedness, which a vast majority of them can ill afford. Resultantly,
after the euphoria of a few initial years, Bt. Cotton cultivation has
only added to the miseries of the small and marginal farmers who
constitute more than 70% of the tillers in India.
Reply of the Government
It is unfortunate to attribute the problems to Bt. Cotton.
Bt. cotton-effectively controlled bollworms preventing yield losses
from an estimated damage of 30% to 60% during 2002 to 2011 period.
Yields are estimated to have increased at least by 30% due to effective
protection from bollworm damage. All India average yield, which was
189 kg. lint per ha. in 2001 increased to 491 kg. lint/ha. in 2011.
About 9400 mt. tonnes of insecticides were used for bollworm control
in 2001, which reduced to only 222mt. tonnes in 2011. The per ha.
income of the farmers, which was Rs. 7058/- in 2000 increased to
Rs. 16125/- in 2010 under rainfed conditions and from Rs. 15370/- in
2000 to Rs. 25000/- in 2010 under irrigated conditions. Increase in
income of farmers have definitely increased the capacity of the farmers
to invest in their well-being and hence improved their socio-economic
status.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]

146
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.90 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Regulatory Mechanism for Transgenics
Recommendation (Para No. 8.127)
The Rashtrapati in his maiden address in the Central Hall of
Parliament on 25 July, 2012 observed ‘trickle down theory do not
address the legitimate aspirations of the poor. We must lift those at
the bottom so that poverty is erased from the dictionary of India’. In
case of transgenics in agriculture crops in India, the experience of last
decade has conclusively shown that while it has extensively benefitted
the industry, as far as the lot of poor farmers is concerned, even the
trickle down is not visible. The Committee, therefore, unanimously
recommend that till all the concerns voiced in this Report are fully
addressed and decisive action is taken by the Government with utmost
promptitude, to put in place all regulatory, monitoring, oversight,
surveillance and other structures, further research and development
on transgenics in agricultural crops should only be done in strict
containment and field trials under any garb should be discontinued
forthwith.
Reply of the Government
As stated earlier, this recommendation is contrary to the
recommendation that there is a need for generating data on long term
impacts on biodiversity and human health.
There is a mix-up in the recommendations for field trials and
commercial release.
Parameters that need to be taken into consideration for taking a
decision on field trials are different from that of a decision on
commercial release.
Field trials are integral part of research and development and
therefore decision on field trials are based on scientific facts. However,
decision on commercial release may go beyond scientific facts to include
need, socio-economics, public perception, corporate rivalry and political
will; all of which fall beyond the scope of the purpose for which field
trials are meant. Bio-safety research cannot be conducted in glass house
as the safety efficacy and performance of GM crop would vary
depending on the host environment, host crop and inserted gene.

147
Bt. cotton was commercially released in other countries and has a
robust record of safety and performance for about sixteen years. The
situation in India has been no different. Globally, India is the second
largest exporter of cotton. In spite of the controversy regarding
Bt. cotton, the ground reality is that Bt. cotton has been beneficial to
farmers as none of the State Government have requested for withdrawal
of the approval granted for Bt. cotton.
The discontinuation of field trials undermine the existing two
decade global experience and is completely arbitrary and without basis
in the context of confined experimental field trials. Discontinuation of
GM crops field trials has serious implications. It will virtually stop the
attempts of public sector institutions to test and introduce GM crop
varieties that can be inexpensive, reusable-seeds, and cost effective.
Such a move will discourge and demotivate the public sector GM
crops research. Discontinuation of field trials will also discourage all
other technology providers, from introducing competitive GM crop
events in cotton, thus reinsuring the monopoly of the existing
technology provider. The move will also deprive farmers of useful
GM crops with new genes and enforce them to repeatedly use the
same gene events thus rendering the existing genes and Bt. cotton
unsustainable soon.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.93 of
Chapter-I of this Report.

148
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Setting up of Experts Committee by Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.89)
The Committee are extremely perturbed with these developments
as they pertain to a research venture in public sector domain and with
public good in mind. Though not being a scientific entity, they are
still not convinced by the inexplicable time lags and information gaps
in the explanations furnished by various agencies of Government
involved with the matter. They, therefore, exhort ICAR to go ahead
with the setting up of the proposed experts Committee without any
further loss of time and convey their findings to the Committee within
three months of presentation of this Report to Parliament. Any further
delays in the matter will only add to the environment of suspicion
prevalent about the issue nowadays.
Reply of the Government
Findings of the expert committee shall be made available to the
Committee.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Expert Committee to Examine cases of Bt. Cotton Feed causing
Physiological changes in Sheep
Recommendation (Para No. 2.90)
While on this aspect the Committee would also refer to the findings
of the report on animal feeding trial on biosafety studies with
biotechnologically transformed Bt. cotton crop seed meal conducted at
Central Sheep and Wool Research Institute, Avikanagar, Rajasthan in
2008. Some of the findings are Bt. cotton seed feeding increased RBC
and decreased WBC in blood, the weight of kidney, spleen, pancreas,
heart, lung, penis, kidney fat, cole fat, GI tract, ingest and empty GI
tract were not different among Bt. cotton seed and non Bt. cotton seed

149
fed lambs. However, Bt. cotton seed feeding increased liver weight,
testicle weight and testicle fat g/kg empty live weight. The Committee
as laymen, cannot fathom the import of these findings, but since there
are deviations in important biological attributes in the target group,
when fed with Bt. cotton seed, they would definitely like a professional
evaluation of these developments, their possible causes and
consequences by an expert committee comprising of eminent scientists
from ICMR, pathologists, veterinarians and nutrition experts.
Reply of the Government
The study referred to by the Standing Parliamentary Committee
has been undertaken in 2008 whereas Bt. cotton was accorded approval
in 2002 after a detailed review of all the studies required for regulatory
approval. Prima facie it appears that the study has not been undertaken
as per the define set of DBT protocols. A preliminary review of report
also shows several discrepancies, such as:
• While the Hb Values are around 11 G/dl, the Packed Cell
Volumes or PCV also known as Hematocrit are also around
11 and 12 %. This is impossible. The PCV values should be
normally 3 times the Hb in any animal with normal
complement of Hb per Red blood cell. According to Merck
Vet Manual the PCV values are normally 22 to 38 %. There
seems to be an error here.
• The RBC values are within the range. Here again if RBC
values are high , how come hematocrit or PCV is so low.
Since PCV is after all the %age of red cells vis-a-vis the
plasma in blood.
• All values even if they are lower or higher between the
groups should be compared with the normal range of values
and only if they are outside the range do they attain any
significance even if the differences are statistically significant.
As desired by the committee, RCGM and GEAC would examine
the study report to provide considered views.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
RCGM and GEAC to furnish their considered views on the Feed
Study Report
Recommendation (Para No. 2.91)
Furthermore, and again as laymen they would like to point out
that the data in the said report pertaining to kidney weight, spleen
weight, heart weight, lung weight, kidney fat, cole fat, pancreas weight

150
and penis weight also shows variations in Bt. cotton seed fed lambs
and non Bt. cotton seed fed lambs. They would, therefore, recommend
a relook by the expert committee constituted for the purpose, into all
these findings and apprise the Committee about their evaluation and
interpretation of the data at the soonest. Lastly, the Committee desire
RCGM and GEAC to furnish their considered views on this feed study
report and how it fared in their consideration while deciding the bio-
safety and health safety aspects of the product in question.
Reply of the Government
• The safety of foods derived from Bt crops, including cotton
has been exhaustively considered by regulatory authorities
in dozens of countries. Bt. crops are approved in 13 countries
plus EU for cultivation and many more for food and feed.
• Bt. crops have an exemplary record of safety as evidenced
by the extensive body of literature of studies undertaken
by academic and government research organizations, and
by the accumulated experience gained globally in the many
countries where these are grown and consumed since these
crops were first cultivated over 15 years ago.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Conversion of Biodiversity
Recommendation (Para No. 5.51)
The Committee’s interactions with the various ministries/
departments/agencies of the Government who were examined for and
in connection with the subject have revealed that while there is
awareness and appreciation of the various findings contained in
IAASTD Report and a lot of preparatory action is available in
documents, purposeful and definitive action towards adopting and
implementing sustainable and environment friendly practices and
technologies in agriculture and allied sectors which will conserve
biodiversity and also ensure safety of human health and livestock health
is unfortunately yet to be initiated in right measures.
Reply of the Government
India has been at the forefront in identifying suitable technologies
and developing sustainable and environmental friendly practices in
agriculture. The National Agriculture Research System (NARS) with

151
its extensive network of research institutions along with State
Agriculture Universities (SAUs) has been continuously working towards
the above agenda. Besides spanning across various stakeholder
departments several initiatives such as Task Force, constitution of expert
committees, framing of policy guidelines is a continuous process and
these update as well as guide the agenda that is to be taken up.
Union of India is more comfortable to take cognizance of home grown
recommendations for making agriculture more competitive as well as
sustainable rather than drawing conclusions only from IAASTD, which
has only provided sweeping generalised statements
In fact, the Independent Evaluation Group, an independent unit
within the World Bank group in its global programme review has
noted that IASTTD had limited representations of farmers and those
closest to them. There was predominance of international NGOs over
national and local NGOs and therefore local knowledge representation
was found to be inadequate.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.42 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Department of Consumer Affairs expressing unawareness and
unpreparedness in handling of transgenic food crops and related
aspects
Recommendation (Para No. 6.148)
The examination of Department of Consumer Affairs which are
the guardian of consumer rights in the country also revealed the same
status of unawareness and unpreparedness in so far as handling of
transgenic food crops and related aspects are concerned. The Committee
found it indeed surprising that the Department which administer the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and which are intimately involved in
the issues concerning consumer rights, consumer interest, informed
consumer choice, etc. have not taken any proactive steps inspite of the
controversies surrounding transgenic crops. While justifying their
inaction before the Committee they took refuge behind the Clause in
the Consumer Protection Act which puts the onus for filing a complaint
in an appropriate form on the consumer. The Department were also
blissfully unaware of the reports that commodities derived from

152
transgenic food crops were coming into the country, unchecked and
uncontrolled and tried to wash their hands in the matter by stating
that there is no stipulation regarding mandatory mention of any
transgenic food in the existing rules. On a persistent query of the
Committee they volunteered only to the extent of amending, if
necessary, the packaged commodities rules to make it mandatory for
the manufacturer to indicate whether the product is a GM product.
The Committee also found that the Bureau of Indian Standards which
is a body under the Department has set up a technical Committee by
the name of Biotechnology for Food and Agriculture Sectional
Committee for standardization in the field of food and agriculture
products derived from modern biotechnology. Nine Indian standards
have been formulated by the said Committee, however, these standards
which are mostly test methods and guidelines are voluntary in nature
for the producers to adopt. As has been mentioned elsewhere in this
Report copious amounts of cotton seed oil has been produced in the
country from Bt. cotton seeds during last decade since Bt. cotton
cultivation started in India. The Committee would like to have the
considered views of the Department on this issue from the point of
view of Consumer Protection Act, consumer rights, informed consumer
choice, etc. without any delay.
Reply of the Government
The issue of labelling of foods is under the purview of FSS Act,
2006 which is working on the issue. Meanwhile the Department of
Consumer Affairs has issued a notification on labelling of GM food.
The details of implementing the same have to be elaborated.
Regarding the consumption of cotton seed oil, it is clarified that
safety studies on Bt cotton included assessment of cotton seed oil.
Further, it is clarified that labelling of oil derived from GM crops is
exempted (except if oil has special properties such as high oleic soy
oil) even in countries with mandatory labeling regulation in place
because highly processed oils do not contain proteins expressed in
GM crops.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Implications of Transgenic Food Crops on Indian System of
Medicines
Recommendation (Para No. 6.149)
As is common knowledge, several food crops have substantial
medicinal value and they are extensively used in the Indian System of
Medicines viz. Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha. Agricultural food crops are

153
also used in Naturopathy and Homoeopathy. The Committee, therefore,
examined the Department of AYUSH which are mandated with the
formulation of policy issues for development and propagation of India
System of Medicines. It came as a huge surprise to the Committee
when the principal witness admitted during his oral evidence before
the Committee on 10 February, 2011 that the Department became aware
of the various implications of transgenic food crops on the Indian
System of Medicines only after they received the questionnaire of the
Committee for eliciting written information from the Department. The
Committee also note that the Department of AYUSH had on 1 June,
2010 through a communication to the Secretary, Ministry of
Environment and Forests conveyed their concerns that Bt. brinjal may
have implications on AYUSH sector. They had also asked them not to
permit open trial or commercialization of Bt. brinjal or any other
medicinal plant until detailed analysis of their impact on India System
of Medicines is done as plant materials are highly sensitive to
phytochemical/agroclimatic/environmental factor. The Department of
AYUSH had in view of all these developments requested Ministry of
Environment and Forests to co-opt Chief Executive Office of National
Medicines Plant Board, Adviser, Ayurveda, Director General, Central
Council for Research in Unani Medicines in GEAC. Interestingly , the
Ministry of Environment and Forests through their letter dated 7
February, 2011 informed the Department of AYUSH that so far ‘no
transgenic medicinal plant have been developed and none are under
field trials. The research being conducted is of a preliminary nature,
where the research institutions have developed a transformation
protocol for integration of all the new genes as the whole process will
take several years the request for inclusion of AYUSH/Unani and
National Medicinal Plants Board to GEAC will be considered at the
appropriate stage’.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Reply of the Government
It is clarified that the concerns expressed on Bt. brinjal by
Department of AYUSH are under consideration by GEAC as part of
review process of Bt brinjal.
Regarding nomination of representative from AYUSH to GEAC,
the Department of AYUSH had requested three members (Ayurveda,
Unani & Siddha) be co- opted by the GEAC. GEAC being a statutory
body, experts are invited as special invitees on a case-by-case basis
based on the agenda items.

154
Further, a nominee of Department of AYUSH has been included in
the reconstituted “Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation” in the
Department of Biotechnology.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
FSSAI to Notify Labelling and Related Aspects of All Items covered
under Section 23 of FSS Act
Recommendation (Para No. 7.62)
A similar dithering by the Government is observed by the
Committee on the issue of labeling of GM foods and products thereof.
Section 23 of FSS Act requires FSSAI to notify labelling and related
aspects of all items covered under the Act. However, it has not been
able to do so inspite of being in existence for years now. The Committee
understand that FSSAI is presently working upon the procedure of
labeling for GM foods and products thereof within its system and
would be forwarding its recommendation to the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare.
Reply of the Government
FSSAI is in the process of developing the regulation for labelling
of GM foods and as indicated in earlier paras, the Committee will be
kept informed of the developments.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
Government to Immediately Issue Regulation for Labelling of all
Genetically Modified Products
Recommendation (Para No. 7.63)
In this context the Committee have considered the various opinions
proffered to them by various ministries/departments of the
Government, scientists and experts, both within the system and outside,
NGOs and civil society, general public regarding labelling of genetically
modified crops, food and products, thereof. Inspite of the various
reasons cited by ICAR and some other ministries/departments the
Committee are in agreement with the majority opinion that the
consumer has the supreme right to make an informed choice. They,
therefore, recommend that the Government should immediately issue

155
regulation for making labelling of genetically modified products
including food crops, food and food products so as to ensure that the
consumer is able to make an informed choice in the important matter
of what she/he wants to consume. When China, which is more
populous a country and which also produces transgenic products can
make labeling of such products mandatory the Committee find no
hitch in labeling being made mandatory in India.
Reply of the Government
As indicated above, the discussions on labelling of GM foods are
under consideration of FSSAI and the Committee shall be informed
about the developments. Regarding the example of China it may be
noted that although China introduced mandatory labelling, no authentic
data is available regarding the extent of implementation of the same.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation),
F. No. 4-5/2011-SDV , dated the 30th November, 2012]
   N
EW D ELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA,
03 March, 2014 Chairman,
12 Phalguna, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

156
ANNEXURE I
INDICATIVE LIST OF THE SCIENTIFIC SUBJECTS FOR WHICH
EXPERTISE IS REQUIRED FOR SAFETY ASSESSMENT
OF GM CROPS
Core Plant Biotechnology Impact on
Characterization and impact on human health
environment
Molecular biologist Plant physiologist Immunologist
Genetics Plant pathologist Pharmacologist
Microbiologist Entomologist Clinical scientist
Biochemist Agronomist Toxicologist
Toxicologist Plant breeder Food technology and
nutrition
Bioinformatics Environmental biologist

157
ANNEXURE II
COMPOSITION OF IBSC AND RCGM
1. Institutional Bio-Safety Committee (IBSC)
As per Rules, 1989, each IBSC of an organization shall have the
following members:
Head of the organisation or his designate (a suitable senior officer)
as the Chairperson
Three or more scientists engaged in rDNA work or molecular
biology with atleast one outside expert in the relevant discipline.
A member with medical qualifications—Biosafety Officer (in case
of work with pathogenic agents/large scale use).
A nominee of DBT.
The Head of the organisation or his designate (suitable senior
officer) shall chair the IBSC. The Chairperson should represent the
organization and preferably have knowledge and experience in scientific
research pertaining to rDNA technology and GMOs/LMOs.
Each IBSC has a nominee from DBT who oversees the activities to
ensure that safety aspects are being fully adhered by the organisation.
The DBT nominee serves as the link between DBT and the respective
IBSC.
2. Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM)
RCGM has scientists from public sector research institutions as
members in individual capacity and representatives from the three
research bodies viz. Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR),
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research (CSIR). List of members of the present RCGM,
their affiliations and areas of expertise are as follows:
Sl.No. Expert Current Affiliation Scientific Expertise
12 3 4
1. Dr. B. Sesikeran National Institute of Nutritional pathology,
Nutrition (NIN) toxicology, oncology,
nutrition and apoptosis

158
 2. Dr. A.K. Kondapi School of Life Sciences Biochemistry, drug
University of Hyderabad delivery stem, basic biology
 3. Dr. A.C. Mishra National Institute of Epidemiology, virology ,
Virology taxonomy, ecology and
vector bionomics
 4. Dr. S.V . Chiplunkar Advanced Centre for Immunology
Treatment Research and
Education in Cancer
 5. Dr. Madhu Dixit Central Drug Research Pharmacology
Institute
 6. Dr. S.K. Subbarao National Institute of Genetics, cytogenetics,
Malaria Research epidemiology &
Malariology
 7. Dr. R.S. Gokhale Institute of Genomics Medical biotechnology
and Integrative Biology
 8. Dr. P . Kondaiah Indian Institute of Molecular characterization
(Served for One Term Science
during 2003-2006)
 9. Dr. K.V . Prabhu Indian Agricultural Plant breeding and genetics
Research Institute
10. Dr. P .K. Gupta Ch. Charan Singh Plant breeding and genetics
University
11.D r. S.J. Rahman Acharya N.G. Ranga Entomologist
Agricultural University
12. Dr. T. Mohapatra Central Rice Research Genetics, genomics and
Institute plant breeding
13. Dr. Kantipudi N. Babu Indian Institute of Plant pathology and plant
Spices Research biotechnology, genetic
resources and crop
improvement
14. Dr. O.P . Yadav Dir ectorate of Maize Plant breeding and genetics
Research
15. Dr. S. Solomon Indian Institute of Sugarcane Breeding and
Sugarcane Research Insect Pest Management
16. Dr. K.S. Varaprasad Directorate of Oilseeds Insect Pest Management
Research and Biodiversity/Varietal
Conservation
 12 3 4

159
17. Director National Bureau of Germplasm Conservation,
Plant Genetic Resources plant biotechnology
18. Dr. J.S. Sandhu Indian Council of Quality Control, Regulation
(Nominee ICAR) Agricultural Research and production of crop
seeds
19. Prof. Ram Rajasekharan, Central Food Food technology and
(Nominee, CSIR) Technological nutrition
Research Institute
20. Dr. Vijay Kumar, Indian Council of Pre-clinical and Clinical
(Nominee, ICMR) Medical Research studies, Toxicology
21. Dr. Ranjini Warrier, Ministry of Environment Biodiversity and
(Nominee MoE&F/ & Forests Environment Risk
GEAC) Assessment
22. Sh. Satyapal Shani, Drugs Controller’s Office Pre-clinical and Clinical
[Nominee DCG (I)] (Ministry of Health) Trials, Animal Testing,
Toxicology
23. Dr. Ramesh Babu Department of Ayurveda, Medicinal plants Biology
Devalla Yoga & Naturopathy, and use in Ayurveda,
(Nominee AYUSH) Unani, Siddha and Siddha and Unani
Homoeopathy (AYUSH) medicine
24. Dr. B.K. Shukla, Department of Science & Basic Biology
(Nominee DST) Technology
25. Dr. K.K. Tripathi, Department of Vaccines & Toxicology
(Scientist-G, DBT) Biotechnology
26. Dr. K.S. Charak, Department of Botany and plant
(Scientist-G, DBT) Biotechnology physiology
27. Dr. Bindu Dey, Department of Medical Biotechnology,
(Scientist-G, DBT) Biotechnology Clinical Trials
28. Ms. Rajalakshmi Department of Regulatory Affairs
Muralidharan, Biotechnology
(Scientist-E, DBT)
12 3 4

160
ANNEXURE III
KEY INTERNATIONAL CONSULTATIONS ADDRESSING THE
SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF GM FOODS (1990-2007)
Year Organization Title and link (where available)
12 3
1990 FAO 1/WHO2 Strategies for assessing the safety of foods produced by
biotechnology, a joint FAO/WHO consultation, Geneva,
Switzerland, 5-10 November, 1990 (http://www.who.int/
foodsafety/publications/biotech/1990/en/index.html)
1990 IFBC
3 Biotechnologies and food: Assuring the safety of foods
produced by genetic modification. Regulatory Toxicology and
Pharmacology, 12: S1-S196.
1993 WHO Health aspects of marker genes in genetically modified plants.
Report of a WHO Workshop, Copenhagen, Denmark,
21-24 September, 1993.
1994 WHO Application of the principles of substantial equivalence to
the safety evaluation of foods or food components from
plants derived by modern biotechnology. Report of a WHO
Workshop, Copenhagen, Denmark, 31 October-4 November,
1994.
1996 FAO/WHO Biotechnology and food safety. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO
Consultation, Rome, Italy, 30 September-4 October, 1996. FAO
Food and Nutrition Paper No. 61.
1996 ILSI
4 ILSI Allergy and Immunology Institute (AII) guidance for
assessing the allergenic potential of foods derived from
biotechnology.
1997 OECD
5 Safety Assessment of New Foods: Results of an OECD Survey
of Serum Banks for Allergenicity Testing, And Use of
Databases (http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/1997doc.nsf/
LinkTo/sg-icgb(97)1-final).
1998 OECD Report of the OECD Workshop on the Toxicological and
Nutritional Testing of Novel Foods (http://www.olis.
oecd.org/olis/1998doc.nsf/LinkTo/sg-icgb(98)1-final).

161
2000 FAO/WHO Safety aspects of genetically modified foods of plant origin,
a joint FAO/WHO consultation on foods derived from
biotechnology , Geneva, Switzerland (http://www.who.int/
foodsafety/publications/biotech/ec_june2000/en/index.html)
2000 CAC 6 First session of the Codex ad hoc Inter-Governmental Task
Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology.
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/
ctf_march2000/en/index.html)
2001 FAO/WHO Allergenicity of genetically modified foods, a joint FAO/WHO
consultation on foods derived from biotechnology, Rome,
Italy , 22-25 January, 2001
2001 CAC Second session of the Codex ad hoc Inter-Governmental Task
Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology.
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/
ctf_march2001/en/index.html)
2002 OECD Report of the OECD Workshop on the Nutritional Assessment
of Novel Foods and Feeds (http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/
2002doc.nsf/LinkTo/env-jm-mono(2002)6)
2002 CAC Third session of the Codex ad hoc Inter-Governmental Task
Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology.
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/
ctf_march2002/en/index.html)
2003 CAC Fourth session of the Codex ad hoc Inter-Governmental Task
Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology.
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/
july2003/en/index.html)
2003 OECD Report on the Questionnaire on Biomarkers, Research on the
Safety of Novel Foods and Feasibility of Post-Market
Monitoring (http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/2003doc.nsf/
LinkTo/env-jm-mono(2003)9)
2005 CAC Fifth session of the Codex ad hoc Inter-Governmental Task
Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology.
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/
sept05/en/index.html)
2006 CAC Sixth session of the Codex ad hoc Inter-Governmental Task
Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology.
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/
dec06/en/index.html)
12 3

162
2007 CAC Seventh session of the Codex ad hoc Inter-Governmental Task
Force on Foods Derived from Biotechnology.
(http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/
sept07/en/index.html)
1Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
2World Health Organization
3International Food Biotechnology Council
4International Life Sciences Institute
5Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
6Codex Alimentarius Commission
12 3

163
ANNEXURE IV
ECONOMIC IMPACTS AND IMPACT DYNAMICS OF BT
(BACILLUS THURINGIENSIS) COTTON IN INDIA
Jonas Kathage 1 and Matin Qaim 1
Department of Agricultural Economics and Rural Development, Georg-
August-University of Goettingen, D-37073 Goettingen, Germany
Edited by Calestous Juma, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, and
approved May 15, 2012 (received for review March 2, 2012)
Despite widespread adoption of genetically modified crops in many
countries, heated controversies about their advantages and
disadvantages continue. Especially for developing countries, there are
concerns that genetically modified crops fail to benefit smallholder
farmers and contribute to social and economic hardship. Many
economic studies contradict this view, but most of them look at short-
term impacts only, so that uncertainty about longer-term effects
prevails. We address this shortcoming by analyzing economic impacts
and impact dynamics of Bt. cotton in India. Building on unique panel
data collected between 2002 and 2008, and controlling for nonrandom
selection bias in technology adoption, we show that Bt has caused a
24% increase in cotton yield per acre through reduced pest damage
and a 50% gain in cotton profit among smallholders. These benefits
are stable; there are even indications that they have increased over
time. We further show that Bt cotton adoption has raised consumption
expenditures, a common measure of household living standard, by
18% during the 2006–2008 period. We conclude that Bt cotton has
created large and sustainable benefits, which contribute to positive
economic and social development in India.
farm survey | small farms | agricultural biotechnology
Despite widespread adoption of Genetically Modified (GM) crops
in many countries (1), controversies about their advantages and
disadvantages continue. In the public debate, negative attitudes often
seem to dominate. Civil society groups tend to emphasize potential
risks of GM crops and question reports about positive agronomic and
economic effects (2–5). Especially with a view to developing countries,
there are widespread concerns that GM crops fail to benefit smallholder

164
farmers and contribute to social and economic hardship (4, 5). Much
of this debate focuses on Bt cotton (5–9), as this is currently the most
widely used GM crop technology among smallholders. Using
comprehensive data from India, we show that these concerns about
negative social and economic impacts are not backed by representative
empirical evidence. Bt cotton contains genes from Bacillus thuringiensis
that make the plant resistant to the cotton bollworm complex. This
inbuilt insect resistance can lead to savings in chemical pest control
and higher effective yields in farmers’ fields (9). Several studies have
shown that Bt cotton adoption is associated with significant benefits
to farmers in various countries (10–14). In addition to productivity
gains (15–19), Bt adoption entails reduced incidence of acute pesticide
poisoning among smallholders (20). However, the available literature
on Bt cotton impacts has four important shortcomings, which may
also explain why controversies continue. First, with very few
exceptions (21), most of the evidence is based on data from field
trials or from the first few growing seasons after the commercial release
of Bt varieties in a country. This evidence is unsatisfying because it
does not allow analysis of longer-term developments. For example,
resistance build-up in pest populations or growing importance of
secondary pests may potentially lower Bt benefits over time (22–24).
Second, most impact studies do not properly control for nonrandom
selection bias (17), which may occur when more successful farmers
adopt the new technology earlier or more widely (25). As these
successful farmers may have higher crop yields and profits anyway,
this can result in inflated benefit estimates. Third, most available
studies focus on agronomic impacts of Bt, such as yield and pesticide
use effects, but economic effects, such as profit changes, are not
analyzed at all or only based on simplistic comparisons. Fourth, and
related to the previous point, many existing studies concentrate on
impacts at the plot level, without considering possible broader welfare
effects for farm households. We address these shortcomings by using
comprehensive panel data collected in India in four waves between
2002 and 2008. Estimation of panel data models allows us to account
for selection bias and also analyze impact dynamics. In particular, we
estimate fixed-effects specifications of yield, profit, and consumption
expenditure models to derive net impacts of Bt adoption on cotton
yield per acre, profit per acre, and household living standard. To our
knowledge, this economic impact assessment of any GM crop
technology that builds on more than 2 years of panel data is unique.
Results
In India, cotton is primarily grown by smallholder farmers with
farm sizes of less than 15 acres and cotton holdings of 3–4 acres on
average. The first Bt cotton hybrids were commercially released in

165
India in 2002. By 2011, 7 million farmers had adopted Bt on 26 million
acres, around 90% of the total Indian cotton area (1). We carried out
a survey of Indian cotton farmers in four waves between 2002 and
2008. This survey covered a total of 533 farm households in four
principal cotton-producing States ( see Materials and Methods). The
sample is representative of Bt. and conventional cotton farmers in
central and southern India. Given that we purposively oversampled
Bt adopters in the first wave, sample adoption rates differ from actual
adoption rates. The share of Bt-adopting farmers in our sample was
38% in 2002. After a small decline in 2003, it increased to 46% in
2004. (In the 2004, 2006, and 2008 survey waves, we also asked farmers
for their adoption of Bt hybrids in 2003, 2005, and 2007, respectively.
However, further details about the cultivation experience were only
asked for the respective survey years.) The adoption share jumped to
93% in 2005 and reached 99% in 2008. A similar trend is also observed
for individual adoption intensities, defined as the Bt. acreage relative
to the total cotton acreage on a farm. Alongside a range of household
characteristics, data on all cotton plots of surveyed households were
recorded, leading to a total of 1,655 plot observations.
Table 1 compares selected variables between Bt. and conventional
cotton plots and farms (for a more detailed overview, see Table S1).
We differentiate between early (2002–2004) and late (2006–2008)
adoption periods. Most previous studies on Bt cotton impacts in India
concentrated on the early period; evidence for the later period is thin.
Bt seed costs per acre were more than three times higher than
conventional seed costs during the early period. During 2006–2008,
the cost difference was lower because of Government interventions in
seed pricing and increasing competition in the market for
Bt. technology (19, 26). Pesticide costs were significantly higher on
conventional plots than on Bt. plots during 2002–2004, and there was
no difference during 2006–2008. Widespread adoption of Bt. has led
to areawide suppression of bollworm populations, so that conventional
cotton farmers also substantially reduced their pesticide applications
(27). Similar positive spillover effects were observed for Bt. cotton in
China and Bt maize in the United States (28, 29).
Table 1. Descriptive statistics for 1,655 plots and 533 associated
households (averages for 2002–2004 and 2006–2008)
Plot or household information 2002–2004 2006–2008
Conventional Bt Conventional Bt
           1 2 3 4 5
Plot level information
Seed cost (1,000 Rs/acre) 0.51 (0.26) 1.60*** (0.43) 0.47 (0.21) 0.91*** (0.32)
Pesticide cost (1,000 Rs/acre) 2.27*** (1.80) 1.43 (1.57) 1.07 (1.21) 1.07 (1.38)

166
Yield (kg/acre) 520.64 (315.54) 705.40*** (360.41) 588.85 (318.66) 829.03*** (341.08)
Profit (1,000 Rs/acre) 3.60 (5.80) 6.14*** (6.89) 5.31 (6.80) 10.32*** (7.73)
No. of plots 601 298 64 692
Household level information
Land owned (acres) 13.25 (15.45) 15.07* (18.42) 11.48 (12.28) 11.61 (12.68)
Expenditures (1,000 Rs/y) 85.87 (71.01) 122.76*** (79.00) 87.90 (64.14) 90.43 (88.82)
No. of households 363 222 61 432
*, *** imply that the mean value is significantly higher than that of conventional/Bt
in the same time period at the 10% and 1% level, respectively. Mean values are shown
with SDs in parentheses. Household expenditures were deflated using the consumer
price index. Rs. Indian Rupees. Additional variables are shown in Table S1.
In terms of yield per acre, Bt. strongly outperformed conventional
cotton in both time periods (Table 1). This finding is not because of
higher yield potentials of Bt. hybrids, but because of more effective
pest control and thus lower crop losses. Higher yields are also the
main reason for much higher profits on Bt. cotton plots. These
observed differences provide interesting insights into Bt. effects, but
they cannot be interpreted as net impacts of the technology , because
confounding factors and possible nonrandom selection bias have to
be controlled for. This process requires regression analysis.
Impact on Cotton Yield. Results of panel fixed-effects specifications
of a cotton yield function are shown in Table 2 (full model results
with all control variables are shown in Table S2). The positive and
significant coefficient of Bt. in column 1 indicates that Bt. has a positive
net impact on cotton yield per acre. Controlling for all other factors,
Bt. increases cotton yield by 126 kg per acre, which is equivalent to
a 24% gain over mean yields on conventional cotton plots. The
Bt. dummy variable captures Bt. adoption in any year, whereas the
additional Bt. 2006–2008 dummy takes a value of one only when
Bt. was used in the 2006 or 2008 survey waves. In the first column,
the Bt. 2006–2008 coefficient is insignificant, indicating that the
Bt. yield effect was stable over time and did not increase or decrease
in the later compared with the earlier period.
The dummies for the three survey waves in column 1 of Table 2
are all positive and significant, indicating that overall yield levels
were higher in 2004, 2006, and 2008, compared with the reference
year 2002. Omitting these year dummies in column 2 leads to a large
positive and significant Bt. 2006–2008 coefficient. These results suggest
           1 2 3 4 5

167
that the Bt. yield gain was in a magnitude of 297 kg per acre (sum
of Bt. and Bt. 2006–2008 coefficients) in the later period and thus
more than doubled compared with 2002–2004. As Bt. adoption strongly
increased over time, there is a close correlation between Bt. 2006–2008
and the year dummies. Hence, some of the Bt. effects are captured by
the year dummies in column 1. Not including year dummies, as in
column 2, may overestimate the Bt. yield gains, because Bt. 2006–2008
may then also capture time effects that are unrelated to the technology.
However, systematic changes in temperature or rainfall did not occur
during the period of analysis (30, 31), and there were also no other
breakthrough technologies in Indian cotton production (20, 32). Nor
did we find evidence of attrition bias. (Because we have an unbalanced
panel, there is the possibility of attrition bias, which could emerge
when farmers who obtained lower than average yields with Bt cotton
in 2002–2004 dropped out of the sample in the later 2006–2008 period.
This drop could potentially hide a decrease in Bt. impact over time.
Analyses with different subsamples that we carried out do not support
this hypothesis. We re-estimated the model in column 1 of Table 2
excluding the dropout farmers. With this smaller sample, the
Bt. coefficient is 130.94, which is very similar to the original coefficient
of 125.90, and the Bt. 2006–2008 coefficient remains insignificant. Hence,
we conclude that there is no attrition bias.) Therefore, Bt. was probably
the main factor contributing to the observed time effects.
Table 2. Net impact of Bt on cotton yield and profit per acre
Explanatory variables Yield (kg/acre) Profit (Rs/acre)
Bt (dummy) 125.90*** (20.41) 116.91*** (20.68) 1,877.21** (889.16) 2,151.51** (893.33)
Bt 2006–2008 (dummy) 3.59 (43.46) 180.06*** (20.54) -260.45 (1,144.58) 1,736.39** (803.31)
2004 125.39*** (17.68) 2,066.07*** (466.18)
2006 297.03*** (40.53) 5,006.86*** (1,017.09)
2008 208.61*** (43.68) 2,332.61** (1,149.50)
R2 0.39 0.34 0.38 0.36
Hausman test 90.47*** 70.00*** 42.39*** 24.60**
**, ***, Coefficient is statistically significant at the 5% and 1% level, respectively.
Coefficient estimates are shown with SEs in parentheses. Estimates are based on panel
regressions with household fixed effects to control for nonrandom selection bias. The
reference year is 2002. Not all explanatory variables included in the models (e.g.,
input quantities, prices, and other controls) are shown for brevity (full model results
with all control variables are shown in Tables S2 and S3). The Hausman test results
show that fixed-effects are preferred over random-effects specifications. Rs. Indian
Rupees.

168
Impact on Cotton Profit:  Bt. technology can influence cotton profit
mainly through three channels, namely changes in yield, changes in
pesticide cost, and changes in seed cost (33). To assess net profit
changes per acre, we estimated fixed-effects specifications of a profit
function (Table 2; full model results with all control variables are
shown in Table S3). The coefficients in column 3 indicate that Bt.
increases profit by 1,877 Rs. per acre (38 US$), equivalent to a 50%
profit gain over conventional cotton. In this specification, the Bt. impact
per acre does not change significantly over time. However, total cotton
profits per farm rose, because farmers increased their Bt. adoption
intensity. Combining the estimate of 1,877 Rs. with the data on
adoption intensity, Bt. added 5,307 Rs. (107 US$) to annual farm-level
cotton profits during 2002–2004 and 10,524 Rs. (213 US$) during 2006–
2008. Nationwide, for the 26 million acres currently under Bt., this
implies an annual net gain of almost 50 billion Rs. (1 billion US$) in
cotton profits.
Similar to the yield analysis above, the year dummies in column
3 of Table 2 are all significant. When omitting these year dummies,
the Bt. 2006–2008 coefficient turns positive and significant (column 4),
indicating that the Bt. profit gains may actually have increased
substantially in the later period to 3,888 Rs. (79 US$) per acre (sum
of Bt. and Bt. 2006–2008 coefficients). This result may partly be
explained by lower Bt. seed prices during 2006–2008. However, as
seeds only account for a relatively small share of total production
costs, the more important reason for larger profits per acre are higher
yield gains and thus higher sales revenues.
Impact on Household Living Standard:  Cotton is often the major
crop for cotton-producing households in India, so that profit gains
through Bt. technology are also likely to increase household living
standard. A common way of measuring living standard in the
development literature is to look at household consumption
expenditures, because expenditure is usually a more reliable indicator
than income (34). We use a fixed-effects specification of a consumption
expenditure model. As the level of analysis is the household, instead
of using dummy variables to capture Bt. adoption, we use the
households’ Bt. area in any year and the Bt. area in 2006–2008 as
variables of particular interest. The results suggest that Bt. had no
significant effect on consumption expenditures in the early adoption
period, but it increased household living standard significantly in the
later period (Table 3; full model results with all control variables are
shown in Table S4). This finding is plausible. Although Bt. adopting
households also increased cotton profit during 2002–2004, they did

169
not immediately change their consumption behaviour but waited until
they realized that the profit gains are sustainable.
In 2006–2008, each acre of Bt. increased household consumption
by 2,826 Rs. (57 US$) per year (Table 3). Based on this finding, we
can also calculate the total living standard effect per household by
multiplying with the mean Bt. area of adopting farms. During 2006–
2008, Bt.-adopting households increased their annual consumption
expenditures by 15,841 Rs. (321 US$) on average. Compared with
non-adopters, this finding implies a net increase of 18%, which
underlines that Bt. cotton has significantly raised living standards of
smallholder farm households.
Table 3. Net impact of Bt. on household living standard
Explanatory variables Consumption expenditure (Rs./y)
Bt. area (acres) 197.65 (1,227.07)
Bt. area 2006–2008 (acres) 2,825.65** (1,196.64)
2004 19,433.01*** (4,543.11)
2006 1,257.58 (5,653.66)
2008 9,250.43 (5,937.91)
R
2 0.17
Hausman test 35.50***
**, ***, Coefficient is statistically significant at the 5% and 1% level, respectively.
Coefficient estimates are shown with SEs in parentheses. Household expenditures were
deflated using the consumer price index. Estimates are based on panel regressions
with household fixed effects to control for nonrandom selection bias. The reference
year is 2002. Control variables include cotton area, so that the coefficients of Bt. area
and Bt. area 2006–2008 can be interpreted as the net effect of Bt. technology (full
model results with all control variables are shown in Table S4). The Hausman test
result shows that fixed-effects are preferred over a random-effects specification.
Rs. Indian Rupees.
Discussion
The results show that Bt. cotton adoption has caused sizeable
socio-economic benefits for smallholder farm households in India. The
technology has increased cotton yields and profits by 24% and 50%,
respectively. These effects are similar in magnitude to the ones shown
in earlier studies for India based on cross-section data (15–19, 33).
The panel data used here confirm that impacts per acre of Bt. cotton
have been stable over time. Because of rapidly rising Bt. adoption

170
rates in India, the aggregate benefits increased tremendously.
Countrywide, this technology is now used on 90% of the cotton area.
On average, household living standard increased by 18% among Bt.
adopters. Most of these adopting households are relatively poor. Hence,
Bt. cotton contributes to positive economic and social development.
The stable Bt. effects per acre are a conservative interpretation.
Robustness checks indicate that the per acre benefits probably increased
over time. This finding could be explained by the growing number of
available Bt. hybrids and the release of new Bt. events after 2005. In
2002, only three Bt. hybrids, which were developed by the Indian
seed company Mahyco and contained Monsanto’s Bollgard I
technology (event MON 531), were approved by the national regulatory
authorities. In 2004 and 2005, three other Indian seed companies, which
had sublicensed the Bollgard I technology , received approval for the
commercialization of several additional Bt. hybrids. In 2006, the
number of approved Bt. hybrids increased sharply. In addition, new
Bt. events were deregulated by the national authorities, including
Monsanto’s Bollgard II technology, but also technologies developed
by public research institutes. By 2011, the number of commercialized
Bt. varieties and hybrids containing different events had increased to
over 880 (1). More Bt. events and greater varietal diversity imply
effectiveness against a broader spectrum of insect pest species and
better adaptation to different agroecological conditions.
Our findings of large and sustainable economic and social benefits
of Bt. cotton do not imply that impacts may not decrease in the long
run. As of now, Bt. resistance development and secondary pest
outbreaks do not seem to be major problems in India, but this should
be further monitored. Sustainable innovation in agriculture always
implies that technologies are further improved or replaced by new
technologies after some time. Nonetheless, our results clearly refute
the assertion that Bt. technology would harm smallholder farmers
because of low and eroding economic benefits. As Bt. cotton is the
only GM crop technology that is already widely used by smallholder
farmers, these findings may add to the wider public biotechnology
debate.
Materials and Methods
Survey: A panel survey of Indian cotton farmers was carried out
in four waves between 2002 and 2008. A multistage random sampling
procedure was used. The survey covered four States of central and
southern India, namely Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, and

171
Tamil Nadu. These four States encompass a wide range of different
cotton-growing situations. A total of 10 different districts and
63 villages were surveyed. The first wave was implemented in early
2003, covering the 2002 cotton growing season. Because this was the
first season where Bt. cotton was officially commercialized, the number
of adopters was still very low. Therefore, Bt. cotton adopters were
purposely oversampled by randomly selecting from complete lists of
technology users at the village level (33). Follow-up waves were
implemented in 2-y intervals, in early 2005 (referring to the 2004
cotton season), early 2007 (referring to the 2006 season), and early
2009 (referring to the 2008 season). The survey is representative of
Bt. cotton adopters and non-adopters in central and southern India,
where over 60% of the total Indian cotton area is located.
To some extent, sample attrition occurred over time, as is normal
in panel surveys extending over several years. Some farmers had
migrated to other areas, which happened particularly in one district
of Karnataka. Other farmers had stopped cotton cultivation during
the period, mostly because of focusing on new cash crops, such as
sugarcane. Farmers who dropped out during the period were replaced
by other randomly selected farmers in the same locations. The sample
size was also slightly increased over time. In total, the sample includes
observations from 533 different farm households, of which 198 were
included in all four survey waves. All observations were used for the
regression analysis, resulting in an unbalanced panel. An unbalanced
panel allows more efficient estimation than any balanced subset of it
(35).
During face-to-face interviews in all four waves, farmers were
asked to provide a wide array of agronomic and economic information,
including input-output details on their cotton plots. Farmers who grew
Bt. and conventional cotton simultaneously provided details for both
alternatives, so that the number of plot observations is somewhat
larger than the number of farmers surveyed. The total number of
cotton plot observations is 1,655 over the four waves. At the household
level, data were collected about household structure, asset ownership,
and living standard. Living standard is measured by household
consumption expenditures (including the value of subsistence
consumption), which were captured through a 30-d recall for food
and other consumables, and a 12-mo recall for more durable items.
Regression Models: We want to estimate unbiased treatment effects
of Bt. adoption on cotton yield per acre, profit per acre, and household
living standard. For this purpose, we develop and estimate three types

172
of models where Bt. is included as an explanatory variable: a cotton
yield function, a cotton profit function, and a household consumption
expenditure model. These models can generally be represented as:
Yit=Xit β+Vit [1]
               where
Vit=Ci+µit [2]
where y is the respective outcome variable (yield per acre, profit per
acre, consumption expenditure per household), subscript i is the plot
or household observation, and subscript t is time (survey wave). This
fixed-effects specification allows for individual heterogeneity ci to be
correlated with the vector of explanatory variables xit. We use fixed
effects because we suspect that more progressive and efficient farmers
are more likely to adopt Bt. technology . The existence of such selection
bias and thus the superiority of a fixed-effects over a random-effects
specification is tested with a Hausman test.
Year dummies are included in the regression models to control
for time fixed effects, using the first survey wave in 2002 as the
reference year. For the yield and profit functions, which are estimated
using plot observations, we use a Bt. adoption dummy as treatment
variable, which is one for a Bt. plot in any particular year and zero
otherwise. In addition, we include a Bt. 2006–2008 dummy, which is
one if Bt. was used in 2006 or 2008. The Bt. dummy indicates whether
or not the technology has a positive net effect on cotton yield and
profit, and the Bt. 2006–2008 dummy reveals whether there are impact
dynamics: if the Bt. coefficient is positive and significant and the Bt.
2006–2008 coefficient is statistically insignificant, then the technology
causes benefits that do not change over time. On the other hand, a
negative Bt. 2006–2008 coefficient would indicate shrinking benefits,
whereas a positive coefficient would reveal increasing benefits over
time.
The consumption expenditure model is estimated at the household
level. Some farm households have both Bt. and conventional cotton.
Moreover, the acreage cultivated with Bt. varies. Therefore, instead of
Bt. dummies, we use two continuous Bt. variables. The first such
dummy is Bt. area, which measures the number of acres cultivated
with Bt. on the farm, independent of the time period. The second is
Bt. area 2006–2008, which measures the number of Bt. acres only
during that later period. We control for total cotton area on the farm.
Thus, the Bt. estimation coefficients can be interpreted as the effects
on household consumption expenditures per acre of Bt. cotton. The

173
test for impact dynamics is as explained for the yield and profit
function models.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The long-term financial support of the
German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) for
compiling the panel data set is acknowledged; prize money received
from the German Agricultural Society (Deutsche
Landwirtschaftsgesellschaft) was also used for this research.
1. James C (2011) Global Status of Commercialized Biotech/GM
Crops: 2011. ISAAA Brief 43 (ISAAA, Ithaca, NY).
2. Union of Concerned Scientists (2009) Failure to Yield:
Evaluating the Performance of Genetically Engineered Crops (UCS
Publications, Cambridge, MA).
3. Greenpeace (2010) Economic Failures: Genetic Engineering
Enforces Corporate Control of Agriculture (Greenpeace
International, Amsterdam).
4. Friends of the Earth (2011) Who Benefits from GM Crops: An
Industry Built on Myths (Friends of the Earth International,
Amsterdam).
5. Shiva V , Barker D, Lockhart C (2011) The GMO Emperor Has
No Clothes (Navdanya International, Florence, Italy and
New Delhi, India).
6. Glover D (2010) Is Bt. cotton a pro-poor technology? A
review and critique of the empirical record. J Agrar Change
10:482–509.
7. Stone GD (2011) Field versus farm in Warangal: Bt cotton,
higher yields, and larger questions. World Dev 39:387–398.
8. Gruère G, Sengupta D (2011) Bt cotton and farmer suicides
in India: An evidencebased assessment. J Dev Stud 47:316–
337.
9. Qaim M, Zilberman D (2003) Yield effects of genetically
modified crops in developing countries. Science 299:900–902.
10. Carpenter JE (2010) Peer-reviewed surveys indicate positive
impact of commercialized GM crops. Nat Biotechnol 28:319–
321.
11. Qaim M (2009) The economics of genetically modified crops.
Annual Review of Resource Economics 1:665–693.

174
12. Pray CE, Huang J, Hu R, Rozelle S (2002) Five years of Bt
cotton in China—The benefits continue. Plant J 31:423–430.
13. Subramanian A, Qaim M (2010) The impact of Bt cotton on
poor households in rural India. J Dev Stud  46:295–311.
14. Ali A, Abdulai A (2010) The adoption of genetically modified
cotton and poverty reduction in Pakistan. J Agric Econ
61:175–192.
15. Bennett R, Ismael Y, Kambhampati U, Morse U (2004)
Economic impact of genetically modified cotton in India.
AgBioForum 7:96–100.
16. Bennett R, Kambhampati U, Morse S, Ismael Y (2006) Farm-
level economic performance of genetically modified cotton
in Maharashtra, India. Rev. Agr. Econ.  28: 59–71.
17. Crost B, Shankar B, Bennett R, Morse S (2007) Bias from
farmer self-selection in genetically modified crop productivity
estimates: Evidence from Indian data.  J Agric Econ
58:24–36.
18. Morse S, Bennett R, Ismael Y (2007) Inequality and GM
crops: A case-study of Bt. cotton in India. AgBioForum 10:44–
50.
19. Sadashivappa P , Qaim M (2009) Bt cotton in India:
Development of benefits and the role of government seed
price interventions. AgBioForum 12:172–183.
20. Kouser S, Qaim M (2011) Impact of Bt. cotton on pesticide
poisoning in smallholder agriculture: A panel data analysis.
Ecol Econ 70:2105–2113.
21. Huang J,  et al.  (2010) A decade of Bt. cotton in Chinese
fields: Assessing the direct effects and indirect externalities
of Bt cotton adoption in China. Sci. China Life Sci. 53: 981–
991.
22. Tabashnik BE (2008) Delaying insect resistance to transgenic
crops. Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA 105:19029–19030.
23. Wang S, Just DR, Pinstrup-Andersen P (2008) Bt. cotton and
secondary pests. Int J Biotechnol 10:113–121.
24. Wang Z, et al. (2009) Bt. cotton in China: Are secondary
insect infestations offsetting the benefits in farmer fields?
Agric Sci. China 8:83–90.

175
25. Barrett CB, Moser CM, McHugh OV , Barison J (2004) Better
technology, better plots, or better farmers? Identifying
changes in productivity and risk among Malagasy rice
farmers. Am J Agric Econ 86:869–888.
26. Krishna VV , Qaim M (2008) Potential impacts of Bt. eggplant
on economic surplus and farmers’ health in India. Agric
Econ 38:167–180.
27. Krishna VV , Qaim M (2012) Bt. cotton and sustainability of
pesticide reductions in India. Agric Syst 107:47–55.
28. Wu KM, Lu YH, Feng HQ, Jiang YY , Zhao JZ (2008)
Suppression of cotton bollworm in multiple crops in China
in areas with Bt. toxin-containing cotton. Science 321: 1676–
1678.
29. Hutchison WD, et al.  (2010) Areawide suppression of
European corn borer with Bt. maize reaps savings to non-
Bt. maize growers. Science 330:222–225.
30. Government of India (2012) Monthly rainfall and
temperature data. India Meteorological Department. Available
at http://www.imd.gov.in (Accessed on 7 May, 2012).
31. Gruère GP , Sun Y (2012) Measuring the contribution of Bt.
cotton adoption to India’s cotton yields leap. IFPRI
Discussion Paper 01170 (International Food Policy Research
Institute, Washington, DC).
32. Karihaloo JL, Kumar PA (2009) Bt. Cotton in India–A Status
Report  (Asia-Pacific Consortium on Agricultural
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India), 2nd Ed.
33. Qaim M, Subramanian A, Naik G, Zilberman D (2006)
Adoption of Bt. cotton and impact variability: Insights from
India. Rev Agr Econ 28:48–58.
34. Deaton A (1997) The Analysis of Household Surveys: A
Microeconometric Approach to Development Policy (Johns
Hopkins Univ Press for the World Bank, Baltimore).
35. Baltagi B, Song S (2006) Unbalanced panel data: A survey.
Statist Papers 47:493–523.

176
Supporting Information
Kathage and Qaim 10.1073/pnas.1203647109
Table S1. Descriptive statistics for 1,655 plots and 533 associated
households (averages for 2002–2004 and 2006–2008)
Plot or household information 2002–2004 2006–2008
Conventional Bt. Conventional Bt.
Plot level information
Seed cost (1,000 Rs/acre) 0.51 (0.26) 1.60*** (0.43) 0.47 (0.21) 0.91*** (0.32)
Seed rate (g/acre) 659.82*** (552.39) 490.72 (114.23) 646.64*** (474.33) 570.75 (160.93)
Irrigation (share of plots) 0.46 (0.50) 0.58*** (0.49) 0.48 (0.50) 0.59* (0.49)
Fertilizer (t/acre) 0.23 (0.15) 0.26*** (0.16) 0.20 (0.10) 0.25*** (0.15)
Pesticide (1,000 Rs/acre) 2.27*** (1.80) 1.43 (1.57) 1.07 (1.21) 1.07 (1.38)
Labor (d/acre) 70.72 (32.30) 83.23*** (40.81) 63.12 (35.74) 69.75 (44.67)
Yield (kg/acre) 520.64 (315.54) 705.40*** (360.41) 588.85 (318.66) 829.03*** (341.08)
Cotton price (Rs/kg) 19.67 (3.06) 19.52 (2.69) 20.07 (4.87) 23.31*** (4.05)
Revenue (1,000 Rs/acre) 10.22 (6.36) 13.79*** (7.32) 12.41 (7.48) 19.35*** (8.42)
Total cost (1,000 Rs/acre) 6.62 (3.07) 7.65*** (2.94) 7.10 (3.34) 9.03*** (5.12)
Profit (1,000 Rs/acre) 3.60 (5.80) 6.14*** (6.89) 5.31 (6.80) 10.32*** (7.73)
No. of plots 601 298 64 692
Household level information
Age of farmer (y) 44.24 (12.49) 44.43 (12.47) 48.14** (12.52) 45.18 (12.67)
Education of farmer (y) 7.29 (4.97) 8.04** (4.81) 4.73 (5.08) 7.32*** (5.15)
Land owned (acres) 13.25 (15.45) 15.07* (18.42) 11.48 (12.28) 11.61 (12.68)
Cotton area (acres) 6.99 (37.12) 6.20 (6.73) 4.42 (4.51) 5.79** (4.60)
Household size (head) 6.46 (3.46) 6.75 (3.80) 6.59 (3.38) 6.28 (4.07)
Expenditures (1,000 Rs/y) 85.87 (71.01) 122.76*** (79.00) 87.90 (64.14) 90.43 (88.82)
No. of households 363 222 61 432
*, **, *** imply that the mean value is significantly higher than that of conventional/
Bt in the same time period at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively . Mean values
are shown with SDs in parentheses. Household expenditures were deflated using the
consumer price index. Rs. Indian Rupees.

177
Table S2. Estimated coefficients of quadratic production (yield)
function
Explanatory variables Pooled-data model Fixed-effects models
12 3 4
Inputs
Bt. (dummy) 156.46*** (21.85) 125.90*** (20.41) 116.91*** (20.68)
Bt. 2006–2008 (dummy) 31.62 (44.79) 3.59 (43.46) 180.06*** (20.54)
Seed rate (g/acre) 0.54** (0.02) –0.004 (0.03) –0.01 (0.03)
Sow date (d) 0.23 (0.40) –0.85** (0.42) –0.86** (0.44)
Harvest date (d) 1.16*** (0.27) 1.03*** (0.29) –0.08 (0.25)
Irrigation (yes/no) 139.75*** (15.80) 97.26*** (19.35) 83.00*** (0.00)
Fertilizer (t/acre) 70.61 (135.43) 1.29 (144.01) –29.08 (149.13)
Square of fertilizer 844.08** (351.59) 558.55 (358.62) 646.46* (371.64)
Pesticide (1,000 Rs./acre) 20.62 (13.17) 1.72 (14.24) –8.91 (13.58)
Square of pesticide –1.85 (2.91) –1.86 (2.94) –1.52 (3.03)
Labour (d/acre) 4.44*** (0.55) 5.11*** (0.69) 4.83*** (0.72)
Square of labour –0.01*** (0.003) –0.02*** (0.01) –0.01** (0.01)
Fertilizer-pesticide interaction –72.08*** (27.31) –35.28 (27.95) –38.85 (28.97)
Fertilizer-labour interaction –1.77 (1.22) –2.91** (1.35) –3.23** (1.39)
Pesticide-labour interaction 0.14 (0.13) 0.17 (0.14) 0.29** (0.14)
Household characteristics
Age of farmer (y) –2.34*** (0.65)
Education of farmer (y) –0.29 (1.55)
Cotton experience of farmer (y) 0.62 (0.91)
Karnataka –9.89 (20.64)
Andhra Pradesh 19.43 (20.87)
Tamil Nadu –193.54*** (40.79)
2004 103.94*** (19.91) 125.39*** (17.68)
2006 235.41*** (41.42) 297.03*** (40.53)
2008 128.01*** (44.64) 208.61*** (43.68)

178
Constant –130.12 (82.19) –104.19 (83.07) 287.23*** (69.10)
No. of observations 1648 1648 1648
R2 0.38 0.39 0.34
Hausman test 90.47*** 70.00***
*, **, ***, Coefficient is statistically significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
The model in column 1 is based on comparisons of plots both within and between
households. Columns 2 and 3 are based on comparisons of plots within households
(household fixed effects). The dependent variable in all three models is cotton yield
in kilogram per acre. Coefficient estimates are shown with SEs in parentheses. The
reference year is 2002. The Hausman test results show that fixed-effects are preferred
over random-effects specifications. Rs. Indian Rupees.
12 3 4

179
Table S3. Estimated coefficients of quadratic profit function
Explanatory variables Pooled-data model Fixed-effects models
12 3 4
Inputs
Bt. (dummy) 1,595.67* (847.63) 1,877.21** (889.16) 2,151.51** (893.33)
Bt. 2006–2008 (dummy) 1,485.88 (1,087.64) –260.45 (1,144.58) 1,736.39** (803.31)
Seed rate (g/acre) 0.72 (0.47) 0.09 (0.63) –0.07 (0.63)
Sow date (d) –4.56 (8.47) –18.37* (9.59) –19.92** (9.72)
Harvest date (d) 14.26** (5.73) 13.72** (6.73) –2.36 (6.15)
Irrigation (yes/no) 2,922.27*** (318.20) 2,087.24*** (439.54) 2,027.25*** (442.23)
Seed price (Rs./450 g.) 0.71 (0.70) 0.16 (0.76) –0.35 (0.76)
Cotton price (Rs./kg.) 812.81*** (64.91) 814.17*** (71.21) 615.53*** (53.88)
Fertilizer price (Rs./kg.) –286.88*** (90.49) –361.04*** (98.40) –340.12*** (99.74)
Square of fertilizer price 6.37*** (1.98) 8.39*** (2.21) 7.58*** (2.24)
Pesticide price (Rs./L) 0.60 (0.43) 0.05 (0.48) 0.53 (0.47)
Square of pesticide price 0.0001 (0.0001) 0.0002* (0.0001) 0.0001 (0.0001)
Wage rate (Rs./h.) 138.38 (136.08) –74.12 (152.33) 230.42 (145.12)
Square of wage rate –10.50* (6.00) –3.27 (9.37) –23.84*** (8.84)
Fertilizer-pesticide price interaction –0.10*** (0.02) –0.09*** (0.02) –0.09*** (0.02)
Fertilizer-labour price interaction 18.45 (13.78) 3.20 (15.66) 7.45 (15.83)
Pesticide-labour price interaction –0.01 (0.03) 0.02 (0.04) –0.00004 (0.04)
Household characteristics
Age of farmer (y) –45.37*** (13.71)
Education of farmer (y) 5.43 (32.59)
Cotton experience of farmer (y) 2.12 (19.25)
Karnataka 997.04** (428.77)
Andhra Pradesh –757.56* (412.86)
Tamil Nadu –2,331.92*** (825.00)
2004 1,454.26*** (464.90) 2,066.07*** (466.18)
2006 2,093.82** (933.78) 5,006.86*** (1,017.09)
2008 –1,389.82 (1,064.79) 2,332.61** (1,149.50)
Constant –15,530.24*** (2,276.21) –14,554.41*** (2,268.62) –6,492.66*** (1,676.44)

180
No. of observations 1648 1648 1648
R2 0.35 0.38 0.36
Hausman test 42.39*** 24.60**
*, **, ***, Coefficient is statistically significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
The model in column 1 is based on comparisons of plots both within and between
households. Columns 2 and 3 are based on comparisons of plots within households
(household fixed effects). The dependent variable in all three models is cotton profit
in Indian Rupees (Rs.) per acre. Coefficient estimates are shown with SEs in parentheses.
The reference year is 2002. The Hausman test results show that fixed-effects are
preferred over random-effects specifications.
12 3 4

181
Table S4. Estimated coefficients of household consumption
expenditure function
Explanatory variables Pooled-data model Fixed-effects model
Bt. area (acres) 2,636.22*** (925.83) 197.65 (1,227.07)
Bt. area 2006–2008 (acres) 428.85 (973.06) 2,825.65** (1,196.64)
Cotton area (acres) 104.81 (69.19) 41.55 (74.10)
Cultivated area (acres) 1,374.32*** (147.68) 1,123.82*** (229.72)
Household size (AE) 13,735.91*** (807.15) 9,255.51*** (1,259.57)
Age of farmer (y) 564.98*** (134.82)
Education of farmer (y) 1,832.08*** (344.70)
Karnataka –2,048.50 (4,211.89)
Andhra Pradesh 35,430.50*** (4,283.91)
Tamil Nadu 39,745.87*** (7,346.99)
2004 14,234.28*** (4,556.09) 19,433.01*** (4,543.11)
2006 –406.97 (5,179.06) 1,257.58 (5,653.66)
2008 3,957.18 (5,237.25) 9,250.43 (5,937.91)
Constant –58,234.18*** (8,787.57) 15,250.02** (6,663.66)
No. of observations 1,431 1,431
R
2 0.43 0.17
Hausman test 35.50***
**, ***, Coefficient is statistically significant at the 5% and 1% level, respectively . The
model in column 1 is based on comparisons within and between households.
Column 2 is based on comparisons within households (household fixed effects). The
dependent variable in both models is annual household consumption expenditures in
Indian Rupees. Household expenditures were deflated using the consumer price index.
Coefficient estimates are shown with SEs in parentheses. The reference year is 2002.
AE, adult equivalents.

182
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 03 March, 2014 from
1100 hours to 1130 hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Shri Premdas Katheria
5. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
8. Shri Patel Kisanbhai V .
9. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
10. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
12. Dr. K.V .P . Ramchandra Rao
13. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
14. Shri S. Thangavelu
15. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

183
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting
of the Committee and read out the valedictory Speech. The Committee,
then, took up the draft Reports for consideration and adoption:—
(i) The Committee first took up for consideration the draft
Action Taken Report on the Action Taken by the
Government on Observations/Recommendations contained
in the Thirty-Seventh Report on “Cultivation of Genetically
Modified Food Crops — Prospects and Effects” decided that
the following 23 recommendation para nos. given below
should be reiterated:
1.20, 3.40, 3.41, 3.42, 3.48, 5.46, 5.49, 5.52, 5.53, 5,57, 5.58,
5.59, 6.144, 6.147, 8.116, 8.117, 8.118, 8.119, 8.120, 8.121, 8.124,
8.126 and 8.127. The Committee also decided to include the
following comment in the Report in appropriate para:
‘The Committee note from press reports that the Minister
for Environment and Forests has decided to allow field trials
of transgenics which is contrary to the recommendations of
the Committee in the Thirty-seventh report. The Committee
strongly deprecate this.’
Subject to above amendments, the Committee adopted the
report.
*(ii) **** **** **** ****
*(iii) **** **** **** ****
 3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the aforesaid
report on the basis of factual verification and present the same to the
Hon’ble Speaker, as the Parliament is not in session.
*4. **** **** **** ****
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

184
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2011-12)  ON  CULTIVATION  OF  GENETICALLY MODIFIED
FOOD CROPS—PROSPECTS AND EFFECTS OF MINISTRY OF
AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND
COOPERATION)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 102
(ii) Observations/Recommendations   which   have   been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1.21, 1.22, 1.23, 2.74, 2.75, 2.76, 2.80, 2.82, 2.87,
2.88, 2.92, 3.35, 3.36, 3.37, 3.38, 3.39, 3.43, 3.44, 4.28, 4.30,
4.31, 4.32, 4.33, 5.43, 5.44, 5.45, 5.54, 6.141, 6.142, 6.143,
6.150, 6.151, 6.152, 6.153, 6.154, 6.155, 6.156, 7.59, 7.71 and
8.115.
Total 40
Percentage 39.21%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations  which the  Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of  the  Government’s
replies:
Para Nos. 2.77, 3.45, 3.47, 4.29, 4.34, 5.47, 5.48, 5.55, 7.18
and 7.21.
Total 10
Percentage 9.80%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which
replies of the  Government  have  not  been  accepted
by the Committee:
Para Nos. 1.20, 2.78, 2.79, 2.81, 2.83, 2.84, 2.85, 2.86, 3.40,
3.41, 3.42, 3.46, 3.48, 5.46, 5.49, 5.50, 5.52, 5.53, 5.56, 5.57,
5.58, 5.59, 6.144, 6.145, 6.146, 6.147, 7.19, 7.20, 7.60, 7.61,
7.75, 7.76, 8.116, 8.117, 8.118, 8.119, 8.120, 8.121, 8.122, 8.123,
8.124, 8.125, 8.126 and 8.127.
Total 44
Percentage 43.14%
(v) Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.89, 2.90, 2.91, 5.51, 6.148, 6.149, 7.62 and 7.63.
Total 08
Percentage 7.85%